Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED NINTH REPORT
 
REPORT NO. 
209
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
One Hundred and Ninety First Report on Demands 
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation 

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED NINTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its
One Hundred and Ninety First Report on Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTTEE ........................................................................................... 1—18
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................. 19—21
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 3—26
7. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 27—45

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10.  Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred and Ninth Report on “Action Taken Replies by the Ministry of Civil
Aviation on the observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Ninety First
Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation”.
2. The One Hundred and Ninety First Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 3
rd May, 2013 to the
Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred and Ninety First Report was received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 1 st October, 2013.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the
17th December, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 17, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 26, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAI – Airports Authority of India
AERA – Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India
AI – Air India
AIA TSL – Air India Air Transport Services Limited
AIESL – Air India Engineering Services Limited
ASA – Air Service Agreement
ASMGCS – Advanced Surface Movement Guidance and Control System
A TC – Air Traffic Control
ATF – Aviation Turbine Fuel
BCAS – Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
B E – Budget Estimates
CA TFM – Central Air Traffic Management
CHPL – Commercial Helicopter Pilot Licence
CNS-ATM – Communications, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management
CRS – Commission of Railway Safety
CAR – Civil Aviation Requirement
CASP-AP – Co-operative Aviation Security Programme-Asia Pacific
CTC – Cost to the Company
DGCA – Director-General of Civil Aviation
DPE – Department of Public Enterprises
EASA – European Aviation Safety Agency
EBIDTA – Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization
EPFO – Employees’ Provident Fund Organization
FAA – Federal Aviation Authority
FRP – Financial Restructuring Plan
FDI – Foreign Direct Investment
FII – Foreign Institutional Investor
FIANS – Future Indian Air Navigation System
FOP – Flight Operations Plan
FY – Financial Year
GAGAN – GPS Aided Geo Augmentation Navigation
(iv)

GBS – Gross Budgetary Support
HCI – Hotel Corporation of India
ICAO – International Civil Aviation Organization
IEBR – Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources
IGIA – Indira Gandhi International Airport
IGRUA – Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi
IMG – Inter-Ministerial Group
LCC – Low Cost Carrier
LIC – Life Insurance Corporation of India
MoCA – Ministry of Civil Aviation
MoDoNER – Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
MoU – Memorandum of Understanding
MRO – Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul
NCAP – National Civil Aviation Policy
NCD – Non-convertible Debentures
NER – North-Eastern Region
NOC – No Objection Certificate
PAT – Profit After Tax
PBN – Performance-based Navigation
PCN – Pavement Classification Number
PHHL – Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited
PLI – Productivity Linked Incentives
RE – Revised Estimates
RFQ – Request for Quotation
ROT – Runway Occupancy Time
SEBI – Securities and Exchange Board of India
SBU – Strategic Business Unit
SID – Standard Instrument Departure
SLP – Special Leave Petition
STARS – Standard Terminal Arrival Routes
SWIM – System Wide Information Management
TAP – Turn Around Plan
UAE – United Arab Emirates
UPSC – Union Public Service Commission
WP – Writ Petition
(v)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
on the observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Ninety First Report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, which was presented to both the
Houses of Parliament on 3
rd May, 2013.
2. The Action Taken Replies received from the Ministry in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:–
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Department:
Para Nos. 7, 10, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 47, 61, 62, 63, 73, 76, 82, 88, 91, 93,
101 and 103
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of the Department replies:
Nil. 69, 80, 94 and 102
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Department have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 87, 99 and 100
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are still
awaited:
Para Nos. 10, 37, 38, 88, 89, 90 and 92
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of these recommendations/
observations, which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be
furnished to it at the earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee
contained in the One Hundred and Ninety First Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and
recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the
succeeding paragraphs
ANNUAL PLAN 2012-13
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. The Committee finds that the spending pattern of Plan funds has been poor during
2012-13 which needs a lot of improvement. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Civil
Aviation will impress the concerned organizations/undertakings to spend the allocated fund with
proper planning and coordination with respective stakeholders. The Committee notes that except the
investment in Air India, all other organizations were allocated substantially reduced allocations at RE
stage which also could not be optimally utilized. The Committee feels that reduction of funds at
RE stage does not augur well for the much beleaguered aviation sector. Most of these under-
utilizations have been mainly due to finalization of schemes. The Committee expresses dismay over
non-finalization of building plan for BCAS and DGCA that are pending for so many years. Slow

2
progress in case of NER projects is a cause of concern to the Committee. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to take necessary steps urgently to finalize/approve these Plan schemes
at the earliest to spend the allocated funds during the current year.
(Recommendation at Para 7 of 191
st Report)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6. Air India has utilized the entire amount of budgetary resources which were allocated to
them i.e. Rs.6,000 crores by way of Equity Infusion. There has been no under-utilisation of the
allocated funds.
7. AAI has spent an amount of Rs.145.35 crore in 2012-13 which is around 99% of the RE
2012-13 allocation of Rs.147 crore. However, an amount of Rs.59.29 crores only could be released
in 2012-13 due to expenditure ceiling for the last quarter/month of the financial year.
8. AAI is in readiness to take up the construction work of DGCA and BCAS Headquarter
buildings. However, the work is held up due to resumption of Safdarjung Airport land unilaterally
by the Ministry of Urban Development and declaring it as green recreational area. The efforts of
this Ministry to get back the Safdarjung Airport land did not succeed and the matter has been
referred to the Cabinet Secretariat for a decision. The work on DGCA and BCAS building at other
locations viz. Amritsar, Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Guwahati and Mumbai has been awarded and
construction activities commenced at these locations.
9. The Airports Authority of India (AAI) has spent an amount Rs.6.12 crore in 2012-13 against
the RE 2012-13 allocaton of Rs.7.62 crore for the development of airport infrastructure in the
North East. However, funds could not be released in 2012-13 due to expenditure ceiling for the
last quarter/month of the financial year.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
10. The details of the meetings undertaken with the Ministry of Urban Development as
regards the construction work of DGCA and BCAS Headquarters buildings may also be
informed to the Committee. The Committee recommends that matter may be taken up
expeditiously. The Committee further recommends that Ministry should pursue the removal
of restrictions of 33% ceiling of expenditure for the last quarter with the Ministry of
Finance seriously. The ceiling on spending in last quarter ultimately results in under-
utilization of funds and delay in execution of infrastructure projects.
ANNUAL PLAN 2013-2014
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
11. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation was able to get only 56% of the
projected plan allocations for the current fiscal. The Committee feels that such inadequate allocation
will definitely hamper progress of ongoing infrastructure projects and other aviation related
programmes. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will expedite the approval of various Schemes
and persuade Planning Commission for allocation of more funds at RE stage. The Committee also
hopes that the allocated funds will be utilized judiciously to avoid any reduced allocation at RE
stage.
(Para 10 of ibid)

3
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
12. The recommendation of the Committee are noted.
13. AAI projected Budgetary Grant of Rs.200 crore for the year 2013-14. However, an amount
of Rs.42 crore has been approved by Planning Commission in BE 2013-14. Out of the approved
grant of Rs.42 crore for Pakyong and Tirupati airports, an amount of Rs.29.50 crores has already
been released to AAI upto 26.08.2013.
14. AAI has submitted an additional demand of Rs.462.21 crore (2013-14) for carrying out
various projects/schemes. The matter has been taken up with the Finance Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee may be appraised about the reply of the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission on the request of the Ministry for additional demand of funds.
GROUND HANDLING SBU
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
16. The Committee notes that despite many labour unrests witnessed during the last year, the
national carrier was able to improve its performance notably both financially and operationally. It
recorded positive EBITDA of Rs.19 crores during the year 2012-13 as against a negative EBITDA
of Rs.2237 crores during the year 2011-12. Air India’s on-time performance was 84.8 % in the
case of domestic sector and 74 % for international sector as against the turnaround plan
benchmark of 85%. The passenger load factor of Air India was 72% as against the target under
turnaround plan of 69.5%. The turnaround plan benchmark on yield per kilometer was 3.53, against
which Air India achieved 3.76.
(Para 36 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
17. Agreed. For the year 2013-14, EBITDA of more than Rs.1000.00 crores has been budgeted.
There has also been an improvement in the physical performance in terms of ‘On Time
Performance, Load Factor etc.’.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
18. The Committee hopes that the national carrier will improve its performance in the
current fiscal both in respect of financial and physical aspects.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
19. The Committee finds that Air India was able to get Rs.5000 crores as against the
requirement of Rs.8574. The Committee finds that as part of the FRP and as approved by the
Cabinet, the Government of India had given a commitment to infuse the Equity as per the FRP.
Any delay or shortfall in the infusion of the equity would adversely affect the implementation of
Turn Around Plan and FRP, since Air India would be compelled to borrow short term loans from
Banks in order to bridge the equity gap which would entail payment of interest, which may
adversely affect the profitability of the company. In fact, one of the conditions under which, the
regulator (RBI) and the consortium of Banks supported the FRP, entails timely equity support to
Air India by Government of India.
(Para 37 of ibid)

4
20. The Committee feels that since Air India has started achieving the milestones as prescribed
in the TAP during the last year, further allocation of Rs.3574 crores as equity infusion will help
the national carrier to implement the turnaround plan smoothly and carry forward the improved
performance in the coming years also. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government
should provide the promised equity infusion which has been accumulated without any interruption
during the course of the financial year.
(Para 38 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
21. Ministry is taking up with Department of Expenditure for grant of additional budget of
Rs.3574.00 crores at RE-2013-14 stage.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22. The Committee desires that it may be appraised on the reply of the Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission on the request of the Ministry for additional demand of
funds for infusion of equity in Air India.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
23. The Committee feels that Air India with its wide range of aircraft in its kitty should expand
its operations beyond metro cities. Since majority of the non-metro airports have been modernized/
developed by Airports Authority of India, the national carrier should make efforts to penetrate those
unexplored markets. When the private carriers are in a position to offer air services to Tier-II and
Tier-III cities, Air India should explore offering its services to such cities using smaller aircrafts.
The Committee still feels that Air India’s entry into LCC segment will definitely strengthen its
business. The Committee recommends that the Air India should try to provide better service and
products to the passengers which have lot of scope for improvement.
(Para 39 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
24. Air India is trying to connect non-metro airports through its operations as well as through
that of its subsidiary :Alliance Air. It is proposed to replace 19, A320 aircraft with brand new ones
which would be in an all economy configuration. This would provide the necessary capacity to
provide connectivity to the Tier II and Tier III cities as well as satisfy the requirement of the LCC
segment of the domestic market. Air India would certainly endeavor to provide better services to
its passengers in the coming years.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that with the replacement of old A320
aircraft, the national carrier can expand its connectivity beyond metro cities in the coming
years.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
26. The Committee also hopes that Air India’s entry into ground handling operations will add
much needed financial fillip for the company. The Committee notes that process of operationalising
the MRO SBU is going on in a snail’s pace and the Government and the Air India do not appear

5
to be taking adequate initiatives to speed up the process. The Committee is confident that the MRO
SBU and the Ground handling activity of AIATSL, if planned and executed properly, can bring lot
of revenue to Air India. The Committee recommends that the Government should, if need be, make
necessary policy changes to enable these two agencies to function on proper business and
commercial prudence. The Committee notes significant headway in implementing the human
resources merger programmes. The Committee recommends that all the outstanding issues must be
settled as early as possible to enable Air India to function as a single entity.
(Para 40 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
27. The process of operationalization of the subsidiary companies was slow during the year
2011-12 mainly on account of the requirement of necessary approvals. After receiving the Cabinet
approval in September 2012, Air India went ahead with the operationalisation of the subsidiary
companies. However, the Unions of Air India challenged the same before the Mumbai High Court.
After a series of hearings, the Mumbai High Court gave an order in favour of Air India based on
certain assurances given by the Management relating to service conditions, continuity of service
and protection of employees’ pay and benefits. The Unions then filed an SLP before the Supreme
Court. Who has also decided in favour of Air India on 9
th May, 2013. Further steps towards
operationalisition will now be taken. However, a section of employees have also approached the
Chennai High Court challenging the transfer of employees to the Ground Handling Company. As a
result of implementation of the Charamadhikari Committee Report, the revised CTC i.e. cost to the
company has been determined. The new CTC will be implemented as per the DPE norms and scale.
As regards licensed categories the Cabinet has given its approval to rationalize the pay structures
in line with the competition.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee notes the reply and feels that the employees related issues of
subsidiaries of Air India should be addressed at the earliest. In this regard the Committee
reiterates its recommendation that these outstanding issues must be settled as early as
possible to enable Air India function as a single entity.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
29. The Committee further recommends that before taking any policy decision in respect of AI,
proper study and analysis of its impact on the functioning and viability of Air India should be
carried out. Air India is our national carrier in which thousands of crores of rupees of taxpayers’
money has been invested. The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Ministry and AI to keep this
fact always in mind while taking any decision.
(Para 41 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
30. Government is aware of the huge infusion being made towards the Financial Restructuring
Plan and Turn Around Plan of Air India. Several cost control measures have been initiated during
the last couple of years in order to improve Air India’s operational and financial performance. The
cash losses came down in 2012-13 as compared to 2011-12. No fresh recruitment has taken place
in Air India for the last several years. Old and ageing aircraft have been grounded and are being
disposed of and new state of the art aircraft are being inducted in the fleet in order to improve
the schedule integrity and reduce the maintenance cost. Similarly, new routes which are being

6
planned taken into account the cash margins which can be generated on these routes. The working
capital loans have been restructured to reduce interest cost. PLI has been abolished with effect
from 1 st July, 2012 and the pay structure has been rationalized.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee feels that with a committed annual Government equity, Air India can
improve its performance more than the parameters mentioned in TAP in the coming years and
reaffirm its status of ‘Maharaja’.
(Para 42 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
32. To achieve a cash positive status by the year 2016 and PAT (Profit after Tax) positive
status by 2018, every effort is being made in order to achieve these parameters under the TAP.
Due to the induction of new aircraft in its fleet, the average age of the fleet is less than 5 years.
Air India is confident of regaining the status of ‘Maharaja’ in the coming years.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
33. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that measures taken under the Turn
Around Plan of Air India and induction of new aircraft in its fleet will help the national
carrier to regain its numero uno  status.
HOTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Committee finds that Hotel Corporation of India was allocated Rs.25.00 cores (BE)
for 2012-13 which was reduced to Rs.10.00 crores at RE level. HCI was able to spend the entire
revised allocation for its various schemes. Now, it has been allocated with a paltry sum of
Rs.5.00 crores for 2013-14 for all the four units. The Committee feels that such a nominal
investment for these units under HCI does not inspire any confidence. If the idea is to do away
with these properties, Committee does not know. The Committee hopes that allocation of funds
will be mainly utilized to renovate/upgrade Centaur Hotel Srinagar and Chefair Flight Catering
Delhi and more funds would be demanded at RE stage and complete the same within the fixed
timeframe.
(Para 47 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
35. Funds of Rs.10.00 crores in Financial Year 2012-13 to be utilized by Hotel Corporation of
India renovation of its properties at Delhi and Srinagar. Rs.5 crores has been allotted to it in current
Financial Year (2013-14) and additional fund allocation may be considered later.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
36. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take up its case with
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for further allocation of funds for the Hotel
Corporation of India to keep them as a reckoning force in the hospitality sector.

7
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Committee finds that the AAI was allocated a budgetary support of Rs.280 crores (BE)
for the year 2012-13 while it has been reduced to Rs.42.00 crores in BE 2013-14. Out of this,
Rs. 32.00 crore is exclusively for development works at airports in Pakyong and Tirupati. The
Committee was informed that AAI’s requirement for various projects under Grant-in-Aid Schemes
is to the tune of Rs.460.21 crores. The Committee feels that such a drastic cut in budgetary
support for the airport infrastructure developer of the country will definitely slow down the
ongoing projects especially in North-Eastern Region. The Committee hopes that necessary funds
will be allocated to AAI at the RE stage so that its ongoing as well as future projects are not
delayed for want of funds. The Committee also recommends that pending balance of Rs77 crores
be released for the GAGAN project at the earliest opportunity.
(Para 61 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
38. AAI has sought additional grants of Rs.462.21 crore in 2013-14 at RE-2013-14 stage. The
issue of grant of additional grant is being taken up with Ministry of Finance.
39. AAI has also informed that it will submit a proposal soon for release of balance fund for
GAGAN Project to the Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee notes the reply and observes that enhancement of grant for AAI for its
projects in North Eastern Region at RE stage will strengthen the airport infrastructure in NER.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
41. The Committee also finds that out of the required 3500 ATCs to control the Indian skies
only 2300 personnel are available. The Committee hopes that AAI will take necessary steps to
address the issue by augmenting its training facilities at Allahabad.
(Para 62 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
42. The AAI Board has approved the creation of 1200 posts Junior Executive (ATC).
Recruitment of 200 Junior Executive (ATC) is proposed to be undertaken every six months. AAI
has also informed that the training facilities at Allahabad, Hyderabad and Gondia training centres
have already been adequately augemented.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee is happy to note that large number of posts have been created as JE
(ATC), recruitment is on and training facilities have been augmented at designated places
on the basis of its recommendations.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. The Committee was informed on the deadlock persisting over the development of Patna

8
airport. The Committee reiterates its observation/recommendation contained in its 174 th Report in
respect of Patna Airport last year and hopes that the AAI will pursue the matter with the State
Government of Bihar for ensuring some viable alternate plan taking into consideration impending
danger for the air travelers to Patna. The Committee would like to have a status note including
efforts made, alternate proposals and the results thereof.
(Para 63 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
45. Government of Bihar vide letter dated 19.01.2011 and 14.10.2011 had requested AAI to
construct a Greenfield Airport at Nalanda with 1200 acres of land to be provided by State
Government. AAI vide letter dated 4.01.2012 has conveyed to the Government of Bihar may
develop a Greenfield Airport at Nalanda under PPP mode subject to mandatory clearances,
applicable rules and regulations.
46. AAI has informed Chief Secretary, Government of Bihar vide letter dated 21.02.2012 that
there is no possibility of upgrading the runway at Patna airport due to non-availability of land and
presence of obstacles in both directions of runway. On the request of State Govt., AAI had carried
out a feasibility study for a Greenfield airport at Nalanda and for construction of civil enclave and
extension of existing runway upto 3800 m at Bihta. The study report was submitted to State Govt.
of Bihar and AAU has proposed 4800 acres of land as recommended in the feasibility study for
developing Greenfield at Nalanda but the State Government has offered 1200 acres only. Apart from
identifying and acquiring extent of land needed, the establishement of physical facilities on the land
is another issue, which may cost anywhere around Rs.1000-1200 crores approx for Phase 1 (for
A320 type operations) development. Bihta Airport belonging to IAF can be considered as an
aternative to Patna airport for wide bodied airport operations and for establishment of Civil
Enclave, as basic infrastructure including runway already exist. At Bihta airport, extension of
runway of dimensions 3800 x 45m suitable for wide bodied aircraft with Cat-1 approach lights is
possible.
47. AAI had submitted concept proposal for the development of Civil Aviation in the state of
Bihar and accordingly, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up the matter with the Ministry of
Defence. It has been proposed that AAI airport at Gaya may be exchanged with IAF’s Bihta Airport
which is a fully developed airport in the vicinity of Patna. It is proposed to retain 78 acres of land
together with existing terminal at Gaya airport with AAI as civil enclave for operating civil flights.
Given the proximity of Bihta to Patna, the Bihta airport after development would be able to service
the civil aviation requirements of Patna city.
48. Secretary, Civil Aviation has also written to the Government of Bihar to consider the option
of swapping the Bihta airstrip with Gaya airport and to convey the concurrence of the State
Government to it so that the matter could be taken up with the Ministry of Defence.
49. Response of State Government is awaited.
50. As regards to existing Patna airport, all the obstacles (trees) in the approach path of runway
are pruned and licensing of airport is under examination.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
51. The Committee has been expressing its concern about Patna airport and hopes that
the coordinated efforts between Ministries of Civil Aviation, Defence and State Government
of Bihar will definitely end the stalemate over development of airport in Bihta as an
alternative to Patna airport.

9
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee finds that as against the projected demands of Rs.5.00 crores under plan,
the Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited was not able to get any budgetary support from the
Government. The Committee feels that necessary budgetary support, if given to PHHL at RE stage,
it can take up its capacity building and skill development/expansion projects without delay. The
Committee feels that PHHL should expand its business beyond off-shore operations and present
itself as a viable air service provider in unexplored tourist destinations. The Committee also hopes
that heliport project at Rohini, Delhi is completed as per its schedule.
(Para 69 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
53. Noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
54. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL A VIATION
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee finds that DGCA was allocated Rs.60.00 crores (BE) under plan head for
the year 2012-13 which was reduced to Rs.13.00 crores at RE level. However, an amount of
Rs.4.27 crore only was spent out of the allocated amount. The main reason attributed to the non-
utilization fund was the non-finalization of headquarters building for DGCA. The Committee hopes
that all the land related issues for the building project will be sorted out with the concerned
agencies and the project is taken-up further. The Committee further hopes that the spending pattern
of DGCA will improve during the current fiscal. The Committee recommends that the process of
filling-up of vacancies in DGCA should be expedited so that the day-to-day functioning of the
principal regulatory body of the country is not affected.
(Para 73 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
56. The office of the Director-General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has taken necessary steps to
sort out the land related issues for the DGCA Building. Regarding construction of building for Joint
training Academy, tenders are being finalized by Airports Authority of India and it’s expected that
some noticeable progress would be achieved during the current financial year. The details of the
Recruitment status for filling of vacancies in DGCA are as under:
57. Consequent upon restructuring of DGCA, a total of 427 Group ‘A’ posts at various levels
were revived and additionally created in the year 2009 taking the total sanctioned strength of GR
“A” posts to 574. Immediately after the creation of posts, DGCA started process for amendment
of Recruitment rules so that these posts could be filled up. So far, Recruitment Rules for 24
Grades have been notified and action for filling up the posts in these grades is under process of
consultation with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and UPSC. The proposal for recruitment in respect
of 14 Grade A posts is at various stages of completion. A direct recruitment in respect of eight
grades was finalized after the re-structuring of DGCA. A total of 88 candidates were recommended

10
by UPSC for appointment in these eight grades. Till now 70 candidates have joined and pre-
appointment formalities in respect of other candidates are still going on.
58. As against the sanctioned posts of 574 in grade A, so far 208 are filled up by appointment
of regular employees. Further, the process of recruitment of 130 Airworthiness Officers is also
completed. UPSC declared the final result on 9.5.2013 in respect of 100 successful candidates and
forwarded their dossiers to DGCA. Offer of appointment to these candidates are being issued and
it is expected that all these 100 candidates would joint DGCA after completion of police
verification, medical tests, etc. within the next six months. Additionally, 62 personnel have been
engaged as consultants to provide functional support till regular appointments are made. All out
efforts are being made to complete the recruitment process in all the grades. Thus, as against the
sanctioned total of 574 manpower in grade A, 270 are in position on either as regular or expert
consultant/contract appointment.
59. As far as the 101 grade B and 215 grade C posts are concerned, 69 posts of Grade B and
153posts of Grade Ca are filled up. For filling up the vacancy, the DGCA regional offices have
approached the respective regional offices of Staff Selection Commission. The Recruitment Rules
for all these grades are also being revised/amended.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
60. The Committee feels that the matter relating to the construction of headquarters for
DGCA is hanging for several years and does not expect to see some notable progress during
the current fiscal. The process of filling-up of vacancies in DGCA should also be completed
at the earliest and the matter should be informed in detail to this Committee.
BUREAU OF CIVIL A VIATION SECURITY
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
61. The Committee finds that the construction of new building for BCAS is pending for a long
time due to some land related issues. The Committee hopes that pending issues on the new building
project may be addressed at the earliest. The Committee also hopes that vacant posts in BCAS are
filled-up on priority to strengthen its operations throughout the country. The Committee’s queries/
apprehension about need for setting up of a dedicated Civil Aviation Security Force could not be
clarified by the Ministry. The Committee would like to be apprised of the main reasons for having
a separate force, problems being faced with the present set up and the funds involved; whether
Ministry was going to have separate recruitment or persons on deputation; how about the transition
period, etc.
(Para 76 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
62. For BCAS, a proposal was mooted in the 2007-08 for a HQ office cum training centre at
A-2, Karbala Lane, Lodi Road, New Delhi with built up area of 6100 spm at a cost of Rs.28.00
crore. This proposal could not progress because of lack of clear title of the property and land
being shown as ‘residential’ as per the Delhi Master Plan. In 2010, another DPR was prepared for
a combined office of DGCA and BCAS on 1.75 acres of land at 12 metres distance from the of
existing Pawan Hans hanger at Safdarjung Airport with built up area of 7600 sqm at a cost of
Rs.67.00 crore for BCAS alone. Later the built up area was revised to 4446 sqm with a cost of
Rs.38.00 crore. Ministry of Urban Development has objected to the SFC Memo on the ground that
the Safdarjung Airport land as been resumed by it.

11
63. Regarding a dedicated Civil Aviation Security Force (ASF), a Cabinet Committee for creation
of ASF has been circulated to concerned Ministries for their comments.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
64. T he Committee notes the reply and is surprised to see the fact that the construction
of new building for BCAS could not see the light of the day due to one or other reasons
for the last six years. The Ministry should coordinate with the concerned Ministries to
break the impasse. The Committee may also be apprised on the comments of the concerned
ministries to the cabinet note on creation of Civil Aviation Security Force.
FDI IN A VIATION SECTOR
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee finds that the much fancied decision of allowing FDI in civil aviation sector
has not find many takers so far, except the one. The Committee desires to know whether any
study had been carried out by the Government before taking such an important policy decision.
The Committee feels that the Government should assess the consequences of the new policy in the
context of problems faced by Indian domestic airlines particularly the AI. The Committee
recommends that FDI may be allowed in such a way that it should not affect the operational
viability of India’s national carrier - Air India and various airports of India. The FDI in civil aviation
sector should aim at developing aviation hubs within the country and any policy on the contrary
should be discouraged.
(Para 80 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
66. In accordance with the decision of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs a Press
Note No.6 (2012 Series) was issued by Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion which
reflects the revised position on FDI by foreign Airlines in Civil Aviation Sector.
67. Till now two proposals for foreign investment from foreign airlines have been received.
(i) By Ehtihad Airways in Jet Airways
(ii) By Air Asia in Tata Telestra
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
68. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
BILATERALS
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
69. The increase in bilateral capacity put the premium that Ethihad paid in perspective. The
Committee is aware that bilateral negotiations between two countries for increasing airline seats
take place only when the existing allotments become insufficient. The Committee understands that
concerned domestic Airlines have not exhausted those allotted seats. In such a situation, the
Committee is surprised to see this increase in the bilateral to 36,670 seats a week by the
Government. Prime facie  this move appears to facilitate one airline to strike a deal with a foreign

12
Airline for its stake sale at a huge premium. The Committee feels that the huge premium could be
a backhanded way of obtaining access to the huge Civil Aviation market in India.
(Para 82 of ibid)
70. The Committee, therefore, calls upon the Ministry to reconsider the Agreement for bilateral
with the UAE, which may be kept frozen at the current level of 13,330 seats and any bilateral may
be opened only after the capacity of the Indian carriers is increased. Moreover, this Committee has
always maintained that Air India being the national carrier must have the first right of refusal for
any bilateral.
(Para 91 of ibid)
71. The Committee recommends that the bilateral arrangement with the Abu Dhabi may be
reconsidered by the Government to protect our national carrier and the airports of India.
(Para 93 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
72. While assessment of traffic potential, future growth, demand-supply gap, load factors
are criteria generally adopted for deciding bilateral traffic rights, there are other vital
considerations such as requirements projected by the eligible airlines of India for foreign
operations, enhancement of international connectivity, geo political, economic, diplomatic or
strategic considerations and overall passenger interests which are taken into account while
entering into bilateral air services negotiations. The bilateral air services negotiations with UAE
(Abu Dhabi) were held in view of demands from Abu Dhabi as well as Indian carriers,
passengers interests for enhanced international connectivity to new overseas destinations and
services from international airports in India other than gateway cities besides overall economic
interest of India in terms of Government’s policy of liberatlisation for attracting foreign
investment in various sector including civil aviation. The MOU signed with Abu Dhabi extends
benefits to Indian carriers such as fifth freedom rights both intermediate and beyond points
with change in guauge facility at Abu Dhabi which will facilitate optimal utilization of aircraft
resources and providing enhanced connectivity. Adequately safeguards have been built in the
MOU to protect the interest of Indian carriers/airport operators. The enhancement in traffic
entitlements has been done in a phased manner with sector specific capping, limiting the
operational flexibility of the foreign carrier and providing adequate time to Indian carriers to
plan and consolidate their position to keep pace with growing Indian aviation market. Further,
stakeholder consultation is invariably done prior to bilateral negotiations and views of all the
stakeholders including the national carrier is taken into account by inter-ministerial group
comprising of representatives from various ministries/departments to decide the negotiating
strategy and mandate for the negotiating team. The recent negotiations in respect of India-Abu
Dhabi air services matters was done as per the mandate given by a Group of Ministers. The
bilateral traffic rights to Indian carriers are allocated as per laid down guidelines. However,
primacy of the national carrier has been retained as traffic rights are allocated to other carriers
only after considering the operational requirements of Air India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
73. The Committee notes the reply and feels that the issue of bilaterals with UAE leaves
several questions unanswered. The Ministry’s reply suggests that this decision was taken
more on subjective consideration than objective/concrete ones. The real impact of this will
be against the interest of domestic carriers.

13
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
74. The Committee finds that already, India is struggling to create a world class hub at Delhi,
faced with competition from airports like Dubai and Doha in the Gulf and Bangkok, Hong Kong
and Singapore in South East Asia and despite leading airports like Delhi and Mumbai having been
privatized. While Delhi and other private airports along with the Government of India have made
huge investments in upgrading infrastructure and building new world class terminals, they are
hampered by the competition posed by these well-established hubs and their aggressive mega
carriers. Allowing Abu Dhabi to come up as another hub which is only about three hours flight
away from the major Indian metros might have adverse impact on our efforts to establish a world
class hub in India.
(Para 87 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
75. At present, 6 state of the art airports have been developed at metro cities namely Delhi,
Mumbai, Bangalore, Hyderabad,, Chennai and Kolkata. In addition, Airports Authority of India (AAI)
has also modernized and upgraded 35 airports and several Greenfield airports are also coming up
in important cities. It has been identified that airports at metro cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata
and Chennai can emerge as strong hub airports while Hyderabad and Bangalore also have fair
potential for development of hub airports. The Government of India has already constituted a
standing Inter-Ministerial Group(IMG) comprising of Secretary (Civil Aviation) as Chairman with
representatives from Planning Commission, Department of Revenue, Department of Economic
Affairs, Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Ministry of External Affairs
and Ministry of Home Affairs to remove the bottlenecks and to provide the right coordination
mechanism for the development of aviation hubs in India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
76. The Committee finds the reply abjectly evasive; it has not responded to the issue/
apprehension underlined by the Committee in the above recommendation. The Ministry in
future should be precise and to the point in its replies.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
77. The Committee feels that creating hubs needs time and also a home carrier with a critical
size to be able to sustain the hub. Air India has just started to create a hub in Delhi as its chosen
hub, which needs to be encouraged/supported in its endeavour. The development of events will,
no doubt, have adverse impact on Air India’s efforts in this regard.
(Para 88 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
78. Air India established a hub at Delhi Airport in the year 2010-11 with a time table in order
to take advantage of the infrastructure facilities available at T3. The integrated terminal at Delhi
serves at a gateway point to the East and West. Delhi serves as an effective Hub. Flights from
various domestic destinations connect to the flighs from Delhi to USA, UK, South East Asia, Middle
East and Gulf. The additional bilateral entitlements to Abu Dhabi would not affect the carriage of
traffic by AI as Air India would be operating direct services to destinations in Europe and North
America.

14
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
79. The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the grounds/basis based on
which it has said that said bilaterals with UAE would not affect Air India traffic.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80. The Committee finds that Air India is already struggling to make a turn around as Indian
passengers prefer to travel via the foreign hubs. Rs.30,000 crores of taxpayer’s money is being
pumped into it by the Government to keep it afloat and signs of certain turnaround is already
visible.
(Para 89 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
81. The recommendations of the Committee noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
82. The Committee notes the reply as interim reply only.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
83. The Committee is of the opinion that in this way, Air India will be denied the ability to
establish direct services to long haul destinations with the B787 Dreamliner that they have ordered
for this very purpose. If the Ministry supports the development of more and more hubs outside
India, thousands of crores of taxpayer’s money will go waste, not to mention the investment of
thousands of crores made by private enterprise along with the Government in developing world
class airports in Delhi and other major metros.
(Para 90 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
84. The recommendations of the Committee noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
85. The Committee notes the reply as interim reply and further action on the
observations of the Committee may be appraised duly.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
86. The Committee notes that no sound Civil Aviation Policy exists in India which is the need
of the hour. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should come out with
a clear Civil Aviation Policy with an aim to provide growth to the national carrier and national
airports.
(Para 92 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
87. In view of the significant growth of the sector and the current problems being faced, the
need for a National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP) is being felt again. The Minister of Civil Aviation

15
had also desired that a Civil Aviation Policy be formulated to address the long term issues of the
Civil Aviation sector. Accordingly, a Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of
Secretary.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
88. The Committee would like to know terms of reference, date of constitution,
composition of the Committee alongwith the period within which it is supposed to submit
its report.
SALE OF BILATERAL BY JET AIRWAYS
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
89. The Committee was informed that Jet Airways sold three of its slots in London to the
Ethihad Airlines and the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation has confirmed that the Ministry is
aware of the development. The Committee feels that carriers have no right to sell the bilateral
allotted to them to other airlines that too foreign airline. The Committee recommends that the
Government should take away the slots from Jet Airways and the airlines should be penalized for
selling the national property – bilateral.
(Para 94 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
90. The slots are permissions to use runway and airport infrastructure and are allocated by the
airports to the airlines as per their procedure. The airlines at Heathrow (London) are free to swap/
trade the slots with any other airline through lease or buy it from other airlines. This operates on
the principle of willing buyers and willing sellers. As demand exceeds supply at Heathrow, slot
trading is now the principle means of entry. This is purely the function of Airport coordination Ltd.
of Heathrow airport and the airlines. The Government of India has no role in allocation of slots
at any foreign airport including Heathrow Airport. Jet Airways has informed that they were
allocated 1 pair of slots in November, 2005 and subsequently bought 3 pairs of slots in 2005 and
2006 and out of which 1 pair of slots has been sold by them to Omen Air. Jet Airways have
further informed that they have also sold the remaining 3 pairs of slots to Etihad airways and have
subsequently leased them back after due compliance with relevant statues, rules and regulations and
are using these slots for their operations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
91. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
SETTING UP OF ARANMULA AIRPORT IN KERALA
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
92. The Committee finds that the proposed Greenfield airport in Aranmula (Kerala) is 120 km
from Trivandrum and 90 km from Cochin, both are international airports and it is violative of the
Government policy of not allowing an airport within 150 km. Moreover, the Kochin International
Airport and Thiruvananthapuram Airport are brand new airports and there is no scope for saturation
of capacity in these airports in near future. The Committee notes that the proposed Aranmula
Airport is violating the principles of 150 kms distance rule and the saturation of the nearby existing

16
airports. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposal for construction of Aranmula
Airport may be reconsidered by the Government.
(Para 99 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
93. Clause 8.1 of Policy for Airport Infrastructure envisages that (a) No Greenfield airport
would be allowed within an aerial distance of 150 kms of an existing civilian airport and (b) In
case a Greenfield airport is proposed to be set up within 150 kms of an existing civilian airport,
the impact on the existing airport would be examined. Such cases would be decided by the
Government on a case to case basis.
94. Ministry of Civil Aviation had granted necessary site clearance for the project and necessary
comments from Ministry of Defence, Directorate General of Civil Aviation, Planning Commission,
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Home Affairs and Airports Authority of India.
95. In its 13
th meeting of the Steering Committee on Greenfield airports held on 17 th August,
2012, the Committee noted that the nearest civilian airports are Cochin and Thiruvanathapuram. The
project falls within an aerial distance of about 150 kms from the existing airports at Cochin and
Thiruvanathapuram. In the meeting, the State Government which is the promoter of Cochin airport
and AAI which owns and operates Thiruvanathpuram airport supported the proposal. After detailed
discussion, the Committee recommended to the Central Government for grant of ‘in principle’
approval for setting up of the airport. The Central Government accepted the recommended of the
Steering Committee and granted ‘in principle’ approval to the project.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
96. The Committee is aghast to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation had granted site
clearance etc. and ‘in principle’ approval has been accorded to the Project.
(Para 99)
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
97. The Committee in its 131
st Report on the Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports
expressed its apprehensions over the closure of existing Government owned airports to facilitate the
private Greenfield airports there. The Government took shelter behind the Concession Agreement
signed with the two private airport operators to justify the closure of government owned airports
in Bangalore and Hyderabad. In this backdrop, the Committee fails to understand the logic behind
granting ‘in principle’ approval by the Central Government for Aranmula Greenfield Airport project.
The Committee feels that the Government should come out with a clear policy decision on new
airports within 150 km radius of existing one.
(Para 100 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
98. The Government of India, keeping in view the enormous growth in air passengers and to
encourage infusion of greater investment in airport sector, pronounced a policy for Greenfield
Airport in April, 2008. Clause 8.1 of the Policy for Greenfield Airports envisages that (a) No
Greenfield airport would be allowed within an aerial distance of 150 km of an existing civilian
airport and (b) In case a Greenfield airport is proposed to be set up within 150 km of an existing
civilian airport, the impact on the existing airport would be examined. Such cases would be decided

17
by the Government on a case to case basis. Hence the Government is having a clear policy in the
matter.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
99. The Committee feels that Government’s policy for “Greenfield Airports” as
implemented is not in favour of airports operated by “Airports Authority of India”.
General Observations
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
100. The Committee finds that except equity boost for Air India, the Union Budget 2013 has
nothing special to offer for the Indian aviation sector. The industry’s most vociferous demand of
reduction of sales tax on ATF which varies from 4-25 from states to states and ‘declared goods’
status for ATF could not be addressed by the Government in this year’s budget also. ATF price
in the country remains among the highest and this is the main cause for higher cost operations
of air service providers.
(Para 101 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
101. The matter of placing V AT on ATF under declared Goods category (which attracts a lower
and uniform rate of 5% ) under the provisions of Central Sales Tax Act was taken up with Ministry
of Finance. However, this has not been agreed to by Ministry of Finance. Separately, Ministry of
Civil Aviation had taken up the matter of reducing V AT on ATF with several State Government. The
State Governments of Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand have reduced V AT on ATF to 4%.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
102. The Committee recommends that efforts may be made to rationalize taxes and
observes that uniform sales tax on ATF throughout the country will stabilize the cost of
operation of air service providers.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
103. The Committee feels that the much hyped creation of Civil Aviation Authority to take care
of all the regulatory and investigative needs of the aviation sector with more powers is still pending
with the Ministry. The Ministry had been informing the Committee for couple of years now that
they are contemplating the Civil Aviation Authority to bifurcate and delineate the functions of policy
maker, regulator and investigator in civil aviation sector. The Committee hopes that the draft Bill
for the purpose would be taken on priority to give the authority required shape.
(Para 102 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
104. A Cabinet Note and a Bill for setting up of a Civil Aviation Authority have been submitted
to the Cabinet.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
105. The Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013 is under the consideration of

18
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.
A Report containing the recommendations/observations of the Committee on the Bill will be
submitted separately.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
106. The Committee hopes that allocation of additional funds for Air India and Airports Authority
of India at RE level will help these organizations to carry on their programmes/projects for the
betterment of aviation industry in the country.
(Para 103 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
107. Ministry is pursuing with Department of Expenditure for grant of additional budget at RE
stage.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the continuous efforts taken by the
Ministry for allocation of additional funds at RE stage for Air India and Airports Authority
of India with Ministry of Finance will yield some positive results.

19
19
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The details of the meetings undertaken with the Ministry of Urban Development as
regards the construction work of DGCA and BCAS Headquarters buildings may also be
informed to the Committee. The Committee recommends that matter may be taken up
expeditiously. The Committee further recommends that Ministry should pursue the removal
of restrictions of 33% ceiling of expenditure for the last quarter with the Ministry of
Finance seriously. The ceiling on spending in last quarter ultimately results in under-
utilization of funds and delay in execution of infrastructure projects. (Para 10)
ANNUAL PLAN 2013-2014
The Committee may be appraised about the reply of the Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission on the request of the Ministry for additional demand of funds.
(Para 15)
GROUND HANDLING SBU
The Committee hopes that the national carrier will improve its performance in the
current fiscal both in respect of financial and physical aspects. (Para 18)
The Committee desires that it may be appraised on the reply of the Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission on the request of the Ministry for additional demand of
funds for infusion of equity in Air India. (Para 22)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that with the replacement of old A320
aircraft, the national carrier can expand its connectivity beyond metro cities in the coming
years. (Para 25)
The Committee notes the reply and feels that the employees related issues of
subsidiaries of Air India should be addressed at the earliest. In this regard the Committee
reiterates its recommendation that these outstanding issues must be settled as early as
possible to enable Air India function as a single entity. (Para 28)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that measures taken under the Turn
Around Plan of Air India and induction of new aircraft in its fleet will help the national
carrier to regain its numero uno  status. (Para 33)
HOTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take up its case
with Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for further allocation of funds for the
Hotel Corporation of India to keep them as a reckoning force in the hospitality sector.
(Para 36)
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
The Committee notes the reply and observes that enhancement of grant for AAI for
its projects in North Eastern Region at RE stage will strengthen the airport infrastructure
in NER. (Para 40)

20
The Committee is happy to note that large number of posts have been created as JE
(ATC), recruitment is on and training facilities have been augmented at designated places
on the basis of its recommendations. (Para 43)
The Committee has been expressing its concern about Patna airport and hopes that
the coordinated efforts between Ministries of Civil Aviation, Defence and State Government
of Bihar will definitely end the stalemate over development of airport in Bihta as an
alternative to Patna airport. (Para 51)
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 54)
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL A VIATION
The Committee feels that the matter relating to the construction of headquarters
for DGCA is hanging for several years and does not expect to see some notable progress
during the current fiscal. The process of filling-up of vacancies in DGCA should also be
completed at the earliest and the matter should be informed in detail to this Committee.
(Para 60)
BUREAU OF CIVIL A VIATION SECURITY
The Committee notes the reply and is surprised to see the fact that the construction
of new building for BCAS could not see the light of the day due to one or other reasons
for the last six years. The Ministry should coordinate with the concerned Ministries to
break the impasse. The Committee may also be apprised on the comments of the concerned
ministries to the cabinet note on creation of Civil Aviation Security Force. (Para 64)
FDI IN A VIATION SECTOR
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 68)
BILATERALS
The Committee notes the reply and feels that the issue of bilaterals with UAE leaves
several questions unanswered. The Ministry’s reply suggests that this decision was taken
more on subjective consideration than objective/concrete ones. The real impact of this will
be against the interest of domestic carriers. (Para 73)
The Committee finds the reply abjectly evasive; it has not responded to the issue/
apprehension underlined by the Committee in the above recommendation. The Ministry in
future should be precise and to the point in its replies. (Para 76)
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the grounds/basis based
on which it has said that said bilaterals with UAE would not affect Air India traffic.
(Para 79)
The Committee notes the reply as interim reply only. (Para 82)
The Committee notes the reply as interim reply and further action on the
observations of the Committee may be appraised duly. (Para 85)
The Committee would like to know terms of reference, date of constitution,
composition of the Committee alongwith the period within which it is supposed to submit
its report. (Para 88)

21
SALE OF BILATERAL BY JET AIRWAYS
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 91)
SETTING UP OF ARANMULA AIRPORT IN KERALA
The Committee is aghast to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation had granted site
clearance etc. and ‘in principle’ approval has been accorded to the Project. (Para 96)
The Committee feels that Government’s policy for “Greenfield Airports” as
implemented is not in favour of airports operated by “Airports Authority of India”.
(Para 99)
General Observations
The Committee recommends that efforts may be made to rationalize taxes and
observes that uniform sales tax on ATF throughout the country will stabilize the cost of
operation of air service providers. (Para 102)
The Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013 is under the consideration of
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.
A Report containing the recommendations/observations of the Committee on the Bill will be
submitted separately. (Para 105)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the continuous efforts taken by the
Ministry for allocation of additional funds at RE stage for Air India and Airports Authority
of India with Ministry of Finance will yield some positive results. (Para 108)

MINUTES

24

25
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th December, 2013 in Room No. 67,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
10. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
11. Shri S. Pakkirappa
12. Shri Prabodh Panda
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee. The Chairman introduced
Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary, M.P. who for the first time joined the Committee. Thereafter,
the Committee considered and adopted the following draft Action Taken Reports on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14).
(i) * * *
25
*** Relate to other matters.

26
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
(iv) * * *
(v) Two Hundred Ninth Report on the Action Taken Replies on the Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of Ministry of Civil Aviation.
3. The Committee adopted the said reports with certain modifications after some discussion.
4. * * *
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

27
27
LIST OF REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 ( with
evidence )
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence )
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

28
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 ( with evidence )
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence )
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th January, 1996.

29
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 (with evidence)
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence)
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (1 Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

30
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption From Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence )
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.8.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001 (8 Reports)
2002 (7 Reports)

31
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 ( with evidence )
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the
country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
2003 (12 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.

32
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 70
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004
2004 (4 Reports)
2004-05 (12 Reports)

33
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 (with evidence)
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
6.12.2004 (RS)
3.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.09.2005
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
2005-06 (18 Reports)

34
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage By Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

35
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
2006-07 (13 Reports)

36
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
16.8.2007
16.8.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
9.05.2007
9.05.2007
9.05.2007
9.05.2007
9.05.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (19 Reports)

37
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133rd
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

38
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
23.10.2008
(Presented to Parliament)
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
23.10.2008
(Presented to Parliament)
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (l0 Reports)

39
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty Ninth Report on Development
of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities
for the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.02.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
03.03.2010
(Presented to Parliament)
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

40
1
158th
159th
160th
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty First Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
21.07.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
28.07.2010
(Presented to Parliament)
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to the
Parliament
01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

41
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
11.08.2011
(Presented to the
Parliament)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
11.08.2011
(Presented to the
Parliament)
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
27.04.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
27.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

42
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11.2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

43
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways-
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
27.02.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
27.02.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11. 2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

44
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
07.08.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
07.08.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
17.12.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
17.12.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
17.12.2013
(Presented to the
Parliament)
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
2013-14 (8 Reports)

45
1
204th
205th
206th
207th
208th
2
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Two Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Third Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One-Hundred
Ninety Fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninety Fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Tourism
4
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
06.02.2014
(Presented to the
Parliament)
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
3
13.01.2014
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.