PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 179
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY NINTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT ON 'FUNCTIONING OF 
NATIONAL MUSEUM'
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 MAY, 2012)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 MAY, 2012)
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 MAY, 2012)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 MAY, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY NINTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT ON ‘FUNCTIONING OF
NATIONAL MUSEUM’
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST MAY , 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 ST MAY , 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2012/V AISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—16
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 17—19
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 21—24

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2011-2012)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Shri Satish Sharma
4. Shri Narendra Kashyap
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
6. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
#7. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
$8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
%9. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
*10. V acant
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
13. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
14. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
15. Shri Hassan Khan
16. Dr. Kruparani Killi
17. Shri Jose K. Mani
18. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
19. Shrimati Jaya Prada Nahata
20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Rajaram Pal
22. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
23. Shri Rudramadhab Ray
24. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shrimati Meena Singh
27. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
@31. Shri Subrata Bakshi
# V acancy caused due to expiry of the term of Shri Shadi Lal Batra w.e.f. 2 nd April, 2012 and renominated on 4 th May, 2012.
$ Nominated on 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Vikram Verma who ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to expiry of the
term w.e.f.  2 nd April, 2012.
% Nominated on 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Syed Azeez Pasha who ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to expiry of
the term w.e.f.  2 nd April, 2012.
* Vacancy caused due to expiry of the term of Shri Ramdas Agarwal w.e.f. 3 rd April, 2012.
@ Nominated on 2 nd March, 2012 vice Shri Ajit Singh who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his
inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.  18th December, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Seventy Ninth Report  on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty Seventh Report
on ‘Functioning of National Museum’.
2. One Hundred Sixty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 10
th March,
2011 in Rajya Sabha and on 11 th March, 2011 in Lok Sabha.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred Sixty Seventh Report  were received from the Ministry of Culture on 24 th January, 2012.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report as its meeting held on the 17 th May 2012.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
May 17, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Vaisakha 27, 1934  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred Sixty Seventh Report on The
Functioning of National Museum of the Ministry of Culture which was presented on 10 th March,
2011 in Rajya Sabha and on 11 th March, 2011 in Lok Sabha.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on the 24 th January, 2012
in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been
categorized as follows:–
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry:
Para Nos. 16, 42, 62, 64, 67, 68, 70, 75 and 76 Total—9
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Ministry replies:
Para Nos. 5, 6, 23, 24, 30, 33 and 41 Total—7
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 22, 31, 32, 36, 37, 46, 55, 56 and 57 Total—9
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are
still awaited:
Para Nos. 58, 59, 63, 78 and 79 Total—5
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken. The recommendations of the Committee contained in
the One Hundred and Seventy Seventh Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and
recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the
succeeding paragraphs.
Closure of Galleries
5. The Committee is at loss to note that out of 26 galleries in the National Museum,
7 remained closed for 3 to 4 years, Manuscripts Gallery being closed for 8 years from 2003. The
Committee found that the reasons given were not convincing at all. For example, ‘Central Asian
Antiquities – II’ gallery after repairing of roof leakages, remained closed as the space of the gallery
was being used for storing the exhibition material. Some of the galleries were sealed by the
investigation agencies pending vigilance inquiries into theft cases. Decorative Arts–I gallery
remained closed due to storage of display materials. Another gallery – ‘Tanjavur Paintings’ could
not be opened because of shortage of synthetic moulding and other wooden material. Two
galleries–Musical Instruments and Wooden Carving – were remained closed due to roof leakage and

2
shortage of display material. Another gallery could not be opened after the demise of the Curator
in-charge of the gallery in 2008.
6. The Committee finds such excuses as shortage of display and other material, posts being
vacant, leakage, etc. for keeping the large number of galleries closed for long time, unacceptable.
It, in fact, reflects an utterly casual attitude as well as lack of proper planning. Problems mentioned
above, if taken up promptly and consistently, should have been undoubtedly sorted out within
reasonable time to complete the work. The Committee is of the view that if this is the state of
affairs in the National Museum situated in New Delhi, condition of museums in other cities cannot
be expected to be any better. The Committee emphasizes the need to sensitize the concerned
authorities to ensure that the problems enumerated above which led to the closure of almost 1/4
th
of the galleries of the National Museum, are addressed in time.
(Para 13 and 14 of the 167 th Report)
Reply of the Government
7. The Galleries were initially closed for various reasons viz. to undertake renovation, works,
to mount exhibition in the gallery, water seepage from roof, etc. Re-opening of the Galleries were
delayed because of reasons beyond the control of the National Museum such as water leakage from
roofs, delegated financial power of DGNM were very limited, i.e. only Rs. 1.00 lakh, etc. Beyond
this amount every file had to be moved seeking approval of the Integrated Finance Division of the
M/o Culture, which took more time. In April, 2011, the DGNM has been given enhanced financial
powers of Rs. 10.00 lakhs. Materials for renovation works have therefore been procured. In view
of this, most galleries are in the advanced stages of renovation and re-opening. Action for filling
up the vacant posts, is in progress.
8. Status of Action Taken to reopen the seven galleries, which have remained closed for
various reasons is as under:–
(i)
Musical Gallery:- This has been reopened in December, 2010.
(ii) Tanjavur Gallery:-  Over 70% renovation work has been completed. Action for
installation of improved lighting system and one large LCD TV is in progress. The
Gallery is expected to be reopened in the first quarter of 2012.
(iii) Wood Carving Gallery:- This gallery was closed for renovation of adjacent gallery i.e.
Musical instruments gallery (Musical Instruments were shifted to this Gallery).
Musical Instruments gallery was reopened in December, 2010. Thereafter, renovation
of Wood Carving Gallery was initiated. Dr. Chhaya Bhattacharya Haesner, Tagore
Fellow at National Museum and Dr. Charu S. Gupta, Dy. Director Crafts Museum,
New Delhi, who are the experts for this gallery were also consulted for renovation
works. Action for reopening of the Gallery is in progress. Lighting and layout has
been approved. Gallery is expected to be reopened in the second quarter of 2012.
(iv)
Central Asian Antiquties-II:- Technical Plan for the Gallery has been prepared with
inputs from Dr. Chhaya Bhattacharya-Haesner, Tagore Fellow working in the Central
Asian Antiquities. A concept note has also been submitted by her. Action for reopening
the gallery is in progress.
(v)
Tribal Art and North East Gallery:- Objects/Collections are on display in the Gallery.
Modern lighting system will be put in place besides some civil works. Gallery is
expected to be reopened in the second quarter of 2012.

3
(vi) Decorative Art Gallery:- Requisite civil and electrical works for building of 10-12 new
show cases, modern lighting system, etc. have been taken up and work is in progress.
For decipherment of inscriptions and informative labels, assistance of some Persian
scholars will be taken. Thereafter, a firm date for reopening the gallery will be fixed.
(vii) Manuscripts:- Gallery Renovation and reopening of Manuscripts gallery with the
existing one officer has been initiated.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
9. The Committee notes the status of work undergoing in various galleries. The
Committee hopes that the steps taken to open the closed Galleries will be completed in a
fixed time schedule. As regards need for obtaining financial sanction beyond Rs. 1 lakh
from IFD, the Committee finds it very low. The Committee is happy to know that this limit
has since been enhanced upto Rs. 10 lakhs and hopes that now the works should get
expedited faster. The Committee does not consider the water seepage from the roof to be
beyond the Ministry’s control; it was perhaps due to lack of required monitoring and
coordination with the CPWD authorities.
10. The Committee finds that the National Museum despite having a large building and a huge
collection in its possession, several of its galleries are closed mainly due to lack of adequate manpower,
essential logistics and proper maintenance. The Committee is also surprised to note that there are no
laid down guidelines with regard to the taking up of renovation of galleries of museums and the work
is taken up only when the problem has reached to an alarming stage which finally results in closure
of galleries. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Culture to explore the techniques and practices
available world-over for renovation of galleries and museums. The Committee recommends the
Government should frame guidelines for renovation of museums in the country in a fixed time schedule.
The guidelines may consist of details as to when and how the galleries will be taken for renovation
with a view to ensure that display of the collections continues without interruption. (Para 15, ibid)
Reply of the Government
11. Necessary action for re-opening of closed galleries and filling of vacant posts have been
taken. At present, there are no laid down guidelines with regard to taking up of renovation of
galleries of National Museum. However, renovation of galleries is taken up periodically. Government
has taken initiative on museum reform and a 14 Point agenda has been formulated to carry forward
the desired reforms in phases. National Museum is taking appropriate action in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
12. The Committee would like to know if it is possible to have guidelines for renovation
of Galleries laid down and if yes, the reason for not having it done so far may be given.
The Ministry should share the 14 point Agenda formulated to carry forward the museum
reforms as well as the actions taken so far in this regard, with the Committee.
13. The Committee feels that every Museum should have some extra space so that in case any
gallery has to be closed due to renovation, etc., the collection from those galleries could be safely
shifted to unutilized space. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the idea of creating
additional space/galleries to display more number of collections in its possession, may be
considered and acted upon. (Para 16, ibid)

4
Reply of the Government
14. At present in the National Museum no additional space is available.  Out of the three phases,
two phases viz. Phase I and Phase II are complete. Phase-III of the National Museum will be taken
up as soon as the space occupied by ASI is vacated for which necessary action is in progress.
Suggestions of the committee has been noted for compliance when additional space is available.
Thereafter more number of collections will be displayed .
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee would like to know the progress regarding shifting of ASI as well as
roadmap for phase III project, if any.  However, the Committee notes that the work is still
to be started and depends on several ifs and buts and does not know how much space would
be generated after phase III.
MAINTENANCE OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM
16. The Committee notes the problems faced in maintaining the building of the National
Museum as CPWD, it appears has not been able to do the job to the satisfaction of museum
authorities. Despite their consistent efforts, the problems of water logging, seepage, etc. continue
to persist. The Committee is of the view that the National Museum is not like any other building;
it houses lakhs of invaluable collections and precious items which need to be preserved and
maintained under perfect conditions. The CPWD has been engaged in building section since 1854
including handling of maintenance of building of hundreds of cultural institutions in the country.
By this time, CPWD must have acquired expertise in handling the maintenance works of the
Museum or similar institutions. The Committee recommends that a dedicated wing may be created
in the CPWD which can handle the work of maintenance of buildings of cultural institutions like
the National Museum. The Committee also recommends that the performance of the CPWD maybe
closely monitored and in case things do not improve the maintenance of the building of National
Museum and its various civil and electrical works may be taken away from CPWD and handed
over to some specialized and competent agencies preferably under the Government for better
maintenance and upkeep of the Museum building. (Para 22, ibid)
Reply of the Government
17. CPWD has been requested to create a dedicated wing for the maintenance of the National
Museum. Also, the National Museum is considering for entrusting Maintenance work to some
specialized agency as recommended. National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC) was
consulted. They stated that since the main constructions were not done by them, they showed certain
reservations in taking up maintenance work alone. However, when the major work for construction
of Phase-III would be taken-up/awarded to an agency (other than CPWD), maintenance works of the
entire Museum would also be awarded to such agency. In the meantime, the works of electrical and
civil divisions of CPWD have been closely monitored. Even though, both the electrical and civil
divisions of CPWD have improved their maintenance part, their performances are not completely
satisfactory since there have been some isolated seepage/leakage in two galleries.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
18. The Committee is of the view that since CPWD will remain the agency for

5
maintenance works of phase I and phase II, there is need for close liaison with them to
attend the work promptly. National Museum should also be able to alert CPWD in advance
before the monsoon period starts. All the staff should also be sensitized to bring even the
small seepage problem to CPWD’s notice before they become unmanageable. The
Committee hopes that with the construction of building at 3 rd phase, the things will
improve.
SECURITY
19. Another disturbing feature that came to the notice of the Committee was the closure of
galleries in the museum due to theft and vigilance cases. The Secretary, Department of Culture
informed the Committee that he was writing to the CBI about this. The Committee hopes that while
the investigative/enforcement agencies must do their work, the Ministry also needs to be seriously
looking into this aspect and ensuring that the acts of pilferage, theft, etc. do not recur at all.
Needless to say that such things do happen mainly because of lax of security and supervision by
the persons on the higher positions in the Museum administration. (Para 23, ibid)
20. The Committee has been expressing concerns about the security of museums from time to
time in its earlier reports. The Museums have highly valuable and precious collections which form
part of our rich and diverse heritage. The Committee, therefore, recommends to make use of the
best technology available to safeguard the museum to prevent theft or unwanted incidents. The
Committee hopes that the matter should be taken up with the investigative agencies to get things
expedited and to ensure that the gallery closed due to pending inquiry into theft be opened at the
earliest. (Para 24, ibid)
Reply of the Government
21. There has been no closure of any gallery due to theft. A vigilance case against three officers
of the National Museum was reported to Vigilance Section of the Ministry of Culture in 2005. The
case involved scrutiny and examination of lot of documents. Three officers of the National
Museum were charge sheeted and the case has been referred by Central Vigilance Section to the
CBI for preliminary investigation. As requested by CBI, files and documents were provided to them.
However, the disciplinary proceedings could not progress further, since the proceedings have been
stayed by the Central Administrative Tribunal in respect of two officers. The case has therefore,
not been finalized as yet. Further, as suggested by the Committee, the security systems of the
National Museum are being upgraded. In order to ensure a proper security of the National Museum
CCTV coverage in all the galleries, X-ray Scanning/baggage machine and Door Frame Metal
Detector (DFMD), have been proposed and bid were invited through open tender. Technical and
financial evaluation of these bids has been done and bidders/firms have been shortlisted. Since the
work involves expenditure of about 1.5 Crores, the process for obtaining financial concurrence has
been initiated.
Reply of the Government
22. In order to ensure foolproof security to check pilferage/theft of art works, National
Museum has already initiated action for installation of CCTV surveillance in all the galleries/stores,
X-ray scanning of baggage, Door Frame Metal Detector (DFMD) etc. The security systems of the
National Museum are being upgraded. In order to ensure a proper security of the National Museum
CCTV coverage in all the galleries, X-ray Scanning/baggage machine and Door Frame Metal

6
Detector (DFMD), have been proposed and bid were invited through open tender. Technical and
financial evaluation of these bids has been done and bidders/firms have been shortlisted.  Since the
work involves expenditure of about 1.5 Crores, the file has been submitted for obtaining financial
concurrence.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
23. The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to upgrade the security system
and hopes that it would be completed in a fixed timeframe. The financial concurrence
sought in this regard may be expedited.
24. The Committee also recommends that latest security gadgets should be added on
regular basis with a view to improve the security in the Museum.
DISPLAY OF EXHIBITS
25. The Committee notes that out of 206000 collections with the National Museum, only 15681,
constituting 7.61 per cent of total collections, were on display. The Committee is not satisfied with
the number as well as selection of items on display in the National Museum. The Committee does
not agree with the idea of justifying lower display percentage on the basis of this percentage in
other museums. Although the Committee was not informed about this percentage in other world
museums, it however, learnt that display percentage in Louvre in France was about ten. Here also
it is less. The Committee was not informed about the capacity of the National Museum to have
items on display. The Committee feels that our efforts should be to have maximum of them on
display at a time to ensure maximum exposure of our rich and diverse heritage to the people.
Visitors, in fact, can not come to the National Museum again and again. (Para 30, ibid)
Reply of the Government
26. No Museum in the world displays its entire collections because of the fact that all the
collections are not worth to display. Only selected exhibits are displayed for education/propagation
of culture. However, display of objects depends upon the availability of display area and as such,
every Museum displays its collections within the limitations of its space. The details of display of
the collections following museums vis-a-vis their total collections is as under:–
Sl. Name of Museum Total No. of No. of Artefacts Percentage
No. collections of on Display %
Artefacts
  1. National Museum 2,06,000 15,681 7.61
  2. Indian Museum 1,10,000 3500 3.18
  3. Victoria Memorial Hall 28,393 1500 5.28
  4. National Gallery of Modern Art, 17000 1000 5.88
New Delhi
27. The National Museum has noted the suggestion of the committee for compliance. Though
at present only 7.61% of the total collections are on display, when the Phase-III of the National
Museum will be constructed, more number of its collections will be displayed. Phase-III of the

7
National Museum will be taken up as soon as the space occupied by ASI is vacated for which
necessary action is in progress.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee would not like to make any comment about the display percentages
in our Museums without knowing this percentage in the famous Museums of the world. It
would like to have those figures.
29. The Committee also observers that the displays in the Museum are not rotated regularly, and
therefore, the visitors lose the charm of visiting the Museum. The Committee recommends that a
year long display-schedule may be drawn up and publicized widely showing which of the artifacts
will be on display when, so that people know this beforehand. It would enable them to plan the
time of visiting the Museum. In the summer vacations, time may be extended in the evening and
the museum should be made more attractive/interesting to the students through creative audio-visual
presentations. (Para 31, ibid)
Reply of the Government
30. Objects on display in different galleries are rotated periodically rotated from time to time,
both to enable visitors to see different objects and also for preventive conservation of the objects.
Besides this, there are arrangements for display of ‘Object of the Month’ and ‘Gallery of the
Month’ where displayed objects are rotated at regular intervals. Special exhibitions are organised
with objects from reserve collections.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee notes the comments and recommends that wide publicity should be
given to the display “of the object of the month” and “Gallery of the Month”.
32. The Committee expresses its concern about the fact that the Art Acquisition Committee of
the National Museum has been defunct for the last 16 years affecting the addition of objects
adversely. No justification for this can convince the Committee about this delay. The Committee
recommends that reasons for this delay must be looked into and steps be initiated immediately to
constitute the Art Acquisition Committee. The Committee would like to be informed about this at
the earliest. (Para 32, ibid)
Reply of the Government
33. Art acquisition Committee became defunct after certain malpractices were reported and
some complaints received. National Museum could not initiate further action for reorganisation of
the Committee due to lack of storage space and since conservation capability stands stretched to
the maximum. At present the existing storage space has fully been utilized and there is no additional
space available to keep any additional art objects. As soon as the space is created after construction
of Phase-III, art acquisition committee would be reconstituted/ revamped. Construction of
phase-III would start, once ASI vacates the premises.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Committee does not find the reply of the Ministry convincing. Acquisition of

8
Artifacts, an integral function of any Museum should be a continuous process and lack of
space to keep acquired objects should not be an excuse.  Idea of acquiring alternate storage
on temporary basis should have been explored. The Committee recommends that steps
should be taken for creation of Art Acquisition Committee at the earliest.
35. The Committee fails to understand how  909 objects (2269-1360) could be added during
the period when Art Acquisition Committee was not functioning. The Committee would like to be
informed of the procedure adopted for acquisition of collections during that period.
(Para 33, ibid)
Reply of the Government
36. Acquisition of these collections was made through gifts and donations  from PMO, State
Governments, foreign Governments, Institutions, individuals, etc. However, It appears that the
number indicated in the observations of the Committee needs to be rectified. On careful scrutiny,
it was found that total number of acquisitions during 1999-2011 are 928 and details of the same
is as under:–
Gifts – 633; Purchased  - 121 (28 items from National Defence Fund and 93 modern coins from
vendors for new coin gallery.) and Loan – 174
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Committee notes the addition in collections through gifts and donations and hope
they are kept safely in the existing space.
VERIFICATION OF COLLECTIONS
38. The Committee finds it hard to believe that no verification of artifacts kept in the Museum
had been done since 2003. The Committee expresses its concern about such a casual approach
towards protection and upkeep of the valuable treasures of the nation. The Committee fears that
when the verification process is taken up some of the objects may be reported missing. Lack of
manpower given as reason for not undertaking the verification, is neither convincing nor
acceptable. Help of professional agencies may have been taken for doing this verification. The
Committee feels that the Ministry should have more watchful and National Museum pro-active in
this regard, which they have failed to do so. The proposal of digitization of art objects is a good
effort but physical verification is required to account for the articles. The Committee recommends
that the Government should make all out efforts to take up the process of verification of articles
without further loss of time and to ensure that the process of verification is started soon and be
done regularly in future. (Para 36 , ibid)
Reply of the Government
39. National Museum has initiated process to start the physical verification of the artifacts of
different sections. As a first step, National Museum proposes to utilize the best expertise in the
concerned fields and some have already been identified. Letters to the experts from the field of
Archaeology (Dr. R.D. Trivedi, former Director (ASI)) and Numismatic and Epigraphy (Dr. Munira
Khatun) has been sent for their consent on receipt of which action for physical verification would
start. Collections in the Dr. Zakir Hussein Memoriam Museum will be verified by a Committee of

9
officers of the National Museum in the next quarter. Collections of Paintings Department is being
verified simultaneously as handing/taking over of the collections is in progress.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee is happy to know that verification process has been started.  It would
like to know when the physical verification would be completed and also the status of
consent from the experts. The Committee reiterates that verification should be a continuous
process and all the efforts be made in this regard.
41. The Committee finds that there is a minimal use of IT in the affairs of National Museum.
The Paintings and Manuscripts for major part of the collection in possession of National Museum
are very fragile and some of them are rarest of rare and one of its kinds and their frequent physical
handling can cause irreparable damage in them. The Committee found that the museum is not
equipped to use digital and new media. Today in the digital age of internet, interactive games and
computers, most museum are in need of drastic upgradation of this purpose. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that, as a first step, digitization of objects, both for their conservation and
for giving access to scholars, researchers and general public, through Internet and other means
must be considered for expeditious implementations. (Para 37, ibid)
Reply of the Government
42. Action is in progress for the National Museum to enter into a MOU with M/S Google for
a virtual move-around the Museum’s Gallery. Under the Google art project, to start with, 150
master pieces from the National Museum collections has been identified for digitisation and will be
available on the internet. Primary documentation for this is in progress. The National Museum
intends to cover more art objects in future and make them available for viewing over the internet.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee notes that National Museum has to go a long way in making use of
the latest technology. The Museum has still not finalized the MoU for virtual move around
in the Museum Gallery. Besides this, there is no reply on the recommendation of
the Committee for digitization of objects and for giving access to scholars, researchers
and general public. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken on these
recommendations.
44. The Committee expresses its concern at slow progress of phase III of the building
expansion plan that was started in 2003. Seven years is, in fact, too long to justify the delay for
whatever reasons. Large number of our collections is not being displayed due mainly to the
shortage of display areas. The Committee notes with dismay that despite the fact that EFC for the
phase-III was carried out way back in 2003 and an amount of Rs. 33 crore was also sanctioned,
the project is yet to be taken up. The Committee has learnt that the process of proving alternative
accommodation to the ASI is on and that is taking time. If the non-shifting of ASI was the main
reason of delay in the expansion plan of the museum, the Committee fails to understand why the
allocation of alternative accommodation to the ASI was taking such a long time. The Committee
hastens to add that while earmarking new accommodation to the ASI, its enhanced need for more
space due to its increasing strength should be kept in mind. The Committee recommends that
efforts be made to expedite shifting of the ASI to a suitable space so that its functioning is not

10
adversely affected and the expansion plan of the museum could be taken up without further
delay. (Para 40, ibid)
Reply of the Government
45. National Museum has already initiated necessary steps in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
46. The Committee notes a studied silence about issues relating to shifting of ASI and
the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee would like to have details
about this process started way back in 2003. It hopes that Ministry of Culture, under whose
purview both, ASI and National Museum fall, will take steps to shift ASI in a time-bound
manner so that National Museum can go ahead with the construction of III
rd phase.
47. The Committee further recommends that the cost assessment of the project would need to
be revised/reviewed and adequate allocation made so that the work does not suffer for want of
funds. (Para 41, ibid)
Reply of the Government
48. The cost assessment would be redone  after ASI vacates the premises and Ministry of
Culture will be requested to allocate requisite funds.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
49. The Committee hopes that the project would get sufficient funds once the space is
available for construction and the project will not be delayed due to lack of funding.
SIGNAGE
50. The Committee while visiting the Museum noted that the signage and the labels about the
displays were unattractive and too small in size to see. Certain errors of translation in Hindi and
those of typing were also noticed. The Committee recommends that the immediate steps may be
taken to make the signage and tags more visible and attractive to the visitors. (Para 42, ibid)
Reply of the Government
51. Improved display of Internal and External Signages have already been implemented by
National Museum. Display of labels/tags inside the galleries has also been initiated.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee notes the reply.
53. The Committee is happy to note that based on its earlier recommendations, the Government
has delinked the selection of heads of cultural bodies including that of Director General, National
Museum from the purview of UPSC and adopted that procedure of search – cum – selection
process. However, the Committee is surprised to note that the Govt. could not find suitable
candidates for the post of Director General and the National Museum, as a result, remained

11
headless during the last many years which had a telling impact on all the  activities of the National
Museum. The Committee is afraid that if such a state of affairs continued for a few more years,
the condition of the National Museum may become from bad to worse. (Para 55, ibid)
54. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the appointment of DG of National Museum
should be handled at the highest level and the Government should take urgent steps to appoint a
professional as the Director General from among the museum experts. (Para 56, ibid)
55. The Committee emphasizes the need to make the post of Director General, National
Museum more attractive by providing adequate autonomy, both administrative and financial, to
avoid unnecessary delays in its urgent works. The Committee is of the view that there are many
experts in the country who could have been persuaded to work for the betterment of this institution
in the manner acceptable to them. (Para 57, ibid)
Reply of the Government
56. The Search-cum-Selection Committee in its meeting held on 07.01.2010 decided to re-
advertise the post for inviting more applications to enlarge the scope of selection. Accordingly, the
vacancy for the post was re-advertised in the leading National Dailies on 16.01.2011. But no
suitable candidate has been found for the post of DGNM. However, searching of a suitable
candidate is still going on under Search mode.
57. The Committee is surprised at the maze of recruitment procedure which is not only
extremely complicated about also difficult to follow. In this connection, the Committee takes note
of the evidence tendered by the Secretary on the 30
th September 2010 which is reproduced below:-
“…….. As you rightly pointed out, why do we need so many recruitment rules? It is almost
one recruitment rule for 1.5 posts. If you go through the recruitment rules, you will
amazed, and after putting in 35 years in the bureaucracy, even, I cannot decide much on
all this, Why do we need such complications? And, that is the question which I have been
asking, to which I will retire without an answer…….These were created by our convoluted
systems in deference to what we call inter-Ministerial operating procedures, which go on
ensuring, through checks and balances, that every form of check that is possible is put in
place. It has formed like silt, sedimentation, and over decades has reached such a level that
it would require to be dealt with sternly. My first submission is that the number of
vacancies is mind-boggling……..”                                      (Para 58 , ibid)
58. The Committee feels that this has created all the mess in the National Museum as all the
problems is attributed to shortage of staff. The Committee finds that mainly due to shortage of
manpower, the work of verification of artifacts could not be taken up and some of the galleries
had to be closed for unduly larger period. The Committee finds that in many cases steps to fill
up vacancies were taken years after the posts were fallen vacant, as a result, during the period
of 1994 to 2003, many posts which were lying vacant for more than one year were deemed to
be abolished and as such they could not be filled up.                            (Para 59, ibid)
Reply of the Government
59. The process for filling up of vacant posts has been initiated. Proposal for filling up of 12
Group ‘A’ posts have been taken up with UPSC and necessary action is on to complete
observations raised by them. Requisition for filling up of 26 posts has been made with Staff
Selection Commission. Six posts have been filled up by promotion and requisition for publication

12
of advertisement in respect of 08 posts has been sent to Employment News. Two cases are being
progressed for consideration of Departmental Promotion Committee.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
60. It appears that no efforts were made for searching eminent persons/experts from the
field by the Search-cum-Selection Committee particularly for the higher positions. The
Committee hopes that necessary steps would be taken to fill the vacancies in time bound
manner.
61. The Committee is of the view that the Government’s instruction that a post lying vacant
for more than one year may be deemed abolished, was being followed mechanically with total
disregard to its consequences to the functioning of National Museum. If this instruction is to be
followed in all the Museums, in a few years’ time the Museums will be without any employee and
then the Government would have a strong case to hand them over to private parties for running
them. (Para 60, ibid)
Reply of the Government
62. Out of 41 temporary posts, sanction for 31 posts have been received. Also, 04 permanent
posts which were deemed abolished have also been revived. Action has also been initiated for filling
up the vacant posts as per details given in the reply to Para 58/59.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63. The Committee notes the reply.
64. The Committee, thus, has a strong reason to believe that the Government has failed to give
attention to the National Museum which it deserved. It recommends that efforts be made to review
all the lapsed posts and they are filled up at the earliest. (Para 61, ibid)
Reply of the Government
65. Four permanent posts which were deemed abolished posts have been revived as mentioned
in reply to Para No. 60. Action in respect of other posts has been initiated for revival. Action has
also been initiated for filling up the vacant posts as per details given in the reply to Para 58/59.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
66. The Committee notes the reply.
67. The Committee welcomes the creations of new posts of Additional Director General and
Joint Director General. The Committee has, however, noted that the selection through UPSC is a
rigid and time consuming procedure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the posts of
Additional Director General and Joint Director General may be kept outside the purview of UPSC
selection process and instead the search cum selection process may be adopted. It should be
ensured that the posts may be filled up within a period of three months. (Para 62, ibid)
Reply of the Government
68. Ministry of Culture had proposed in the draft Recruitment Rules to keep the posts of ADG

13
and JDG out of purview of UPSC. However this was not agreed to by both UPSC and DOPT and
hence the proposed RRs have been framed as per extant Govt. rules. The draft RRs have now been
sent to UPSC on 23.11.2011 after the same were cleared by DoPT on 10.10.2011. Their
concurrence from UPSC is awaited.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
69. The Committee would like to know the arguments given by UPSC and DoPT against
Search Committee procedure for not keeping the posts of Additional Director-General and
Joint Director-General out of the purview of the UPSC.
70. The Committee finds that the plethora or recruitment rules and the lack of autonomy in
decision making at the level of the National Museum are greatly affecting the functioning of the
institution. The Committee recommends that National Museum may be made an independent
autonomous body with all the inherent powers to administer its affairs including recruitment and
staffing. The recruitment process of the National Museum may be delinked from UPSC and Staff
Selection Commission. The Museum may be authorized to devise its own procedures for selection
of officers and staff the same way the central universities are recruiting their faculties and
supporting staff. (Para 63, ibid)
Reply of the Government
71.  The Suggestion has been noted for necessary action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
72. The Committee notes the reply and would like to know what actions were being
proposed in this regard.
73. The Committee notes the lack of commitment in the Ministry not only in filling up of the
posts but also in reassessing the recruitment of staff. The Committee observes that the staff
strength in various categories was assessed many years ago. The Committee recommends that a
reassessment of the vacant positions should be taken up expeditiously and placed before the
Government. (Para 64, ibid)
Reply of the Government
74. A study was undertaken to reassess the manpower planning for the National Museum.
Report has been submitted. Further necessary action in this regard is in progress.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
75. The Committee may be provided a copy of the Report on manpower planning for the
National Museum.
76. The Committee notes that there are number of museums all over India both under
Government and private control and most of them are in a state of neglect and need attention
by specially trained staff. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the matter may be taken
up with the Ministry of Human Resources Development to look into the course details and
revamp it to make it more useful content-wise. The practical aspect of training such as internship

14
in a museum may be added so that the people recruited should be actually handling the objects
and that they know how to handle the objects, collection display etc. The Committee also
recommends that possibility of integration of museology course in the university curricula may
be explored.
77. The Committee also recommends that since the requirement of museums are specific, the
appointing agency may be persuaded to keep a separate cadre for museology with transferable options
in the other Government museums on deputation basis all over India. This will give exposure to all
to work in other museums also and in their place of choice. (Para 67 & 68, ibid)
Reply of the Government
78. A sub-committee of CABC under the Chairmanship of Prof. B.N.Goswami was constituted
which inter-alia was mandated to suggest curriculum on Museum Management. The Committee
has submitted its report to the Govt. Necessary actions are being taken to implement the various
recommendations which includes creation of a separate cadre of Museum Professionals.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
79. The Committee notes the reply.
SOUVENIR SHOP
80. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry in setting up the Souvenir Shop.
However, the Committee is of the view that publicity through print and electronic media is required
to be given to the shop so that more people come to buy the products. Further, all the Government
agencies/PSU/State Government Emporia/all offices of State and Central Government where
memento/gifts are purchased may be informed of the products available in the shop and briefed
through Bulletin/Brochure every month. Internet shopping may also be introduced to tap the
potential market. (Para 70, ibid)
Reply of the Government
81. The National Museum has noted the suggestions for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
82. The Committee may be informed of the steps taken to promote the souvenir shop.
WEBSITE OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM
83. In an age where everything is just a click away, the Committee recommends that the
National Museum should make efforts to make the site more attractive, descriptive and interactive.
(Para 72, ibid)
Reply of the Government
84. The website of the National Museum is under review and redesigning. Tender process is
being finalized.

15
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
85. The Committee recommends that the website should be redesigned at the earliest by
finalizing the tender process.
86. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry. It, however, emphasizes the need
to have Citizen partnership in the Museum. For this purpose people may be invited to the functions
to be held in Museum. They should also be involved through publications, post cards and souvenir.
(Para 75, ibid)
Reply of the Government
87. The National Museum has noted the suggestions for compliance.  All functions held in the
Museum are being advertised in leading news papers. Action to update the mailing list is also in
progress.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
88. The committee notes the reply.
89. The Committee is also of the view that although audio guides are available in the Museum
but its content needs improvement. The Committee recommends that views of general public may
be taken to enhance the content and it should also include history of Delhi and information about
other monuments. The content may also be according to the taste of the tourists such as for
children so that they are not bored by the long lectures. (Para 76, ibid)
Reply of the Government
90. Tender for providing multimedia guides has been finalized and action in this regard is in
progress.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
91. The Committee notes the reply.
GOSWAMI COMMITTEE REPORT
92. The Committee notes that the Ministry has taken some measures to comply with the
recommendations of the Goswami Committee Report. However a lot needs to be done like setting
up an “Advisory Boards or a Committee” with specialists from fields of exhibition, gallery,
collections management, presentation etc. so that they can pool their efforts and guide the curators
and others in setting up the National Museum. The Committee recommends that the observations
of the Goswami Committee should be taken in positive way and the Ministry should start
implementing it without delay. (Para 78, ibid)
Reply of the Government
93. As per the recommendation of the Goswami Committee, a Museum Advisory Board  for
National Museum under the Chairmanship of Prof. B.N. Goswami has since been constituted with
members drawn from the Museum field. Four meetings has been held since December, 2010 and

16
lot of activities as suggested by the Board has been initiated for efficient functioning of the National
Museum.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
94. The Committee may be apprised of the activities suggested by the Museum Advisory
Board for the National Museum and the action taken so far for effective functioning of
National Museum.
CONCLUSION
95. The Committee appreciates the frank admission by the Secretary, Ministry of Culture before
it, which has been reproduced in para 12 of this Report. He clearly shares concerns of the
Committee the administration of museum leaves much to be desired in several aspects that have
been described and commented upon by the Committee in this Report. The Ministry of Culture has
been considered so important that it has been put directly under the charge of the Prime Minister
himself. But the Committee is surprised to see that this importance is not reflected by the manner
in which the affairs of the Museum are being managed. The Committee hopes that its observations
and recommendations regarding the functioning of the Museum would be brought to the notice at
the highest level in the Government for taking immediate steps to conduct the affairs of not only
of the National Museum, Delhi but, of all the Museums under the Ministry, in the professional
manner. (Para 79, ibid)
Reply of the Government
96. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance and remedial action
being taken, wherever required to improve the functioning of National Museum.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
97. The Committee notes that the reply of the Government does not reflect the
seriousness with which it had summed up its impression received during its visits and
deliberations on issues relating to working of the National Museum. Instead, it side-tracks
the Committee’s concerns and recommendations.

17
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CLOSURE OF GALLERIES
The Committee notes the status of work undergoing in various galleries. The
Committee hopes that the steps taken to open the closed Galleries will be completed in a
fixed time schedule. As regards need for obtaining financial sanction beyond Rs. 1 lakh
from IFD, the Committee finds it very low.  The Committee is happy to know that this limit
has since been enhanced upto Rs. 10 lakhs and hopes that now the works should get
expedited faster. The Committee does not consider the water seepage from the roof to be
beyond the Ministry’s control; it was perhaps due to lack of required monitoring and
coordination with the CPWD authorities. (Para 9)
The Committee would like to know if it is possible to have guidelines for renovation
of Galleries laid down and if yes, the reason for not having it done so far may be given.
The Ministry should share the 14 point Agenda formulated to carry forward the museum
reforms as well as the actions taken so far in this regard, with the Committee. (Para 12)
The Committee would like to know the progress regarding shifting of ASI as well as
roadmap for phase III project, if any.  However, the Committee notes that the work is still
to be started and depends on several ifs and buts and does not know how much space would
be generated after phase III. (Para 15)
MAINTENANCE OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM
The Committee is of the view that since CPWD will remain the agency for
maintenance works of phase I and phase II, there is need for close liaison with them to
attend the work promptly. National Museum should also be able to alert CPWD in advance
before the monsoon period starts. All the staff should also be sensitized to bring even the
small seepage problem to CPWD’s notice before they become unmanageable. The
Committee hopes that with the construction of building at 3
rd phase, the things will improve.
(Para 18)
SECURITY
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to upgrade the security system
and hopes that it would be completed in a fixed timeframe. The financial concurrence
sought in this regard may be expedited. (Para 23)
The Committee also recommends that latest security gadgets should be added on
regular basis with a view to improve the security in the Museum. (Para 24)
DISPLAY OF EXHIBITS
The Committee would not like to make any comment about the display percentages
in our Museums without knowing this percentage in the famous Museums of the world. It
would like to have those figures. (Para 28)
The Committee notes the comments and recommends that wide publicity should be
given to the display “of the object of the month” and “Gallery of the Month”. (Para 31)
17

18
The Committee does not find the reply of the Ministry convincing.  Acquisition of
Artifacts, an integral function of any Museum should be a continuous process and lack of
space to keep acquired objects should not be an excuse.  Idea of acquiring alternate storage
on temporary basis should have been explored. The Committee recommends that steps
should be taken for creation of Art Acquisition Committee at the earliest. (Para 34)
The Committee notes the addition in collections through gifts and donations and hope
they are kept safely in the existing space. (Para 37)
VERIFICATION OF COLLECTIONS
The Committee is happy to know that verification process has been started.  It would
like to know when the physical verification would be completed and also the status of
consent from the experts. The Committee reiterates that verification should be a continuous
process and all the efforts be made in this regard. (Para 40)
The Committee notes that National Museum has to go a long way in making use of
the latest technology. The Museum has still not finalized the MoU for virtual move around
in the Museum Gallery. Besides this, there is no reply on the recommendation of
the Committee for digitization of objects and for giving access to scholars, researchers
and general public. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken on these
recommendations. (Para 43)
The Committee notes a studied silence about issues relating to shifting of ASI and
the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee would like to have details
about this process started way back in 2003. It hopes that Ministry of Culture, under whose
purview both, ASI and National Museum fall, will take steps to shift ASI in a time-bound
manner so that National Museum can go ahead with the construction of III
rd phase.
(Para 46)
The Committee hopes that the project would get sufficient funds once the space is
available for construction and the project will not be delayed due to lack of funding.
(Para 49)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 52)
It appears that no efforts were made for searching eminent persons/experts from the
field by the Search-cum-Selection Committee particularly for the higher positions. The
Committee hopes that necessary steps would be taken to fill the vacancies in time bound
manner.                                                                    (Para 60)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 63)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 66)
The Committee would like to know the arguments given by UPSC and DoPT against
Search Committee procedure for not keeping the posts of Additional Director-General and
Joint Director-General out of the purview of the UPSC. (Para 69)
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know what actions were being
proposed in this regard. (Para 72)
The Committee may be provided a copy of the Report on manpower planning for the
National Museum. (Para 75)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 79)

19
SOUVENIR SHOP
The Committee may be informed of the steps taken to promote the souvenir shop.
(Para 82)
WEBSITE OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM
The Committee recommends that the website should be redesigned at the earliest by
finalizing the tender process. (Para 85)
The committee notes the reply. (Para 88)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 91)
GOSWAMI COMMITTEE REPORT
The Committee may be apprised of the activities suggested by the Museum Advisory
Board for the National Museum and the action taken so far for effective functioning of
National Museum. (Para 94)
CONCLUSION
The Committee notes that the reply of the Government does not reflect the
seriousness with which it had summed up its impression received during its visits and
deliberations on issues relating to working of the National Museum. Instead, it side-tracks
the Committee’s concerns and recommendations. (Para 97)

MINUTES

22

23
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday the 17 th May, 2012 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Shri Thomas Sangma
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri Hassan Khan
9. Dr. Kruparani Killi
10. Shri Jose K. Mani
11. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
12. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
13. Shrimati Meena Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered the draft 179
th and 180 th Reports on the Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty-seventh
Report on the Functioning of National Museum and its One Hundred Seventy-second Report on the
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern Region respectively. After some discussion, the
Committee adopted the Reports with minor modifications.
23

24
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence, S/Shri Shadi Lal Batra and
Jagat Prakash Nadda to present the reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Hassan Khan and
Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha on the 21
st May, 2012.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The meeting then adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.