 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
364 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Forty-Third Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTHREPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Forty-Third Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of Ministry 
of Tourism 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  08th February, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS        iii-iv 
4. REPORT                      1-47 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   48-51   
6. ANNEXURE        52-54 
7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
55-57

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy  - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji* 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar* 
 
 Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan  
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Nagender Lakra, Senior Secretariat Assistant 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f. 26th September, 2023 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Sixty-Fourth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Forty-Third Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of Ministry of Tourism. 
2. The Three Hundred Forty-Third Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
the13th March, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Forty-Third Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on 6th 
October, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  6th 
February, 2024. 
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
February 06, 2024                                               Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Magha 17, 1945 (Saka)                                  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                            Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
BE Budget Estimates 
CFTIs Central Funded Technical Institutions 
CNA Central Nodal Agencies 
CRS Central Reservation System 
DPHH Domestic Promotion and Publicity Head 
DPPH Domestic Promotion and Publicity Head 
DTVs Domestic Tourist Visits 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FCI Food Craft Institute 
FCTIs Foreign Currency and Travel Informatics 
FTVs Foreign Tourist Visits 
FTAs Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
G20 Group of Twenty 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
ICC Indian Cultural Centre 
ICCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IHM Institute of Hotel Management 
IITTMs Indian Institutes of Tourism and Travel Management 
IEC Information, Education, and Communication 
IITF Incredible India Tourism Facilitator 
LRS Liberalized Remittance Scheme 
LGSCATSS Loan Guarantee Scheme for Covid Affected Tourism 
Service Sector 
MICE Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions 
MIs Managing Institutions 
MSME Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 
NEP National Education Policy 
NCHMCT National Council for Hotel Management and Catering 
Technology 
NIDHI National Integrated Database of Hospitality Industry 
OPP Overseas Promotion and Publicity 
PFMS Public Finance Management System 
PRASHAD Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage 
Augmentation Drive 
PWDs Public Works Departments 
RE Revised Estimates 

iv 
 
RTSOI Responsible Tourism Society of India 
SA Sub Agencies 
SD 2.0 Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
SEIS Service Exports from India Scheme 
STCI Sustainable Tourism Criteria of India 
TCS Tax Collected at Source 
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 
UT Union Territory 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism 
on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred Forty -Third Report 
on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of Ministry of Tourism which was presented  to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 13th March, 2023.  
  
  
2.         The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 6 th October, 2023 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
  
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.: 7, 23, 27, 40, 46, 48, 49, 56, 74, 77, 95, 103, 135, 138, 141, 161, 
170, 173 and 175. 
  
Total: 19 
  
Chapter-II:  
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:6, 8, 16, 25, 47, 50, 63, 67, 78, 84, 90, 91, 93, 109, 124, 125, 126, 
132, 133, 139, 140, 143, 151, 156, 168 and 174. 
Total: 26 
  
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 26, 39,  57, 62, 64, 75, 76, 88, 89, 96, 100, 114, 
115, 119, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 148 and 162. 
Total: 26 
  
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil                                                                                              
Total: Nil 
  
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
  
Assessment of Demands For Grants 2023-24 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The shortfall is mainly in the major scheme of the Ministry, the Flagship Scheme, 
Swadesh Darshan and PRASHAD and in promotion and publicity, both domestic and 
overseas. The Ministry has launched the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 Scheme and identified 55 
destinations under the same and budgetary  cuts at this stage would delay the implementation 
of the scheme. Howeve r, the Ministry has submitted that the shortfall in allocation is not 
likely to impact any Scheme as the Ministry can ask for additional funds at RE stage, if 
required. Further, the major Schemes of the Ministry are on -going in nature and will 
continue during the financial year 2024-2025 also. Accordingly, any pending liability on any 
Scheme can be met from the budget of 2024 -2025. The Committee recommends that if the 
Ministry requires additional funds at the R.E. stage the Ministry of Finance should alloca te 
the same. 
(Para 7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1              The comments of the Committee are noted. 
  
Focus Area of the Ministry for 2023-24 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee observes that the Ministry had projected a B.E. of Rs. 320 crores for 
promotion and publicity for both domestic and overseas. The actual B.E is only Rs. 242 
crores. Keeping in view that 2023 is being promoted as the Visit India Year and the 
promotional schemes drawn up by the Ministry, the Committee feels that the  allocated 
amount would not be sufficient for the purpose. 
 (Para 23) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      The recommendation of the committee is noted. Ministry will seek additional fund at 
RE stage, if required. However, it will also depend upon approval of the Competent 
Authority on continuation of Overseas Publicity and Promotion Scheme for the period upto 
2025-26. At present, only inevitable  expenditure under this scheme is made with the 
approval of the Department of Expenditure on case to case basis. 
 

3 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        The Committee also observes that the Focus areas of the Ministry for 2023 -24 are 
identical to the Focus areas in the year 2022 -23. The Committee notes that Focus Areas are 
defined in a budget to ensure that maximum effort and funds are provided to that area during 
that financial year to ensure success of the project. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry instead of routinely focusing on the same goals may set up precise achievable 
targets in the various areas of functioning. 
 (Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
  
 Monitoring of Projects Under Swadesh Darshan  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee observes that in every year from 2019 onwards, the allocation  under 
the Scheme has been reduced by about 50% at the Revised Estimates stage. There is a 
marked decrease in utilisation of the allocated budget since 2019 onwards. The Committee 
notes that the Ministry has submitted that its Schemes being ongoing in natu re, any 
shortcomings in funds would be adjusted in the next Financial Year. The Committee notes 
that reduction at R.E. stage usually happens due to inefficient planning and implementations 
on the part of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Mini stry should re-examine 
its planning, organising and implementing strategy with a view to remove bottlenecks and 
inefficiencies at all levels. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make all 
efforts for full utilization of funds under this scheme  so that the allocation is not reduced at 
R.E. stage. 
 (Para 40) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      Recommendation of the committee is noted. 
  
Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        The Committee observes that the Swadesh Darshan Scheme 1.0 had fifteen thematic 
circuits pertaining to culture, heritage, Eco -tourism, Wildlife, Rural, Cruises etc and almost 
all these themes have been repeated in the Scheme 2.0. With the exception of MICE and 
Wellness Tourism, no new areas for tourism have been i dentified. Consequent to the 
pandemic, staycations and working holidays have become popular tourism trends. Niche 
tourism areas like Caravan tourism, Gastronomy tourism, Avi tourism and Military tourism 
are gaining popularity. However, Scheme 2.0 has not e xplored these emerging trends in 
tourism.         

4 
 
(Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      In Swadesh Darshan (1.0) scheme, projects were sanctioned under identified thematic 
circuits whereas objective of Swadesh Darshan 2.0, is to develop   responsible 
and  sustainable  tourism  destinations  following  a  tourist  and  destination  centric  approa
ch.  
  
5.2      As per the guidelines of the Swadesh Darshan 2.0, the Scheme will encourage 
development of benchmarks and standards for generic and theme specific development of 
tourism destinations and the States will follow the benchmarks and standards while planning 
and developing the projects. While major themes such as Culture and Heritage, Adventure 
Tourism, Eco Tourism, Wellness Tourism, MICE Tourism, Rural Tourism, Beach Tourism 
and Cruises (Ocean & Island) have been identified on the sch eme guidelines, all other 
themes will fall in one of the above major themes.    
  
5.3      The observation of the Committee is duly noted and it is submitted that the Ministry 
will continually strive to ensure that new and emerging niche areas of tourism a re not left out 
from the purview of its schemes.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee observes that major changes have been made in the funding pattern, 
disbursal of funds and receipt of Utilisation Certificates in the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 Scheme. 
New features of Impact Assessment of the projects under the Scheme and monitoring of the 
Scheme through a Comprehensive Portal by authorities at all levels have been introduced. 
The Committee appreciates the inclusion of these new features and feel s that impact 
assessment of tourist footfalls, employment generation at the ground level would help the 
Ministry in successful planning of future schemes. Digitization of all the processes of the 
Scheme and monitoring by Centre, State and District level authorities through a portal would 
assist the Ministry in management and reduce the delays. 
 (Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      Observation of the Committee is noted. The unified portal for e -Services is being 
developed by the Ministry of Tourism. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee has been informed that the Ministry has empanelled 10 Consultants for 
the SD 2.0 Scheme and has done three workshops with them regarding the vision, scope and 
deliverables of the Scheme. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry, drawing from 

5 
 
its experience in the previous Scheme, has endeavored to enhance the capability of the 
Consultants. 
 (Para 49) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      Observation of the Committee is noted. 
  
 Impact of PRASHAD scheme 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.        The Committee observes that there are a total of 45 sanctioned projects under this 
scheme out of which only 20 have been completed. 9 projects under this Scheme are still 
pending completion with only upto 60% progress. There are still 16 projects yet to be 
developed under this scheme. Considering the fact that this scheme was initiated in 2014 -15 
the progress is very slow. The Committee observes that all the projects, both completed and 
ongoing, under PRASHAD have had de lays of at least one year (ANNEXURE -V). Some 
projects like the Development of Mathura -Vrindavan, U.P as Mega Tourist Circuit (Ph -II) 
and Development of Basic facilities at Vishnupad temple, Gaya, Bihar have had delay of 4 
years. The Committee also observes that some of the Targets in the EFC proposal of October 
2021 pertaining to this Scheme have not been achieved. 
 (Para 56) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      The suggestion of the committee is noted. The Ministry of Tourism is regularly 
reviewing progress of the ongoing projects under the chairmanship of Secretary (Tourism). 
  
Promotion and Publicity  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.        The Committee notes that domestic tourism has been given special importance in the 
budget by schemes like “Dekho Apna Desh”, development of 50 new locations as tourist 
friendly destinations, the development of Vibrant Villages schemes in Border areas and 
establishment of Unity Malls. The Committee also notes that the Outcome Budget of the 
Ministry for the year 2023-24 has a target of 5% increase in domestic tourism. 
 (Para 74) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      The observation of the Committee is noted. 
  
 
 

6 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.        The Committee recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to utilise the budget 
effectively and then approach the Ministry of Finance for increased allocation at the Revised 
Estimates stage. 
 (Para 77) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
10.1      The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
  
Human Resources Development 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.        The Committee acknowledges that the Hospitality Sector is the most affected sector 
in the Covid pandemic with massive revenue losses and job vulnerability still continuing to 
this day. However, the Committee notes that even in the pre-covid era, the number of persons 
placed after skill training is very low. The outcome of the skill training does not seem 
commensurate with the expenditure incurred on the programmes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should review the quality of the programmes and faculty to 
enhance the skills of the students to an employable level. Pre -placement assistance such as 
mock interviews sessions may also be given to the students to help them in the job market 
(Para 95) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1      The recommendation of the Parliament Standing Committee has been well taken and 
the Division has already overhauled the program, right from the process of empanelment to 
bringing improvement in the Guidelines. The suggestion of P arliament Standing Committee 
is also noted for compliance. 
  
Safety and Security in Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee notes that Swadesh Darshan 2.0 Scheme is a destination and tourist 
centric scheme. The foremost attribute in the i mage of a tourist destination is that of a safe 
and secure place and out of all the requirements of a tourist, safety is paramount. In the last 
few decades, safety and security have become even more of a pressing concern. The 
Committee is pleased to see th e initiatives taken by the Ministry to take up the matter of 
selecting 25 tourist sites as pilot project for formation of a separate police unit in the 
States/UTs. However, only 14 States have till date, deployed tourist police in one form or the 
other. The Committee exhorts the Ministry to continue to take up the matter with other states 
for creation and deployment of tourist police at destinations in their areas. 
(Para 103) 

7 
 
Reply of the Ministry         
12.1    Recommendation of the Committee is noted. The matter has been taken up with all the 
Principal Secretaries of the Tourism Department of the State Govt. and UT Admin reiterating 
the need to develop a uniform Tourist Police in all States and Union Territories. 
  
Utilisation Certificates 
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee observes from the details given by the Ministry that a number of 
Utilisation Certificate are pending to the tune of a cumulative amount of Rs. 370.45 crores. 
The Ministry has not indicated the year from which the UCs are pending. Since conditionality 
regarding submission of Utilization Certificates is a bar for the release of funds, the 
pendency of Utilization Certificates and the amount involved therein have implications for 
the further release of funds and  impinges on the effective implementation of tourism 
infrastructure projects formulated by the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may take all efforts to reduce the pendency of the UCs. 
(Para 135) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    The Ministry of Tourism notes the recommendation of the Committee. The Ministry 
of Tourism is undertaking regular review meetings with the implementing agencies on 
multiple issues including timely utilization of funds and submission of UCs. 
  
Niche Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
14.      The Committee observes that the pandemic has changed not only the way we live and 
work but also the way we travel. One of the major outcomes of the pandemic was the 
normalization of remote working which has given rise to the growing popularity of 
staycations, vacations in places near nature and remote places etc. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take steps to conduct frequent market surveys and collect 
data to understand travel trends. The Committee observes that  data and market intelligence 
surveys are vital for creating a road map for the travel industry as future travel is going to be 
very different. 
 (Para 138) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1    The Ministry of Tourism notes the recommendation of the Committee.  
  
  
 

8 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15.      The Ministry has identified 55 destinations in Swadesh Darshan 2.0 and 45 under 
PRASHAD scheme. As per the Union Budget at least another 50 destinations are to be 
developed. The Committee has been informed that Ekta Mall is already set up near the Statue 
of Unity which can be used as a model for developing Unity Mall. Unity Malls are to be 
constructed in every State showcasing the local culture and products and the Ministry is in 
the process of undertaking consultation s with various stakeholders including State 
Governments. The Committee observes that every state of India has a unique culture and 
geographical features, which can be showcased by the Unity Malls to cater to every kind of 
Niche tourist. 
 (Para 141) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    The observation of the Committee is noted.  
  
 Ease of Doing Business 
Recommendation/Observation 
16.      The Committee is pleased to see the initiatives taken by the Ministry in improving Ease 
of Doing Business in the Tourism sector. The Committee observes that Tourism and 
hospitality fall under the purview of several departments and hence face many challenges 
related to regulatory compliances. There is a need to simplify, rationalise and streamline the 
regulations with a focus on deploying digital technologies and self-certifications. 
(Para 161) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    The observation of the Committee is noted.  
  
Improving the Consultation Process with MPs 
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee feels that the  entire process of selection of the destinations under 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0 was done soliciting no inputs from Members of Parliament who 
represent the public and from important stakeholders. The Committee recommends that in the 
future the Ministry may adopt  a participatory and consultative approach with MPs before 
formulating major schemes and plans. 
(Para 170) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    Recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
  

9 
 
Revision of Tourists Data Computing Method 
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee observes that as per the verified data sent by the Ministry, the data 
relating to the monument in question was in fact incorrect. In this particular case, the data of 
the ASI was incorrect. Due to the incorrect data, the monument in quest ion which was never 
on the list of Top Ten Monuments of India, was listed in fourth place that year. The 
Committee feels that this shows a lack of scrutiny on part of the Ministry as this should have 
been verified at least at the time of formulating the li st of Top Ten Monuments. The 
Committee is of the view that data on tourism from government publications are extrapolated 
and used widely. The Ministry has submitted that a Standard Tourism Methodology has been 
developed in line with UNWTO for a comprehensi ve and uniform collection of Tourism 
Statistics from all districts. The Ministry should take all measures to ensure that the data 
received by it from the ASI and the state Governments is accurate. 
(Para 173) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    The observation of the Committee is noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee notes that it is the sole responsibility of the Ministry of Tourism to the 
authenticity of the data published in their publications, whatever may be sources of 
collection. Unless and until they are satisfied with the correctness of the data the Ministry 
should not publish it in the public domain. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Tourism may evolve its own mechanism to collect data on the arrival of foreign tourists and  
domestic tourists and all other data relevant to the tourism sector. 
 (Para 175) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    The observation of the Committee is noted. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER-II 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
  
Assessment of Demands For Grants 2023-24 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        As is evident from the above Table, against the projected demand of Rs. 2675.01 
crores the net allocation made for the Ministry of Tourism under Demand is 2400.00 crores. 
The shortfall is Rs. 275.01 crores. 
 (Para 6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      The additional requirement of funds would be sought at RE stage. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The reduction under the promotion and publicity budgetary Head is also inexplicable 
given that tourism is to be promoted on a Mission Mode this year and 2023 is being 
promoted as the Visit India Year. The Ministry has not given any reason for the reduction in 
funds under the Domestic Promotion  Head. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Finance may allocate additional funds under this Head at the R.E. stage. 
 (Para 8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      Any additional requirement of funds would be sought at the RE stage. 
  
Surrender of Savings  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        The Committee finds that the reduction in Revised Estimates in the past three years is 
across all Central Sector Schemes. The Flagship Scheme of the Ministry, Swadesh Darshan 
has had budgetary cuts of upto 50% at the Revised Estimates stage in the past three years. 
 (Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      During the current financial year 2022 -23, the Ministry projected allocation of  Rs. 
1543.61 Crores at RE stage against the BE allocation of Rs. 2,400.00 Crores.   Against the 
projection of Rs. 1543.61 crores, the Ministry of Finance allowed an allocation of  Rs. 

11 
 
1343.13 crores.   The projection at RE Stage was reduced by the Ministry due to less 
expenditure in the first two quarters of the Financial year.   
3.2      The Ministry of Finance revised the procedure for release of funds under Central 
Sector and Cen trally Sponsored Schemes.   Implementation of the revised procedure posed 
certain challenges like nominating Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs), Sub Agencies (SAs), 
selection of Banks, mapping of the CNAs Sub Agencies and the Banks on the Public 
Finance Manageme nt System portal, etc. which took considerable time for resolution 
resulting in low level of expenditure.   Further, the unspent balances lying with the 
Implementing Agencies were to be fully returned to the CNA's Account by all the 
Implementing Agencies.   Release of funds to the Implementing Agencies in respect of 
Schemes like Swadesh Darshan, PRASHAD, Assistance to Central Agencies and Assistance 
to Institutes of Hotel Management, Food Craft Institutes, etc. was not possible till the 
unspent balance lying with all the Implementing Agencies was returned to the Central Nodal 
Agencies‟ Account.   The implementing agencies took lot of time in returning the unspent 
balance, inspite of vigorous efforts by the Ministry. In the Month of September 2022, the 
Ministry of Finance slightly relaxed the condition of refunding unspent balances by all the 
Implementing Agencies to enable further release of fund under the any Scheme and allowed 
release of funds to those implementing agencies which have returned the unspent 
balances.       
3.3      Another reason for lesser expenditure is the fact that no new projects were sanctioned 
under Swadesh Darshan, which is the flagship Scheme of the Ministry, which consume major 
share of the Ministry‟s budget, as the Scheme was reviewed and a revamped Scheme of SD 
2.0 was introduced.   Accordingly, the expenditure under this Scheme was limited to the on -
going projects sanctioned under SD 1.0.   There is delay on the part of some of the State 
Governments in submitting requisite documents lik e Utilization Certificates, Completion 
Certificates, etc. despite regular interaction with the State Governments even at the level of 
Secretary (Tourism).  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee feels that a separate budget allocation should h ave been kept for a 
major yearlong event like the G20 which is expected to have much impact on Indian tourism. 
The Committee notes that the budget of Rs. 242 crores would not be enough for all the 
routine promotional activities to be undertaken as well as the additional events and Summits 
planned for the G20. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry may approach 
the Ministry of Finance for increased allocation for the budget for promotional activities. 
(Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      Ministry is presently able to meet the expenditure from DPPH and OPP scheme. For 
additional funds, if required, Ministry of Finance would be approached at the appropriate 
time. 

12 
 
 Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        The Committee has been informed that the focus in this Scheme 2.0 has shifted from 
thematic circuits to tourist and destination centric development and sustainable and 
responsible tourism. The Committee appreciates the Scheme’s focus on sustainable tourism 
as unplanned and exces s tourism has adverse impact on the local physical environment and 
civic services. However the Committee finds that the remaining key principles of the Scheme 
are generic and vague and not easily transferable to achievable outcomes. 
(Para 47) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      Development of tourism is primarily the responsibility of the State Governments. The 
Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its „Swadesh Darshan‟ scheme as „Swadesh Darshan 
2.0 (SD 2.0)‟ with the objective to develop sustainable and respons ible destinations, 
following a tourist & destination centric approach. The Scheme will encourage development 
of benchmarks and standards for generic and theme specific development of tourism 
destinations and the States will follow the benchmarks and standa rds while planning and 
developing the projects. Selection of destinations under SD2.0 scheme will be based on the 
State Perspective Plan (SPP) submitted by the State Governments.  
  
Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee desires to know if the Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0 is being developed 
on the Hub and Spoke Model which can draw tourists to other destinations near the 
destinations being developed under the Scheme. 
(Para 50) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      As per the scheme  guidelines of the SD2.0 scheme, it aims at enhancing tourist 
experience throughout his journey from arrival to return and it will be a key element of 
planning for tourism development under the Scheme. Further, the Competition in tourism is 
not confined to  tourism service providers or one particular experience, but the overall 
experience of the destination. The Scheme accordingly focuses on the destination as a whole 
and not merely adding a few components here and there at the destination. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee has been informed that out of the five components of the Champion 
Services Sector Scheme, funds have been released for only two and the remaining three are 
under implementation. The Committee would like to know the time frame for implementation 
of the remaining three components. 

13 
 
(Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      The implementation of the remaining three components depends upon demand raised 
by concerned implementing agencies/organizations. 
  
Development of Iconic Destinations 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.      The Committee is surprised to note that though the Ministry of Tourism has proposed 
17 destinations as iconic destinations the Government has not approved the proposals. The 
Committee recommends that the Gove rnment may take a decision on the proposals at the 
earliest. 
(Para 67) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1    Considering that the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 is envisaged as destination centric scheme 
and some of the destinations identified as iconic destinations have already been taken under 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0, it may not be prudent to go ahead with the 'Development of Iconic 
Tourist Destinations' scheme. Therefore, the Ministry of Tourism has decided not to go 
further with the scheme. 
  
Promotion and Publicity  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.        The Committee appreciates the various schemes of the Ministry to promote domestic 
tourism. The Committee notes that the Ministry gives funds for the conduct of various 
fairs/festivals in India. The Committee would like to know whether fairs/festivals of India are 
included in the international calendar in the manner of the Wagner Festival in Germany, the 
Ballet Festival, the Philharmonic etc. The Committee feels that the local cultures, fairs and 
festivals of India have not been as keenly promoted as the tangible culture. The Committee 
recommends that if required, the Ministry may take the help of ICCR and the Ministry of 
Culture for the promotion of the intangible culture of India. 
(Para 78) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      The Utsav Portal website, a digital initiative developed and launched by the Ministry 
of Tourism, aims to showcase all the events, festivals and live darshans across India to 
promote different regions of the country as popular tourist destinations worldwide.  It is now 
being integrated into the incredible India web -site. The recommendation of the committee is 
noted. 
  

14 
 
Overseas Promotion and Publicity Including Marketing Development Assistance 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.      The Committee observes that the Ministry is planning to leverage India’s presidency 
of G20 to promote both domestic and inbound tourism this year. However, the Overseas 
Promotion and Publicity scheme has not yet been approved and the Ministry can conduct 
only the crucial and unavoidable activities at this stage. The Committee feels that this would 
be a setback to the Ministry’s plans for global campaigns for promotion. The Committee 
notes that all eight functioning overseas promotion offices are being shut down. The Ministry 
has stated th at alternative methods of promotion are being used but has not specified the 
methods in this regard. The Committee observes that Tourism Officers have been appointed 
in Indian Missions abroad for the purpose of promotion of tourism. The Committee desires 
that details of the work being done by the Tourism Officers and the roadmap of the Ministry 
for the promotion of Indian tourism abroad may be provided. The Committee observes that 
Ministry should have closed down the overseas offices only after providing al ternate methods 
for overseas promotion and publicity. The Committee emphasizes that the Ministry should not 
lose the opportunities provided by the G20 meetings and the Visit India promotional 
campaign and should make sure that a roadmap for promotion overseas is in place before the 
start of the next financial year so that budget can be utilized. 
(Para 84) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1    The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. Ministry of Tourism 
promotes India as a holistic destination in the tourism generating markets to promote various 
Indian tourism products and tourism destinations of the country to increase  India‟s share of 
the global tourism market. These objectives are met through an integrated marketing and 
promotional strategy, and a syn ergized campaign in association with the Travel Trade, State 
Governments and Indian Missions. The Government continuously engages with industry 
experts and other relevant stakeholders and take their suggestions and feedback for 
promotion of varied tourism products of India and attract tourist with specific interest and to 
ensure repeat visits for the unique products in which India has a comparative advantage. 
10.2    Ministry of Tourism has provided roles and responsibilities for the promotion of 
Indian Tou rism to the Tourism officers. Tourism officer in Indian Missions prepared a 
country specific strategy for promoting Incredible India in respective countries. 
10.3    Further, in order to boost visitor arrival Ministry of Tourism, G overnment of India has 
declared “Incredible India! Visit India Year 2023”. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
11.      The Committee observes that if Tourism is to be promoted on a Mission Mode in India 
and the vision of its contribution to USD 5 Trillion Dollar is to become a reality, it is 
necessary to have in place the institutional capacities to meet the needs of the i ndustry. The 
Committee notes that no new Institute of Hotel Management (IHM) has been set up in the last 

15 
 
three years, except for a Central Institute of Hotel Management (CIHM) at Jagdishpur, U.P 
which has been in execution stage since the last three years.  The Committee would like to be 
updated on the physical progress of this project. Upon query, the Ministry has stated that no 
new proposal has been received in the previous financial year from the State Govts/UT 
Admins for consideration under the Scheme As sistance to 
IHMs/IITTMs/NCHMCT/ICIs/FCIs/PSU. The Committee recommends that the Ministry make 
efforts to explore the possibility of establishing IHMs/FCIs in those States which do not have 
any such institutes. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may  endeavour to have tie-
ups of IHMs with leading Hotel groups to give the students industry exposure. 
(Para 90) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1    Three new Food Craft Institute (FCI) has been set up at Balaghat, Dhar, Shahdol in 
Madhya Pradesh in the year 2020. 
11.2    Three FCI has been upgraded into State IHM at Leh (Ladakh) (2020), Jabalpur 
(Madhya Pradesh) (2021) and Dharamshala (Himachal Pradesh) (2020). 
11.3    New proposal has been received in the division for upgradation FCI into State IHM at 
Aligarh (Uttar Pradesh) and Mysuru (Karnataka) and opening of SIHM at Gorakhpur. 
11.4    All the States, either have Central IHM or State IHM or FCI.   
11.5    All the IHM Boards have representation from the Industry and these board members 
are contributing to the functioning of these institutes in a professional manner. 
11.6    The suggestion of the Committee is duly noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may also submit details of progress in 
modification of the curriculum as per the NEP scheme. 
(Para 91) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1    The NCHMCT started working on the Action plan for the adoption of National 
education policy 2020 by hospitality institutes in the month of June 2020. The approach of 
the NCHM was to first discuss in a forum the key essential salient features of the NEP and 
how they can be subsumed into developing our degree curriculum. To deliberate on these 
issues we have constituted a Working Group comprising members from amongst Principals, 
University Professors, Industry experts (training, education side), education experts.  
  
12.2    A total of 4 meetings have been conducted so far. The said Committee focuses on the 
following:  

16 
 
i. Curriculum & Credit Framework for UG/PG Program in Hotel & Hospita lity 
Administration (CCFUGP). 
ii. Duration of Programs, Credits requirement. 
iii. Content Development workshops. 
iv. Formation of Academic Committee of NCHMCT. 
  
12.3    Present status of NEP Scheme is under: - 
(i) After receiving 03 Nominations from JNU, NCHMCT will call a meeting of its academic 
Committee to review & approve the NEP complied new Curriculum & Credit Framework 
for UG/PG Program in Hotel & Hospitality Administration. 
(ii) Then, sent for final approval of the competent authority i.e. Honourable vice chancellor of 
JNU before the implementation of this new curriculum from academic session 2023 -24 
onwards at all the institutes affiliated with the National Council for Hotel Management. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee observes t hat the Tourism sector offers many opportunities for 
entrepreneurship and especially for small and family businesses. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may take all efforts for creation of Centres of Excellence in Institutes and 
inclusion of Tourism management as a distinctive course. 
(Para 93) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    The NCHMCT has prescribed the criteria to declare any institute as a Centre of 
Excellence. The Council has already informed all the chairmen of the boards of respective 
institute of the same. 
13.2    At present, Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management is running MBA 
(Travel and Tourism Management) and BBA (Tourism and Travel) through its different 
centres. Students from different parts of the country have enrolled in th ese courses. IITTM 
through these courses provides trained Manpower to the leading Tourism and Hospitality 
related companies of the Country. After getting experience and learning Tricks of the Trade, 
many students have also started their own ventures in Tourism. 
13.3    Insofar, as Central Institute of Hotel Management are concerned, all Institutes under 
the Academic umbrella of NCHMCT presently encouraging students to be entrepreneur and 
necessary inputs are also given. The NCHMCT being the academic controlling body of these 
IHMs are also disseminating the information about the entrepreneurship program running by 
ITDC through its Ashok Institute of Hospitality and Tourism and informing them to join the 
entrepreneurship program. 
13.4    The Tourism Management as a subject is a part of the syllabus of B.Sc. (HHA) run by 
the Council. 

17 
 
 Loan Guarantee Scheme for Covid Affected Tourist Services Sector (LGSCATSS) 
Recommendation/Observation 
14.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work alongwith the Ministry of 
MSME to target small enterprises in the tourism sector. The Committee would also like to 
have details of the number of funds allocated and utilized towards MSME participation in 
tourism in the last five years. 
(Para 109) 
Reply of the Ministry         
14.1    Ministry of Tourism is running the "Loan Guarantee Scheme for Covid Affected 
Tourism Service Sector (LGSCATSS)", under which, loan upto Rs. 10.00 lakh is extended 
to each Tour Operators/ Travel Agents/ Tourist Transport Operators approved/re cognized by 
the Ministry of Tourism, upto Rs. 1.00 lakh is extended to each Regional Tourist Guide/ 
Incredible India Tourist Guide approved/recognized by the Ministry of Tourism and Tourist 
Guides approved/ recognized by the State Govt./ UT Administration. 
  
14.2    Purpose of the LGSCATSS is to provide guarantee coverage for the loans provided 
by the Scheduled Commercial Banks to the above mentioned beneficiaries, to discharge their 
liabilities and restart their business affected due to Covid -19 pandemic. Validity of the said 
scheme was till 31.03.2023 or till the guarantee of Rs. 250.00 crores are issued under the 
scheme, whichever is earlier and is applicable to all eligible loans sanctioned under the 
scheme on or after 04.10.2021 (issuance of LGSCATSS gu idelines by NCGTC) till 
31.03.2023. No guarantee fee will be charged from the MLIs by NCGTC for the credit 
facilities provided under the Scheme. 
  
14.3    As on 12.06.2023, 18 scheduled Commercial Banks are on board for the scheme. 
Around 464 guarantees ha ve been issued amounting to Rs. 6.62 crore approx., out of which 
Rs. 3.88 crore stands disbursed. 
  
Global Perspective – Comparison of India With Other Countries 
Recommendation/Observation 
15.      The Committee observes that International Tourist Arrivals and Domestic Tourism are 
both on the rise in India but have yet to reach the pre-pandemic levels. 
(Para 124) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) in India during 2019 to 2022:- 
Year FTAs (in Millions) % change 

18 
 
2019 10.93   
2020 2.74 -74.9 
2021 1.52 -44.4 
2022 @ 6.19 305.4 
Source: Bureau of Immigration 
@: Provisional 
  
Domestic Tourist Visits (DTVs) and Foreign Tourist Visits (FTVs) in India during 2019 to 
2022 
Year 
DTVs  
(in Millions) 
FTVs  
(in Millions) % change DTVs % change FTVs 
2019 2,321.98 31.41     
2020 610.22 7.17 -73.72 -77.17 
2021 677.63 1.05 11.05 -85.29 
2022 @ 1,739.50 9.80 156.70 828.79 
Source: State/UT Tourism Departments 
@: Provisional 
Note: Data for Maharashtra and Delhi are estimated figures. All India figures were 
obtained after combining figures of all States/UTs. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
16.      In reply to a query of the Committee regarding the steps taken to simplify the e -visas 
and create awareness , the Committee has been informed that  currently the e -Visa scheme, 
(under five sub -categories of e -Tourist Visa, e -Business Visa, e -Medical Visa, e -Conference 
Visa and e-Medical Attendant Visa) is available to nationals of 165 countries. The Committee 
was also informed that the Ministry along  with the Ministries of Home and External Affairs 
has been promoting and creating awareness of the e -visa facilities through circulars, road 
shows, meetings, seminars, social media, digital media, travel and consumer fairs etc. among 
the tourist stakeholders and the tourists. 
(Para 125) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    The e-Visa facility in following 7 categories are being extended to the Nationals of 
167 countries:- 
1) e-Tourist Visa 

19 
 
2) e-Business Visa 
3) e-Medical Visa 
4) e-Conference Visa 
5) e-Medical Attendant Visa 
6) e-Ayush Visa  
7) e-Ayush Attendant Visa 
Ministry of Tourism through other line Ministries and through various modes promote Indian 
e-Visa facility. E-Visa is valid for entry through 29 designated airports and 5 designated sea 
ports. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      In reply to a query of the Committee regarding the need to standardize tourism 
services and formulation of a roadmap for promoting and enforcing quality standards in 
tourism, the Ministry has submitted that a National Integ rated Database of Hospitality 
Industry (NIDHI) has been launched as a common repository of data from Ministry of 
Tourism, State Departments of Tourism and Industry. NIDHI enables the Central and State 
Governments to deliver better support and services incl uding policies and strategies. It also 
empowers the hospitality industry to benefit from technology in availing of various services. 
NIDHI portal was revamped as NIDHI+ on 27.9.2022. This upgraded initiative has more 
inclusivity, that is, of not only accom modation units, but also of travel agents, tour operators 
and other tourism service provider operators. In addition, Tourism and Hospitality units can 
also avail of Sustainable Tourism criteria of India (STCI) Certification on NIDHI+ Portal 
after following the due procedure. The Ministry of Tourism in association with IITTM, the 
Central Nodal Agency for Adventure Tourism, is also in the process of revision of the safety 
guidelines for Adventure Tourism after having consultations with States and industry 
stakeholders. 
(Para 126) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    Ministry of Tourism had set up web based public delivery system in May 2014 for the 
purpose of providing recognition to the Tourism Service providers with more transparent 
and paperless procedure. Through  this, the proposals received in the Ministry are to be 
processed within 60 days from the date of the receiving of the application. The guideline for 
providing recognition to the Tourism service providers was revised in December 2020, 
which got effective from January 2021. Under the revised guidelines, earlier 5 sub categories 
were brought down to 3 sub categories which may be seen as under:- 
1) Tour operator (inbound, domestic, adventure MICE) 
2) Travel Agent 
3) Tourist Transport Operator. 

20 
 
19.2    A new ca tegory of Green Shoot/ Startup agencies has also been introduced for the 
first time to encourage the principles of Atma Nirbhar. With NIDHI + portal, Ministry is 
trying to provide one stop solution with regard to recognition for travel and tourism 
stakeholders and hoteliers. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee notes the following efforts made by other World Governments to 
promote tourism after the pandemic:- 
 Japan will spend JPY 3.6 billion to enhance information to travellers and promote 
tourism destinations, 
 Norway has reduced the VAT rate for travellers across the sector from 12% to 8%. 
 France implemented one of the most generous furlough schemes costing €26bn and 
paying 70% of employee salaries up to €6,927 gross per month. 
 Malaysia delayed tax instalments by six months for tourism, as opposed to three 
months for the rest of the economy. 
 From a liquidity perspective, Germany offered unlimited loans with no interest to 
business, 
 Hong Kong bolstered its capacity for promotion, allocating an additional $90.2 
million to its Tourism Board. 
 UK has reduced its VAT from 20% to 5% for hospitality and created a £25,000 grant 
scheme for businesses in the retail, hospitality, tourism, and leisure sectors that 
occupy rental properties as sole tenants. 
(Source: World Travel and Tourism Council)  
(Para 132) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    The observations made by the Committee are noted. The Ministry of Tourism in India 
has also made every effort to promote tourism after the Pandemic which included prep aration 
of detailed operational guidelines for Covid safety and awareness as well operational 
recommendations for smooth resumption of business post -pandemic; technological 
interventions such as the Incredible India digital platform and social media to 
promote products, festivals, cuisines etc. In addition, a  "Loan Guarantee Scheme for Covid 
Affected Tourism Service Sector (LGSCATSS)" was also introduced by the Ministry of 
Tourism.       
  
 Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee reiterates its vi ew that the government should give assistance to the 
tourism industry which has been recognized as one of the transformative areas of the 
economy. 
 (Para 133) 
 

21 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    Ministry of Tourism is running the "Loan Guarantee Scheme for Covid Affected 
Tourism Service Sector (LGSCATSS)", under which, loan upto Rs.10.00 lakh is extended to 
each Tour Operators/ Travel Agents/ Tourist Transport Operators approved/recognized by 
the Ministry of Tourism, upto Rs.1.00 lakh is extended to each Reg ional Tourist Guide/ 
Incredible India Tourist Guide approved/recognized by the Ministry of Tourism and Tourist 
Guides approved/ recognized by the State Govt./ UT Administration. 
19.2    Purpose of the LGSCATSS is to provide guarantee coverage for the loans  provided 
by the Scheduled Commercial Banks to the above mentioned beneficiaries, to discharge their 
liabilities and restart their business affected due to Covid -19 pandemic. Validity of the said 
scheme was till 31.03.2023 or till the guarantee of Rs.250.0 0 crores are issued under the 
scheme, whichever is earlier and is applicable to all eligible loans sanctioned under the 
scheme on or after 04.10.2021 (issuance of LGSCATSS guidelines by NCGTC) till 
31.03.2023. No guarantee fee will be charged from the MLIs  by NCGTC for the credit 
facilities provided under the Scheme. 
19.3    As on 12.06.2023, 18 scheduled Commercial Banks are on board for the scheme. 
Around 464 guarantees have been issued amounting to Rs.6.62 crore approx., out of which 
Rs.3.88 crore stands disbursed.  
  
Niche Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
20.      The Committee also observes that more tourism needs have evolved during the 
pandemic and Niche Tourism is one of the new trends post pandemic. Due to health and 
safety issues, tourists are now preferring to travel to offbeat places and specific travel 
experiences rather than universally popular destinations. 
(Para 139) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1    Post pandemic, Ministry of Tourism has formulated various National Strategies and 
Roadmaps to promote Niche Tourism products like Rural Tourism, Adventure Tourism, 
Sustainable Tourism, MICE, Eco-tourism, Medical and Wellness Tourism. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
21.      The Committee observes that the Ministry may explore the upcoming areas of Nic he 
Tourism like Caravan tourism, Gastronomy, Heritage, Golf and Sports Tourism, Art, 
Responsible Tourism and Sustainable Tourism. Kerala is already promoting Caravan 
tourism under the tagline  “Karavan Kerala” and there is much potential for promoting this 
niche area in the whole country. Responsible Tourism is also being promoted by Kerala as 
the concept of Responsible Tourism conscious of climate change and environmental concerns 
are gaining popularity. The World Responsible Tourism Summit is going to take  place in 

22 
 
Kerala in 2026. The Committee is also informed that Night Tourism is being promoted at 
tourist destinations is being done by the State Governments. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry of Tourism may take up with the Ministry of Culture/ AS I to consider opening 
some monuments at night taking into account security issues and safeguarding the 
monuments. 
(Para 140) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1    Ministry of Tourism has notified a National Strategy for Sustainable Tourism. In line 
with the strategy Travel for LiFE Initiative has been launched, which has been formulated on 
the philosophy of Mission Lifestyle for Environment (LiFE) which is a global mass 
movement against climate change. It has  also framed guidelines for extending financial 
support f or promotion of Golf Tourism. As regards recommendation of the Committee to 
take up with the Ministry of Culture/ ASI to consider opening some monuments at night 
taking into account security issues and safeguarding the monuments.  Ministry of Culture has 
been requested to consider the same vide OM dated 07.07.2023. 
  
Cruise Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
22.      The Committee observes that Cruise tourism is no longer seen as a privilege of the 
wealthy and is becoming popular with the middle classes also  especially the young 
generation. India has however not witnessed any significant growth in this sector. The 
Committee appreciates the initiative for opening cruise tourism specific terminals which 
would give a boost to cruise tourism. India has a huge coa stline of 7500 km and large 
number of ports and cities located in these seashores. Therefore, the potential of cruise 
tourism is immense. The Ministry of Tourism should devise new policies and programmes for 
developing cruise tourism to its full potential.  The Ministry may coordinate with the Ministry 
of Shipping and relevant State Government Departments to address various issues pertaining 
to cruise shipping. 
(Para 143) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
22.1    Ministry of Tourism organised the event “Cruise Tourism”  on the side lines of 4th 
Tourism Working Group Meeting under India‟s G20 Presidency on 19.06.2023. The event 
deliberated on the strategies to promote Cruise Tourism as a Model for Sustainable and 
Responsible Travel and see the participation of G20 member countries, invited countries and 
industry stakeholders. During the meeting draft National Strategy for Cruise Tourism was 
unveiled. 
22.2    Following strategic pillars have been identified as part of the integrated cruise tourism 
policy: - 
(i)Infrastructure & Circuit Enablement 

23 
 
(ii) Market Development 
(iii) Ease of Doing Business for Cruise Tourism 
(iv) Integrated Tourism around cruise terminals 
(v) Fiscal Support 
(vi) Investment Facilitation and Promotion 
(vii) Skilling Development for Cruise Tourism 
(viii) Institutional Structure and Governance 
  
22.3    The coastline of the country and its inland waterways have enormous potential to 
develop cruise tourism, both international and domestic. To harness this, a Task Force has 
been constituted with Secretary ( Tourism) as the Chairman and Secretary (Shipping) as the 
Co-chairman. The Task Force consists of representatives from the ports, Ministries of 
Health, Home Affairs, External Affairs, Customs, CISF, Coastal States, etc. The 14th 
Meeting of the Task Force was held on 03.05.2023. 
  
Digitilisation in Tourism 
 Recommendation/Observation 
23.      The Committee appreciates the digital initiatives taken by the Ministry of Tourism. The 
Committee observes that the pandemic has accelerated the need for digitalisation in the 
tourism sector. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibilities of 
integration of the Digital Portal with e-visa application system. 
(Para 151) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1    Link for e-Visa Portal has already been provisioned on the Incredible India website of 
the Ministry of Tourism. 
  
Attracting Foreign Investments in The Tourism Sector 
Recommendation/Observation 
24.      The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. The Ministry may give 
details of the pla ns of the ID&IP Division regarding FDI promotion. The Committee also 
feels that the Ministry does not have a roadmap to leverage the G20 opportunity to its 
maximum potential for the promotion of tourism and increase of foreign exchange. The 
Committee recom mends that the Ministry may develop a more detailed road map for 
attracting FDI in Tourism Sector. 
(Para 156) 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1    The Industry Development and Investment Promotion Division (IDIP) at the Ministry 
of Tourism was instituted with the vision to promote investment including FDI in the 
tourism and hospitality sector, with the following focus areas: 
 i.          Ease of doing business, 
 ⦁ A policy bench marking initiative has been carried out. It has received inputs from 
States/UTs on fiscal and non-fiscal parameters. On the inputs received, the Ministry has held 
stakeholder consultations to formulate national frameworks to usher progressive reforms in 
the sector. 
   
24.2    Public Private Partnerships in Tourism and Hospitality sector. 
The Ministry of Tourism aims to pursue tourism in mission mode, with convergence, and 
public partnerships. The Ministry of Tourism organized a two -day narional workshop on the 
stated theme.   Experts from UNWTO, leading   members  from industry,   Tourism 
Ministers  from  the  States/UTs  and  officials  from  the  States  and  UTs  covered  an 
extensive array of pertinent topics covering best practices and areas for inter department 
synergy and development. 
⦁ The Ministry has also instituted a steering Commi ttee for increasing investments and 
public private participation in tourism and hospitality sector.   The Committee   has 
representation from key line ministries,   industry  associations  (CII,  FICCI,  HAI,  HHAI) 
and invest India. Investment promotion and facilitation in the tourism and hospitality sector , 
⦁ A focused outreach targeting key global players across tourism segments has been 
started.  The Ministry has organised domestic roadshows in partnership with states and UTs 
to help promote investment in the tourism and hospitality sector. 
⦁ During  the  period, the  Ministry  of  Tourism  also  held  focused  interactions  with heads 
of Global hospitality chains and   has  been working actively  to  present  India as a suitable 
destination for investment. 
⦁ Additionally,  Ministry of   Tourism  has  identified  20 key source markets for Indian 
tourism, and the concerted efforts to augment the investor outreach through these channels 
are being made. 
⦁ The  Ministry of  Tourism  has  been  collaborating  with  States/UTs  to  source investible 
projects from them. 
⦁ The Ministry in extensive consultation with industry members has been working towards 
national framework for rationalization in tourism sector. 
  
 
 
 

25 
 
Green and Sustainable Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
25.      The Committee feels that Green tourism must be promoted by mainstreaming 
sustainability into the tourism sector. When tourism is made sustainable, it can create jobs 
and economic growth while avoiding situations where local communities and natural ecology 
are exploited. The Committee observes that sustainable tourism has the potential to 
contribute directly or indirectly to the UN Sustainable Development Goals in the Agenda 
2030. The Committee recommends that the Ministry  may allocate funds for the promotion of 
green and sustainable tourism in its schemes and projects. 
(Para 168) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1    Ministry of Tourism has   now  revamped its  Swadesh Darshan scheme as Swades h 
Darshan 2.0 (SD 2.0) with the 
objective  to  develop  sustainable  and  responsible  destinations  following  a  tourist & 
destination  centric  approach. 
  
Revision of Tourists Data Computing Method 
Recommendation/Observation 
26.      The Committee may be informed about the details of  the methodology employed by the 
Ministry in the identification of domestic tourists and distinguishing the different categories 
of foreign tourists. 
(Para 174) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1    Ministry of Tourism compiles the number of Domestic and Foreign T ourist Visits to 
different States and Union Territories (UTs) based on the information received from 
respective States/UTs. The Compilation of domestic tourism statistics is undertaken by the 
Statistical Cells in the Departments of Tourism of State Governm ents/ UT Administrations. 
These statistics are generally based on the monthly returns collected from hotels and other 
accommodation establishments. 
26.2    However, Ministry of Tourism has developed a Standard Tourism Methodology in 
line with UNWTO for a c omprehensive and uniform collection of Tourism Statistics at 
district level. The methodology has been shared with all States/UTs.   
  
 
 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER-III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
Surrender of Savings  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee observes that in the last three years, the allocation at the Revised 
Estimates stage is half of the Budgetary Estimates and the Actual Expenditure is even less. 
The utiliz ation percentage of the Ministry for the last two years i.e. 2020 -21 & 2021 -22 is 
only 89.85 & 82.89 respectively and for the FY 2022 -23 it is only 34.56% till 31st January 
2023.While expenditure in 2020 may be understandably low due to the pandemic, the s tatus 
in respect of 2021 and 2022 is no better. The utilization percentage of only 34.6% in 2022 -23 
is unacceptable. The Committee does not accept the reply of the Ministry that the change in 
procedure of release of funds was a factor in low utilization  of funds. The change in 
procedure was for all Ministries and other Ministries have managed to utilize  most of their 
funds by December, 2022. 
 (Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      During the current financial year 2022 -23, the Ministry projected allocatio n of Rs. 
1543.61 Crores at RE stage against the BE allocation of Rs. 2,400.00 Crores.   Against the 
projection of Rs. 1543.61 crores, the Ministry of Finance allowed an allocation of Rs. 
1343.13 crores.   The projection at RE Stage was reduced by the Ministr y due to less 
expenditure in the first two quarters of the Financial year.   
1.2      The Ministry of Finance revised the procedure for release of funds under Central 
Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes.   Implementation of the revised procedure posed 
certain challenges like nominating Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs), Sub Agencies (SAs), 
selection of Banks, mapping of the CNAs Sub Agencies and the Banks on the Public 
Finance Management System portal, etc. which took considerable time for resolution 
resulting in low level of expenditure.   Further, the unspent balances lying with the 
Implementing Agencies were to be fully returned to the CNA's Account by all the 
Implementing Agencies.   Release of funds to the Implementing Agencies in respect of 
Schemes like Swadesh Darshan, PRASHAD, Assistance to Central Agencies and Assistance 
to Institutes of Hotel Management, Food Craft Institutes, etc. was not possible till the 
unspent balance lying with all the Implementing Agencies was returned to the Central Nodal 
Agencies‟ Account.   The implementing agencies took lot of time in returning the unspent 
balance, inspite of vigorous efforts by the Ministry. In the Month of September 2022, the 
Ministry of Finance slightly relaxed the condition of refunding unspent balances by all the 
Implementing Agencies to enable further release of fund under the any Scheme and allowed 

27 
 
release of funds to those implementing agencies which have returned the unspent 
balances.       
1.3      Another reason for lesser expenditure is the fact that  no new projects were sanctioned 
under Swadesh Darshan, which is the flagship Scheme of the Ministry, which consume major 
share of the Ministry‟s budget, as the Scheme was reviewed, and a revamped Scheme of SD 
2.0 was introduced.   Accordingly, the expendit ure under this Scheme was limited to the on -
going projects sanctioned under SD 1.0.   There is delay on the part of some of the State 
Governments in submitting requisite documents like Utilization Certificates, Completion 
Certificates, etc. despite regular interaction with the State Governments.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.4      The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has cited reasons such as 
challenges and delays in implementation of revised procedure for release of funds by 
Ministry of Finance viz. nominating CNAs/SAs, selection of banks, mapping of CNAs/ 
SAs on PFMS, return of unspent balances by implementing agencies etc. which are 
primarily procedural in nature. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry 
should sort out the procedural issues which led to delays, so that funds are fully utilized 
in future.   
  
 Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee further finds that the entire budget allocation of Rs. 2400 crores is 
under Revenue Head with nil allocation to Capi tal Head. The Ministry has submitted that a 
major portion of the outlay amounting to Rs.1742 crores is earmarked for development of 
infrastructure for tourism development and Rs. 242.00 crores for promotion and branding 
activities. For tourism infrastructu re Schemes, an amount of Rs, 1412.00 crores is allocated 
for Swadesh Darshan, Rs. 250.00 crores is kept for the Scheme of PRASHAD (Pilgrimage 
Rejuvenation and Spiritual and Heritage Augmentation Drive) and Rs 80 crores is allocated 
for Scheme for Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development. 
(Para 17) 
3.        Much of the budgetary outlay is for development of infrastructure. Swadesh Darshan, 
the flagship scheme of the Ministry is focused on development of theme based infrastructur e. 
Infrastructure for all tourist amenities like creation of tourist information centre, reception 
centre, convention centres, cafeterias, beautification of tourist attractions are covered under 
this scheme. The Committee does not find it rational that tho ugh Capital assets are being 
created under the schemes of the Ministry, the entire expenditure is classified under Revenue. 
Revenue expenditure is short -term, recurring expenditure mostly pertaining to salaries, 
operating expenses, administrative costs etc . Due to its very nature, revenue expenditure 
cannot be reduced as the expenses such as salaries and wages are incurred irrespective of 
the activities carried out. The Committee finds however that for the last five years, the 
budgetary allocation of the Ministry has been halved at the Revised Estimates stage and even 

28 
 
this budget has remained unutilized. The Actual expenditure for the past five years has been 
much less than the budget allocated in Revised Estimates. 
(Para 18) 
4.        The Committee notes the submissions of the Ministry that though at the macro level, 
the budget is under Revenue Head, yet within the Schemes, there would be Object Heads 
pertaining to “Creation of Capital assets.” Under the two Major schemes, Swadesh Darshan 
and PRASHAD, ther e is no recurring expenditure on salary etc. These schemes are mainly 
meant for asset creation and only 5% funds are given for O&M (Operations and 
Maintenance). However, though only assets are being created under these schemes, the outgo 
of funds can be re duced depending on the progress of the projects and receipt of 
Utilization Certificates. 
(Para 19) 
5.        The Committee observes that creation of capital assets leads to value creation and 
generates future cash flows for the economy. Further, the multip lier effect of Capital 
expenditure is much more than that of the Revenue expenditure. In India, the multiplier effect 
of Capital expenditure made by the Central Government is estimated at 2.45 and for State 
Governments, it is around 2 while the multiplier effect of Revenue expenditure is only 0.99 
(RBI Bulletin, December, 2020) . Wrong classification therefore may not give the correct 
picture on total investment in infrastructure and may impact both the Index of Industrial 
Production and the GDP. The Committee notes that the classification as Revenue is arbitrary 
without following any valid criteria in case of various projects of Ministry of Tourism. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance 
and submit a detailed explanation to the Committee. 
(Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      In compliance of the direction of the Hon‟ble Committee, the issue of classification of 
the entire allocation under revenue Head, has been examined thoroughly. The Ministry of 
Finance vide OM No.2(16) -B(P&A)/2022 dated 29.12.2022 conveyed the   allocation of 
funds to Ministry of Tourism wherein the entire allocation is under Revenue category.   The 
allocation is divided into two categories i.e. Scheme and Non -Scheme.  The allocation under 
the segment Scheme is used for implementation of various Schemes of the Ministry while 
the allocation under Non -Scheme is used for establishment expenses of the Ministry and its 
Regional Offices and subordinate office and the expenditure on IT ini tiatives.  The 
establishment expenditure includes, salaries, office expenses, rent and other items of 
expenditure.  Out of the allocation of Rs. 2,400.00 Crores for the financial year 2023 -2024, 
the allocation for Schemes is Rs. 2291.49 crores and Rs.108.51 crores is for Non-Scheme. 
5.2      As per the notification of Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, forwarded 
vide OM dated 12 th December 2022, the entire allocation for different Schemes of the 
Ministry of Tourism amounting to Rs. 2291.49 cror es comes under Revenue 
Expenditure.  This includes Grants – in - Aid for creation of Capital Assets also.    The 
scheme of Swadesh Darshan, PRASHAD, Assistance to Central Agencies and Assistance to 

29 
 
IHM/FCI etc. evolve Grants in Aid for creation of Capital A ssets.  For the Schemes 
involving creation of infrastructure, funds are released under “Grants -in-Aid for Creation of 
Capital Assets”.   The infrastructure created under grants from the Ministry of Tourism is 
owned by the respective State Governments/autonomous bodies/Central Agencies.  Since the 
Ministry is giving Grants in Aid to the State Governments/Autonomous Bodies/Central 
Agencies for implementation of these Schemes, the ownership of the assets created is not 
with the Ministry.  The Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic 
Affairs‟s  OM No. F3/27/2014 -FRBM dated 9 th September 2014 clarified the Grants for 
Creation of Capital Assets  as under: 
5.3      Grants for creation of capital assets as a concept was introduced in the FRBM Act 
through the amendment in 2012.   The Act define grants for creation of capital assets as 
grants-in-aid given by the Central Government to state governments, autonomous bodies, 
local bodies and other scheme implementing agencies for creation of capital assets which are 
owned by these entities.  These grants are relevant for the projection of the effective revenue 
deficit, which has been defined under the Act as the difference between revenue deficit as 
defined under the Act and grants for creation of capital assets………” 
5.4      Out of the Non -Scheme components, as per the classification issued by Ministry of 
Finance as mentioned above, the components of ICT equipment like computers, laptops, etc., 
Machinery & Equipment and Furniture and Fixtures with cost exceeding Rs. 1 lakh or three 
years‟ of effective life and Motor Vehicles, fall under capital expenditure.   Under the Non -
Scheme segment, out of the allocation of Rs. 108.51 Crores, the total allocation for all the 
components mentioned above together comes  to Rs. 1.66 Crore.   The Ministry of Tourism 
had to open 58 New Heads of Accounts for the financial year 2023 -2024 at short notice due 
to creation of a number of New Heads by MoF.   In the process of opening so many new 
Heads and considering that these comp onents fall under Non -Scheme segment, the Head of 
Account for the above components was  also opened under Revenue Expenditure 
inadvertently. The Ministry will take action to open Heads of Accounts under Capital Section 
for these components. 
  
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.5      The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry; however, it reiterates its 
recommendation that there is a need to revisit the policy for allocating the entire budget 
under the Revenue Head and making no allocation under Capital Head. The Committee 
also desires to know whether such a policy is being adopted for other Ministries as well. 
The Committee also expresses its concern at the inadvertent error of the Ministry in 
opening a Head of Accounts under Revenue Head instead of C apital Head and 
recommends that due care should be exercised in such accounting matters in future. 
  
 
 

30 
 
Focus Area of the Ministry for 2023-24 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee observes that the Ministry has cited the National Tourism Policy as a 
focus area. Upon query, the Ministry has stated that a Cabinet note has been submitted on 
the policy and approval is awaited. The Ministry has further submitted that consultation 
process with State Governments, Line Ministries of the Central Go vernment, Industry 
stakeholders etc.  has been completed. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
make all efforts so that the Tourism Policy is enacted during this financial year. 
 (Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      Ministry of Tourism is maki ng all possible efforts to expedite finalization of the 
policy. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.2      The Committee desires to know the outcome of the consultation process held with 
the various stakeholders and the progress made in enactment of the Tourism Policy.  
 
Monitoring of Projects Under Swadesh Darshan  
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee observes that the Swadesh Darshan Scheme 1.0 had been initiated in 
2014-15 and as of now only 59 of the 76 projects have been completed. As per the Outcome 
Budget 2022-23 of the Ministry, all the projects under this Scheme were to be complet ed by 
December, 2022. However, 17 projects, i.e. about 22% of the projects under this Scheme are 
still pending after release of nearly 90 % of the overall budget of the Scheme. The Committee 
observes that the physical and financial progress of the pending projects under this Scheme 
1.0 is not satisfactory (ANNEXURE -IV). Out of the 17 pending projects, 4 have less than 
50% progress and it is doubtful if they would get completed within this year as planned by 
the Ministry. The Committee notes that the Ministr y has given multiple reasons for delay in 
this project but in most cases the delay seems to be of clearance from forest authorities, 
temple authorities, environment clearance and delays due to contractors. Since the Scheme 
has been in operation for about 7 years, the Ministry should by now have evolved procedures 
and strategies to deal with the challenges of implementing projects under this Scheme. The 
Committee notes that the delay seems to be more in some States like Uttar Pradesh, Jammu 
& Kashmir, Kerala  and Rajasthan. While delays in Jammu & Kashmir are mainly due to 
difficult terrain and weather conditions, the delays in two projects of Kerala are due to 
temple and environmental clearance. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
analyse the reaso ns for delay, State -wise, and evolve appropriate strategies to combat the 
under-performance of the projects in these states. The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s 
submissions that review meetings are held regularly to monitor the progress of these 

31 
 
projects. The Committee would like the details of the number of review meetings held for the 
above 17 projects in the last year. 
(Para 39) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      The suggestion of the committee is noted. The Ministry of Tourism is regularly 
reviewing progress of the ongoing projects under the chairmanship of Secretary (T) and 
several meetings were held under the Chairmanship of Secretary (T) during FY 2022-23.   
Details of B.E., R.E. and actual expenditure since 2015 -16 under Swadesh Darshan scheme 
are as follows: 
   Rs. in Crore 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.2      The Committee has been informed that out of the 76 projects, only 63 have been 
completed and the deadline for completion of the remaining 13 projects has been 
extended till December, 2023. The Committee notes that the details of the review 
meetings held for the pending projects have not been submitted in the reply. The 
Committee, therefore, desires that the aforesaid information may be provided at the 
earliest.           
  
 Impact of PRASHAD scheme 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.      The Committee notes that the proposed B.E. 2023-24 under this Scheme was Rs. 307.05 
crores and the actual B.E. 2023 -24 is Rs. 250 crores. The B.E. 2022 -23 for this scheme was 
Rs 234 crores and the actual expenditure upto 31st January, 2023 has been only Rs . 63.90 
S. 
No. 
Financial 
Year 
B.E. RE Actual Expenditure 
1 2015-16 - - 309.54 
2 2016-17 706.35 972.40 971.23 
3 2017-18 959.91 950.00 943.78 
4 2018-19 1100.00 1100.00 1101.15 
5 2019-20 1106.00 566.00 565.93 
6 2020-21 1200.00 600.00 560.76 
7 2021-22 630.00 262.00 261.36 
8 2022-23 1181.30 600.00 184.13 
9 2023-24 1412.00 - - 

32 
 
crores, i.e. only 27%. Since there is a ceiling of 25% expenditure in the last quarter of the 
financial year, there is bound to be a high amount of savings under this Scheme. Considering 
that there is already much delay in the execution of projects  under this scheme, the 
Committee feels that the Ministry has not utilised its budget properly. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take steps to complete the pending projects of this Scheme 
and utilize the allotted budget. The Committee also de sires to know the status of the 16 
projects which are yet to be developed. 
(Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1    Progress on the 16 ongoing projects varies across different stages of execution. Among 
these, 7 projects were sanctioned during the financial year 2020 -21, and active 
implementation is underway for all of them. Notably, the projects display completion 
percentages spanning from 31% to 80%, contributing to an aggregate final cost of Rs. 268.37 
Crores, utilizing a cumulative released amount of Rs.152.04 Crores up to the current juncture. 
8.2    Among the 3 projects sanctioned in the following financial year (2021 -22), work has 
commenced on 2, while one project remains pending due to awaiting approval of the state 
government's master plan. 
8.3    Regarding the 6 projects sanctioned in the most recent financial year (2022 -23), active 
implementation is in progress for two projects, and tendering processes have been 
successfully completed for 4 projects. The imminent release of the first installment for these 
projects is anticipated. 
8.4    It's noteworthy that the Ministry of Tourism is diligently overseeing project progress 
through a multifaceted approach. This includes regular review meetings led by senior 
officials, on -site inspections conducted by bo th officials and Programme Management 
Consultants, and the submission of monthly progress reports by the implementing agencies.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.5    The Committee observes that the execution of projects under the Ministry has 
been at very slow pace, as projects sanctioned in 2020 -21 are still under process of 
implementation. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that 
the implementation of the projects may be expedited for their timely completion which 
would ensure proper utilization of budget allocated to the Ministry.   
  
Champion Services Sector Scheme 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.      The Committee notes that the proposed B.E. 2023 -24 for this scheme was Rs. 197.50 
crores and the allocated B.E. 2023 -24 is Rs. 196.22 crores. The Committee notes that there 
has been poor utilisation of funds in the past three years in this sector. The actual 
expenditure in the years 2020-21 and 2021-22 has been around 76% only. For the F.Y. 2022-

33 
 
23 (upto 31st January, 2023), the actual expenditure is only 60% of the enhanced Revised 
Estimates of Rs. 132.26 crores. 
(Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1    The Ministry of Finance revised the procedure for release of funds under Central Sector 
and Centrally Sponsored Schemes. Implementation of the revised procedure posed certain 
challenges like nominating Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs), Sub Agencies (SAs), selection 
of Banks, mapping of the C NAs Sub Agencies and the Banks on the Public Finance 
Management System portal, etc. which took considerable time for resolution resulting in low 
level of expenditure. Further, the unspent balances lying with the Implementing Agencies 
were to be fully returned to the CNA's Account by all the Implementing Agencies. Release of 
funds to the Implementing Agencies in respect of Schemes like Swadesh Darshan, 
PRASHAD, Assistance to Central Agencies and Assistance to Institutes of Hotel 
Management, Food Craft Instit utes, etc. was not possible till the unspent balance lying with 
all the Implementing Agencies was returned to the Central Nodal Agencies‟ Account. The 
implementing agencies took lot of time in returning the unspent balance, inspite of vigorous 
efforts by t he Ministry. In the Month of September 2022, the Ministry of Finance slightly 
relaxed the condition of refunding unspent balances by all the Implementing Agencies to 
enable further release of fund under the any Scheme and allowed release of funds to those 
implementing agencies which have returned the unspent balances. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
9.2    The Committee notes that the Ministry of Finance revised the procedure for 
release of funds under Central Sector Scheme in March, 2022, leading to some 
procedural challenges in the subsequent financial year, 2022 -23, but there has been 
poor utilization of funds by the Ministry in the past years also. The Committee hopes 
that the procedural issues have been resolved and there would be better utili sation of 
funds in future.  
  
Champion Services Sector Scheme 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.      The Committee appreciates that the Incredible India Tourism Facilitator Basic Course 
is conducted online and more than 4000 students have completed the course. The Committee 
desires to know if any data regarding the employment of these students is kept by the 
Ministry. 
(Para 64) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
10.1    Since, IITF Certificate holders mostly work as freelancer, employment data is not 
maintained for them.  

34 
 
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.2    The Committee notes the reply and desires that a mechanism should be 
formulated to track the employment status of the IITF certificate holders and 
accordingly data should be updated thereof.   The Committee has been informed that 
the employment prospects of Tourist facilitators are affected as they are not allowed to 
enter the monuments as Guides. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
conduct a survey of the employment of the Facilitators and take necess ary measures to 
boost their prospects. 
 
Social Media Promotion 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.      The Committee notes that the proposed budget allocation under this Head was Rs. 120 
crores but the actual B.E. 2023 -24 is only 75 crores. The Committee feels  that this budget 
would be insufficient in view of the emphasis given to Domestic tourism this year. With the 
pandemic receding, tourism is rebounding back to pre -Covid levels. In fact “Revenge 
Tourism” is the trend in domestic tourism as people try to mak e up for the inability to travel 
during lockdowns. 
(Para 75) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Domestic promotion is undertaken in various ways by the Ministry, and it includes 
multiple promotional activities carried out by the Domestic Offices. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
11.2    The reply of the Ministry does not address the issue as to whether the budget 
allocated is sufficient in view of the emphasis given to Domestic Tourism.   The 
Committee desires to know the specific steps to improve domest ic tourism and the 
promotional activities thereof.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee notes that the budget allocation of Rs. 75 crores in 2022 -23 was 
reduced to Rs. 60 crores in the Revised Estimates and the actual expenditure was only R s. 
28.54 crores. The Committee feels that this may have been a factor in the reduction of 
allocation in B.E. 2023-24. The Committee notes that in this year, the Ministry has spent only 
about 47.56 % of the allocated amount of Rs. 60 crores up to 31st January 2023. 
(Para 76) 
 
 

35 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The expenditure depends upon the different proposals received from various States, 
implementing agencies, stakeholders. After the pandemic, lesser number of proposals had 
been received from different states for organizing fairs, festivals and various events. 
  
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
12.2    The Committee feels that the effects of pandemic are receding and tourism is 
rebounding back to pre-Covid levels and effective measure need to be taken up in  right 
earnest for promotion of tourism.   Further, the Committee desires to know the specific 
steps to improve domestic tourism and the promotional activities thereof.  
  
Human Resources Development 
Recommendation/Observation 
13.        The Committee notes  that against the projected B.E. of Rs. 68 crores, an increased 
allocation of Rs. 70 crores has been given in B.E. 2023 -24. The Committee further notes that 
the B.E. 2022 -23 of Rs. 70 crores had been reduced to Rs. 50 crores at the R.E. stage. The 
Actual expenditure till 31st January, 2023 has been only Rs. 19.82 crores, i.e. only 39.64%. 
(Para 88) 
Recommendation/Observation 
14.        The Committee feels that it would be a large amount of savings under this head as 
only 39.64% has been spent by the Ministry and only two months remain in the financial 
year. 
(Para 89) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
14.1    As per the direction of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance vide letter No. 
1(18)/PFMS/FCD/2021 dated 09.03.2022 regarding revised procedure for flow of funds 
under Central Sector Schemes, Ministry of Tourism designated a Central Nodal Agency 
(CNA) and implementing agencies (IAs), down the ladder designated as Sub-Agencies (SAs). 
Accordingly, Ministry of Tourism directed all autonomous bodies to re fund the unspent 
amount in account of CNA and open zero balance current account for the purpose of 
receiving CFA for projects. However, a total expenditure of Rs. 49,83,36,149/ -  was incurred 
during financial year 2022-23, which is 99.7% of RE. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
14.2    As per the reply provided by the Ministry, it is comprehended that in the last two 
months of the financial year the Ministry has spent a considerable amount of the R.E. 
i.e. from 39.64% (till 31 st January, 2023) to 99.7%.  The Committee would like to be 

36 
 
informed in detail about the expenditure incurred during these last two months of the 
financial year 2022-23. 
   
Safety and Security In Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
15.      The Committee observes that an allocation of Rs. 5.27 Cr. has been made under the 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme "Safe Tourist Destination for Women" in R.E. 2023 -24, which is 
the same as in BE and RE 2022-23. 
(Para 96)  
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    Matter regarding submission of proposal under „Safe  Tourism Destination for 
Women‟ was taken up with the State Govt./UT Admin in the past and as directed by the 
Committee, the matter has been taken up again. 
  
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
15.2    The Committee desires to know the status of submissi ons of proposals under 
„Safe Tourism Destination for Women‟ from State Governments/ UT Admin, as stated 
by the Ministry in its reply. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
16.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may again take up the matter with all 
the other states to submit their proposals under this Scheme. The Committee also desires to 
have details of the proposal submitted by the state of Madhya Pradesh. 
(Para 100) 
Reply of the Ministry                                           
16.1    The details of the proposal submitted by Madhya Pradesh Tourism Department is 
given as under: 
The Government of Madhya Pradesh has come up with its proposal on  Safe Tourist 
Destination for Women in Madhya Pradesh,  the details of which are given below for 
reference:- 
16.1.1. Background  
Women should feel safe and most comfortable while travelling and enjoying tourist 
destinations.  This feeling and mindset is of utmost importance to boost the confidence and 
moral strength of women.     The fear of crime against women in tourist destinations affects 
women travellers restricting their travel to tourist destinations independently.   Women 
particularly either travelling solo or in a group, feel unsafe after dark due to feeble presence 
of women workforce in and around the touri st destinations, unavailability of public toilets, 

37 
 
lack of street lighting, public spaces like parks, temples, market areas, lack of information 
and support services for women add up to the situation.   A single event of violence against 
women is enough to deepen this perception and fear of violence.   All this limits the basic 
right and freedom of women as equal citizens to enjoy the world around them.  
  
16.1.2. Statistics  
The National crime records bureau statistics for 2014 in India show that a total of 3,37,922 
cases of crime against women were recorded as compared to 3,09,546 case in 2013 
indicating a rise of 9.2% in reporting of such crimes. The total number of registered rape 
cases is 36,735 (9% higher than the previous year).   Delhi UT has reported the highest crime 
rate (169.1) compared to 56.3 at all India level during the year 2014, followed by 
Assam(123.4), Rajasthan(91.4), Tripura(88.0), West Bengal(85.4), Madhya Pradesh (79.0) 
and Telangana(78.3)  
16.1.3. Objectives of Madhya Pradesh Tourism Boa rd for Safe and secure environment for 
women 
 Provide safe, secure and women friendly environment in and around tourist 
destinations. 
 Enhance women‟s confidence and desire to visit tourist destinations without any fear 
of violence and safety. 
 Development of women friendly spatial design, implementation and maintenance of 
infrastructural gaps. 
 Provide information and advisories about available resources and timely support 
services using technology. 
 Provide self defence training to women and girls. 
 Promote women workforce participation in tourism activities through orientation and 
skill enhancement programmes. 
 Provide job opportunities to women through employment and self employment 
activities in tourist destination. 
 Promote community participation and awareness on women safety. 
 Formation of legal bodies and federations to organise local community intended for 
safety of women. 
 Strengthening the concept of “Atithi Devo Bhava” to build the belief of safety among 
all women tourists visiting the State. 
Madhya Prades h Tourism Board has proposed 50 tourist destinations in 20 clusters under 
this project. The proposed duration of this project is initially for 03 years i.e. 2019 -20, 2020-
21 and 2021-22. 
  
16.1.4. Partnership with stakeholders  
Madhya Pradesh Tourism Board  will work in consultation, collaboration and partnership 
with:- 
1. Department of Women and Child Development, Government of Madhya Pradesh. 

38 
 
2. Department of Home, Government of Madhya Pradesh 
3. Department of Urban Development, Government of Madhya Pradesh 
4. Department of Transport, Government of Madhya Pradesh 
5. Department of School Education, Government of Madhya Pradesh 
6. Department of Higher Education, Government of Madhya Pradesh 
7. Department of Technical Education & Skill Development, Government of Madhya 
Pradesh 
8. State Rural Livelihood Mission, Department of rural development, Government of 
Madhya Pradesh. 
9. Grassroots women‟s organization and local NGO 
10. Media, the private sector, research institution 
  
Madhya Pradesh Tourism Board will establish a dedicated unit for Project Management for 
support in implementation and monitoring of the project.   Under project, grassroots women 
organization and local NGOs would be empanelled for implementation of the proposed 
activities.  So that local le vel knowledge and expertise could be used for implementation of 
the project. 
S. No. Particulars No. of consultants Proposed fees in Rs. 
1. State Level Project 
monitoring consultants 2 50000/month/person 
2. MIS Consultant 1 25000/month 
3. Computer Operator 1 16000/month 
4. Office Assistant 1 10000/month 
5. 
Cluster Level Project 
Monitoring Consultants for 20 
clusters 
20 30000/month/person 
  
16.1.5. Proposed Activities 
1. Capacity building, orientation, training and sensitization - Building the capacity of 
stakeholders is an essential part of project implementation. 
2.  Sensitization/training of public and private transport staff including bus and taxi drivers 
and conductors on the importance of ensuring women‟s safety and actions to be taken when 
an incident of sexual harassment is witnessed or reported. 
3.  Capacity building of all Police Officers, inspectors and sub inspectors in Women‟s safety 
issues 

39 
 
4.  Workshops and brainstorming sessions with school teachers, principals, students on how 
to make the environment within and around the school and tourism places safer for girls and 
women, strengthening on gender issues, circulation of simple guidelines to all educational 
institutions to improve their physical environment and amenities in order  to make the space 
within and around the institution safe for girls and women, use of theatre and art to create 
awareness on issues of violence against women, street plays etc 
5.  Urban Development - Women‟s safety issues will be incorporated in Local Area 
Plans.  Workshops with urban administration and development department for engendering 
tourism destinations. 
6. Civic awareness and participation - To organize sensitization of local community on 
women‟s safety through the regular briefings, as well as a special workshop. 
7.  Strengthening of safety mechanism 
8.  Safety audits 
9. Signposts with city map and location map 
10. Safety mobile applications, alert system 
11. Help desk and emergency numbers 
12. Support in foreign languages 
13. Information through website 
14. Installation of CCTV 
15. Advocacy efforts 
16. Formation of federations and other legal bodies 
17.Skill and employment generation 
18.Fulfilment of infrastructural gaps at the tourism destination with reference to woman 
safety. 
19. Self defence training 
20. Community participation and awareness 
21. Information, education and communication 
  
16.1.6. Role of Women in the implementation of the safe tourism destination project:-  
 Technical support in designing and implementation of the safe tourism destination 
project  
 Support in monitoring and evaluation  
 HR Support 
16.1.7. Expected Outcome 

40 
 
 Increased number of women tourists and solo women traveller 
 Increased use of public spaces by women 
 Increased awareness and reduced acceptability of sexual harassment among the 
general public; 
 Reduction of sexual harassment of women and girls in the tourism destinations of 
intervention, feedback, experience and stories by the women traveller, prominent 
presence of women workforce participation in tourism destinations. 
  
16.1.8. Proposed Financial Budget 
Proposal will be submitted to the women and Child development department, Government 
of India under Nirbhaya Scheme for funding the project.   Government of Madhya Pradesh 
will be contributing its 40% share of the total budget.   Total proposed cost of the project 
works out to Rs.279866706 (Rs. Twenty -seven crore ninety -eight lakhs sixty six thousand 
seven hundred six only) where Central Share will be Rs.167920024 and State Share will be 
Rs.111946682.  This amount is calculated for a period of three years.   Details of expenditure 
year wise will be as under:- 
Fund Contribution 1st year 2nd year 3rd year Total amount 
Central share 
(60%) 62446860 60330816 45142348 167920024 
State Share (40%) 41631240 40220544 30094898 111946682 
Total 104078100 100551360 75237246 279866706 
          
  
A survey has also been conducted regarding the job opportunities that will be available for 
women and girls in the next three years.   As per the random survey done at the Khajuraho 
tourism destination 1345 jobs will be available for women and girls in next three years. 
16.1.9. Monitoring Mechanisms 
Madhya Pradesh Tourism Board has its state office in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh and District 
level District Tourism Promotion councils (DTPC) in each district of Madhya Pradesh which 
is headed by the collector of the concerned district. Therefore, it is proposed that the State 
Level dedicated team of experts and DTPC will be involved in the regular monitoring of the 
project. It is als o proposed that SPMU and cluster level expert will be placed for support in 
the implementation and monitoring of the implementation of activities at ground level. 
Regular MIS, progress reports and monitoring reports could be prepared and shared with the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development, GoI. 
  
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
16.2    The Committee notes the details furnished by Government of Madhya Pradesh to 
the Ministry regarding the proposal for „Safe Tourism Destination for Women‟ scheme. 

41 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite its efforts in obtaining 
the proposals of various States.   This is vital for the success of the scheme and for 
ensuring safety of women at tourist destinations across the country and will help in 
increasing the number of tourists, especially women, to safely undertake such visits.  
  
Assistance to Central Agencies For Infrastructure Development  
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee observes that an allocation of Rs 80.00 Cr. in B.E 2022 -23 under this 
Head was reduced to Rs. 55 Cr. in R.E. 2022 -23. The Committee observes that in the Action 
Taken Report for the Demands for Grants 2022 -23, the Ministry had given details of the year 
wise number of projects under this scheme and sanctioned budge t. The Ministry also stated 
that 23 projects were sanctioned and taken up for implementation during the last five years 
i.e. 2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021 -22. The Ministry has now informed that 
22 projects have been completed till date. There fore, only one project must be pending. The 
Committee desires to know whether only 23 projects have been sanctioned out of the original 
63. Further, if only one project is pending, the reason for slow utilization of funds may be 
given. 
(Para 114) 
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee also feels that sanction and completion of only 22 projects since 2012 -
13 i.e. in a decade is very slow progress. Since only one project appears to be pending, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take up some new projects for the remaining 
funds of Rs. 60 crores under this head. 
(Para 115) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Sanctioning of new projects is an ongoing process wherein projects are examined by 
a Sanctioning Committee under Secretary (Tourism) based on guidelines issued by the 
Ministry for various schemes from time to time, keeping availability of funds in mind. 
Completion of projects is also a regular feature, based on timelines approved by the 
Sanctioning Committee. As regards the scheme Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism 
Infrastructure Development, it may be mentioned that the scheme in its present form was 
approved by the SFC for the period 2021 -22 to 2025-26 at a total financial outlay of Rs.440 
crore. Prior to this, projects were sanctioned in earlier version of the scheme since 2012 -13 
and the financial liabilities towards their continuation and completion are being met from the 
budgetary allocation under the new scheme. From 2012 -13 till date, a total of 59 projects 
have been sanctioned. Of  these 19 projects have since been completed and 13 projects are 
under various stages of implementation. Further, 5 projects have been closed down on 
account of delay in implementation by the agencies.  The Ministry is in the process of 
awarding sanction fo r more projects to Central Agencies from available funds and likely 
savings on account of closure of some projects.  

42 
 
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
18.2    The Committee notes the delay in sanction and completion of the projects and 
also notes that there is a discrepa ncy in the reply of Ministry.  Earlier Ministry had 
informed that 22 projects have been completed since 2012 -13, but now the Ministry is 
stating that 19 projects have been completed since 2012 -13. The Committee desires to 
know the exact n umber of projects sanctioned and completed under this scheme.   Also, 
the Committee would lik e to be apprised of the reason for the aforementioned 
discrepancy. 
 Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee observes that the creation of tourism infrastructure by way of roads, 
cruise terminals, railway connectivity, and medical facilities has its multiplier effect in terms 
of overall economic growth and employment generation and acts as a catalyst to economic 
development of the country. The Commit tee desires to be appraised of the progress of work 
on the remaining 15 railway stations. The Committee also observes that the Ministry of 
Tourism during the last Demand for Grants had been pursuing the matter of road 
connectivity of 114 destinations under  MoRTH, respective State Governments and State 
PWDs. The Committee desires to be apprised of the progress in the matter. 
(Para 119) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    Update regarding road connectivity of 114 destinations has not been received from 
MoRTH, State Governments or PWDs. The matter regarding early completion of the projects 
was taken up with Ministry of Railways in various meetings and the Task Force meeting held 
under the chairmanship of Secretary (T). Ministry of Railways has submitted the status of  the 
projects, which is at ANNEXURE I. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
19.2    The Committee recommends that the Ministry may proactively follow up with 
MoRTH and State Governments/PWDs and obtain the updated information regarding 
road connectivity of 114 destinations. 
  
Global Perspective – Comparison of India With Other Countries 
Recommendation/Observation 
20.      The Committee appreciates the various initiatives taken by the Ministry to promote 
tourism. However the Committee observes that the reimbursement of the SEIS (Service 
Exports from India Scheme) is probably the single largest issue raised most during the 
pandemic by country’s inbound trade as well as others in the tourism industry, like hotels, 
which benefited from the scheme. Under the SEIS Scheme the Government offered domestic 
exports duty credit scrips in the range of 5% to 7% of the net foreign exchange  earned 
depending upon the nature of services. These SEIS scrips could be used to pay import duty or 

43 
 
can be encashed by selling it to any importer. The Committee notes that for FY 2019-20, SEIS 
benefits were capped at Rs. 5 Cr and rates for eligible servic e categories were reduced 
across the board by 2 because of budgetary constraints imposed by the Ministry of Finance 
for implementing the Scheme. Now the SEIS Scheme has not been extended beyond FY 2019 -
20. 
(Para 127) 
Recommendation/Observation 
21.      The Committee observes that in view of the fact that the tourism sector was facing the 
crisis of the century, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry take up the SEIS rate 
reduction issue with the Ministry of Commerce to increase the rate of SEIS bene fits to 10% 
and extend the scheme for a further period of 2-3 years for enabling cost savings. 
(Para 128) 
Recommendation/Observation 
22.      The Committee notes that the tourism industry has not yet gained its pre -pandemic 
levels in India and many busines ses are struggling to recover their losses. The Committee 
observes that SEIS incentives enable Tour Operators to maintain some price parity vis -à-vis 
the competition. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation to the Ministry to 
again take up the matter with the Ministry of Commerce. 
(Para 129) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1    Hon‟ble Minister of Tourism has taken up the matter with Hon‟ble Finance Minister 
and Hon‟ble Minister of Commerce & Industry but the same has not been approved. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
22.2    The Committee observes that Service Exports for India Scheme (SEIS) despite 
being a vital scheme, has not been extended beyond FY 2019 -20. Further, the Ministry 
has stated that the matter regarding SEIS was taken up with Hon‟ ble Finance Minister 
and Hon‟ble Minister of Commerce & Industry but the same has not yet been 
approved. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons cited by the 
concerned Ministries for discontinuing SEIS. Further, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation given in the 343 rd and 357 th Report on the SEI scheme in view of the 
fact that the tourism industry has not yet gained its pre -pandemic levels in India and 
many businesses are struggling to recover their losses.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
23.      The Committee further observes that the Finance Act, 2020 which was announced just 
before the start of COVID -19 crisis, inter alia, had come up with the new insertion of Tax 
Collected at Source (TCS) provisions under Section 206C (1G)(a) of Incom e Tax Act, 1961 

44 
 
pertaining to TCS @ 5% on foreign remittance through Liberalized Remittance Scheme 
(LRS) and under Section 206C (1G)(b) pertaining to TCS@5% on the selling of overseas tour 
packages by tour operators. The Committee had recommended rollback of the provision for 
the reason that Indian Tour Operators are unable to match the prices offered for Outbound 
tours in comparison to Foreign Tour Service Providers due to additional burden of taxes 
which include GST and the newly inserted TCS provision. 
(Para 130) 
24.      The Committee observes that the TCS has now been increased from 5% to 20% which 
would be detrimental to the Outbound Tour businesses of Tour Operators. The Committee 
reiterates its earlier recommendation to roll back the TCS provision. 
(Para 131) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 24.1    Hon‟ble Minister of Tourism has taken up the matter with Hon‟ble Finance Minister 
and Hon‟ble Minister of Commerce & Industry.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
24.2    The Committee would like to be apprised about the status of the matter taken up 
with Ministry of Finance regarding increasing of TCS from 5% to 20% and would 
reiterate again its recommendation to roll back the TCS provision. 
  
E-Visa Scheme  
Recommendation/Observation 
25.      The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry to facilitate the issue 
of e -Visa. The Committee would also like to be informed about the initiative of “Visa at 
Your Doorstep”. 
(Para 148) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1    The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Home Affairs.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
25.2    The Committee desires to know about the status of the matter taken up with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs regarding initiative of “Visa at Your Doorstep” scheme. 
  
 
 
 

45 
 
 Green and Sustainable Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
26.      The Committee asked the Ministry whether any roadmap has been formulated for 
promoting green and sustainable tourism and the steps taken so far to incentivize  green and 
sustainable practices in the tourism sector and the key challenges in this regard. The 
Committee also asked for details of the funds allocated and utilized  towards green and 
sustainable tourism in the last 5 years. 
(Para 162) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1    To position India as a preferred global destination for sustainable and responsible 
tourism. Ministry of Tourism has formulated National Strategy for Sustainable Tourism. 
Following strategic pillars have been identified for the development of sustainable tourism in 
the strategy document: - 
 Promoting Environmental Sustainability 
 Protecting Biodiversity 
 Promoting Economic Sustainability 
 Promoting Socio-Cultural Sustainability 
 Scheme for Certification of Sustainable Tourism 
 IEC and Capacity Building 
 Governance 
26.2    The Ministry of Tourism organized a National summit for developing Sustainable and 
Responsible Tourism Destination and Responsible Traveller Campaign in association with 
RTSOI and UNEP on 4th June, 2022 at New Delhi on eve of World Environment Day.  
  
26.3    In order to promote sustainable and responsible tourist destinations and promote 
sustainable tourism in the country, Ministry of Tourism in association with IITTM, UNEP 
and RTSOI organized five Regional Workshops covering all States/ UTs of the country. The 
summit and workshops saw participation from representatives from identified central 
Ministries, State Governments/ UT Administration and Industry Stakeholders. An estimated 
expenditure of Rs.56.4 lakh has been incurred on organizing these. 
  
26.4    Ministry of T ourism has now revamped its Swadesh Darshan scheme as Swadesh 
Darshan 2.0 (SD 2.0) with the objective to develop sustainable and responsible destinations 
following a tourist & destination centric approach.  
  
 
 
 

46 
 
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
26.5    The reply of the Ministry does not address the query raised by the Committee 
about the details of fund allocation and utilization towards green and sustainable 
tourism in the last 5 years. The Committee may be apprised of the above details. 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
  
-Nil- 
  
***** 
  

48 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Surrender of Savings  
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has cited reasons such as challenges 
and delays in implementation of revised procedure for release of funds by Ministry of 
Finance viz. nominating CNAs/SAs, selection of banks, mapping of CNAs/ SAs on 
PFMS, return of unspent balances by implementing agencies etc. which are primarily 
procedural in nature. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry should sort out 
the procedural issues which led to delays, so that funds are fully utilized in future.      
                                                                                                               (Para 1.4) 
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry ; however, it reiterates its 
recommendation that there is a need to revisit the policy for allocating the entire budget 
under the Revenue Head and making no allocation under Capital Head. The Committee 
also desires to know whether such a policy is being ad opted for other Ministries as well. 
The Committee also expresses its concern at the inadvertent error of the Ministry in 
opening a Head of Accounts under Revenue Head instead of Capital Head and 
recommends that due care should be exercised in such accounting matters in future. 
                                                                                                               (Para 5.5) 
  
Focus Area of the Ministry for 2023-24 
The Committee desires to know the outcome of the consultation process held with the 
various stakeholders and the progress made in enactment of the Tourism Policy. 
  (Para 6.2) 
Monitoring of Projects Under Swadesh Darshan  
 The Committee has been informed that out of the 76 projects, only 63 have been 
completed and the deadli ne for completion of the remaining 13 projects has been 
extended till December, 2023. The Committee notes that the details of the review 
meetings held for the pending projects have not been submitted in the reply. The 
Committee, therefore, desires that the  aforesaid information may be provided at the 
earliest.                   
(Para 7.2) 
 Impact of PRASHAD scheme 
The Committee observes that the execution of projects under the Ministry has been at 
very slow pace, as projects sanctioned in 2020 -21 are still under process of 

49 
 
implementation. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that 
the implementation of the projects may be expedited for their timely completion which 
would ensure proper utilization of budget allocated to the Ministry.                                    
                                                                                                            (Para 8.5) 
  
Champion Services Sector Scheme 
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Finance revised the procedure for release of 
funds under Central Sector Scheme in March, 2022, leading to some procedural 
challenges in the subsequent financial year, 2022 -23, but there has been poor utilization 
of funds by the Ministry in the past years also. The Committee hopes that the 
procedural issues have been resolved and there would be better utilisation of funds in 
future.                                                                                                                         (Para 9.2) 
The Committee notes the reply and desires that a mechanism should be formulated to 
track the employment status of the IITF certificate holders and accordingly data should 
be updated thereof.  The Committee has been informed that the employment prospects 
of Tourist facilitators are affected as they are not allowed to enter the monuments as 
Guides. The Committee recommends that the Ministr y may conduct a survey of the 
employment of the Facilitators and take necessary measures to boost their prospects.                                         
              (Para 10.2) 
 
Social Media Promotion 
The reply of the Ministry does not address the issu e as to whether the budget allocated 
is sufficient in view of the emphasis given to Domestic Tourism.   The Committee desires 
to know the specific steps to improve domestic tourism and the promotional activities 
thereof.  
(Para 11.2) 
The Committee feels that the effects of pandemic are receding and tourism is 
rebounding back to pre-Covid levels and effective measure need to be taken up in right 
earnest for promotion of tourism.   Further, the Committee desires to know the specific 
steps to improve domestic tourism and the promotional activities thereof.       
(Para 12.2) 
Human Resources Development 
As per the reply provided by the Ministry, it is comprehended that in the last two 
months of the financial year the Ministry has spent a considerable amount of t he R.E. 
i.e. from 39.64% (till 31 st January, 2023) to 99.7%. The Committee would like to be 
informed in detail about the expenditure incurred during these last two months of the 
financial year 2022-23.                                                                                                                  
(Para 14.2) 

50 
 
 Safety and Security In Tourism  
The Committee desires to know the status of submissions of proposals under „Safe 
Tourism Destination for Women‟ from State Governments/ UT Admin, as stated by the 
Ministry in its reply.                                                                                                                  
(Para 15.2) 
The Committee notes the details furnished by Government of Madhya Pradesh to the 
Ministry rega rding the proposal for „Safe Tourism Destination for Women‟ scheme. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite its efforts in obtaining 
the proposals of various States.   This is vital for the success of the scheme and for 
ensuring safety of  women at tourist destinations across the country and will help in 
increasing the number of tourists, especially women, to safely undertake such visits.        
(Para 16.2) 
 
 Assistance to Central Agencies For Infrastructure Development  
The Committee notes the delay in sanction and completion of the projects and also notes 
that there is a discrepa ncy in the reply of Ministry.  Earlier Ministry had informed that 
22 projects have been completed since 2012 -13, but now the Ministry is stating that 19 
projects have been completed since 2012 -13. The Committee desires to know the exact 
number of projects sanctioned and completed under this scheme.   Also, the Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reason for the aforementioned discrepancy.       
(Para 18.2) 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may proactively follow up with MoRTH 
and State Governments/PWDs and obtain the updated information regarding road 
connectivity of 114 destinations.                                                                                 
 (Para 19.2) 
  
Global Perspective – Comparison of India With Other Countries 
The Committee observes that Service Exports for India Scheme (SEIS) despite being a 
vital scheme, has not been extended beyond FY 2019 -20. Further, the Ministry has 
stated that the matter regarding SEIS was taken up with Hon‟ble Finance Minister and 
Hon‟ble Minister of Commerce & Industry but the same has not yet been approved. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons cited by the concerned 
Ministries for d iscontinuing SEIS. Further, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation given in the 343 rd and 357 th Report on the SEI scheme in view of the 
fact that the tourism industry has not yet gained its pre -pandemic levels in India and 
many businesses are struggling to recover their losses.  
 (Para 22.2) 

51 
 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the status o f the matter taken up with 
Ministry of Finance regarding increasing of TCS from 5% to 20% and would reiterate 
again its recommendation to roll back the TCS provision.                                        
(Para 24.2) 
E-Visa Scheme  
The Committee desires t o know about the status of the matter taken up with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs regarding initiative of “Visa at Your Doorstep” scheme.                                      
            
 (Para 25.2) 
 Green and Sustainable Tourism 
The reply of the Ministry does not address the query raised by the Committee 
about the details of fund allocation and utilization towards green and sustainable 
tourism in the last 5 years. The Committee may be apprised of the above details. 
(Para 26.5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
ANNEXURE I 
Statement indicating status on Joint Development of Railway projects 
S.No. Name of the Projects 
(Joint Development 
of  ) 
Amount 
Sanctioned (In 
Cr) 
Amount 
released 
till date 
Status of the project as given 
by M/o Railways 
1. Agra Cantt. Railway 
Station 
5.05 5.05   
  
  
  
UC received and project is 
complete  
  
2. 
Ajmer Railway Station 
5.52 5.52 
3. Puri Railway Station 6.15 6.15 
4. Kamakhya Railway 
Station 
4.96 4.02 
5. Guwahati Railway 
Station 
4.99 4.34 
6. Trivandrum Railway 
Station 
5.98 4.00 
7. Hyderabad Railway 
Station 
4.41 3.52 UC received and the project is 
complete. Balance amount is to 
be released 
8. Tirupati Railway 
Station 
5.75 4.59 UC received and the project is 
complete. Balance amount is to 
be released 
9. Hospet Railway station 5.41 4.32 UC received and the project is 
complete. Balance amount is to 
be released 
10. 
Jaipur Railway Station 
4.88  3.90 UC received and the project is 
complete. Balance amount is to 
be released 
11. Madurai Railway 
Station 
4.48 3.56 Work completed. However, 
completion certificate is 
awaited. 
12. Rampurhat Railway 
Station 
3.48 1.74 Work completed. However, 
completion certificate is 
awaited. 
13. Amritsar Railway 
Station 
5.84 4.68 UC is awaited 

54 
 
14. Gaya Railway Station 5.18 4.14 UC is awaited 
15. Rameshwaram Railway 
Station 
4.70 3.67 UC is awaited 
16. Tarakeshwar Railway 
Station 
3.87 1.93 UC is awaited 
17. Chittorgarh Railway 
Station 
4.99 2.50 UC is awaited 
18. Rai-Bareilly Railway 
Station 
4.44 3.55   
  
Recommended by M/o 
Railways for short closure 
because the stations are 
selected under Amrit Bharat 
Station Scheme. 
19. Nanded Railway Station 5.18 2.59 
20. Aurangabad Railway 
Station 
5.71 2.85 
21. New Jalpaiguri Railway 
Station 
4.55 2.27 
22. Kurukshetra Railway 
Station 
3.02 1.51 
  
***** 
 

55 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

56 
 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Wednesday, the 6th February, 2024 in 
Committee Room -2, First F loor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
  
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
  
 Lok Sabha 
  
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
14. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
  
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider a nd adopt 
the following draft Reports of the Committee: - 

57 
 
1) Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Three Hundred Forty -Third Report on Demands for 
Grants (2023-24) of Ministry of Tourism 
2) ***1 
3) *** 
4) *** 
5) *** 
6) *** 
2.        The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one. After a 
brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid six draft Reports and authorized the 
Chairman to carry out minor modifications o f typographical and factual errors and 
formatting, if needed in all the Reports. 
3.       The Committee authorized Dr. C. M. Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A. A. 
Rahim, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 8 th February, 2024. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Anto Antony, M.P. and in his absence, Shri K. 
Muraleedharan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
4.        *** 
5.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6.       The Meeting adjourned at 10:35 A.M. 
                                                                                                                                      
New Delhi,                                                                                      D. S. Prasanna Kumar 
6th February, 2024                                                                                    Joint Secretary 
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 