 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA     161 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
THE ANTI-HIJACKING (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 18.10.2010) 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 18.10.2010) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 01.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 01.03.2011) 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
OCTOBER, 2010/ASVINA, 1932 (SAKA)     

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
THE ANTI-HIJACKING (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 18.10.2010) 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 18.10.2010) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 01.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 01.03.2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
OCTOBER, 2010/ASVINA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 

CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(iv) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... (v) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................................................. 1-5 
4. O BSERVATIONS /C ONCLUSIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS ––  AT A GLANCE .......................................... 6-7 
5. A NNEXURE ..................................................................................................................... 9-15 
6. M INUTES ....................................................................................................................... 17-22 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2009-2010)  
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury      -------      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 
@5. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7. Shri Thomas Sangma 
 
#8. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma 
 *9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10. Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 15. Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 16. Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 22. Shri S.D. Shariq 
 23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25. Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28. Shri K. Sugumar 
 29. Shri Kabir Suman 
 30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
*COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2010-11)  
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury      -------      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 4.  Shri Narendra Kashyap 
 5.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
 6.  Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
 8.  Shri Satish Sharma 
 9.  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK  SABHA  
 11.  Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12.  Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13.  Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 14.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil  
 15.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 16.  Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18.  Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao  
 22.  Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq  
 23.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25.  Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28.  Shri K. Sugumar 
 29.  Shri Kabir Suman 
 30.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31.  Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
 

SECRETARIAT  
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION  
  I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture, having been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf this One Hundred and Sixty 
first Report on “The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 2010”. 
2.   The Committee, at its meeting held on the 30th  September, 2010 considered the Bill and heard the 
representatives of Ministries of Civil Aviation; Home Affairs and Law and Justice. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of Ministries of Civil Aviation; Home Affairs 
and Law and Justice and experts/stakeholders/organi zations/individuals for placing before the Committe e the 
material and information desired in connection with  the Bill and for clarifying the points raised by t he 
Members. 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the Report  at its meeting held on the 8th October, 2010. 
 
 
 
  SITARAM  YECHURY 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
October 8, 2010 Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Asvina 16 , 1932 (Saka)  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
  The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was int roduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 19th August, 
2010. The Bill was referred to the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture for examination and report within two months. 
2.   The Amendment Bill seeks to bring conspirators  and abettors of hijacking also into the ambit of t he 
Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 and include ‘death penalty’ as punishment for hijacking. 
3.  The Committee while examining the Bill heard th e views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry  of 
Home Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department). The 
Committee had invited views/suggestions from the in dividuals/organizations through Press Communique 
issued in various newspapers. In response, it recei ved several written Memoranda that were considered by the 
Committee. 
4.   The Committee in its meeting held on the 30th September, 2010 heard the views of the officials of  the 
Ministries of Civil Aviation; Home Affairs and Law and Justice on the provisions of the Bill and the r ationale 
for bringing the amendment and sought clarifications on various points. 
5.   The hijacking incidents like that of Indian Ai rlines flight IC-814 in 1999 and those in the Unite d States 
of America on the 11th September, 2001 using civili an aircrafts as missiles for causing mass destructi on and 
subsequent attempts worldwide to hijack aircrafts b y certain outlawed groups or organizations have 
necessitated a fresh and thorough examination of th e preparedness of all concerned to face such exigen cies. It 
has, therefore, become necessary to reassess our st rengths and weaknesses in the existing strategies f or 
handling such exigencies. 
6.  The Ministry informed that the existing law was  insufficient to deal with these new situations and  
penalties in it were not deterrent enough to the pr ospective offenders. It was therefore, felt necessa ry to make 
the existing Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 more comprehe nsive in order to cover all aspects and all kinds o f 
hijacking by the offenders and conspirators and fur ther, to make the law more stringent by including d eath 
penalty also for such offences. 
7.  It was also informed that the Convention for th e suppression of Unlawful seizure of Aircraft ---- the 
Hague Convention 1970 ---- has been ratified by Ind ia and the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 was based on th e 
provisions of the Convention. 
8.  The Committee was informed that Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was prepared after 
consultation with and approval of a Group of Minist ers Chaired by Hon’ble Home Minister, Cabinet 
Secretariat and Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department). 
9.  When the Committee pointed out that the Bill ap parently laid more emphasis on punishment and not o n 
prevention of the crime, the Ministry informed that  various preventive measures were already in place.  A 
dedicated Aviation Security Force (ASF) with Quick Response Team (QRT) was in position to tackle any 
situation. In addition there was a proper plan to h andle any crisis situation by the designated Committees, viz. , 
Committee of Secretaries on Aircraft Hijacking (COS AH), Central Committee and Aerodrome Committees. 
The Ministry further informed that various other anti-hijacking measures, such as Access Control into Airport, 
verification of Identity proof by Aviation Security  Group (ASG)/Police before entry into Terminal Buil ding 

and by airlines at their Counters, frisking of person, 100% screening of cabin/hand-baggage, secondary (ladder 
point) screening of persons and hand-baggage before  boarding the aircraft done by airline, access cont rol to 
aircraft by guarding its all entry points, 100% scr eening of cargo/main/courier by x-ray/physical 
check/Explosive Track Detector (ETD) before loading  into aircraft, deployment of Sky-Marshal etc. Pane l of 
psychologists, Linguistics are also available for liaisoning with the Hijackers. 
10.   On being asked, Ministry clarified that the H ague Convention of 1970 called upon the States ‘to make 
the offence punishable by severe penalties’. It did  not specifically mention about ‘death penalty’ as 
punishment. 
11.   When asked about position in other countries in this regard, the Committee was informed that whi le in 
some countries death penalty was provided for hijac kers (in case of passenger/crew casualties during 
hijacking), it was not awarded in some other countries. For example:- 
In Japan, a person who by use of force or threat of  force seizes the aircraft or exercises control ove r an 
aircraft is punished with imprisonment for life or a term which shall not be less than seven years. If such 
act resulted in death of a person, he shall be punished with death or life imprisonment. 
In China, whoever sabotages the means of transport,  etc., shall be sentenced to a fixed term 
imprisonment of not less than ten years, life imprisonment or death. 
In case of Germany, penalty for the offence of high jacking is minimum five years and maximum 15 
years provided that there are no fatalities. In cas e someone gets killed, the penalty is usually life 
sentence. Death penalty does not exist in Germany. In case of Australia, it is not very clear. There i s no 
death penalty. 
In case of the UK, a person who commits the offence  of hijacking shall be liable, on conviction on 
indictment, to imprisonment for life. In France, as is known, there is no death penalty since the 80s. 
In case of the USA, an individual committing or att empting or conspiring to commit aircraft piracy shall 
be put to death or imprisonment for life, if the de ath of another individual results from the act or attempt 
of hijacking. 
12.   The representatives from the Ministry of Home  Affairs and Law and Justice also endorsed the argu ment 
of the Ministry of Civil Aviation for awarding deat h penalty. They also emphasized the need for such a n 
amendment in the increasing threats of impending hi jacking in the most destructive form. They submitte d that 
the death penalty proposed in the Bill was 'constitutionally valid and legally sustainable'. 
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION  
13.   The Committee in its meeting held on the 8th October, 2010 considered clauses of the Bill and th e 
Committee’s recommendations have been given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
14.   Section 2 of the Bill reads ---- In Section 3  of the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the 
Principal Act), for Sub-section (2), the following Sub-section shall be substituted, namely:---- 
“(2) Whoever, either on his own, or in concert with others, attempts to commit any of the acts referred to 
in sub-section (1) in relation to any aircraft or a bets the commission of any such act, shall also be 
deemed to have committed the offence of hijacking of such aircraft”.  

15.   The Committee feels that the proposed amendment is the need of the hour and unavoidable in the 
heightened threat for such a daring crime. The Comm ittee endorses the proposed amendment to 
provide for the capital punishment, apart from the hijackers, to the conspirators and abettors also wh o 
commit any of the acts referred to in Sub Section ( 1) of the Section 3 of the Anti-Hijacking Act, so t hat 
all those involved, directly or indirectly, got the same punishment as the hijackers.  
16.   Clause 3 of the Bill reads --- For Section 4 of the Principal Act, the following Section shall b e 
substituted, namely:- 
“4. Whoever commits the offence of hijacking shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life and  
shall also be liable to fine.”  
17.   The Committee notices that the proposed amendment i n Section 4 of the Principal Act was not 
clear whether the provision of death penalty will b e applicable to only those hijackers who kill 
hostages/security men or to all hijackers, with or without any fatalities. The Committee is of the opinion 
that if the death penalty was a foregone conclusion for the offence of hijacking, the opportunities for any 
negotiation or settlement to save lives of the pass engers may be foreclosed. What about the safety of 
passengers and crew when the hijacker is sure that they will get death penalty for their offence? 
Whether the death penalty would really be deterrence to those hijackers who do it as suicide mission?  
18.   In response thereto the representatives of th e Ministry of Law submitted before the Committee th at the 
construction of the amendment provided for punishme nt with death or imprisonment for life and shall al so be 
liable to fine, which meant that a penalty less tha n death was also possible depending on the gravity of the 
offence. 
19.   The Committee, however, recommends that death penal ty must be made applicable to those 
offenders whose action results in the death of hostages/security men during the act of hijacking. 
GENERAL  RECOMMENDATIONS  
20.   The Committee had its reservation on the defi nition as provided in Section 3 (3) of the Act whic h states 
inter-alia:  
For the purposes of this section, an aircraft shall  be deemed to be in flight at any time from the mom ent 
when all its external doors are closed following em barkation until the moment when any such door is 
opened for disembarkation, and in the case of a for ced landing, the fight shall be deemed to continue 
until the competent authorities of the country in w hich such forced landing takes place take over the 
responsibility for the aircraft and for persons and property on board.  
21.   It is noted that the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 , defined the act of hijacking as ‘seizing or exerc ising 
control of an aircraft, unlawfully, by force or thr eat of force or by any other way of intimidation on  board an 
aircraft in flight’. The term aircraft in flight ha s also been defined as ‘starting from the moment ex ternal doors 
of the aircraft are closed followed by embarkation till the moment they are opened again for disembarkation’ . 
22.   The Ministry of Civil Aviation was asked to e xplain the rationale behind limiting the scope of t he 
definition of hijacking. The Ministry subsequently in their written clarification submitted that Anti- Hijacking 
Act, 1982 was based on the provisions of the Hague Convention, 1970, wherein the offence of Hijacking had 
been defined as “any seizure of aircraft in flight”. Therefore, all the cases relating to seizure of aircraft in flight 

were covered herein. Accordingly, all other cases o f seizure of aircraft on ground shall be treated as  any other 
criminal offence and be dealt as per the provisions of IPC and other related laws. 
23.   The Committee is not quite convinced by the explana tion given by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
It notes that the definition of aircraft movement from door-closure to door-opening does not include the 
forced entry into aircraft and its take-over when t he aircraft is on the taxiway at the airport with o r 
without passengers or when pre-flight checking of t he aircraft is in progress. The Committee is of the  
view that the definition of hijacking needs to be widened to include such situations also.  
COMPENSATION TO VICTIMS  
24.   During the deliberations it was noted that th e issue of compensation to the victims of hijacking  or their 
dependents had not been provided in the proposed am endment nor is it available in the Principal Act. T he 
Ministry was asked to clarify the point. In a subse quent written submission, the Ministry clarified th at the 
purpose and objective of the proposed amendment was to make the existing law more comprehensive and also 
stringent to have deterrent effect on the potential  offender. This is essentially a penal provision. T he issue of 
compensation, in fact, is to be separately dealt wi th as in case of other victims of illegal acts. The refore, the 
issue of compensation to victims of hijacking for t he loss of the life/injury shall be dealt with as p er the 
prevalent civil law. 
25.   The Committee notes that the compensation under civ il law is time-taking involving lot of 
litigation and procedures. The Committee feels that  when we have a stand alone legislation for 
hijacking, it should be appropriate to include all the aspects related or incidental to the Act of hij acking 
in this legislation itself. The compensation, no do ubt, should be an integral part of it. The Committe e, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Av iation should consider including necessary 
provisions to provide for compensation in the ‘Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982’.  
26.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that these two  aspects need to be examined thoroughly in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice a nd other experts/agencies with a view to 
incorporating the suggestions of the Committee relating to the definition of Hijacking and provisions for 
compensation appropriately in the Bill itself to make it comprehensive. 
HIJACKING OF OTHER MODES OF TRANSPORT  
27.   The Committee notes that in the recent years there are increased incidents of hijacking of buses , cars, 
trains etc. by anti-social elements for ransom or f or other objectives. The Committee notes that takin g control 
forcefully of such modes of transport were not cove red under any specific law, except the criminal law s. The 
compensation to the victims of such hijacking were also not provided in any law. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government should consider havi ng such a legislation to deal with taking control 
forcefully of other modes of transport and provide for the punishment to the offenders and 
compensation to the victims of such hijacking.  
 
 
 
 

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ---- AT A GLANCE  
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION 
  The Committee feels that the proposed amendment i s the need of the hour and unavoidable in the 
heightened threat for such a daring crime. The Comm ittee endorses the proposed amendment to 
provide for the capital punishment, apart from the hijackers, to the conspirators and abettors also wh o 
commit any of the acts referred to in Sub Section ( 1) of the Section 3 of the Anti-Hijacking Act, so t hat 
all those involved, directly or indirectly, got the same punishment as the hijackers. (Para 15)  
  The Committee notices that the proposed amendment  in Section 4 of the Principal Act was not 
clear whether the provision of death penalty will b e applicable to only those hijackers who kill 
hostages/security men or to all hijackers, with or without any fatalities. The Committee is of the opinion 
that if the death penalty was a foregone conclusion for the offence of hijacking, the opportunities for any 
negotiation or settlement to save lives of the pass engers may be foreclosed. What about the safety of 
passengers and crew when the hijacker is sure that they will get death penalty for their offence? 
Whether the death penalty would really be deterrence to those hijackers who do it as suicide mission? 
    (Para 17)  
  The Committee, however, recommends that death pen alty must be made applicable to those 
offenders whose action results in the death of hostages/security men during the act of hijacking.  
    (Para 19)  
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
  The Committee is not quite convinced by the expla nation given by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
It notes that the definition of aircraft movement from door-closure to door-opening does not include the 
forced entry into aircraft and its take-over when t he aircraft is on the taxiway at the airport with o r 
without passengers or when pre-flight checking of t he aircraft is in progress. The Committee is of the  
view that the definition of hijacking needs to be widened to include such situations also. (Para 23)  
COMPENSATION TO VICTIMS 
  The Committee notes that the compensation under c ivil law is time-taking involving lot of 
litigation and procedures. The Committee feels that  when we have a stand alone legislation for 
hijacking, it should be appropriate to include all the aspects related or incidental to the Act of hij acking 
in this legislation itself. The compensation, no do ubt, should be an integral part of it. The Committe e, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Av iation should consider including necessary 
provisions to provide for compensation in the ‘Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982’. (Para 25)  
  The Committee, therefore, recommends that these t wo aspects need to be examined thoroughly in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice a nd other experts/agencies with a view to 
incorporating the suggestions of the Committee relating to the definition of hijacking and provisions for 
compensation appropriately in the Bill itself to make it comprehensive. (Para 26)  
HIJACKING OF OTHER MODES OF TRANSPORT 
 The Committee recommends that the Government shoul d consider having such a legislation to 
deal with taking control forcefully of other modes of transport and provide for the punishment to the 
offenders and compensation to the victims of such hijacking.         (Para 27) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. LVII of 2010 
 
 
THE ANTI-HIJACKING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010  
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year o f the Republic 
of India as follows:–– 
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Anti-Hijacking (Amendm ent) 
Act, 2010. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
 2.  In section 3 of the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 (here inafter 
referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section ( 2), the following 
 
 
Short title and commencement. 
 
 
 
Ammendment of section 3 

sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- 
 “( 2) Whoever, either on his own, or in concert with ot hers, 
attempts to commit any of the acts referred to in s ub-section ( 1) in 
relation to any aircraft or abets the commission of  any such act, 
shall also be deemed to have committed the offence of hijacking of 
such aircraft.” . 
 3.  For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted. namely:---- 
 “ 4.  Whoever commits the offence of hijacking shall be punished 
with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to 
fine.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of new section for 
section 4 
Punishment for hijacking  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
 The hijacking incidents which have taken place in the recent past including the hijacking of Indian 
Airlines flight No. IC-814 in 1999 and the hijackin g incident in the United States of America on the 1 1th 
September, 2001 have shown that civilian aircrafts were hijacked and used as missiles for causing mass  
destruction. Subsequent attempts worldwide to hijac k aircrafts and the threat by the outlawed groups o r 
organisations have necessitated a fresh and thoroug h examination of the preparedness of all concerned to face 
such exigencies. It has therefore become necessary to reassess the strengths and weaknesses of the exi sting 
strategies for handling such exigencies. 
 2. The present law has insufficient penalties to d eal with these new situations and is not deterrent enough 
to prospective offenders. It is necessary to make t he extant provisions dealing with hijacking, more 
comprehensive in order to cover all aspects and kin ds of hijacking by offenders and conspirators and t o make 
the law more stringent by award of death penalty for such offences. 
 3. In view of the increasing cases of hijacking an d impending threats of hijacking, it is proposed to  
amend the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 to,---- 
  ( a) amend section 3 to provide that whoever, either o n his own, or in concert with others, 
 attempts to commit any of the acts referred to in sub-section (1) of said section 3 (which inter alia  
 include seizure or control of an aircraft in fligh t by force or threat of force or by any other form of 
 intimidation, by a person with the intention of co mmitting the offence of hijacking of such aircraft)  
 shall be deemed to have committed the offence of h ijacking of such aircraft; 
  ( b) amend section 4 to enhance its scope by including  death penalty for the offence of hijacking 
 which at present provides for imprisonment for lif e and fine. 
 4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objecti ves. 
 
 
N
EW DELHI ;  PRAFUL PATEL 
The  1 st  June, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE  
EXTRACT FROM TILE ANTI -HIJACKING ACT , 1982   
(65  OF 1982) 
 * * * * * 
CHAPTER II  
HIJAKING AND CONNECTD OFFENCES  
3.   ( 1)         *          *        *  * *  
     (2)  Whoever attempts to commit any of the acts refer red to in 
sub-section (I) in relation to any aircraft, or abets the commission 
of any such act, shall also be deemed to have commi tted the 
offence of hijacking of such aircraft. 
 * * * * * 
4.   Whoever commits the offence of hijacking shall be  punished 
with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. 
 *       *                                    * *               * 
 
 
 
Hijacking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Punishment for hijacking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA  
––––––––– 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982. 
––––––––– 
[Shri Praful Patel, Minister of State (Independent Charge) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation]  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

II 
SECOND MEETING  
  The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday the 30th September, 2010 in Committee  Room ‘B’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury     -------     Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Shadi La1 Batra 
 3.  Shri Narendra Kashyap  
 4.  Shri Thomas Sangma  
 5.  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz  
 6.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil  
 8.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 9.  Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 10.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 11.  Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq  
 12.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 13.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
 14.  Shri K. Sugumar 
 15.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
  REPRESENTATIVES  OF  MINISTRY OF  CIVIL  AVIATION  
 1. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan, Addl. Secy. & FA 
 2. Shri Rohit Nandan, Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri L.R.S. Reddy, Director 
 4. Shri G.S. Malhi, COSCA, BCAS 
 5. Shri Gyaneshwar Singh, Addl. COSCA, BCAS 
 6. Shri R.N. Dhoke, Addl. COSCA, BCAS 
 7. Shri M.T. Baig, Assistant Commissioner, BCAS 
 8. Dr. Balmiki Prasad, Deputy Secretary 
 9. Shri Gowri Shankar, Under Secretary 
 10. Wing Crd. Harbola, Deputy Director, DGCA 

  REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS  
 1. Shri L.D. Jha, Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri N.I. Chowdhury, Deputy Secretary 
  REPRESENTATIVE OF DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL  AFFAIRS  
 1. Shri M.K. Sharma, Joint Secretary & Legal Advis er 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT  
 1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative  Counsel  
 2. Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary & Legislativ e Counsel 
 3. Shrimati Veena Kothavale, Deputy Legislative Co unsel 
 * * * 
2. * * * 
3.  The representatives of the Ministries/Departmen ts responded to the points raised in the meeting. T hey 
also informed that death penalty was constitutional ly permissible. They also informed about the provis ions of 
punishment in other countries like Japan, China, Germany, USA and UK. 
4.  As regards preventive aspects, the Committee wa s informed that various preventive measures were 
already in place such as a dedicated Aviation Secur ity Force with Quick Response Team, plan to handle any 
crisis situation by the designated Committees, viz. , Committee of Secretaries on Aircraft Hijacking, C entral 
Committee and Aerodrome Committees and other anti-hijacking measures. 
5.  Members of the Committee raised their doubts on  the definition of hijacking which cover period fro m 
door-closure to door-opening as it did not include the forced entry into aircraft and its take-over wh en the 
aircraft is on the taxiway at the airport with or without passengers or when pre-flight checking of the aircraft is 
in progress and needs to be widened to include such situations also. 
6.  The representatives of the Ministry/Department gave clarifications on the points raised. To some o f the 
queries, the Ministry was told to give written replies at the earliest. 
  The witnesses then withdrew. 
7. * * * 
8. * * * 
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
10. The meeting adjourned at 1.40 
P.M. to meet again on 8th October, 2010. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

III  
THIRD MEETING  
  The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 8th October, 2010 in Committee Roo m ‘B’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury     -------     Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 3.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
 4.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
 5.  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 6.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 8.  Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 9.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 10.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 11.  Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq  
 12.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha  
 13.  Shri K. Sugumar 
 14.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 * * * 
2.   At the outset, the Committee took up the 161st  Draft Report on the Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bil l, 
2010 for consideration and adoption. After some dis cussion the Committee adopted the Report with minor  
modifications. The Committee recalled a Direction of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha according to wh ich 
Report on the Bill was to be presented within two m onths of reference of the Bill to the Committee. Th e 
Committee accordingly decided that the Report may b e presented to the Hon’ble Chairman on the 18th 
October, 2010 and authorized the Chairman for the purpose. 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
 
 

5. * * * 
6. * * * 
7. The meeting adjourned at 1.40 P.M. 
 
 