PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 168
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA) –
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11 AUGUST, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 11 AUGUST, 2011)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11 AUGUST, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 11 AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2011/VAISAKHA, 1933 (SAKA)MAY, 2011/VAISAKHA, 1933 (SAKA)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 4  MAY, 2011)TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 4  MAY, 2011)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 4  MAY, 2011)TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 4  MAY, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL A VIATION (DGCA) –
ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 4 TH MAY , 2011)
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 4 TH MAY , 2011)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11 TH AUGUST, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 11 TH AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2011/VAISAKHA, 1933 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—15
4. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 17—22
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 23—35

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2010-11)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Narendra Kashyap
5. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Thomas Sangma
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
10. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Aditya Nath
12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
13. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
15. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri P. Karunakaran
17. Shri Jose K. Mani
18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Rajaram Pal
20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
22. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq
23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
24. Shri Dushyant Singh
25. Shri Jitendra Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sugumar
29. Shri Kabir Suman
30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal*
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 19 th January, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Sixty Eighth Report on “Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA)–Issues and Challenges”.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture in its meeting held on the 15
th September, 2009 decided to have an in-depth study on the
functioning of Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). The subject selected was notified in
Parliamentary Bulletin Part II dated the 1
st October, 2009.
3. Apart from a detailed background note obtained from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, the
Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Director General of Civil
Aviation, CMD, Air India Limited and Chairman, Airports Authority of India in its meetings held on
the 8
th January, 29 th June and 8 th October, 2010. In order to get wider views on the subject, the
Committee invited the views of individuals, organisations and institutions on the subject through
advertisement in all major national dailies and vernacular newspapers all over the country.
4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation for providing necessary inputs and clarifications during deliberations on
the subject. The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of the individuals/Associations who
submitted their valuable suggestions on the subject.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 13
th April, 2011.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 13, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Chaitra 23, 1932  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
Aviation sector has become one of the happening sectors in the country in the past two
decades. Opening of Indian skies and private participation in the aviation sector has seen a
perceptible growth in, among others, the passenger traffic and cargo handling from 2002, as
follows:
Year Domestic Passenger I nternational Cargo
Traffic Passenger Traffic (in million tons)
(in lakhs) (in lakhs)
2002 133 127.7 0.55
2003 145 140.3 0.58
2004 182 166.7 0.70
2005 223 193.4 0.80
2006 327 224.8 0.90
2007 433 262.7 0.99
2008 408 288.5 1.08
2009 433 290.6 1.32
2010 (till August 329
2010 provisional)
2. The Committee was informed that the sector had seen a phenomenal growth of 160 per cent
during this period. India became the ninth largest civil aviation market in the world as well as a
major aviation hub in the Asia pacific region. The projected number of passengers in the Indian
aviation market would be 180 million by 2015. The total number of aircrafts flying in the country
has also seen a substantial increase. Increased air travel and entry of private players in this sector
raised question regarding not only the aviation safety but also for quality of services, etc. for the
travelers.
3. New circumstances led to so many new problems and demands particularly for ensuring
aviation safety. It posed new challenges for the existing air safety regulator to equip itself and
develop required management capabilities to ensure safer air travel.
4. Apart from a few major air crashes, instances of a number of near air misses, overshooting
runways, bird hits, frequent vehicular accidents on the airside of airports, frequent disruption due
to lack of precise weather updates/prediction, outdated equipments, overworked Air Traffic
Controllers were increasing that generated a scare about safer air journey in the people’s mind.
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA)
5. Aviation safety in India has been the responsibility of the Directorate General of Civil
Aviation under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. An impression gained ground that the aviation
regulator DGCA was not in a position to cope up with the newer demand and challenges with the
existing manpower, authority and resources at its command. The major impediment faced by the

2
DGCA as the aviation safety regulator in the changed circumstances was the mismatch between
expansion of air services and operations and the required manpower and infrastructure to
adequately supervise, coordinate and enforce the safety standards. Sense of urgency in making
adequate trained manpower available in such critical areas as pilots, trainers, maintenance engineers,
inspection officers, etc. in fact, was conspicuous by its absence.
6. It was with this hypothesis, the Committee decided to look into these issues in the context
of functioning, powers, resources, etc. of the DGCA for presenting a Report to Parliament.
Functions of DGCA
7. Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is responsible for governing safety aspects of
civil aviation, which include certification of airlines and aerodromes, airworthiness of aircraft,
personnel licensing and surveillance of aircraft operations in India.
The functions of DGCA include:
a. Registration of civil aircraft;
b. Formulation of standards of airworthiness for civil aircraft registered in India and grant
of certificates of airworthiness to such aircraft;
c. Licensing of pilots, aircraft maintenance engineers and flight engineers, and conducting
examinations and checks for that purpose;
d. Licensing of air traffic controllers;
e. Certification of aerodromes and Communication Navigation Systems (CNS)/Air Traffic
Management (ATM) facilities;
f. Maintaining a check on the proficiency of flight crew, and also of other operational
personnel such as flight dispatchers and cabin crew;
g. Granting of Air Operator’s Certificates to Indian carriers and regulation of air transport
services operating to/from/within/over India by Indian and foreign operators, including
clearance of scheduled and non-scheduled flights of such operators;
h. Conducting investigation into accidents/incidents and taking accident prevention
measures including formulation of implementation of Safety Aviation Management
Programmes;
i. Carrying out amendments to the Aircraft Act, the Aircraft Rules and the Civil Aviation
Requirements for complying with the amendments to ICAO Annexes, and initiating
proposals for amendment to any other Act or for passing a new Act in order to give
effect to an International Convention or amendment to an existing Convention;
j. Coordination of ICAO matters with all agencies and sending replies to State Letters,
and taking all necessary action arising out of the Universal Safety Oversight Audit
Programme (USOAP) of ICAO;
k. Supervision of the institutes/clubs/schools engaged in flying training including simulator
training, Aircraft Maintenance Engineering training or any other training related with
aviation, with a view to ensuring a high quality of training;
l. Granting approval to aircraft maintenance, repair and manufacturing organizations and
their continued oversight;

3
m. To act as a nodal agency for implementing ICAO Annex 9 provisions in India and for
coordinating matters relating to facilitation at Indian airports including holding meetings
of the National Facilitation Committee;
n. Rendering advice to the Government on matters relating to air transport including
bilateral air services agreements, on ICAO matters and generally on all technical
matters relating to civil aviation, and to act as an overall regulatory and developmental
body for civil aviation in the country;
o. Coordination at national level for flexi-use of air space by civil and military air traffic
agencies and interaction with ICAO for provision of more air routes for civil use
through Indian air space;
p. Keeping a check on aircraft noise and engine emissions in accordance with ICAO Annex
16 and collaborating with the environmental authorities in this matter, if required;
q. Promoting indigenous design and manufacture of aircraft and aircraft components by
acting as a catalytic agent;
r. Approving training programmes of operators for carriage of dangerous goods, issuing
authorizations for carriage of dangerous goods, etc.
8. The DGCA performs these functions through the following Directorates:
(i) Directorate of Regulation & Information
(ii) Directorate of Air Transport
(iii) Directorate of Airworthiness
(iv) Directorate of Air safety
(v) Directorate of Training & Licensing
(vi) Directorate of Aerodrome Standards
(vii) Directorate of Flying Training
(viii) Directorate of Flight Inspection
(ix) Directorate of Administration
(x) Aircraft Engineering Division
(xi) Air Space & Air navigation Services
(xii) T raining Academy.
LEGISLATIVE BACKUP
9. Civil Aviation activities including the safety aspects are governed in India through a
framework of legislation and rules and regulations laid down by the Central Government. The
Aircraft Act, 1934 is the primary aviation legislation of India, which is supplemented by the Aircraft
Rules, 1937, and the Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs). The Committee notes that the DGCA
does not enjoy any statutory backing for its powers, etc.
INTERNATIONAL AVIATION SAFETY AUDITS AND ASSESSMENTS
(i) International Standards and Recommended Practices
10. India, as a contracting State to the Chicago Convention, 1944, follows a policy of adhering
to International Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs) of International Civil Aviation

4
Organization (ICAO) in achieving the highest degree of safety in aircraft operations. SARPs
contained in the ICAO Annexes particularly Annexes 1 (Licensing of Personnel), 2 (Rules of the
Air), 3 (Aviation Meteorology), Annex 5 (Units of Measurements), 6 (Operation of Aircraft),
7 (Registration of Aircraft), 8 (Airworthiness of Aircraft), 9 (Facilitation), 10 (Aeronautical
Telecommunications), 11 (Air Traffic Services), 12 (Search and Rescue), 13 (Aircraft Accident and
Incident Investigation), 14 (licensing of Aerodromes including heliports), 15 (Aeronautical
Information Services), 16 (Aircraft Noise and Engine Emissions) and 18 (Carriage of Dangerous
Goods) and other related ICAO documents have been adopted to lay down rules, regulations and
requirements in the Aircraft Rules, 1937, the Aircraft (Demolition of obstructions caused by
Buildings and Trees etc.) Rules, 1994, the Aircraft (Carriage of Dangerous Goods) Rules, 2003,
Civil Aviation Requirements, Aeronautical Information Circulars (AIC), etc. It is emphasised that
India has adopted most of the International standards of ICAO.
(ii) Safety Audits/Assessments
11. The Committee was informed that aviation safety audit of the concerned country is
conducted under an ‘International Aviation Safety Assessment Programme’ (IASA). It focuses on
the country’s ability to adhere to standards and recommended practices of International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) for aircraft operations and maintenance. Such an audit of DGCA done
in 1997 found India wanting on as many as 70 points. DGCA was audited by an ICAO safety
oversight audit team in 1999 with the follow up audit in 2001. These audits covered ICAO Annexes
1, 6 and 8. In the year 2006, ICAO again audited DGCA covering all safety related Annexes under
the comprehensive systems approach with the object of ascertaining the safety oversight capability
of the DGCA in areas of airworthiness, personnel licensing, operations, aerodromes, air navigation
services and aircraft accident and incident investigation. In March 2009, Federal Aviation Authority
(FAA), based on the report of an audit conducted by ICAO in October 2006, conducted a
reassessment of DGCA. At the end of every audit, the audit team made its findings and
recommendations.
12. The FAA audit team visited India again in September, 2009 which, as claimed by the
Ministry of Civil Aviation found India in compliance with international standards for aviation safety
and reported India to continue to be maintained in Category 1. This was again endorsed during a
visit by FAA in July 2010 which stated that DGCA has demonstrated improvement in its safety
oversight system.
13. The Committee was further informed that out of a total 70 shortcoming observed by the
FAA, 61 had been already addressed. The remaining nine which were basically on air navigation
systems will be addressed by 31
st December, 2010. The newly created Air Navigation Services
Directorate will deal with all related matters including air traffic control, air traffic management and
will also address these pending issues.
14. The Ministry while clarifying informed the Committee that the assessments found India to
be complaint in areas of aviation legislation, operating regulations, civil aviation structure and safety
oversight functions, and licensing and certification obligations. The Audit team, however, raised
concerns in the areas of:
(i) adequate technical guidance for DGCA technical officials;
(ii) hiring and retaining adequate technical personnel in DGCA;
(iii) establishment of an on-going surveillance programme of air operators; and
(iv) resolution of identified safety issues.

5
15. The Committee was informed that most of the findings and recommendations have been
addressed with the remaining findings being addressed by projects undertaken with Technical
Cooperation Bureau of ICAO.
16. The Committee notes the assessments/recommendation of the various safety audits as well
as efforts made by the Ministry/DGCA to comply with them. The adequacy/effectiveness of these
steps have been discussed in the Report. Various aspects of the subject discussed by the
Committee and the Committee’s observations thereon have been brought out in the
succeeding paragraphs of the report.
AIRWORTHINESS OF AN AIRCRAFT
17. The Aircraft Rules, 1937 state that no civil aircraft shall be flown in India unless it holds
a valid Certificate of Airworthiness (C of A) issued by DGCA. The Certificate of Airworthiness is
issued only after an inspection to ensure that the aircraft is of approved Type Design and has been
maintained in accordance with periodic inspection schedules stipulated by the manufacturer of the
aircraft. During Certificate of Airworthiness inspection, it is ensured that components have been
replaced when due, mandatory airworthiness directives and applicable service/alert bulletins
including Supplementary Structural Inspection Programme (SSIP) and Corrosion Prevention and
Control Programme (CPCP) have been complied with.
18. The Certificate of Airworthiness is valid for a period of five years for aircraft of an age upto
10 years and is thereafter valid for a period of 2 years upto the age of 20 years. For aircraft over
20 years of age, the validity of Certificate of Airworthiness has been restricted to one year. During
the course of the validity of Certificate of Airworthiness of an aircraft, officers of DGCA monitor
routine maintenance, major checks and significant defects through spot checks and surveillance.
19. In response to a query, the Ministry of Civil Aviation informed that there are in all 1518
aircraft registered in India, out of which 1085 are aeroplanes, 285 helicopters and 148 others like
gliders, micro light, balloons etc. Many aircraft owned by the State Governments, training institutes
and under ‘Private Category’ are old and do not possess current ‘Certificate of Airworthiness’.
There are 241 aeroplanes, helicopters, gliders, microlights, hot balloons and hang gliders registered
under ‘Private Category’, which cannot be used for hire and reward. Thus, about 50% of aircraft
are presently in operation.
20. The Committee was informed by one of the stakeholders that though DGCA follows ICAO
norms for the selection of airworthiness officer, there is a big gap in the competence of
airworthiness officers of DGCA and those of FAA and EASA. When asked, the Ministry informed
the Committee that unlike FAA and EASA, competent people do not join DGCA due to its
unattractive salary structure. However, DGCA is imparti ng adequate training to raise the
competence of its officers to the required level.
AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS (AMOS)
21. Aircraft maintenance is carried out by the outside organizations approved by DGCA for
which it has to ensure that they have proper infrastructure, appropriate tools/machinery, updated
documents like maintenance manual, wiring diagrams, parts catalogue etc. and aircraft maintenance
engineers holding appropriate licences for the maintenance work. DGCA approval is valid for one
year for which necessary inspections have to be carried annually. All these require a large number
of technically qualified personnel.
22. Besides, the Committee found that in the Directorate of Airworthiness in the DGCA,
out of total sanctioned strength of 249, only 64 were in position.

6
ISSUANCE OF AIR OPERATOR’S PERMIT
23. Before carrying out air transport operations in India, a prospective operator is required to
comply with Schedule XI of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 which lays down the requirements for grant
of permit for scheduled operations. The detailed requirements for the issuance of a permit is given
in the Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs) and involves a number of steps leading to issuance of
an Air Operator’s Permit by DGCA under Rule 134 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937. The steps involved
in the process of the issuance of the permit includes issuance of an initial ‘No Objection Certificate
(NOC)’ for starting an airline, setting up of the facilities and infrastructure by the proposed
operator, grant of permission for import/acquisition of aircraft and the issuance of Air Operator’s
permit. Before the permit is issued, DGCA ensures compliance with safety requirements
(operational and airworthiness). In response to a query, the Ministry of Civil Aviation informed that
presently, there were thirteen scheduled airlines operating 421 aircrafts and three scheduled cargo
operators operating with 17 aircraft. There are 120 non-scheduled permit holders, who operate
different types of aircraft. Besides, State Governments, Central Government, Public Sector
Undertakings, etc. also operate aeroplanes, helicopters and gliders. Further, flying training institutes
also have aeroplanes, helicopters and gliders. Recently Aircraft Rules, 1937 have been amended
requiring ‘aerial work’ aircraft to obtain Non-Scheduled Operator’s permit.
GRANTING LICENSING/CERTIFICATE/APPROV ALS, ETC.
24. DGCA is the authority to issue certificate/licences in keeping with International Standards
and Recommended Practices for various categories of Pilots, flight crew members, Aircraft
Maintenance Engineers, Air Traffic Controllers etc. Apart from checking various documents/
certificates, holding written examinations, DGCA also conducts tests on various counts to test their
skills, health, etc. In response to a specific complaint of granting of medical fitness certificates to
unfit pilots and malpractice in the existing system made by a stakeholder, the Ministry refuted the
allegations and stated that the medical test was conducted by approved organizations such as Chief
Medical Examiner, managed by Indian Air Force. DGCA had undertaken several reforms in Medical
Cells.
25. The work relating to licensing of personnel and conducting regular examination of
competent person in those categories is looked after by the Training and Licensing Department of
the DGCA. The Committee found that of the sanctioned 26 posts in this Department, only
four were in position, let alone the actual requirement for this purpose.
EX-PAT PILOTS
26. The Committee was informed that there are about 10,000 active pilots in the country of
which Airline Transport pilot licence holders are about 3500 and Commercial Pilot licence holders
about 5500. In addition, about 400 foreign pilots have been permitted to operate Indian registered
aircraft. The number of active Aircraft Maintenance Engineer’s license holders in the country is
about 5000.
27. The Committee was informed that due to shortage of pilots in the country a large number
of ex-pat pilots were recruited by both the Government and private air service providers during the
past. The major problem faced by the aviation industry through these ex-pat pilots was the English
language proficiency which often resulted in communication gap between these pilots and
respective ATCs putting air safety into jeopardy. To a specific query on the issue, the Ministry
replied that DGCA had issued requirements for ensuring acceptable level of English proficiency by
all pilots. The requirement includes training programme and evaluation system. DGCA has also set
guidelines for the duty hours of the pilots and cabin crew so that they are not overworked.

7
28. The Committee raised the demand and supply position of trained pilots in the country, for
which the Ministry replied that there were over 3500 unemployed pilots in the country and that
two training institutes run by the Government were trying to create job opportunities.
AERODROME CERTIFICATION
29. The aerodromes used by a scheduled air transport service are licensed by DGCA under Rule
78 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937. DGCA started the process of licensing of aerodromes in the year
2006. In all 23 aerodromes, 18 international and 5 domestic have been licensed by DGCA. The
Committee was informed that after the Mangalore crash, a review of critical airports was taken
up and 12 such airports have been identified. For the enforcement of regulatory provisions of
aerodrome licensing, the DGCA’s Aerodrome Directorate has only one officer.
30. The issue relating to functioning of major airports without valid licence was also raised. The
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, apprised the Committee of the background of aerodrome
licensing in the country and the circumstances leading to such a situation. He explained the legal
issues involved and also the necessity to bring the airports/airstrips in certain area under the control
of Ministry of Defence. The Secretary informed the Committee that all those issues were being
sorted out and assured that licenses will be issued in due course to all the operating airports in
the country subject to the compliance of rules and regulations issued by International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO).
DGCA & ATC
31. To a query on the interface between DGCA and A TC operations in the country, the
Committee was informed that currently ATC operations are being provided by AAI and DGCA
performs oversight function. However, a more active interface is planned. A new Directorate has
been created within the office of Director General of Civil Aviation with the name “Airspace and
Air Traffic Management Directorate” which is aimed at dealing with the issues related to airspace
and air traffic management, licensing of air traffic personnel, communication and navigations
system certification and regulatory oversight on the meteorological services. This Directorate will
also carry out safety oversight function on the services and facilities provided by AAI for the
purpose of air space and air traffic management to ensure that the ATC facilities are using state-
of-the-art technologies and ATCs are manned by adequate staff.
32. The Committee notes that these functions will certainly require highly trained manpower
which is not there currently with DGCA.
SURVEILLANCE OF AIRLINES AND APPROVED ORGANIZATIONS
33. In order to ensure that airlines are following proper operations, maintenance and inspection
procedures, officers of DGCA carry out surprise ‘Spot Checks’ without prior intimation which are
confined to limited area and planned comprehensive ‘Surveillance Checks’ with prior intimation to
the airlines and approved maintenance organizations. The deficiencies noted during such inspections
are brought to the notice of maintenance agencies for taking corrective action in a time bound
manner.
34. The DGCA surveillance programme for the year 2010 has been prepared and published
under the title of Annual Surveillance Programme (ASP) covering all directorates. The programme
targets to carry out 4788 surveillance activities divided month-wise, operator-wise with dedicated
aviation safety inspectors.
35. All Airport Operators’ Certificate holders have been covered under the Surveillance
programme. The surveillance programme includes maintenance organizations, flying training

8
institutes, licensed aerodromes, design organizations, manufacturing organizations, cabin safety,
dangerous goods, and AME training institutes etc. The ASP has been displayed on DGCA website.
Compliance of the published ASP is ensured through a regular monthly monitoring and review
system chaired by Director General and with participation of officers of DGCA headquarters and
regional offices.
FINANCIAL SURVEILLANCE OF AIR OPERATORS
36. Air Transport Directorate in DGCA has started an evaluation of the financial health of the
Scheduled airlines using a model provided by FAA Order 8900.1. The slow down in economy
experienced during the previous year (2009) brought the need to check on the financial health of
an airline and to see its impact on safety. A system of Financial Surveillance of Air Operators has
been put in place wherein based on assessment of the financial condition, need for heightened
surveillance is adjudged during the distress period of an airline. A regulation for the Evaluation of
Air Carrier’s Management of Significant changes – Financial Surveillance from safety perspective
has been issued. A one-time comprehensive audit of NACIL (I), Kingfisher and Jet Airways has also
been carried out.
37. The Committee was informed that under the newly evolved State Safety Programme all
operators were asked to set up safety management system in their management process. The
Committee was further informed that the operators were advised not to link cost cutting safety
related activities. The DGCA has created a Board of Aviation Safety to look into the violations
committed by air service providers duly supported by the newly created Surveillance Division and
Enforcement Division.
SURVEILLANCE OF FOREIGN AIRLINES (SOFA)
38. To fulfill DGCA’s obligation with regard to surveillance of foreign airlines as given in ICAO
Annex 6 a programme namely Surveillance of Foreign Airlines (SOFA) was set up in 2009. Under
the programme, to begin with airlines of countries which have a safety clause in the air services
agreement have been brought under the programme. The observations of these activities are
intimated to the concerned State authorities. An Aeronautical Information Circular (AIC) 5 of 2009
in this regard has been issued and the surveillance programme has been placed on the DGCA’s
website. Prior to initiating the surveillance activity, DGCA conducted meeting with foreign airlines
representatives notifying the programme.
Safety Audits of Various Agencies
39. A few ‘Safety Audits’ of the operators, maintenance agencies, flying training institutes etc.
are also carried out by a special team of officers from Air Safety Directorate, Officers from
Headquarters and officers from the regional offices of DGCA. Large number of such audits are
required to be carried out every year.
40. The Committee was informed that in order to further strengthen aviation safety environment
through synergisation of available expertise, a Civil Aviation Safety Advisory Council (CASAC)
under the Chairmanship of Director General of Civil Aviation had been set up on 28.05.2010. The
members of the council inter alia include heads of scheduled airlines, experts in flight operations,
airworthiness, air navigation, aerodromes & heliports, aircraft engineers and a representative of
Indian Air Force. The terms of reference of the council are (i) to advise DGCA in identified key
areas; (ii) to review the existing regulatory framework and give recommendations to further
strengthen aviation safety; (iii) to develop, examine and recommend incorporation of best regulatory
practices; (iv) to recommend short, medium and long term measures for safety enhancement; and
(v) to reflect public views on aviation safety matters.

9
INVESTIGATION OF AIR ACCIDENTS
41. International Standards of ICAO stipulates that the purpose of investigation should be
prevention of similar accident in future. Indian regulations regarding aircraft accident investigation
are laid down in Aircraft Rules, 1937 and are in accordance with the ICAO standards. DGCA
investigates minor aircraft accidents. Committees constituted by Central Government or Formal
Investigation by Court investigate major accidents or accidents of public importance.
42. The Committee was informed that during the year 2010, there have been 4 accidents of
which 2 were helicopter accidents. Year 2009 also saw total of 4 accidents of which 2 were
helicopter accidents.
43. One of the stakeholders while appearing before the Committee informed that while giving
the autonomous character to the Civil Aviation Authority, recommendations made by various courts
of inquiry and those of the Committee set up by the Government to look into the working of the
DGCA as well as restructuring/strengthening of the DGCA to disassociate the Accident Investigation
Agency, from the Regulatory mechanism, is not lost sight of. Accident Investigation Agency should
be as independent and autonomous as the Regulatory body itself, on the same lines as National
Transport Safety Board in the US, or on the pattern of Commissioner of Railway Safety, who,
while investigating the railway accidents enjoys total independence being attached to the Ministry
of Civil Aviation.
44. The safety regulator will have an independent oversight function of all safety related issues.
All issues of Air Traffic Management which impinge on safety will get covered under its
jurisdiction. Surveillance and monitoring of airside will come under it.
45. During the deliberations of the Committee, the issue of functioning of DGCA as policy
maker as well as a regulator and many a time as an inquiry authority was raised. In response
thereto the Ministry replied that the policy making function is done by the Ministry of Civil
Aviation. The Air Safety directorate is responsible for investigation of all notifiable accidents
involving Indian Civil Registered Aircraft and also foreign registered aircraft in India. DGCA is only
a regulatory body. However, the accident investigation functions of DGCA could be carved out and
entrusted to another agency.
PROPOSED CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY
46. The Committee was further informed that the DGCA not only need to be strengthened and
restructured but should have sufficient administrative and financial flexibility including the operational
flexibility which is the policy followed by the International Civil Aviation Organization and this
mandate is given to all the member countries. The Government has already commissioned a study
with the help of IACO and a report was released in April which had recommended the setting up
of Civil Aviation Authority which is under active consideration. As per the recommendations, the Civil
Aviation Authority will have financial flexibility and will raise its own revenues by way of levies, fees
and charges and will be retained in the Civil Aviation Authority Fund. It will pay all the expenditure
of its authority from its own fund and it will operate on a non-profit basis.
47. The International Civil Aviation Organization had recommended that the proposed Civil
Aviation Authority will have the administrative flexibility in terms of hiring its own personnel and
there will be a Board which will be having specialized members and other members also. The
Authority would be able to frame its own rules and procedures. It will have a separate legal entity
and the composition of the Board has also been identified by the ICAO.
48. The Committee was further informed that the safety functions in the country will be
discharged by the Civil Aviation Authority whereas at the time of formation of the Authority, the

10
accident and investigation part is proposed to be delinked and converted into an independent entity.
That process will take place along with the formation of Civil Aviation Authority and it would
address the larger issue that has been raised for a long time that the regulatory functions must be
delinked from the accident and investigation programme.
49. To a specific query on the time-frame for setting up of the Authority it was informed that
the ICAO has been commissioned to carry out a feasibility study for the ‘Establishment of a Civil
Aviation Authority (CAA)’ and reconstitute DGCA as an autonomous civil aviation authority with
enhanced financial and administrative authority presently. The study started in October, 2009 and
the final Report has been received in April, 2010. The report addresses the need for setting up a
Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and lays down the legislative and administrative measures required
for the establishment and operation of a CAA India. The report is under examination of the
Government. ICAO has also been commissioned to carry out three technical projects in the areas
of flight safety, aerodromes and air navigation services to enhance safety oversight capability of
India. The agreements have been signed and funds transferred to ICAO. The aerodromes project
has recently completed and ICAO audit findings in aerodrome area have been addressed. The other
two projects are underway and will be completed in 6 months to one year.
HUMAN RESOURCES IN DGCA
50. The staff strength of DGCA which was 250 in 2001, came down to 145 in January 2009.
The same has since, been increased to 230. In a recent move to strengthen the regulatory
mechanism, Government has accorded approval for the creation of 427 technical positions and 129
non-technical support staff for strengthening and restructuring of DGCA. The revised organization
structure emphasizes the creation of additional directorates namely air traffic and air space
management directorate, Information Technology division and DGCA  Training Academy . The DGCA
Training Academy is being set up as a joint venture with AAI and BCAS at the state-of-the-art
complex near Delhi airport. The Academy will be headed by a Deputy Director General of DGCA
and will have representation from all directorates of DGCA and run courses for DGCA officers on
related areas including management skill development.
51. The reorganized regional offices are headed by Deputy Directors General who has been
provided with adequate financial and administrative powers. The revised structure includes creation
of operations, airworthiness and air safety divisions. The operations divisions includes flight
operation unit, cabin safety unit, dangerous goods unit for flight safety and aerodromes and air
traffic and air space management units. With the additional posts that have been approved now,
DGCA has a total sanctioned strength of 1240 personnel consisting of 594 officers and 640 staff
members.
52. To a specific query on the capabilities of the present staff strength to meet the existing/
increasing workload of DGCA, it was replied that present staff strength was not adequate to meet
the workload until the newly created posts are filled up. As far as the vacant posts in DGCA are
concerned it was informed that 416 Group ‘A’ posts and 129 Group ‘B’ & ‘C’ are vacant at
present. These vacancies are proposed to be filled up in three phases (by 30.4.2010, 30.04.2011
and 30.04.2012) and expected to be completed by 30.4.2012.
53. The Committee was further informed that due to ban on Direct Recruitment by the
Government, more than 100 posts could not be filled up during the last ten years. Some lapsed
posts have now been revived and some posts have been created during the year 2009 out of which
some promotional posts have been filled up and some proposals are in the pipeline.
54. The Committee was informed that DGCA recruitment are made through UPSC in case of
Group ‘A’ and through SSC/Employment exchange in case of other than Group ‘A’. promotion

11
cases are cleared by the UPSC in four to six months. In case of direct recruitment, one year is
required for completing the process. ICAO has also pointed out that DGCA doesn’t have adequate
skilled and trained manpower.
55. During the deliberations, the Secretary informed the Committee that against 144 technical
personnel in March, 2009 the DGCA now has 432 because of increasing surveillance, oversight and
monitoring requirements. As a result, oversight monitoring mechanism of DGCA has also increased.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. DGCA is the watch dog body which, directly and indirectly, regulates almost all the
operations critical to aviation safety in the country. Its functions range from formulation
of standards and procedures, conducting inspection, issuing licenses, granting approvals/
certificates to airlines, airport operators, training institutions, aero clubs, aircraft
maintenance engineers, pilots, crew members, ATCs/ENS and ATM facilities. Besides, it is
also responsible for looking after legal/regulatory matters. Coordination/supervision between
different civil aviation organizations, national and international, civil and military air
traffic, and investigation of air accidents are also in DGCA’s mandate. Needless to say, the
dimensions and complexity of these functions have become enormous today when the
aviation sector has grown by 160 per cent. The Committee found the DGCA did neither have
the required powers - legal, administrative and financial, nor it has the adequate manpower,
infrastructure and resources for fulfilling its responsibilities adequately and effectively.
57. The Committee learnt that DGCA had no statutory backing and it was functioning
as an appendage of the Ministry. For anything and everything required to be done by the
DGCA, it has to always look up to the Ministry and the Ministry usually take its own time
in taking a decision, for various reasons.
58. The Director-General Civil Aviation, the Committee was informed, was severely
handicapped due to limited administrative and financial powers particularly in situations
requiring urgent attention. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for providing
legal backup to the DGCA for making it more effective and powerful.
59. The Committee was at a loss to find that DGCA had a large number of positions
lying vacant for years together due to prolonged procedure or non-availability of suitable
candidates. As a result, so many positions lapsed making situation from bad to worse. Thus,
their number came down from 250 to 145 posts during 2001-2009, the period when aviation
activities grew by leaps and bounds.
60. This shortage of manpower also includes pilots, aircraft maintenance engineers, air
operation inspectors who play crucial role in oversight function of DGCA such as granting
of approvals/certificates NOCs/Iicences for various critical activities including deciding
airworthiness, maintenance/repair of aircrafts, standard of training institutes, competence of
trainees, skill of pilots, and so many others. How efficiently DGCA was fulfilling these
mandates with a highly depleted manpower could be anyone’s guess? In such a situation,
instances of obtaining Pilots Licenses on the basis of fake certificates should not come as
surprise to anybody.
61. The Committee finds no justification for imposing a ban by Ministry of Finance on
recruitment of staff for the last ten years in a sector that was undergoing an unprecedented
growth and too crucial to our economic development. Although some steps were taken to
recruit more staff during the last one year, but it took more than 8 years during this
crucial period. The Committee really feels concern about such a state of affairs and it is
not convinced by the explanation given in this regard.

12
62. The Committee, while examining the shortage of man power in the DGCA, found the
following vacancies of Group ‘A’ post in various directorates of the DGCA (as in the month
of October, 2010) :-
Sl. N. Directorate Sanctioned Present Staff
strength strength
1. Flying Standard Directorate 43 16
Group A
2. Aerodrome Standard 46 09
Directorate
3. Airworthiness Directorate 249 64
4. Air Safety Directorate 81 15
5. Air Transport Directorate 09 01
6. Flying Training Directorate 10 Nil
7. Training Licencing Directorate 26 04
8. Airspace and Air Traffic 17 01
Management Directorate
63. The vacancies shown against crucial Directorates of DGCA in the Table say it all. A
detailed chart showing the vacancies as on Octo ber, 2010 is placed at Annexure. For
example, there were 130 Group A posts of Airworthiness Officers, out of which only 1 officer
was in position in the Directorate of Airworthiness to issue certificates of Airworthiness and
supervises the work of 135 aircraft maintenance organizations which are supposed to carry
out the job of aircraft maintenance in the country. Similarly, against the 43 Group ‘A’ post
of Air Safety Officer, there was not a single officer in the Air Safety Directorate which
conducts the Safety Audit of the operator, maintenance agency, flying training institutes.
The Directorate could conduct only 3 safety audits during 2010, which, the Committee feels,
is not at all enough. India is considered to be one of the world powers in IT Sector. The
Committee, however, surprised to note that there is no officer in Information Technology
Division of the DGCA, though 5 posts of Group ‘A’ officers, have been sanctioned.
64. The Committee is surprised to find that the Directorate of Licensing responsible for
issuing licenses to airline pilots is working with just four Group A officers against the
sanctioned strength of 26 officers. It was brought before the Committee that there is a
large-scale corruption prevailing in the DGCA for issuing various kind of licenses, especially
for pilots. When taken up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation, it did not accept the charges
of corruption. It, however, informed about several reforms in procedure for issuance of
various licenses including medical certificates. The Committee finds that the recent
instances of corruption being reported in the Media about the issuance of licenses to pilots
on the basis of fake documents, without clearing requisite tests/fitness, amply proves the
existence of criminal connivance between the officers of the DGCA, flight training
Institutes, and flight instructors with the touts. That such a thing was going on within the
DGCA shows that its in-house supervisory and vigilance system was very weak.
65. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the entire licensing system of DGCA
needs to be streamlined and made transparent by making it available in the public
domain. The corruption of all forms should be eliminated from the functioning of DGCA

13
and its various offices. There should be a separate body either a Directorate in DGCA or
an outside agency for keeping strict vigil in this regard so that such instances do not
recur at all.
66. The Committee recommends that Government should take steps to ensure that the
best talent in aviation sector is attracted for managing the affairs of the DGCA. The
Committee observes that due to differences in government and market salaries, DGCA has
not been able to attract competent/qualified personnel.
67. The Committee recommends that number of officers/staff of DGCA should be as per
DGCA’s requirement for ensuring adequate aviation safety and security. The Committee
feels that the recruitment process started by the DGCA should be completed on a fast track
basis. The Committee also recommends that for this the de-linking of recruitment process
from UPSC needs to be considered seriously. The Committee would like to know response
in this regard.
68. The Committee learnt that some times Airlines due to pressure tend to adopt
shortcuts and thereby safety is ignored. The technical clearances are given to the aircrafts
with minor defects to take off so that their normal schedules are not disrupted and airlines
are not put to loss. At times technical personnel including pilots are put under pressure not
to oppose the technical deficiencies, especially in case of chartered flights and those under
the State governments flying VIPs. In view of so many accidents due to this, country has
lost several precious lives including those of VIPs. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that such technical personnel/pilots be provided adequate legal/administrative protection to
decline to fly in the absence of technical, weather and other clearances.
69. Lack of adequate Air Traffic Controllers is another cause for concern who are eyes
and ears of air traffic in the sky. The Committee emphasizes the need for strengthening
of Air Traffic Control system which is overstrained due to obvious reasons. The Airports
Authority of India should start the process of recruiting required number of ATCs on
priority so that the over-worked ATCs could give their best.
70. Apart from that, the Airports Authority of India may be requested to strengthen the
ATC operations by replacing the outdated equipments specially the radars by installing the
advanced satellite based navigation systems in all the airports. Indian Meteorological
Department may be requested for providing meteorological radars at the airports so that air
services are not affected adversely due to cancellation, diversion and rescheduling of air
services.
71. The Committee recommends that the Government should take immediate steps to
implement satellite aided navigation systems and weather predictions, since India is a
forerunner in space technology and one of the best reservoirs of scientific and technical
manpower.
72. The Committee feels that the time has come to strengthen the DGCA by giving it
adequate financial and administrative autonomy. The Committee was informed by the
Ministry that there is a proposal to form a Civil Aviation Authority. However, it is not clear
to the Committee whether the proposed authority would be parallel authority to DGCA or
it will subsume the functions of DGCA. If the idea is to create a separate parallel authority,
the Committee is of the view that it will be mere duplication of work and thus
multiplication of agencies should be discouraged. If the proposed authority will subsume the
DGCA, it should be amply clarified by the Government the extent to which the functions
of the DGCA will be taken over by the proposed authority.

14
73. The Committee is of the view that creation of an independent authority for
accident investigation on an urgent basis will instill confidence in the minds of travelling
public.
74. The Government should also come forward to publicize the reports of various inquiry
committees set up so far to investigate accidents and the follow-up action taken on such
reports so that the air travelers could easily know the dos and don’ts for a safer air
journey. The Committee does not say that with the establishment of Civil Aviation
Authority, the Indian skies would become safer. It, however, may take care many of the
problems that DGCA is currently facing and which have been clearly brought out in this
Report. In UK there is independent audit organization, Air Accident Investigation Board and
Australian Transport safety Board in Australia which can be guiding models for this purpose.
CONCLUSION
75. The Committee appreciates the immediate steps taken by DGCA to address the
shortcomings pointed out by various audit teams since 1997. It, however, means that we
were carrying on with these shortcomings before 1997. We woke up only after international
agencies started pointing them out. And what have we done for compliance? We have
hurriedly laid down plethora of guidelines, procedures, manuals, documents, etc. and taken
some interim measures with a view to meeting the compliance deadlines to avoid serious
implications that India would have faced, had it been downgraded on aviation safety scale.
The larger question, however, still remains unanswered. Is the DGCA capable of
supervising, inspecting and coordinating the implementation of newly laid down procedures,
manuals, etc., when it was not able to implement and oversee even the existing ones?
76. The Committee was informed that DGCA takes appropriate measures to ensure that
the operators rectify the deficiencies found during the course of surveillance, in a time
bound manner. Punitive action is initiated by DGCA in case of serious lapses, which reveal
indiscipline, complacency or negligent behaviour. Lapses on the part of an operator and
personnel (Engineers, pilots and approved persons) result in stringent action by DGCA in
the form of warnings, suspensions, cancellation of licences and approvals.
77. Much in the face of such a claim by the Government, increasing instances of
violations of safety norms, manipulation in obtaining various licenses and existence of sub-
standard training institutes are indicative of serious malaise in the system. The Committee
feels that the existing procedures and regulations need to be revisited with a view to
minimizing the chances of any kind of manipulation. The Committee feels that with such
things happening, the possibility of connivance of some people from within cannot be ruled
out. We need to have a specialized agency to take stern action against the guilty. Message
should go loud and clear that India is strict in its procedure and no laxity by anybody would
be tolerated, if we were to regain the confidence of the travelling people.
78. The Committee feels that considering the large number of existing operators,
maintenance agencies, flying training institutes etc. the new ones being set up, the
frequency of various kind of inspections and audits undertaken by the DGCA may not be
too frequent to have a deterrent effort. The Committee recommends that all such
operators/agencies, institutes may be subjected to safety audits within a fixed time frame
to ensure that they are following all the regulations, guidelines etc. Strict penalties be
prescribed for any manipulation, corruption, etc. in the agencies responsible for this.
79. The Committee noted that during the year 2010 most of the Airlines operating in the
country had been overcharging the passengers by increasing the air fares unreasonably. The

15
Committee recommends that an investigation may be conducted against all airlines and the
excess amount they have collected by way of exorbitant passenger fares may be identified
and those airlines found guilty may be penalized. The Committee also recommends that in
future all the airlines may be asked to increase their fares only with the approval of DGCA.
The recent initiative taken by DGCA asking the airlines to display the fares in their
respective websites has not received much response from the travelling public. A
transparent formula for pricing the air tickets may be evolved and implemented within
three months.
80. The Committee had taken up the subject for examination more than a year ago on
the presumption that the DGCA was severely handicapped in fulfilling its mandate and is
not able to cope up with the growth of the civil aviation industry. The Committee feels sad
to see its apprehensions coming true by the recent instances of obtaining pilot licences on
fake documents and undue clearances/approvals given in some cases to training and
maintenance institutions on extraneous considerations. Connivance of officials of the
DGCA, including senior ones, in these activities is, in fact, the worst thing that can ever
happen in the area of aviation security, that puts life of lakhs of gullible passengers to
grave risk. Apart from this, recent disclosure about what has been going on in Directorate
General of Civil Aviation has brought irreparable loss to our image in world aviation
scenario. The Government must do whatever it can to see that such things do not happen
again and strictest possible action be taken against those involved, directly or indirectly.
81. The Committee only hopes that the proposed Civil Aviation Authority, if set up, will
be able to prevent such things happening again.

ANNEXURE

Annexure
Statement Showing the Details of Sanctioned
Strength/Present Position of Group ‘A’ Posts
Sl. Name of Directorate/ Name of Post Sanctioned Present Staff
No. Division Staff Strength Strength
12 3 4 5
1. Director-General Director-General 01 01
2. Joint Director- Joint Director- 03 03
General General
3. Deputy-Director-General Deputy-Director- 11 07
General
4. Flying Sandard Directorate- CFOI 01 01
43
FOI 17 14
Deputy Director 04 01
Assistant Director 09 00
Cabin Safety Inspectors 07 00
Dangerous Goods 05 00
Inspectors
5. Aerodrome Standard Director 04 01
Directorate-46
Deputy Director 14 04
Assistant Director 27 04
Ops Officer 01 00
6. Airworthiness Director 08 03
Directorate-249
Deputy Director 37 20
Assistant Director 74 37
Airworthiness Officer 130 01
7. Air Safety Directorate-81 Director 06 04
Deputy Director 10 04
19

20
12 3 4 5
Assistant Director 22 07
Air Safety Officer 43 00
8. I & R Directorate-11 Director 01 00
Deputy Director 03 02
Assistant Director 05 00
Legal Officer 02 00
9. Air Transport Directorate- Director 01 00
09
Deputy Director 02 01
Assistant Director 06 00
10. Flying Training Directorate- Director 01 00
10
Deputy Director 02 00
Assistant Director 06 00
Operations Officer 01 00
11. Training Licencing Director 01 01
Directorate-26
Deputy Director 07 01
Assistant Director 13 00
Ops. Officer 03 00
Medical Officer 02 01
12. Airspace and Air Traffic Director 01 01
Management Directorate-17
Deputy Director 04 00
Assistant Director 12 00
13. Statistical Directorate-06 Director 01 01
Deputy Director 02 02
Assistant Director 02 02
Sr. Statiscian 01 01
14. Director of Finance and Director 01 00
Administration-01

21
12 3 4 5
15. Information Technology Programme 01 00
Division-05 Coordinator
Sr. System Analyst/ 04 00
Software Developer
16. Examiner of Personal 01 Examiner of
Personal-00
TOTAL 525 Filled - 144
Vacant - 381

22
22
Statement Showing the Details of Sanctioned Strength/Present Position of
Group ‘A’ Posts  in the Aircraft Engineering Directorate as on 15.02.2010
Sl. Name of Posts/Pay Sanctioned Posts
No. Scale Strength
Filled V acant
1. Director (Aircraft 04 03 01
Engineering
2. Dy. Director (Aircraft 11 4 7
Engineering)
3. Assistant Director 20 12 8
(Aircraft Engineering)
4. Aeronautical Officer 26 08 18
5. Project Officer 01 – 01

23
MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Tuesday the 15 th September, 2009 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Naresh Gujral
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
10. Shri Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri P. Karunakaran
12. Shri Jose K. Mani
13. Shrimati Ranee Narah
14. Shri Rajaram Pal
15. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
16. Shri S.D. Shariq
17. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
18. Shri Dushyant Singh
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
20. Shri K. Sugumar
21. Shri Kabir Suman
22. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
25

26
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee decided that the functioning of Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) may be taken up for examination in view of the number of air accidents involving
helicopters and lack of appropriate and effective regulations to control their movements.
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
13. The Committee adjourned at 2.30 
P.M. to meet again on the 24 th September, 2009.
***Related to other matter.

27
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 8 th January, 2010 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Naresh Gujral
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Thomas Sangma
8. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
9. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri Jose K. Mani
12. Shrimati Ranee Narah
13. Shri Rajaram Pal
14. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
15. Shri S.D. Shariq
16. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
17. Shri K. Sugumar
18. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
20. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
27

28
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar, Secretary
Shri Rohit Nandan, Joint Secretary
Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Director-General Civil Aviation
Shri R.P. Sahi, Joint Director-General
Shri V .P. Agrawal, Chairman, Airports Authority of India
Shri R.K. Tyagi, Chairman and Managing Director, Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. Thereafter, the Committee took up the ‘Functioning of DGCA and helicopter operations in
India’ for discussion. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation and asked them to apprise the Committee about the details of the activities performed
by the DGCA and helicopter operations. The Chairman specifically asked about the steps taken
by the DGCA to cope up with the expanding civil aviation sector in the country, staffing pattern
of DGCA, means and methods through which DGCA executed its functions, etc. The Secretary,
Ministry of Civil Aviation briefed the Committee on the above mentioned issues. Thereafter,
Director-General, Civil Aviation explained to the Committee the functioning of DGCA and steps
taken to strengthen it in view of present scenario in aviation sector. To a specific question of
requirement of the additional legislation and powers for the smooth functioning of DGCA, its
Director-General replied that a Committee was examining the issues for revamping the
organizational set up of DGCA.
7. CMD, Pawan Hans Limited also briefed the Committee on the guidelines followed for the
helicopter operations in the country. The Committee expressed its apprehensions over the absence
of an interface between the DGCA and Defence authorities for helicopter operations in the
country. The Chairman and Members raised several queries to which the officials replied. To
some of the queries raised by the Members, the Chairman directed the Ministry to furnish the
written replies at the earliest.
8. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 1.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

29
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29 th June, 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Naresh Gujral
5. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
6. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
8. Shri Mahesh Joshi
9. Shri Jose K. Mani
10. Shri Rajaram Pal
11. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
12. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
13. Shri S.D. Shariq
14. Shri Jitendra Singh
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri K. Sugumar
17. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
18. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar, Secretary
Shri Rohit Nandan, Joint Secretary
Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Director-General, Civil Aviation
29

30
Shri R.P. Sahi, Joint Director-General
Shri V .P. Agrawal, Chairman, Airports Authority of India
Shri R.K. Tyagi, Chairman and Managing Director, Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Secretary and other
officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Chairman asked the Secretary about the steps taken
for restructuring and further strengthening the existing regulatory mechanism for the aviation
safety. He also enquired, if there was a proposal to restructure the DGCA to ensure the separation
of policy making and Rule making function with DGCA. The issue of granting autonomous status
to DGCA and adequacy of existing rules, acts and regulations were also raised. In addition, he also
wanted to know reasons for large number of vacant position in DGCA, non-compliance of safety
norms as pointed out by the Tyagi Report on helicopter operations, overlapping of functions of
DGCA and AAI, levels of safety, overload of work on pilots, non-adherence of operations manuals
by them and their poor working conditions, etc. On the issue of recent Mangalore air crash,
Members wanted to know the causes and the follow-up action taken thereafter. The Chairman also
made a specific reference to fulfilment of shortcomings noticed in the Universal Safety Oversight
Audit Programme and the proposed Task Force for strengthening and expanding helicopter
operations in the country. The Members also raised the issue of recent reports on the functioning
of major airports in the country without valid licence.
3. Some Members of the Committee also raised air miss accident cases in Mumbai and other
parts of India.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation made a presentation and replied to the queries
raised by the Committee. He also informed the Committee about the preparation of a road map for
setting up a Civil Aviation Authority to look after the safety functions and other issues related to
aviation sector. Thereafter, Director-General, Civil Aviation explained to the Committee the
functioning of DGCA and steps taken to restructure/strengthen it, in view of expanding scenario
in aviation sector. He informed that a Court of Inquiry has been ordered by Government to look
into the causes of Mangalore accident. Chairman, Airports Authority of India explained the
Committee about the circumstances leading to controversy regarding licensing of airports and
assured that it would be corrected at the earliest.
5. CMD, Pawan Hans Limited also briefed the Committee about the safety aspects related to
the helicopter operations in India, particularly his report on helicopter crash in which former Chief
Minister of Andhra Pradesh was travelling.
6. CMD, NACIL briefed the Committee on the working conditions of pilots, compliance of
DGCA’s instructions, near air misses of Air India Express flights, and removal of expat pilots.
7. Members raised several queries to which the representatives replied. To some of the queries
raised by the Members, the Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish the replies at the earliest.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 5.50 
P.M.

31
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 8 th October, 2010 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
3. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shrimati Ranee Narah
9. Shri Rajaram Pal
10. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
11. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
13. Shri K. Sugumar
14. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF ROTARY WING SOCIETY OF INDIA
1. A VM K. Sridharan, President
2. Capt. Uday Gelli, President, Western Region
3. Air Cmde. B.S. Siwach, Secretary General
31

32
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
1. Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar, Secretary
2. Shri Rohit Nandan, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Nasir Ali, Director
4. Shri R.K. Tyagi, CMD, PHHL
5. Shri V .P. Agrawal, Chairman, Airports Authority of India
6. Shri S. Raheja, Member, Airports Authority of India
7. Shri V . Somasundaram, ED, Airports Authority of India
8. Shri M.C. Kishore, ED and Company Secretary, Airports Authority of India
9. Shri Jyoti Prasad, ED, Airports Authority of India
10. Shri R.P. Sahi, Joint DG, DGCA
11. Shri Pradeep Pathak, Director, DGCA
12. Shrimati Tuhinanshu Sharma, Deputy Director, Airworthiness, DGCA
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses from the Rotary Wing Society of India
and requested them to express their views on the Helicopter Operations in India from the view
point of aviation safety. The representatives of the society presented their views on the current
scenario of Helicopter operations and enumerated the difficulties faced by them and the measures
that could be taken for the expansion of helicopter operations in the country in a more viable
manner and the scope of hep1icopter utilization in the medical field. They also explained the safety
aspects of single and double engine helicopters.
4. Members asked questions, to which the representatives of Rotary Wing Society replied. To
some of the queries raised by the Members, the Chairman directed the representatives of Rotary
Wing Society of India to furnish written replies at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew.
5. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation; CMD,
Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited; and Chairman, Airport Authority of India to the meeting. The
Chairman emphasized the need for restructuring the DGCA so that it was able to come up to the
new challenges posed by the emerging aviation sector in the country. The Committee also conveyed
its concern over the reports of air safety violations which were very common these days. The
Secretary stated that in consultation with International Civil Aviation Authority, the Ministry had
taken number of initiatives with a view to adopt to bring the best international practices in the
Aviation Sector and major upgradation of the technology has also in progress so that it would be
fully operational by the year 2013.
*** Related to other matter.

33
6. The Secretary also submitted that helicopter operations would expand by addition of new
fleet in the coming months and training programme for the new pilots had been also started. The
augmented fleet would be utilized for tourism, medical fields, disaster management and law and
order situations. Various aspects on air safety, air traffic system etc. were also discussed during
the meeting. Many Members raised questions on air safety, trained manpower, helicopter operations
etc. which were replied by the officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 1.40 
P.M.

34
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 13 th April, 2011 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
3. Shri Narendra Kashyap
4. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri Rajaram Pal
9. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
10. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq
11. Shri Jitendra Singh
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N. K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
2. The Committee took up the draft (i) 168 th report on the “Directorate General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA) - Issues and Challenges”; and (ii) 169 th report on the “Helicopter Operations
in India” for consideration. After some discussion the Committee adopted the Reports with
minor modification.
34

35
3. The Committee decided to present the Reports to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha during the
inter session period and authorized its Chairman to present the Reports to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha.
4. The Committee thereafter considered its future programme and decided to meet on
25
th April, 2011.
5. The meeting adjourned at 12.30 P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.