Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT
 
REPORT NO. 
216
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th December, 2014)
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its
Two Hundred Eleventh Report on Upkeep of various
Monuments in Delhi, National Museum and other
important issues pertaining to the Ministry of Culture
Observations/

49
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its
Two Hundred Eleventh Report on Upkeep of various
Monuments in Delhi, National Museum and other
important issues pertaining to the Ministry of Culture
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th December, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. T ABLE OF A BBREVIATIONS .................................................................................................. (iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................................. 1—20
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................. 21—24
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 5—28
7. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 29—48

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2014-15)
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K.N. Balagopal
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Kalpataru Das
^5. Shri Rajeev Shukla
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
7. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
8. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
9. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
10. Kumari Selja
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Vinod Lakhamashi Chavda
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama
14. Mohammed Faizal
15. Ms. Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
18. Shri P. Kumar
19. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey
21. Shri Srinivasa Reddy Ponguleti
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
23. Shri Prathap Simha
24. Shri Rakesh Singh
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari
30. Shri K.C. Venugopal
*31. Vacant
(i)
^ Nominated in place of Shri Oscar Fernandes w.e.f. 9 th December, 2014.
* Vacancy caused due to inclusion of Shri Babul Supriyo in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 9 th November, 2014.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred Sixteenth Report on “Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred Eleventh Report on
the Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi, National Museum and other important issues pertaining
to the Ministry of Culture”.
2. The Two Hundred Eleventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 19
th February, 2014 to the
Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two
Hundred Eleventh Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on the 15 th September, 2014.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 10 th December, 2014.
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 10, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 19, 1936 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS
AD – Anno Domini
ASI – Archaeological Survey of India
CCRT – Centre for Cultural Research and Training
CPWD – Central Public Work Department
DDA – Delhi Development Authority
HRD – Human Resource Development
INTACH – Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage
MCD – Municipal Corporation of Delhi
NCT – National Capital Territory
NDMC – New Delhi Municipal Corporation
OM – Office Memorandum
UNESCO – United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
WHC – World Heritage Centre
(iv)

1
REPORT
This Report deals with the Actions Taken by the Ministry of Culture on the observations/
recommendations of the Committee as contained in its Two Hundred and Eleventh Report on
“Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi, National Museum and other important issues pertaining
to the Ministry of Culture”, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on
19
th February, 2014.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Culture vide their O.M.
dated the 15 th September, 2014 in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the
Report.
2.1. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of all the further
recommendations/observations, which have been made in this Report should be furnished to
the Committee at the earliest.
3. After scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made its further
observations/comments on each item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry of
Culture. The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Two Hundred and Eleventh
Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and recommendations/observations of the Committee
on each item of action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
4. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made by the Ministry to get back the
original Mughal era charm of Red Fort. This can happen only when its surrounding is also
developed tastefully in a contemporaneous style of the Monument. It is a sad story that nothing
has been done to renovate this great monument and compensate for the loss and deliberate
destruction that took place during the colonial period by converting it into military barracks. The
Committee recommends that the Ministries of Culture and Tourism should make a joint effort for
this purpose. The Committee emphasizes the need to integrate the Red Fort to Shahjahanabad as
the entire Mughal City, including Red Fort, has been nominated as part of a World Heritage City
of Delhi. (Para 4 of 211
th Report)
Reply of the Government
5. The Comprehensive Conservation Management Plan (CCMP) for the Red Fort has been
prepared on the basis of which necessary conservation and development works are in progress as
per the availability of resources. Most of the identified modern constructions of colonial period in
the Fort Complex, as identified in the Management Plan have been dismantled. Originality of
surrounding areas of Mugal structures is being restored by re-orientation of gardens of Mugal
pattern. In this regard a workshop was also held at Red Fort, Delhi in October, 2013 to discuss
about various issues related to development of historic gardens. The renovation work is in
progress.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
6. The Committee appreciates that most of the identified modern constructions of
colonial period in the Fort Complex have been dismantled to restore the old charm of the
Red Fort. The Committee would like to know about the efforts made to integrate Red Fort
into Shahjahanabad as recommended by it. The Committee may also be apprised of the

2
outcome of the workshop held in October, 2013 to discuss about various issues related to
development of historic gardens.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
7. The Committee also took note of several important museums like Freedom Fighter’s
Museum, Indian War Memorial Museum and Red Fort Archaeological Museum housed inside Red
Fort which preserve many important historical antiquities. But, adequate steps have not been taken
to improve their visibility. The Committee also learnt that many posts are lying vacant and many
museum staff are working as casual labour in these museums almost for two decades and have
not been regularized despite their eligibility. The Committee recommends that steps be taken to fill
these vacancies in time and also to regularize the eligible casual appointees to boost their morale
so they would contribute best in their service career. (Para 5 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
8. A proposal for regularization of temporary status workers is under consideration in DOPT.
A separate case for regularization of casual labour with special exemption for age and educational
qualification has been referred to DOPT at the level of Hon’ble Culture Minister.
9. In addition to the above, the creation of a cadre for museum officials has been included
in re-structuring proposal submitted to Ministry of Finance. A proposal is also in hand to upgrade
a few museums resulting in increase of sanctioned manpower.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
10. The Committee further recommends that Museums are storehouse of knowledge
pertaining to the rich cultural heritage of the country. The direct experience gained by the
museum staff by working for such a long time should be harnessed duly and they may be
regularized on priority.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
11. The Committee therefore emphasizes the need for proper and adequate illumination of the
Qutub Minar to enhance its beauty as well as its visibility. The Committee found that the flood light
at night is too bright that it might harm the monument. The Committee recommends to improve
this at the earliest. (Para 7 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
12. Lighting arrangements at Qutub Minar have been installed by the Delhi Development
Authority (DDA). Electrical Engineers of DDA have assessed the intensity of illumination and
thereafter provided required illumination. However, Archaeological Survey of India, Delhi Circle has
again requested to the DDA to examine the illumination status of the Qutub Minar afresh.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
13. The Committee takes note of the fact that ASI has taken up the matter of
appropriate illumination at Qutub Minar with Delhi Development Authority. However, the
final results are yet to be intimated. The Committee, therefore, desires that the DDA may
do the needful in respect of adjusting the intensity of lighting arrangement at Qutub Minar
so that it does not have an adverse impact on the monument.

3
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
14. The Committee also feels that Qutub Minar, like any other monument, should not be dealt
with in isolation from its surroundings. This world famous Heritage Monument, therefore, must be
developed as an integrated site including historic Mehrauli Village and Mehrauli Archaeological park.
(Para 8 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
15. The surroundings of Qutub Minar has eleven other centrally protected monuments like
Adham Khan’s Tomb, Jamali Kamali Tomb, Marhi Masjid, Wall Masjid, Walls of Lal Kot, Rai
Pithora’s Gate and Sohan Gate, including the ditch where there is an outer wall, Walls of Lal Kot
and Rai Pithora, where they meet together, Wall of Rai Pithora’s Fort including gateways and
bastions, Gandakki Baoli, Zaffar Mahal, Jehaz Mahal and Mehrauli Archaeological Park. There are
3 monuments protected by ASI, some of them looked after by State Department Archaeology and
DDA. However, entire park is in ownership of DDA. There are some other areas owned by private
colonies.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
16. It is evident that all the eleven odd monuments mentioned above are under protected
category. No one knows the exact number of monuments under DDA and State
Archaeological Department and how many of them are unprotected as some of them lie in
private owned areas. This gives a very bleak picture about the whole thing. The Committee
would like to have monument-wise position in respect of their protection either with ASI,
DDA, State Governments or unprotected. In this way, Delhi has already lost hundreds of old
monuments to the encroachers and we are perhaps allowing same thing to happen in areas
around Qutab Minar as well. The Committee is of the view that better co-ordination
between the ASI and the concerned State agencies is needed in the matter of protection of
monuments.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
17. The Committee appreciate the work done by Agha Khan Trust for Culture and INTACH and
recommends that such good initiatives should continue in future for other monuments also.
Partnership with people and developing a larger synergy and coordination among several
stakeholders/agencies for protection and preservation of our iconic Monuments/ Heritage Sites is
the need of the hour. But, we also cannot lose sight of the majority of our monuments that are
lying unattended. Through our own resources as also having partnership with international
organizations such as UNESCO, and other bodies like Aga Khan Foundation, resources may be
generated for renovation, upkeep and beautification of monuments. Since maintenance is a
continuous affair, this can best be done through increasing people’s participation. The MOC should
put in place a credible system to encourage and motivate a large section of the local populace in
the task of upkeep and maintenance of historical and cultural monuments. Once the people treat
these monuments as their own assets and develop a sense of ownership, their maintenance become
assured. (Para 12 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
18. On the lines of engaging Agha Khan Trust for Culture and INTACH conservation projects
for few other monuments are also being executed by funding from National Cultural Fund and
World Management Fund etc. The public awareness programmes are regularly conducted by the
field offices in the form of organizing exhibitions, lectures, interviews, painting competitions etc.

4
to educate the students/public about the rich cultural heritage of the country and its preservation.
The regular conservation work is being attended by the Archaeological Survey of India for
protected monuments.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
19. The Committee notes the reply and further recommends that public awareness
programmes should be more action oriented involving mass engagement in cleaning,
beautifying and protecting the monuments. Much more efforts need to be taken for this
purpose for making its impact visible.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
20. The Committee is glad to note that as a result of its prolonged persuasion, now the Ministry
has given in-principle approval to include Lal Mahal in the list of centrally protected monuments
under the ASI. (Para 19 of ibid)
21. However, it appears to the Committee that in case of Lal Mahal, land grabbers and various
authorities were conniving with each other. They could successfully destroy the precious
monument and illegal constructions took place while Government authorities remained silent
spectators. Even now the ASI people are being denied entry into the illegally encroached premises
of Lal Mahal. The Committee recommends that since a decision has been taken to protect this
important monument, no laxity should be shown to the encroachers and they should be removed
with the help of police force and suitably renovated. (Para 20 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
22. Lal Mahal is located in a thickly populated locality and is heavily encroached. The structure
has recently been declared as a heritage building. The proposal for protection of the structure by
ASI was first submitted in August, 2013. However, there was strong resistance against declaration
of Lal Mahal as a protected monument due to the restriction on construction, repair etc. in the
prohibited/ regulated areas, which protection by ASI would entail. Efforts by ASI officials to pursue
the case for preliminary notification have been hindered by the fact that this is a living monument
and ASI has not even been able to carry out even basic assessment of the structure. DG, ASI has
referred the matter to the Chief Secretary, Government of NCT, Delhi on 12.06.2013 requesting
him to declare the said monument as a state protected monument. The State Government is being
pursued for early action in the matter.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
23. The Committee feels that we have come back to square one in respect of protection
of Lal Mahal. The Committee feels that the concerned authorities failed to act in time due
to reasons better known to them and area around Lal Mahal was allowed to be encroached
in such a manner that it has become next to impossible to even take that under ASI
protection. It would entail massive demolition of houses/buildings built illegally there. The
Committee would like to know stand of Delhi Government in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
24. The Committee is of the view that even if some important monuments are privately owned,
it does not authorize the private owners to alter, deface or demolish the monuments. Appropriate legal
and institutional mechanism need to be put in place to make such private persons accountable and
face severe legal consequences for destroying such monuments/ancient sites. (Para 21 of ibid)

5
Reply of the Government
25. There are very few monuments which are privately owned and have been taken by ASI for
protection and conservation by signing an MOU. No such incidents of damages to these
monuments by the owners have come to the notice. However, the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 to take action against any
defaulter/ miscreant.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
26. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
27. The Committee observes that the Ministry of Culture has the domain knowledge about the
specifications of art and architectural traditions and innovativeness of each monument/site.
Therefore, they should impart the training to tourist Guides. The Committee learnt that there is no
system for on the spot booking of guides at our premier cultural sites. As a result, tourist are left
to be cheated by fake/untrained guides. The Committee also observes that just like counters to sale
entry tickets to visit a monument, a counter should also be there for guided tour/visit of the
monument. Moreover, the specialized Guides should be available with each monument/heritage sites.
(Para 23 of ibid)
28. The Committee observes that several agencies are involved in the process and they meet on
various fora; yet, communication gaps have been often noticed on important matters. The Committee
recommends that both the Culture and Tourism Ministry should develop a closer synergy for
preserving and promoting our heritage and culture. For instance, the Ministry of Tourism is nodal in
imparting training to the Tourist Guides whereas the Culture Ministry has the domain knowledge of
all monuments sites. As a result, many touts are passing on half cooked information to innocent
visitors at various monuments and tourist destinations. (Para 25 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
29. The Archaeological Survey of India conserver, preserve and maintain the monuments/sites
declared as of national importance. However, as per the Government of India Notification No.
S.O.429(E) Dated 20.5.2010, the statutory authority under the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 for framing and issuing guidelines for issuance of
guide license, approval and registration etc. of qualified persons selected through due process to
operate in the protected monuments of national importance is the Additional Director General of
Tourism, Ministry of Tourism, Government of India. However, at present both the Department of
Tourism and Culture are under the same Ministry, hence there will be no such information gap and
closer synergy will be developed.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
30. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
31. The Committee observes that our heritage sites are neglected and left unattended in Delhi
and so also at other places in the Country. The ASI is not in a position to render appropriate care
and protection to monuments. Numerous cases of encroachment and unauthorized construction in
and around these sites have been noticed. The Committee strongly recommends that an Authority

6
should be created under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment
and Validation) Act, 2010. On receiving a complaint from the public or any other private/public
organization the proposed authority should be empowered to take strong action immediately. The
Committee also recommends that creation of database on existence of heritage buildings/
monuments/ancient sites should be completed in a time bound manner and progress in the matter
should be informed to this Committee at the earliest. Further, efforts should be made separately to
identify the potential ones for declaring them as protected. A comprehensive assessment of
preservation works should also be done. (Para 28 of ibid)
32. The Committee also understands that creation of mechanisms under the provisions of
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remain (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010
has been very slow so far. The Committee earlier had asked the Ministry about it but was not
informed about the efforts made in this regard and the reasons for delay. The Committee would
again like to remind the Ministry about the Para 42 of 192
nd Report and recommend to be proactive
for putting the required mechanism in place at the earliest in order to save our ancient sites/
monuments and the Ministry may also apprise the Committee about it through an explanatory note.
(Para 29 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
33. There are 3679 centrally protected monuments/sites in the country including 174 in Delhi
which have been declared as of national importance. The Archaeological Survey of India undertakes
their regular conservation and preservation by way of structural repairs, chemical treatment, laying
of gardens and day to day maintenance as per archaeological norms subject to availability of
resources. There are instances of encroachments in some of the centrally protected monuments.
As there already exist the provisions contained in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains 1958 (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 and Rules framed thereunder, the
Archaeological Survey of India undertakes action for removal of encroachment in the premises of
the protected monuments and protected areas and unauthorized constructions in the prohibited and
regulated areas.
34. In order to contain the such encroachments and removing them, the Superintending
Archaeologist in charge of the Circles have already been vested with the powers of an Estate
Officer to issue eviction notices/orders to the encroachers under Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971. They are also authorised to issue show cause notices under
the provisions of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 1958 (Amendment and
Validation) Act, 2010 and Rules 1959 followed by a direction to the District Collector/Magistrate
by Central Government to remove such encroachment under section 19 (2) of the Act and
Section 38 (2) of the Rule. Assistance in containing and removing encroachments is also sought
from the respective State Government/police force and where there are no fruitful results, actions
are initiated against the encroachers by filing cases in the court of law. In addition to the regular
watch and ward staff, private security personnel, State police guards and CISF have also been
provided for the safety and security of selected monuments. Removal of encroachments is an
ongoing process and is carried out under the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains 1958 (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
35. The Committee’s real concern is that the existing system is not yielding the desired
impact; it leaves a lot to be desired. It would like to know the progress about its
recommendation for creation of database on existence of heritage buildings/monuments/
ancient sites in Delhi.

7
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
36. The Committee further notes that the 90 years old John and Marshall Guidelines for
preservation of monuments are still followed in India whereas new conservation and preservation
policy has not taken shape so far. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the
Government must frame new updated conservation policy incorporating latest technology and
practices for monuments preservation across the country, on priority. (Para 30 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
37. The Conservation Policy for the protected monuments of the Archaeological Survey of India
has been approved and issued on 06.03.2014 for implementation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
38. The Committee notes the reply and would like to have a copy of the Conservation
Policy for the protected monuments of the Archaeological Survey of India.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
(i) Closure of Galleries: The Committee appreciates the work completed by the Ministry. It
hopes that the renovation work of Manuscripts Gallery might have been undertaken as the
due dates of opening of CAA and Decorative Art Gallery have since been completed.
(Para 31(i) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
39. The Decorative Arts Gallery and the Ethnic Art Gallery were opened in July, 2013 and
February, 2014 respectively. Renovation proposals for the remaining closed galleries are being
initiated.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee would like to have a roadmap from the Ministry about renovation of
galleries. The Committee desires that a comparative assessment of the actual work done
vis-a-vis the target and financial allocation made for the purpose should be furnished to the
Committee.
(ii) Museums Reforms: The Committee notes and appreciates the Action Taken Report on the
14 points/issues listed for Museum Reforms (Annexure – I). It would be glad if the same
pace of momentum for the reforms is continued in future. (Para 31(ii) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
41. The momentum for the reforms will continue in the future and the progress in this regard
is being regularly monitored by the Ministry by holding review meetings with the Heads of
Museums. The Ministry has also entered into MoUs with all museums in the financial year 2014-15
and assigned them targets for completion during the year to ensure that reforms are continued by
them.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
42. The Committee notes the reply.

8
(iii) Extra space with the Museum – The Committee feels that extra space should be made
available with the Museum so that whenever renovation work of galleries are undertaken
display items could be relocated. (Para 31(iii) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
43. Extra space will be made available to the National Museum for its expansion when the ASI
will vacate its present premises adjacent to the National Museum, New Delhi.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. The Committee recommends that the ASI should vacate the premises at the earliest
so that extra space would be available to the National Museum. It appears that the Ministry
has not at all acted upon the recommendation made by this Committee.
(iv) Maintenance of National Museum – The Committee further recommends that thorough
checks for leakages may be carried out regularly and in case of their being noticed; they
should be attended to promptly. Latest position may be obtained from the Ministry regarding
building maintenance, civil and electric works. (Para 31(iv) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
45. CPWD is looking after the building maintenance, civil and electric works and thorough
checks are carried out regularly in the National Museum by them.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
46. The Committee is aware of the fact that CPWD is looking after the building
maintenance of National Museum like any other Government building. However, despite this
the Committee had earlier found that the building and precious collection of National
Museum was in a pitiable condition due to seepages etc. In view of it, the Committee
desires a more concrete answer from the Ministry.
(v) Museum Security – The Committee notes that despite the recommendations made in 167th
and 179
th Reports satisfactory reply has been received from the Ministry of Culture. Nothing
has been mentioned by the Ministry about the upgradation of security gadgets of the
Museum and the financial implications/ concurrences for such installation.
(Para 31(v) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
47. CISF is responsible for the security in National Museum and they are in the process of
upgradation of security gadgets. Recently, fire alarm system has been installed, and new CCTV
cameras, monitors have been bought and installed as well. During 2013-14, Rs.15,03,900/- was
spent in the upgradation of security measures in the National Museum.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
48. The Committee would like to know from the Ministry whether the existing security
is found adequate by the museum authorities.
(vi) Display of Exhibits and its publicity – The Committee appreciates the display percentage of
the National Museum. It needs to be increased further in order to bring it at par with other
internationally acclaimed Museums. The Committee feels that it could not be done without

9
the resumption of Phase – III work. The Committee is receiving same argument for a long
time that the Phase – III construction of National Museum would commence only after the
vacation of ASI premises. (Para 31(vi) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
49. The display percentage in the National Museum will be increased as soon as the ASI vacates
its premises so that Phase – III work of the National Museum can be started for the expansion
of the Museum. Meanwhile, efforts are being made to open closed galleries to increase number of
objects on display.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
50. The Committee feels that ASI is not vacating the place due to certain constraints
which should be sorted out at the earliest and recommends that Phase – III work should
commence before the next budget atleast.
(vii) Promotion measures to increase footfall – The Committee recommends that apart from print
media, other publicity avenues like, FM Radio, Notice-board, electronic-media etc., which
are easily accessible to the common people may also be explored. To encourage maximum
foot fall of younger generation, student concession tickets and summer holiday rebates
should also be introduced. (Para 31(vii) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
51. Several promotional measures are being explored by National Museum to increase its
outreach. National Museum web page has been created on the Social networking site of Facebook.
Further, information about the activities in the Museum is being uploaded on National Museum’s
website regularly. The Museum is making intensive use of technology for popularization of its
activities through the introduction of invitations, enewsletter etc., The museum has also started an
outreach cell for popularization of its activities. Student concession tickets are already available in
the Museum. V olunteer Guide Programme launched by the National Museum is also helping to
increase footfalls.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee notes the reply.
(viii) Resumption of Art Acquisition Committee – The Committee recommends that the Art
Acquisition Committee should start functioning at the earliest and they should also take not
of the latest acquisitions. It does not know how long it is going to take more for doing
this. (Para 31(viii) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
53. A draft Art Acquisition Policy has been framed by the National Museum which was
examined in the Ministry and has been sent back to the National Museum for further improvement.
An Art Acquisition Committee will be constituted once the Acquisition policy is finalized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
54. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the fact that Art Acquisition
Committee has not been constituted till date and reiterates its earlier recommendation to

10
expedite the constitution of Art Acquisition Committee which is defunct for the last several
years. The Committee sincerely feels that it is an unfortunate situation.
(ix) Verification of collections – Almost a decade has passed since the last verification was done.
The Committee is aghast to note that it is yet not done. The Ministry may impress upon
the experts to hold verification urgently. (Para 31(ix) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
55. The work for verification of collections has been initiated in the National Museum. Out of
its total collection of 2,06,169 objects, physical verification of 55,644 objects has been completed
by the National Museum.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee observes that out of the total collection of 2,06,169 objects, physical
verification of only 55,644 objects have been done which is only a negligible percentage. The
Committee strongly feels that this should be done in a time bound manner and the
Committee may be apprised about it from time to time.
(x) Digitization – Out of the 2,06,000 collections only 150 artifacts could be digitized which
is a very small number. The Committee recommends that more digitization should be done.
(Para 31(x) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
57. For the purpose of digitization of the collections of the National Museum, Jatan software
developed by the CDAC, Pune has been implemented in the Museum. Through the use of this
software it is proposed to digitize the entire Collection Management process of the National
Museum. Work of data entry in the software is in progress and till date 1259 objects have been
digitized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
58. The Committee would like to know how much more time it would take to complete
the process of digitization.
(xi) Organizational Structure of the National Museum – Efforts made by the Ministry has been
noted by the Committee. The Ministry of Culture ought to work out an amicable solution
to improve the organizational structure while retaining creative independence of institution.
(Para 31(xi) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
59. In order to strengthen the organizational structure of National Museum two posts of
Additional Director General in Pay Band-4 with Grade Pay of Rs. 10000/- and two posts of Joint
Director General Pay band-4 with Grade pay of Rs. 8700 were created in the National Museum.
Recruitment Rules for these posts have been notified recently on 31.3.2014. Action is now being
taken to advertise the vacancy. This will fulfill the long felt need to have a senior suitable officer
manning posts in between DG and Curators. The Museum is also taking necessary action on the
recommendations made during the regular meetings of the Museum Advisory Board with a view
to provide a long term leadership to the National Museum. Dr. V . Venu has been appointed as
Administrator for a period of 3 years during the year 2013-14. 18 vacancies were filled up by the

11
National Museum, New Delhi. For some of the posts which have remained unfilled for a long time,
the recruitment rules are also being amended to ensure their expeditious filling up. Thus, it may
be seen that the Museum is taking all the necessary steps to improve its functioning.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
60. The Committee notes that the action taken process in this regard is still on. It,
however, feels that it has already taken a long time and still it is likely to take some more
time. The Committee strongly recommends that the amendment of recruitment rules be
expedited and all the unfilled vacancies be filled at the earliest.
(xii) Action on the Goswamy Committee Report – The Committee had earlier recommended in
the 167
th Report that the Ministry should comply with the recommendations of the
Goswamy Committee Report. However a lot needs to be done like setting up an “Advisory
Boards or a Committee” with specialists from fields of exhibition, gallery collections
management, presentation etc. so that they can pool their efforts and guide the curators and
others. The Ministry informed that in pursuant to this the Museum Advisory Board has met
number of times; necessary action has been taken to fill up the vacancies on contract basis
till regular appointments are made. Finalization of Recruitment Rules is also underway.
61. The Committee does not find the reply convincing and disapproves the ad-hoc solutions
found by the Ministry in giving contractual appointments. The Committee may be apprised of the
activities suggested by the Museum Advisory Board for the National Museum and the action taken
so far for effective functioning of the National Museum. The work is pending since long time.
Museum Advisory Boards decisions on Gallery renovation and formation of experts’ body should
also be submitted to this Committee. (Para 31(xii) of ibid)
Reply of the Government
62. The Museum Advisory Board of National Museum was created in 2010 under the
chairmanship of Prof. B.N. Goswamy. So far 6 meetings of the Board have already been held.
During 2014, the board held 2 meetings on 7.1.2014 and 2.4.2014. Museum Advisory Board has
suggested activities like (1) digitization (2) Speeding up of Handing/taking over, (3) Physical
verification, (4) Improving surroundings of National Museum Building (5) Finalization of RR’s,
Filling of vacant post (6) use of LED light in Galleries (7) Modernization of Galleries (8) Bringing
out series of academic publication. The Museum is acting on all these recommendation and their
status is as given below.
62.1. National Museum has begun the process of digitization of its collection under Jatan
Platform. Till date, 1259 art objects have been digitized.
62.2. Handing over/Taking over of collection is underway – so far, 17,384 objects have been
handed over/ taken over.
62.3. Physical Verification – 55,644 objects from 11 collection department have been verified.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62.3.1 The Committee may be apprised of the data regarding the total number of exhibits
in the collection of National Museum, number of exhibits handed over/taken over and
number of exhibits physically verified.
62.4 Finalization of RRs and filling the posts of National Museum being done in time bound
manner. Regular meetings are being held in the Ministry in this regard. As a result, the Recruitment

12
Rules in respect of the posts of Additional Director General, Joint Director General, Chemist,
Deputy Chemist, Assistant Chemist, Assistant Conservator have been notified recently. For another
22 posts, National Museum has made available proposals for amendment of Recruitment which are
under process either in this Ministry or are with DOP&T/UPSC/Ministry of Law for vetting. For
remaining 58 posts, National Museum has been advised to expedite the same action. Regarding
filling up of posts in the National Museum, as many as 18 posts have been filled during the year
2013-14 and for filling up of 3 more posts Director (C&A), Research Officer and Deputy
Curator(PCWA), proposals are being sent to UPSC shortly.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62.4.1 The Committee feels that the process of filling up the vacancies is quite slow. The
Committee is of the view that the pace at which the Recruitment Rules are being finalized
should be expedited.
62.5 In all modernized galleries such as wood carving gallery, Tanjore Art Gallery, LED lights
have been installed. In addition, LED lighting have been fitted in Gupta Art Gallery, Sunga Maurya
Gallery, Late Medieval Art Gallery, Buddhist Art Gallery, Gandhara and Mathura Galleries.
62.6 The following Galleries have been re-opened during 2013-14.
● Tanjore and Mysore Painting Gallery
● Decorative Art Gallery
● Ethnic Art Gallery (Tradition, Art and continuity gallery)
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62.6.1 The Committee is not satisfied with the fact that only three Galleries have been re-
opened in the year 2013-14. The Committee may be apprised of the roadmap in this regard.
62.7 A major Exhibition, “The Body in Indian Art” was opened in National Museum on
14th March, 2014 and will be on display upto 7 th June, 2014.
62.8 National Museum has also brought out the following publications:–
● Monograph on Nazca and Moche Pottery of Ancient Peru.
● Booklet on Ram Katha.
● Booklet on tradition, art and continuity gallery.
● Brochure of “Body in Indian Art” exhibition.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62.8.1 The Committee is surprised to note that only one Exhibition was held and four
publications were brought out and feels that the lead Museum of the country should have
done much more. The Committee desires that the range and frequency of the activities in
the Museum may be increased.
62.9 3 T agore Fellow have been appointed in National Museum to bring out catalogues in
different collection.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry.

13
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
64. Although the Ministry has been receiving increased budgetary allocation, still it is far less
than what actually was required. The Committee strongly feels that given the gigantic dimension
and importance of the task under taken by the Ministry, particularly the ASI, the amount allocated
is not adequate. Hence, the Committee has been recommending every year for more allocation to
the Ministry of Culture lest many of its important activities would suffer. The Ministry of Finance/
Planning Commission should not have “One-size fit all” attitude for all the Ministries while making
budgetary allocations. The Committee recommends that the non-utilization of funds due to the
hostile weather and season may be considered as a special case and ensure that allocations of the
Ministry of Culture are not reduced at R.E. stage. (Para 34 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
65. The recommendations of the Committee are reiterated by Ministry of Culture while
projecting requirement of funds of ASI and Ministry of Culture to Ministry of Finance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
66. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of its earlier recommendation for
making more budgetary allocation to the Ministry of Culture.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
67. The Committee would like to refer to para 22 of the 192
nd Report and to point out the
under-utilization of funds observed under the heads-Archaeology, Archives and Archival Libraries,
museums, Public Libraries and International Cultural relations. The Committee funds a dichotomy
between the Ministry’s claim of spending more than 90% during the last many years and reporting
under utilization in the areas which constitute a large share in the ministry’s allocation. The
Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Culture will have to make more sincere
efforts to maximize its expenditure, at least before the review of the R.E. allocations begins. Under
utilization/savings will certainly impinge upon regular flow and increase of allocation to the Ministry.
(Para 35 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
68. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and expenditure under all Budget
Heads is regularly monitored.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
69. The Ministry may inform the Committee about the steps taken to ensure that under
utilization of funds would be avoided to the maximum possible extent in future.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
70. The Committee has been making a strong case for allocating the fund raised on the entry
tickets to ASI to be used for the conservation, protection, preservation, etc. of our monuments. The
Committee has strongly recommended to the Ministry of Finance to appreciate the importance of our
heritage and allow the amounts collected out of entry fee at monuments to be kept/utilized by the
ASI for its activities and it should be made a non-lapsable fund. The matter be pursued at apex level
and the response of Ministry of Finance should be informed to the Committee. The recommendation
made at Para 37 of 192
nd Report may be implemented in earnest spirit. (Para 36 of ibid)

14
Reply of the Government
71. The recommendations of the Committee are reiterated by Ministry of Culture while
projecting requirement of funds of ASI and Ministry of Culture to Ministry of Finance. The
Ministry of Finance did not approve the creation of non-lapsable fund out of revenues collected
by way of entry tickets on 28.5.2013. The then Hon’ble Culture Minister again requested the then
Hon’ble Finance Minister to reconsider the matter. However, the proposal was again turned down
by the then Finance Minister vide letter dated 30.07.2013.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
72. The Committee is unhappy to note that Ministry of Finance has again turned down
its recommendation for creation of a “non-lapsable fund”. The Committee feels that such
rigidity will only aggravate the problem and resultantly, ASI will not be able to utilize the
funds fully. The Committee would also like to know the reasons given by Ministry of
Finance for non-acceptance of this proposal.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
73. The Committee also notes that the ASI undertakes major activities only after monsoon.
Therefore, the allocations made for conservation preservation activities should be non-lapsable. The
Committee recommends that the fund allocated to ASI need to be permanently given a special
status by the Ministry of Finance so as to make it non-lapsable. (Para 37 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
74. The suggestion made by the Committee has been taken up with Ministry of Finance every
year. The final decision is awaited.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
75. The Committee notes the reply and is keen to know about the final decision.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
76. The Committee strongly recommends that timely steps should be taken to recruit the staff
as per requirement. It also observes that most major organisations like, ASI, National Museum,
National Library are headed by the people who have little experience and knowledge about how to
manage Arts and Culture. Many of them lack professionalism required for the field. The Committee
has over the years found that our premier cultural institutions such as National Museum, Delhi ASI,
and Lalit Kala Academy are headed by officers from the Ministry. It appears that a situation is
allowed deliberately to be created where an officer from the Ministry has to head it and again such
a position is allowed to be continued for a long time on one pretext or the other. While there might
be genuine reason sometimes to do so but, it sends a very wrong signal which vitiates everything
in the cultural field. (Para 40 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
77. The recommendation of the Committee has been accepted and a professional archaeologist
has been appointed as Director General, ASI on Contract basis for a period of three years.
78. All out efforts are being made to fill up the vacancy at all levels in National Museum.
Recruitment Rules for various posts have been amended and made flexible to bring in the best

15
talent in the Museum and also to ensure that they meet the contemporary professional requirement
of the Museum. This matter is reviewed from time to time at the highest level in the Ministry.
During the year 2013-14, National Museum filled up 18 posts. In order to ensure professional
competence in the selection of the Heads of Cultural Institutions under the Ministry including
National Museum the selection process is through a Search-cum-Selection Committee in which
subject experts are also members. This has been done to ensure that people with good professional
experience get selected to these posts.
79. The post of DG, National Museum was last advertised in February, 2013. The Searchcum-
selection Committee shortlisted 3 candidates out of 35 applicants. However, after considering the
academic qualifications of the candidates, their depth and diversity of experience, their performance
during the interaction and after evaluating suitability for the assignment, decided not to recommend
any of them for the assignment. The Committee instead recommended that the day-to-day
functioning of the Museum may be looked after by posting an Administrator. Accordingly,
Dr. V . Venu has been appointed a full time Administrator in National Museum with the approval of
ACC for a period of three years.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80. The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that only people with
professional expertise get selected to the top posts at our premier cultural institutions. It,
however, feels that without casting any aspersion on the experience of Members of Search/
Selection Committee as also on the competence of the officer to work as stop gap
arrangement, such a situation in our cultural bodies should not be allowed at all to go on
for longer periods and this is what is actually happening. In the name of procedure and
involvement of many Ministries, UPSC etc. things cannot and should not be allowed to
continue like that. The Secretary, Culture must take it up with help of all those concerned
to expedite it faster.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
81. The Committee feels that a cultural cadre distinct from the regular administrative cadre
needs to be created to man the functioning of the Akademis, Museums and other cultural
institutions. This should consist of individuals who may be ‘generalists in the arts’. Courses would
have to be introduced for education them in the arts to make them conversant with different forms
of theaters, dance, music, poetry and literature, painting, sculpture and architecture. Courses
created under the Ministries of HRD and Culture to produce right kind of persons to administer
our cultural institutions in a better way. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry
should seriously consider the creation of cultural cadre on the above lines. These organizations
require specific domain knowledge and therefore instead of a generalist a specialist should be
appointed. The Committee in this regard reminds the Ministry about the Para 37 of the 201st
Report to create culture cadre for filling up such posts. (Para 41 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
82. The issues raised by the Committee are being addressed through the new HRD Policy
adopted by ASI. The new policy provides in-depth training and skill development for the different
wing of ASI at induction, mid-term and advance stages of the career of ASI professionals.
83. So for as museums are concerned Ministry has taken up a Comprehensive proposal for
revamping of National Museums Institute (NMI) of Museology, New Delhi which includes
ascertaining the demands of courses relating to Museology, History of Art and Conservations which

16
would aid in planning the future expansion of NMI. The expansion of the NMI will ensure that
a larger number of qualified manpower is made available for the Museum sector as a whole. This
.apart, the proposal for incorporating various new and contemporary aspects concerning Museum
Management like digitization of Museum collection, Museum design, Museum Marketing, Arts
Management and Museum and education in the syllabi of some of the proposed new courses are
also being examined.
84. It has also been decided to pursue the matter towards getting the NMI declared as the
Institution of National Importance.
85. It is not possible to have a culture cadre common to all academies as their requirements
are quite different. The Akademies already have specialists in different fields with which the
respective Akademies are concerned and in view of the uniqueness of their respective expertise, it
may not be possible to utilize the same is any other Akademi.
86. CCRT has assured that being a training institution; they can organize 2 or 3 programmes
for the personnel of the Ministry of Culture and Ministry of HRD. These programmes can be of
one week duration. The CCRT would like to organize two such programmes in CCRT headquarters,
Delhi and one programme in Regional Centre, Hyderabad the modalities of logistics of which can
be worked out.
87. CCRT organized a training programme for Directors of ZCCs. This course was followed
by another training programme for the 2
nd tier officials of the ZCCs. The Centre organized very
recently another programme for the Librarians and Library professional in CCRT in the month of
March, 2014, which was attended by 42 librarians from different States/UTs.
88. Training policy for all organizations is being formulated. With a view to create awareness about
Arts Management in the country, an Arts Management Conclave was recently organized at IIM,
Bangalore wherein top experts in such fields participated. The conclusions drawn therein are being
processed. National Museum Institute, a deemed University, organizes regular courses in History of Art,
Conservation and Museology. ASI also has a training Institute namely Institute of Archaeology where
training in archaeology is imparted to students and the officers of ASI.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
89. The Committee feels that creation of a cultural cadre is the demand of the day and this
major policy decision should be taken immediately. But the Committee notes from the replies
that the Ministry is still addressing it on ad-hoc basis.
90. As regards CCRT, the Committee further observes that the infrastructure and logistics
available with them are not optimally used. At times, renovation works of their auditoriums etc.
are prolonged due to which public interest is not being served. Internal resources generation
also gets adversely affected due to timely non-completion of renovation work.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
91. The Committee is surprised to note that a staggering number of 1593 demolition notices/ orders have
been issued in this regard. The Committee in the para 41 of its 192
nd Report has pointed out about apathy
of the civic authorities, local Police and other agencies in the matter. ASI has no power to ensure compliance
for such orders from them. Even court ord ers were also ignored at times. The Committee is aware that
encroachments, unauthorized occupation and illegal construction near our monuments is a problem about
which we have not been able to do much so far. The Committee feels that possibility of a nexus between
the vested interests, private parties and civic and police authorities cannot be ruled out in this context.

17
Defacing of our national monuments is another serious problem. Therefore, strong action should
be taken against not only the encroachers/offenders but also the agencies/officials of the concerned
departments if there do not obey/cooperate. The Committee may be informed about the efforts
made and responses of the concerned authorities in this regard. (Para 43 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
92. In so far as the encroachments in protected monuments and protected areas are concerned,
section 19(2) provides that “the Central Government may, by order, direct that any building
constructed by any person within a protected area in contravention of the provisions of sub-
section (1) shall be removed within a specified period and, if the persons refuses or fails to comply
with the order the Collector may cause the building to be removed and the person shall be liable
to pay the cost of such removal.”
93. In regard to unauthorisedly constructed buildings in the prohibited and regulated areas of
the centrally protected monuments, action is initiated as per Rule 38 (1) and (2) of the AMASR
Rules, 1959.
94. However, the Archaeological Survey of India is bound to approach the District Magistrate/
Collector for removal of encroachments from protected monuments/area and unathorised
constructions in the prohibited and regulated areas. In few cases, Archaeological Survey of India
approaches even the Courts for legal action against the persons who have encroached upon the
protected monument/area or have indulged in construction activities in prohibited and regulated
areas in violation of the AMASR Act, 1958 or Rules, 1959.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95. The Committee notes that the Ministry has not furnished reply regarding its concern
about defacing of national monuments. The Committee desires that the Ministry may
undertake programmes to sensitize the public regarding the importance of proper
maintenance of our monuments.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
96. The Committee also feels that number of protected monuments under the ASI at present is
far too less and lakhs of our ancient monuments are languishing. As a result, large numbers of
them have either vanished or encroached or illegally occupied. The Committee emphasizes the
urgent need to bring most of them under protected category. Therefore, as mentioned at para 29
of the 192
nd Report, the Committee again strongly recommends that number of protected
monuments should be increased on priority and in a phased manner for which we should have a
roadmap and realistic allocation of funds required. (Para 44 of ibid)
97. Numerous monuments are scattered all over the country which require archaeological
protection. For that we will have to take States on board, who it appears are not to pay required
attention to this aspect. The Committee is of the view that our National Policy must provide
adequate emphasis on this aspect to make conservation and protection as a joint effort with
adequate financial and other support for the culture as mentioned at Para 30 of the 192
nd Report.
(Para 45 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
98. The Central and the respective State Governments, have jurisdiction and responsibility over
the ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains. Keeping in view the spirit of the

18
provision, the Central Government has declared 3690 archaeological sites and remains as
monuments of national importance under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958. The State Governments and local bodies have also enacted laws for the
protection and conservation of monuments, archaeological sites and remains for the monuments
other than those declared as of national importance by the Central Government. The Archaeological
Survey of India has constituted a committee for the consideration of proposals received in respect
of monuments/sites for declaring them as of national importance. However, the protection of
monuments as of national importance is a continuous process.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
99. The Committee understands the limitations posed due to Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 as well as State laws in increasing the number
of monuments under the protection of ASI. But it feels that the Ministry and ASI with a far
more closer interface with the State Archaeology Departments can sensitize, help and
facilitate them for taking over of monuments for protection and conservation. The Committee
recommends that the number of important monuments languishing should be reviewed and
a national database with regard to number of monuments under different jurisdiction
prepared under two categories i.e., “already protected” and “yet to be protected”.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
100. The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that the dossiers sent to the UNESCO
for including our Heritage sites in the List of World Heritage Sites are generally found not to be
in order. As a result, these are sent back for corrections, etc. This has happened several times in
respect of our different sites. The Committee has taken up this issue earlier also with the Ministry
and had expressed its concerned about this. It feels that with the kind of vast technical and other
expertise that we have in this regard, we are unable, to present our case properly to the UNESCO.
It appears we do not do our homework seriously and send dossiers to UNESCO casually. It is a
serious matter that our dossiers have been returned several times. The Committee recommends that
“Dossiers Committee” should be constituted comprising eminent persons from relevant area as well
as other professionals for the purpose so that National does not have to hear again about our
proposals being returned. The Para 45 of the 192nd Report may be referred to this regard.
(Para 46 of ibid)
101. The Committee in this context would like to site the case of Majuli Island, Assam, which
was recommended by the Ministry for being adopted by UNESCO as a World Heritage Sites. But
the said request was returned by the World Heritage Centre (WHC) in March, 2012 as it was not
complete and not accordingly to the Guidelines framed by WHC. (Para 47 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
102. Every Nomination dossiers is considered and recommended for by the ACWHM before it
is submitted to WHC for inscription on World Heritage List. The nomination dossier of Majuli
Island. Assam was recommended by the Advisory Committee on World Heritage Matter. The
proposal of Majuli had been returned because it was not completed as per the latest Operational
Guidelines i.e. 2011.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
103. The Committee notes the reply and feels that we have lost lot of precious time
because it appears, we are preparing dossiers without doing our home work seriously. It is
very odd to receive back paper on the ground that those were not complete.

19
104. The Committee desires that concrete steps should be taken to ensure that
incomplete/improper dossiers are not forwarded to the UNESCO.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
105. The Committee also learnt that the Government of NCT of Delhi has submitted the detailed
dossier to nominate Delhi as a World Heritage City to the UNESCO. In view of this, the Committee
recommends that this may be pursued more seriously. A coordinated and holistic approach is
required to conserve the cultural heritage of this ancient city instead of adopting an isolated
monument approach. (Para 48 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
106. The dossier on Delhi Imperial Capital Cities was sent to W orld Heritage Centre for
completeness check in September, 2013 and as per the suggestion given by WHC modification,
were carried out and finally submitted in January, 2014.
107. Acc ording to the intimation of PRI it has been evaluated and found correct.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made regarding Delhi  vide para
48 of 211
th Report which inter alia states that: “The Committee recommends that this may
be pursued more seriously. A coordinated and holistic approach is required to conserve the
cultural heritage of this ancient city instead of adopting an isolated monument based
approach.”
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
109. The Committee emphasizes the urgent need for strengthening of all wings of Archaeological
Survey of India like Monument, Conservation, Exploration and Excavation, Epigraphy, Chemistry,
etc. due to increase in the quantum as well as nature of these works. The Committee observes
that the workload of Horticulture Wing has increased manifold with the increase in number of
gardens under maintenance from 100 to 500 with no corresponding increase in the manpower. As
a result, sites, monuments, etc. are not being properly maintained and landscaped. Their upkeep is
generally not upto the mark. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a
commensurate increase in the workforce engaged in all the Departments of ASI, particularly in
Horticulture for showcasing our heritage sites. The Committee also recommends that vacancies at
all levels should be filled up on priority and revival of posts whenever necessary also be expedited
with the Ministry of Finance. It is taking lot of time. The Committee desires the Ministry to keep
it informed about the recommendations of the Manpower Management and Planning Consultants
and status of its implementation. The Committee’s recommendations at Para 50 of 192
nd Report in
this regard may also be referred to. (Para 49 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
110. The recruitment process for filling up vacant posts under direct recruitment has been
started. Roster points have been issued to Circle/Branch offices of ASI for recruitment to 300
vacant non-gazetted posts through Staff Selection Commission/open market ASI engaged
M/s Manpower Management and Planning Consultants, K-107-B, Sheikh Sarai, Phase-II, New
Delhi-110017 on 21.5.2010 on the work measurement study to restructure and strengthen the
Archaeological Survey of India, who submitted their report on 14
th March, 2011. Keeping the report
of Manpower Management and Planning Consultants in view a comprehensive proposal for overall

20
strengthening of all wings of ASI like monument, conservation, exploration and excavation,
epigraphy, chemistry, horticulture, planning, budget and account, security, Institute of Archaeology
and introducing a new cadre for the Site Museums, was prepared and has been taken up with
Ministry of Finance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
111. The Committee desires that the Ministry may pursue the matter of strengthening of
all wings of ASI with the Ministry of Finance, so that adequate funds are allocated for the
same and accordingly desired number of posts be created.

21
21
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee desires that final replies in respect of all the further
recommendations/observations, which have been made in this Report should be furnished to
the Committee at the earliest. (Para 2.1)
The Committee appreciates that most of the identified modern constructions of
colonial period in the Fort Complex have been dismantled to restore the old charm of the
Red Fort. The Committee would like to know about the efforts made to integrate Red Fort
into Shahjahanabad as recommended by it. The Committee may also be apprised of the
outcome of the workshop held in October, 2013 to discuss about various issues related to
development of historic gardens. (Para 6)
The Committee further recommends that Museums are storehouse of knowledge
pertaining to the rich cultural heritage of the country. The direct experience gained by the
museum staff by working for such a long time should be harnessed duly and they may be
regularized on priority. (Para 10)
The Committee takes note of the fact that ASI has taken up the matter Of
appropriate illumination at Qutub Minar with Delhi Development Authority. However, the
final results are yet to be intimated. The Committee, therefore, desires that the DDA may
do the needful in respect of adjusting the intensity of lighting arrangement at Qutub Minar
so that it does not have an adverse impact on the monument. (Para 13)
It is evident that all the eleven odd monuments mentioned above are under protected
category. No one knows the exact number of monuments under DDA and State
Archaeological Department and how many of them are unprotected as some of them lie in
private owned areas. This gives a very bleak picture about the whole thing. The Committee
would like to have monument-wise position in respect of their protection either with ASI,
DDA, State Governments or unprotected. In this way, Delhi has already lost hundreds of old
monuments to the encroachers and we are perhaps allowing same thing to happen in areas
around Qutab Minar as well. The Committee is of the view that better co-ordination
between the ASI and the concerned State agencies is needed in the matter of protection of
monuments. (Para 16)
The Committee notes the reply and further recommends that public awareness
programmes should be more action oriented involving mass engagement in cleaning,
beautifying and protecting the monuments. Much more efforts need to be taken for this
purpose for making its impact visible. (Para 19)
The Committee feels that we have come back to square one in respect of protection
of Lal Mahal. The Committee feels that the concerned authorities failed to act in time due
to reasons better known to them and area around Lal Mahal was allowed to be encroached
in such a manner that it has become next to impossible to even take that under ASI
protection. It would entail massive demolition of houses/buildings built illegally there. The
Committee would like to know the stand of Delhi Government in this regard. (Para 23)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 26)

22
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 30)
The Committee’s real concern is that the existing system is not yielding the desired
impact; it leaves a lot to be desired. It would like to know the progress about its
recommendation for creation of database on existence of heritage buildings/monuments/
ancient sites in Delhi. (Para 35)
The Committee notes the reply and would like to have a copy of the Conservation
Policy for the protected monuments of the Archaeological Survey of India. (Para 38)
The Committee would like to have a roadmap from the Ministry about renovation of
galleries. The Committee desires that a comparative “assessment of the actual work done
vis-a-vis the target and financial allocation made for the purpose should be furnished to the
Committee. (Para:40)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 42)
The Committee recommends that the ASI should vacate the premises at the earliest
so that extra space would be available to the National Museum. It appears that the Ministry
has not at all acted upon the recommendation made by this Committee. (Para 44)
The Committee is aware of the fact that CPWD is looking after the building
maintenance of National Museum like any other Government building. However, despite this
the Committee had earlier found that the building and precious collection of National
Museum was in a pitiable condition due to seepages etc. In view of it, the Committee
desires a more concrete answer from the Ministry. (Para 46)
The Committee would like to know from the Ministry whether the existing security
is found adequate by the museum authorities. (Para 48)
The Committee feels that ASI is not vacating the place due to certain constraints
which should be sorted out at the earliest and recommends that Phase–III work should
commence before the next budget atleast. (Para 50)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 52)
The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the fact that Art Acquisition
Committee has not been constituted till date and reiterates its earlier recommendation to
expedite the constitution of Art Acquisition Committee which is defunct for the last several
years. The Committee sincerely feels that it is an unfortunate situation. (Para 54)
The Committee observes that out of the total collection of 2,06,169 objects, physical
verification of only 55,644 objects have been done which is only a negligible percentage. The
Committee strongly feels that this should be done in a time bound manner and the
Committee may be apprised about it from time to time. (Para 56)
The Committee would like to know how much more time it would take to complete
the process of digitization. (Para 58)
The Committee notes that the action taken process in this regard is still on. It,
however, feels that it has already taken a long time and still it is likely to take some more
time. The Committee strongly recommends that the amendment of recruitment rules be
expedited and all the vacancies be filled at the earliest. (Para 60)
The Committee may be apprised of the data regarding the total number of exhibits
in the collection of National Museum, number of exhibits handed over taken over and
number of exhibits physically verified. (Para 62.3.1)

23
The Committee feels that the process of filling up the vacancies is quite slow. The
Committee is of the view that the pace at which the Recruitment Rules are being finalized
should be expedited. .(Para 62.4.1)
The Committee is not satisfied with the fact that only three Galleries have been re-
opened in the year 2013-14. The Committee may be apprised of the road map in this regard.
(Para 62.6.1)
The Committee is surprised to note that only one Exhibition was held and four
publications were brought out and feels that the lead Museum of the country should have
done much more. The Committee desires that the range and frequency of the activities in
the Museum may be increased. {Para 62.8.1)
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 63)
The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of its earlier recommendation for
making more budgetary allocation to the Ministry of Culture. (Para 66)
The Ministry may inform the Committee about the steps taken to ensure that under
utilization of funds would be avoided to the maximum possible extent in future.
(Para 69)
The Committee is unhappy to note that Ministry of Finance has again turned down
its recommendation for creation of a “non- lapsable fund”. The Committee feels that such
rigidity will only aggravate the problem and resultantly, ASI will not be able to utilize the
funds fully. The Committee would also like to know the reasons given by Ministry of
Finance for non-acceptance of this proposal. (Para 72)
The Committee notes the reply and is keen to know about the final decision.
(Para 75)
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that only people with
professional expertise get selected to the top posts at our premier cultural institutions. It,
however, feels that without casting any aspersion on the experience of Members of Search/
Selection Committee as also on the competence of the officer to work as stop gap
arrangement, such a situation in our cultural bodies should not be allowed at all to go on
for longer periods and this is what is actually happening. In the name of procedure and
involvement of many Ministries, UPSC etc. things cannot and should not be allowed to
continue like that. The Secretary, Culture must take it up with help of all those concerned
to expedite it faster. (Para 80)
The Committee feels that creation of a cultural cadre is the demand of the day and
this major policy decisiou should be taken immediately. But the Committee notes from the
replies that the Ministry is still addressing it on ad-hoc basis. (Para 89)
As regards CCRT, the Committee further observes that the infrastructure and
logistics available with them are not optimally used. At times, renovation works of their
auditoriums etc. are prolonged due to which public iuterest is not being served. Internal
resources generation also gets adversely affected due to timely non- completion of
renovation work. (Para 90)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has not furnished reply regarding its concern
about defacing of national monuments. The Committee desires that the Ministry may
undertake programmes to sensitize the public regarding the importance of proper
maintenance of our monuments. (Para 95)

24
The Committee understands the limitations posed due to Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 as well as State laws in increasing the number
of monuments under the protection of ASI. But it feels that the Ministry and ASI with a
far more closer interface with the State Archaeology Departments can sensitize, help and
facilitate them for taking over of monuments for protection and conservation. The
Committee recommends that the number of important monuments languishing should be
reviewed and a national database with regard to number of monuments under different
jurisdiction prepared under two categories i.e., “already protected” and “yet to be
protected”. (Para 99)
The Committee notes the reply and feels that we have lost lot of precious time
because it appears, we are preparing dossiers without doing our home work seriously. It is
very odd to receive back paper on the ground that those were not complete. (Para 103)
The Committee desires that concrete steps should be taken to ensure that
incomplete/improper dossiers are not forwarded to the UNESCO. (Para 104)
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made regarding Delhi vide para
48 of 211
th Report which inter alia states that: “The Committee recommends that this may
be pursued more seriously. A co-ordinated and holistic approach is required to conserve the
cultural heritage of this ancient city instead of adopting an isolated monument based
approach.” (Para 108)
The Committee desires that the Ministry may pursue the matter of strengthening of
all wings of ASI with the Ministry of Finance, so that adequate funds are allocated for the
same and accordingly, desired number of posts be created. (Para 111)

25
MINUTES

26

27
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 10 th December, 2014 in Room No. 62,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K.N. Balagopal
3. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Vinod Lakhamashi Chavda
5. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama
6. Mohammed Faizal
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan
8. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
9. Shri Rajesh Pandey
10. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
11. Shri Dushyant Singh
12. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
13. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Direrctor
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered
the following draft Reports:
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
(iii) The Two Hundred Sixteenth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred Eleventh
Report on Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi, National Museum and other important
issues pertaining to the Ministry of Culture.
27
*** Relate to other matters.

28
3. The Committee adopted after some discussion, the said reports without any modification
and decided to present the Reports to the Parliament on 12 th December, 2014. The Committee,
accordingly, authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri K.N. Balagopal, M.P. and in his
absence, Shri Rajeev Shukla, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajesh Pandey, M.P.
and in his absence, Mohammed Faizal, M.P. were authorized to lay the Reports on the Table in Lok
Sabha on 12
th December, 2014.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

29
29
LIST OF REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITEE  ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AMD CULTURE
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 ( with
evidence )
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence )
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

30
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 ( with evidence )
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence )
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98)
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
25.01.1996
(Presented to Hon’ble
chairman)
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)

31
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 ( with evidence )
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence )
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (1 Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

32
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption from Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.08.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001-2002 (13 Reports)

33
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 ( with evidence )
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 ( with evidence )
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 ( with evidence )
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.
2002-2003 (11 Reports)
2003-2004 (12 Reports)

34
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventieth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
of Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004

35
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 ( with evidence )
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
06.12.2004 (RS)
03.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.09.2005
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
2004-2005 (8 Reports)
2005-2006 (17 Reports)

36
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage by Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

37
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways.
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
2006-07 (15 Reports)

38
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
16.08.2007
16.08.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (17 Reports)

39
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133rd
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

40
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
(Presented to Parliament)
on 23.10.2008
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
(Presented to Parliament)
on 23.10.2008
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (l0 Reports)

41
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty-ninth Report on Development of
Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities for
the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.02.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
(Presented to Parliament)
on 03.03.2010
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

42
1
158th
159th
160th
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-first Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty-fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One hundred
Fifty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty-sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
(Rajya Sabha)
27.07.2010
(Lok Sabha)
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
(Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament)
on 01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

43
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
(Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament)
on 11.08.2011
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
(Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament)
on 11.08.2011
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
02.04.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
27.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

44
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11.2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

45
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways—
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the
Parliament)
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the
Parliament)
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the
Parliament)
on 27.02.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11. 2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

46
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
204th
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty-ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 07.08.2013
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 07.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 17.12.2013
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 06.02.2014
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
13.01.2014
2013-14 (13 Reports)

47
1
205th
206th
207th
208th
209th
210th
211th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety -second Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety-third Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninety-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety-fifth Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety-first Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty-eighth Report on Functioning
of Commission of Railways Safety
Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi,
National Museum and other important
issues pertaining to the Ministry of
Culture
4
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
3
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
18.02.2014
18.02.2014

48
1
212th
213th
214th
215th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninetieth Report on Development of
Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its Two
Hundredth Report on Development of
Tourism, National Highways and Water
Transport in Kerala and Cochin Shipyard
Limited
The Two Hundred Fourteenth Report on
the Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Two Hundred
First Report on Functioning of National
Akademis and other Cultural Institutions -
Issues and Challenges
The Two Hundred Fifteenth Report on the
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Two Hundred
Third Report on Privatization of Services
at Airports
4
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
12.12.2014
12.12.2014
3
18.02.2014
18.02.2014
10.12.2014
10.12.2014
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees ➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.