REPORT NO.
269
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
Cargo Handling at the Major Ports
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st December , 2018 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)

Website : https://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORT,  TOURISM  AND  CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
Cargo Handling at the Major Ports
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st December , 2018 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (vi)-(ix)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-60
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV A TIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................................... 61-74
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 75-91
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 94-103

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2018)
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Praful Patel
5. Kumari Selja
6. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
*9 Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
#10. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
18. Shri P. Kumar
19. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
20. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
(i)
* Nominated on 2nd June, 2018
# Nominated on 2nd June, 2018

(ii)
23. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
25. Shri Prathap Simha
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Shri Praful Patel
7. Kumari Selja
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan
18. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, A VSM (Retd.)
19. Shri P. Kumar
20. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
21. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
22. Shri Rajesh Pandey
23. Shri Rajesh Ranjan (Pappu Yadav)
(iii)

24. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
25. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer
Ms. Vunglunmoi Hangzo, Assistant Research Officer
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two
Hundred Sixty Ninth Report on "Cargo Handling at the Major Ports".
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping; Chairmen, Kolkata Port
Trust; Haldia Dock Complex; and Paradip Port Trust on the subject on 26t April, 2018. The Committee
heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Chairman, Mumbai Port Trust and Chairman-
in-charge, Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust on the subject on 22nd May, 2018. The Committee heard the
views of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Chairman, Chennai Port Trust; Chairman-in-charge, Cochin
Port Trust; CMD, Kamarajar Port Limited; Chairman, V .O. Chidambaranar Port Trust; Chairman-in-
charge, Deendayal Port Trust; Chairman, Mormugao Port Trust; Chairman-in-charge, New Mangalore
Port Trust; and Chairman, Visakhapatnam Port Trust on the subject on 28th June, 2018.
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Shipping and the Ports
for placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in connection with the subject
and for clarifying the points raised by the Members.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 19th December,
2018.
   N EW D ELHI; DEREK O'BRIEN
19 December, 2018 Chairman,
Agrahayana 28, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
BMCTPL : Bharat Mumbai Container Terminal Pvt. Ltd.
BOT : Build Operate Transfer
BPCL : B harat Petroleum Corporation Limited
CFS : Container Freight System
CIDCO : City and Industrial Development Corporation
CONCOR : Container Corporation of India Ltd.
CRISIL : Formerly known as-Credit Rating Information Services of India
Ltd.
CRZ : Coastal Regulatory Zone
CSF : Carrier Security Fee
CSL : Cochin Shipyard Limited
CTO : Chief Technology Officer
CZMP : Coastal Zone Management Plans
DFCC : Direct Freight Corridor Corporation of India
DG : Directorate General
DMICDC : Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development Corporation
DPD : Direct Port Delivery
DPE : Direct Port Entry
DPI : Dubai Ports International
DPT : Deendayal Port Trust
DWT : Deadweight Tonnage
e-DO : Electronic Delivery Orders
EIA : Environment Impact Assessment
ELL : Electrical Level Luffing
ERP : Enterprise Resource Planning
EXIM : Export-Import
FACT : Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore
(vi)

FDI : Foreign Direct Investment
GDP : Gross Domestic Product
GRT : Gross Registered Tonnage
GTI : Gateway Terminals International
GTIPL : Gateway Terminals India Pvt. Ltd.
HDC : Haldia Dock Complex
HPCL : Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
HTL : High Tide Line
ICD : Inland Container Depot
ICTT : International Container Transshipment Terminal
IFFCO : Indian Farmers Fertilizers Cooperative
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
IOCL : Indian Oil Corporation Limited
ITT : Inter Terminal Transfer
JNPCT : Jawaharlal Nehru Port Container T erminal
JNPT : Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust
JV : Joint Venture
KDS : Kolkata Dock System
KIOCL : Kudremukh Iron Ore Company
KoPT : Kolkata Port Trust
KPD : Kidderpore Dock
KSC : Korampallam Surplus course
LDB : Logistics Data Bank
LNG : Liquefied Natural Gas
LOA : Length Overall
LPG : Liquefied Petroleum Gas
LTL : Low Tide Line
MbPT : Mumbai Port Trust
(vii)

MCA : Model Concession Agreement
MCF : Mangalore Chemical & Fertilizers
MHC : Mobile Harbors Cranes
MMT : Million Metric Tons
MoEF&CC : Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
MOT : Marine Oil Terminal
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
MPB : Multi Purpose Berth
MT : Million Tonne
MTPA : Million Tonnes Per Annum
NCR : National Capital Region
NGT : National Green Tribunal
NH : National Highway
NHAI : National Highways Authority of India
NMPT : New Mangalore Port Trust
NP AR : Northern Port Access Road
NSD : Netaji Subhas Dock
NSICT : Nhava-Sheva International Container Terminal
NSIGT : Nhava-Sheva International Gateway T erminal
NTECL : NTPC Tamilnadu Energy Company Limited
OCR : Optical Character Recognition
ONGC : Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
PCS : Port Congestion Surcharge
PGA : Participating/Partner Government Agencies
POL : Petroleum and Oil Products
PPL : Paradeep Phosphates Limited
PPP : Public-Private-Partnership
PPPAC : Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee
(viii)

RFID : Radio Frequency Identification Data
RFP : Request for Proposal
RFQ : Request for Qualification
ROB : Road Over Bridge
ROCE : Return on Capital Employed
Ro-Pax : Roll on - Roll off Passenger
Ro-Ro : Roll on - Roll off
RPO : Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation
RTGC : Rubber Tyred Gantry Cranes
SEZ : Special Economic Zones
SOP : Standard Operating Procedures
SP AR : Southern Port Access Road
SPMs : Single Point Moorings
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle
SQ : Southern Quay
TAMP : Tariff Authority at Major Ports
TEUs : T wenty-foot Equivalent Units
TRT : Turn Round Time
TT : Terminal Transfer
TTPS : Tuticorin Thermal Power Point
UPCL : Udupi Power Corporation Ltd
VOCPT : V .O. Chidambaranar Port Trust
VPT : Visakhapatnam Port Trust
VRC : Vessel Related Charges
VTMS : V essel Traffic Management System
(ix)

REPORT
Ports function as major hubs of international trade and accordingly, they are regarded as primary
catalysts of local economic development in an era of globalization. Approximately, 90% of the international
cargo is transported through ships as it is the cheapest means to do so. There are about 4,764 ports
around the world handling more than 80 per cent of trade. Ports form avital link in the overall trading
chain and consequently, their level of performance and efficiency determines to a large extent, the
international competitiveness of a nation. The growth of a modern port system as a whole is dependent
on a number of factors such as volume, composition, size and expansion of trade of a country.
2. India's coastline measures around 7,500 kms of which around 5,700km is along the mainland and
1,800 is around the islands. Ports in India are classified on the basis of ownership. The Government of
India wholly owns the Major Ports.Eleven of the twelve Major Ports are governed by the Major Ports
Trusts Act,1963 with the exception of Kamarajar Port (erstwhile Ennore Port), which is the only
corporate port that is administered by provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. The main functions of
the Major Portsentail cargo handling which includes berthing of vessels, loading/ offloading of cargo etc.
Ancillary to it are various other activities such as dredging, maintenance of navigational channels,
pilotage, berthing, buoying, bunkering, dry docking including chipping and painting, maintenance of
lighthouses etc. The varied activities of a port make it a dynamic organisation.
3. Developing countries such as China and India are major drivers for port development due to their
high economic growth rates. Due to the changes in ports and in the port industry, most countries are
making giant efforts to secure their ports as hubs brimming with economic activity by investing enormous
funds on port facilities and by improving efficiency in port operations and management. Indian Ports
have formulated ambitious plans for development of new ports. These include augmentation of existing
facilities, mechanization of ports, purchasing of modern cargo handling equipments and improvement in
logistics to meet the challenges emerging from the anticipated growth in trade. The capacity at 12
Major Ports is likely to increase to 1,459,53 million tonnes by 2020 from the level of 679 metric tons
in 2017-18.
4. Given the significant relation between trade and GDP growth, ports need to ensure capacity
expansion in keeping with cargo growth. However, capacity growth at Indian ports has not kept pace
with cargo growth. Since port traffic is increasingly moving towards container and liquid bulk, the need
for ensuring optimum efficiency in terms of cargo handling and management in our Major Ports is of
prime importance. It is in this backdrop that the Department- related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the subject 'Cargo Handling at Major Ports' for
examination and report thereon.
5. In this connection, the Committee heard the views of the Chairmen of Kolkata Port Trust & Haldia
Dock Complex along with Paradip Port Trust on 26th April, 2018;the Chairmen of Mumbai Port Trust
& Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust on 22nd May, 2018; and the Chairmen of Chennai Port Trust, Cochin
Port Trust, V .O. Chidambaranar Port Trust, Deendayal Port Trust, Mormugao Port Trust, New Mangalore
Port Trust, Kamarajar Port& Vishakhapatnam Port Trust on 28th June, 2018. The Committee also heard
the representatives of Employees' Unions of JNPT and MbPT on the subject 'Modernisation of Port
Infrastructure' on 14th November, 2017 during its study visit to Goa. The Committee further heard the

2
Port users and representatives of MbPT; DG Shipping; JNPT; and Ministry of Shipping during this study
visit.
6. The Committee was informed by the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping that the total cargo handled
by the 12 ports rose by about 5 per cent in the previous year. It was 648 metric tonnes in 2016-17 and
it rose to 679 metric tonnes in 2017-18. There has been a significant increase in the capacities in the
Ports. The capacities have risen by 66 per cent during this period. When compared to the preceding three
years, it increased by 25 per cent. Capacity constraints, infrastructure constraints, where present, are
very localized in nature. However, on the larger national scale, the Ports are well equipped to cater to
double digit growth of cargo. The ports can now easily cater to anything above a ten per cent growth.
The Ports have largely seen good profit margins. The profit before tax which was ` 2743.79 crores in
2016-17 rose by about ` 669 crores to ` 3412.89 crores, which signifies a jump of about 24 per cent.
This is a significant number in terms of growth achieved. The traffic was continuously on the decline
for the last 15 years . This has, however, seen a turn in the last 3 years. The percentage of the total
national cargo handled has increased and have now reached a figure of 52 percent which had previously
dipped to 48 per cent. There has been an overall good performance by the Ports.
I. PARADIP PORT
(i) Port Performance
7. The Chairman of Paradip Port deposed before the Committee that traffic handled at the Port has
jumped to 102 million tonnes in 2017-18, from 56 million tonnes in 2012-13. This is more than 60 per
cent growth in the last five years. In 2017-18, on a very high base of around 89 million tonnes, the Port
has registered a growth of close to 15 per cent. The Port, in 2017-18, became the third port in the
country which has clocked hundred million tonnes of cargo. The share of Petroleum product (POL)
traffic is around 34 per cent. Coal is the main cargo of the Port and Paradip is now the largest coal
handling port in the country. The Port handles 65 million tonnes of dry bulk cargo and is also the largest
dry bulk handling port in the country. The lack of containerized facilities has been catered to with the
operationalization of a new clean cargo berth in March 2018.
8. The Committee was informed that upon completion of necessary procedural work, the berth was
expected to be in operation by 2018. The Port, at present, has 16 berths and 3 Single Point Moorings
(SPMs). These SPMs extend upto 20 kms into the ocean and cater to large crude carriers carrying
approximately 274 million tonnes of Crude oil for refineries in Paradip (Orissa), Barauni (Bihar), Bongaigaon
(Assam) and Haldia (West Bengal). The utilization of these SPMs is set to increase in the coming years
owing to the expansion of the above mentioned refineries.
9. With respect to Modernisation of Cargo handling mechanisms, the Port has two oil berths which
are totally mechanized and equipped with state- of- the-art facilities comparable to global standards
maintained in international ports. The Port also has various modernization projects in the pipeline- the
projects coming with an investment of over ` 3500 crores, which will result in an added capacity of
around 55 million tonnes. The expected timeline of completion is 2019-2020.
10. The Committee was informed that berth management has improved in the Port over the recent
period. The iron- ore berth is the oldest berth of the Port. It was the first berth on which the Port was

3
started in 1966 and continues to operate till date. Apart from these, two fertilizer berths which cater to
two major fertilizer plants are Indian Farmers Fertilizers Cooperative (IFFCO) and Paradeep Phosphates
Limited (PPL). In order to improve berthing facilities, several berthing projects have been taken up.
These are:
• Eastern Quay - I, II & III. It involves an investment of over 3,500 crores and is expected
to add an additional capacity of 55 million tonnes. This hub is expected to be the hub port
for all coal exports to South India with around 90- 100 million tonnes of coal for the upcoming
plants in Southern India. The facility is under progress and its expected completion is December,
2019.
11. The Committee notes that in order to improve berthing facilities, Eastern Quay-I, II & III
berthing projects have been taken up for capacity augmentation with an investment of ````` 3500
Crores and execution timeline of December 2019. The Committee is not aware of the initially
approved cost of the project and original timeline for its completion. It has often been seen that
infrastructure development projects experience time and cost overruns. The Committee would
therefore like to be apprised whether the Eastern Quay-I, II and III projects have witnessed any
time overrun and concurrent cost escalation as compared to the initially estimated project costs.
12. The Committee also recommends that a stringent monitoring mechanism be put in place so
that there are no instances of tardiness and inefficiencies inexecution and the project is executed
within the approved cost and designated time-frame.
• Central Quay- I & II. These are currently handling general cargo imports and exports and it
is expected to continue operating in its present state till 2020-21, after which the Port is
looking to mechanize this facility. The same is the case for the Southern Quay (SQ) berth and
the Multipurpose Berth (MPB).
13. Maintaining adequate draft is integral to maintain the operational functionality of ports. Maintaining
draft levels has always been a hurdle for the ports and Paradip Port is no different. Due to the issue
of draft levels, presently only Panama sized vessels of around 14.5 meters draft can call on the Port.
However, the Port is looking to handle fully laden capes of around 180,000 -200,000 Deadweight
Tonnage (DWT). This would place the Port at par with some of the best ports in the country with the
deepest draft. The project is expected to be taken up in January 2019, during which it is expecting to
award the project subject to Environment Clearances.
14. The construction of the outer harbor is a mega project which entails an investment of around
` 10,000 crores with a capacity of 130- 140 million tonnes. However, this estimate was revised due to
the fluctuating demand of coal in Southern India due to the popularity of renewable energy. Hence, this
project has been placed on hold and the project has been reworked to focus on the increased optimization
of the Port.
15. The Committee understands that the world is moving increasingly towards renewable energy
and it is now popular practice to attempt to reduce the dependency on fossil fuels and coal.
Renewable energy is the call of the hour. Whilst applauding the efforts of industries to go green,
its effect on cargo movement and traffic movement cannot be ignored. In this regard, the

4
Committee desires that the Paradip Port must find a way to move away from old business models
and try and cater to a new market that is garnered to creating and using clean and efficient
energy.
16. The synergy of port modernization with the efficiencies is essential to ensure the optimal efficiency
of the Port. To facilitate this, attempts are being made to create the right eco-system in and around the
port area. Around 100 acres of land has been awarded to CONCOR to construct a State-of-the-art
warehousing facility which will result in the creation of warehousing facilities measuring approximately
1.1 million sq. ft of warehousing in that area. Contract has been awarded for the creation of multi-modal
logistics park. Similarly, in order to synchronize with the iron- ore terminal, land has been allotted for
the development of a pellet plant to cater to the traffic for the berths that are being constructed.
17. The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Paradip Port to create a synergized
unit of economic activity in the Port. However, for the modernization to succeed, these must be
completed within a stipulated timeframe and the economies of scale must also be considered in
order to ensure the cost effectiveness for all the stakeholders involved. Connectivity is an issue
which must be given utmost importance and must be taken into serious consideration. Increased
State- Centre coordination, along with inter-Ministerial coordination, with the Ministry of Railways
and Ministry of Road Transport & Highways is the need of the hour.
(ii) Connectivity
18. The Chairman, Paradip Port informed the Committee that one of the key constraints is the issue
of connectivity. The Port is connected by road and air. There is a double line railway connecting Paradip
to the East Coast main line at Cuttack. However, there is a bottleneck in the form of a surface crossing
that takes place at Cuttack which reduces the capacities of the trains that come into the ports. To remedy
this, a project 'Haridaspur - Paradeep Line' was sanctioned. It is close to 82 kms and was conceived
as third line and exit from the Port. The pace of the project has however been quite slow. Stage 0-42
kms is in the advanced stages of completion. However, the stages that include 42- 82 kms have faced
several failures and bottlenecks leading to repeated termination of contracts. The problems are largely
on the State Government side, pertaining to land acquisition, local level administration problems etc.
Attempts are being made to come to a resolution and ensure the smooth completion of the projects by
December 2019.
19. The Committee was informed that the hinterland of the Port extends right up to Chhattisgarh near
Korba area. Logistically, it has the shortest port by rail distances. A large portion of traffic gets diverted
to Andhra Pradesh, Visakhapatnam and Gangavaram. This is due to the lack of doubling and electrification
of the routes connecting Paradeep to Chhattisgarh. Work to remedy this has already been sanctioned.
There is a critical area which extends from Angul to Sambalpur where doubling and electrification are
required. Moreover, a third line has been constructed from Jharsuguda to Champa. These will prove to
be advantageous in terms of aiding the evacuation of port traffic which is expected to reach another 30-
40 million tonnes by the end of 2023-24.
20. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Port to increase its evacuation capacities.
Ports are integral to the increased economic activity of an area and play a major role in the
prosperity of a region. In this respect, the connectivity of a port to and from the various
industrial units in the hinterland is an issue of grave importance. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of Shipping should take up the issues pertaining to 42- 82 kms of Haridaspur-
Paradeep Line with the State Government of Odisha and Ministry of Railways for removing the

5
local level obstacles. The Committee desires that a dedicated mechanism be put in place for
coordination and expeditious completion of 42-82 kms of Haridaspur-Paradeep Railway Line. The
Committee hopes that the Angul- Sambalpur Railway line doubling work will be completed on
time. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must strive for greater
coordination between the State Government concerned and the Ministry of Railways to ensure
seamless connectivity with regards to maintenance of the railway lines and regular upgradation
of the lines.
II. KOLKATA PORT AND HALDIA DOCK COMPLEX
21. The Chairman, Kolkata Port & Haldia Dock Complex deposed before the Committee that Kolkata
has a distinction of being the first major port in the country. It is the only riverine port and has a channel
of 200 kms from the sea through the river Hooghly. While the Port is well connected by rail and road,
Kolkata is also blessed with inland water connectivity. This is a terminal port and has the advantage of
dry docking facility. Major commodities handled in this port are Coal, V egetable Oils and containers .
Kolkata Port as such, has the dock system which includes the Haldia Dock Complex. There are
anchorages in the sea, chief of them being Sagar and Diamond Harbour. The Port also conducts
lighterage operations for handling cargo commodities.
22. The Kolkata Dock System (KDS) is situated on the left bank of river Hooghly at a distance of 232
kms. from Sand Heads. Haldia Dock Complex (HDC), a modern dock complex of Kolkata Port Trust
(KoPT), was set up in 1977 for handling larger vessels, carrying bulk cargo with optimum economy,
keeping KDS primarily for handling break bulk cargo, container etc. The two dock systems of Kolkata
Port viz., KDS and HDC are complementary to each other. HDC is situated on the right bank of the river
at a distance of 125 kms. from Sand Heads. In the Sea approaches of the Channel for about 90 kms,
remote assistance is provided to the ships through Vessel Traffic Management System (VTMS) and the
Pilots board the vessels only after they enter the river.
23. Kolkata Port has a vast hinterland, comprising the entire Eastern India including West Bengal, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan,
Assam, North Eastern States and the two landlocked neighboring countries of Nepal and Bhutan. The
industrial development, commerce and trade of this vast hinterland are inseparably linked to the life and
development of Kolkata Port and vice-versa.


6
24. The Chairman, Kolkata Port stated that the Port has unfortunately witnessed stagnancy in terms of
growth. The Port has recorded a growth of 1.56 lakh MMT from 1 lakh MMT in the previous year.
Kolkata Port is mainly concentrating on containers.  There are 10 berths. Of them, one has a 200 tonne
crane. This was the crane famously used to unload the first coach of Delhi Metro. There is a total of
5 berths dedicated to containers . Of these, 3 are mechanised. These are handled by way of mobile
harbour cranes. Plans have been made to increase another berth on the mechanization side to fulfill the
potential of handling more containers there. The other dock system under Kolkata is in Kidderpore which
has 17 berths mainly catering to smaller barges.
25. Kolkata Port handled 57.886 million tonne (MT) [HDC- 40.496 mt + KDS- 17.39 MT] of traffic
in 2017-18 creating an all-time record in the history of the Port surpassing the previous highest of
57.329MT handled in 2007-08. KoPT registered a high growth of 13.61% over 50.951 MT handled in
2016-17 which was the 3rd highest among Major Ports.KoPT handled 7,96,210 TEUs in 2017-18 vis-
a-vis 7,71,676 TEUs in 2016-17 - registering a growth of 3.18%. KoPT ranked 3rd amongst Indian
Major Ports in terms of Container traffic in 2017-18. In 2017-18, KoPT handled rail-borne traffic of
27.67MT(KDS -5.71MT, HDC - 21.96 MT) against 25.619 MT (KDS - 5.54 mt, HDC - 20.079 MT)
in 2016-17, registering a growth of 8.01%. The financial position for KoPT during 2017-18 has improved
as compared to 2016-17. The Operating Income (excluding Dredging Subsidy) increased to `2046.09
crore during 2017-18, as against `1778.26 crore in 2016-17 - a rise of 15.06%. Operating Surplus
(excluding Dredging cost and subsidy) increased to `838.05 crore in 2017-18, as against ` 659.27 crore
in 2016-17 - an increase of 27.12%. Net deficit for 2017-18 is `98.99 crore, as against a net deficit
of `169.02 crore in 2016-17.
26. Nepal, being a land locked country, routes its third- party export/import cargo mainly through
Kolkata Port. Over the last 3 years, Kolkata Port handled the following cargo for Nepal, which shows
an increasing trend:—
(in tonnes)
Year KDS HDC KoPT
2015-16 11,19,097 4,01,912 15,21,009
2016-17 12,31,421 6,54,192 18,85,613
2017-18 14,77,857 9,24,642 24,02,499
(i) DRAFT LIMITATIONS
27. The Committee was informed that the issue of draft is a major constraint that ails the Kolkata Port
and the Haldia Dock System. The minimum depth required for draft is 3m, in order for docks to operate.
However, being a riverine port, the Kolkata Dock System regularly suffers from heavy siltation which
reduces the draft to less than 3m. Often this makes it unviable for large ships to call on the Port.In order
to bypass this constraint and to get the ships with higher loads, the Port has turned to lighteraging. The
ships are handled at Sagar and Diamond Harbour because it has a draft advantage of one meter extra.
Floating cranes and ship cranes are deployed from Sagar. Portions of the cargo are lighteraged on to
barges. Upon lighteraging, the incoming cargo ships achieve the viable Kolkata Port Draft. The ships and

7
the barges then move on to the Kolkata Port as well as Haldia. Barges are mainly handled in the
Kidderpore dock.
(ii) CONNECTIVITY
28. Kolkata Port, being a city port, suffers from the issue of traffic congestion. With the city limits
expanding over the years, the Port has now become a part of the city, resulting in delayed traffic
movement. It is therefore understood that 24 hours open road movement of trucks is not a possibility.
The Port has a restriction of seven hours. Therefore, methods are being devised to ensure optimum
utilisation of time. First being, through the modernisation of the railway network and the second being,
the Ro-Ro projects.
29. The railway lines cannot handle a full rake container train because the length of the siding is not
sufficient. The work for making two full rake container handling lines has been awarded and work has
also started. It is expected to be completed by December, 2018. The Port can presently handle 1.5 rakes
per day. This is expected to increase to 4 rakes per day with this capacity addition.
30. The roads leading to and from the Port are not exclusive to the Port, but are shared by the civilian
population. The condition of the roads leave much to be desired and the Port has taken it upon itself
to improve the condition of these roads. This is an essential activity as many trucks and trailers come
and go from the ports. In this regard, projects worth ` 15 crores have been completed and projects
amounting to ` 17 crores are in the pipeline. If all goes according to plan, the work on critical roads
is expected to be completed before the monsoon hits the east coast.
31. Another innovative solution to circumvent traffic congestion is the Ro-Ro service between Kolkata
side and Howrah side. Owing to the seven-hour restriction on traffic coming to Kolkata Port, which also
includes the restrictions for trucks and trailers to enter the city, the travel time between the Kolkata and
Howrah side to load and travel back is three days. The Ro-ro service which is already operational on
a trial basis will also be operating on the Botanical Garden side and another terminal has been planned
at Sankrail. These Ro-ro vessels which carry around 20-40 trucks will ply between Kolkata side to
Sankrail on the Howrah side, as Sankrail is out of the city limit and has no traffic restrictions. It is
estimated that around 200-250 trucks can be taken off the road from Kolkata and then taken to the
Howrah side.
32. In addition to the above, another project is to extend the gate of Kolkata Port Gate at Balagarh
Island. The Port Trust has around 300 acres of land at Balagarh Island and the rest of the land is with
the State Government and the Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation. Containers, as well as bulk traffic
from barges, will be moved from Sagar and Diamond Harbor and directly to the Balagarh terminal. This
land is also intended to be leased to industries so that they can set up units from where they can feed
their goods to the Port.
33. The Port has two major dry docks at Netaji Subhash Dock. The Port has joined hands with Cochin
Shipyard Limited (CSL) for developing ship-repairing facility at these two dry docks. This will be on
a profit-sharing basis between CSL and Kolkata Port. The dry docks will be provided, under the present
condition by KPT and investment into the plant and other infrastructure will be done by the CSL. The
profit has been meant to be shared in the ratio of 60 per cent for CSL and 40 per cent by Kolkata Port
Trust.

8
34. The lack of a proper parking bay for the trucks is also an area of concern as it leads to delayed
transfer of cargo shipment. The Committee was informed that three parking terminals with a capacity
for 400 trucks are being developed in and around the port area on Port owned- land as a solution to
the problem of traffic congestion. Of the three, two have been completed and the third is nearing
completion.
35. Haldia Dry Dock has 14 berths inside the dock with 3 oil jetties outside the lock gate. Eight berths
are mechanized which include two container berths and four berths are reserved for handling liquid
cargo. Mechanisation of one more berth is planned which will include complete silo loading facilities for
coal. The tender for this work had already been floated. In order to improve the capacities of the Port,
two quay cranes have been installed in two of the berths. Another crane is under procurement to further
increase the efficiency and productivity of the container operations. A tender has been invited for the
same.
36. Two outer terminals are being developed. One at Shalukhali and another close to Haldia. It has been
named outer terminal 2 and this terminal has a draft of around 7.58 meters. These are being developed
in order to handle liquid cargo. Work has been awarded for both the terminals and environmental
clearance is under process. A floating jetty has also been constructed outside Haldia similar to that at
Sagar island. This will further enhance the capacity of the Port to around 2 million tonnes.
37. With regard to connectivity, Haldia Dock connects to South- Eastern railway at Durgachak. At
present, it consists of a single line which presents constraints on the number of trains the line can handle.
In order to increase the capacity of the line, doubling of the line from Haldia to Durgachak is underway.
In terms of road transport, a Railway ROB is under construction at Haldia just outside the Port in order
to divert the traffic out of the Haldia township onto the main road/ National Highway.
38. Draft is a major constraint for the riverine port. The Committee could gather that a study was
conducted by IIT Madras in collaboration with the Port Trust and it has been suggested that a new
channel called 'Eden Channel' may be introduced. This channel was operationalized in 2016. This has
resulted in a substantial reduction of the cost spent on dredging (approximately 250 crores). Moreover,
the contracts were previously drawn on the quantity of silt dredged. However, as of now, the contracts
are drawn not only on the silt dredged, but also on the completion of assured depth.
39. Lock - gates have become an issue that requires careful study and solution. The lock- gates at
Kolkata and Haldia were constructed pre-independence. With the passage of time, the lock- gates have
become an issue of concern as modern ships are much larger in size and the lock- gates are too small
to ensure their smooth passage.
40. The Chairman of the Kolkata Port & Haldia Dock Complex informed the Committee that they were
working with the IITs to find a solution to the Lock-gate constraints. As of now, there are two possible
solutions. One is to provide another lock gate and the other is to breach this lock gate and to open it
permanently. The study is underway and trials are expected to be conducted by the end of this year.
41. The Committee understands that these pre-independence era ports could not have envisioned
the great strides in shipping during their inception. The infrastructure of the ports needs constant
upgradation. Considering the fact that this was part of the mandate of modernisation of Major

9
Ports in India, the Committee notes the efforts made by the Port authorities. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ports may be upgraded and modernized to suit the present
needs, but with an outlook on future growth as well. The Committee hopes that work related
to modernisation of rail network, Ro-Ro service between Kolkata and Howrah side, proposed ship
repairing facility, development of parking area, modernisation of container berths, development
of outer terminals and the doubling of railway line between Haldia and Durgachak would be
completed within the targeted time frame. The decision on the Lock- gates and other constraints
must be taken up with urgency and trials must not be delayed. Mor eover, the modernization
projects must have fixed target dates and efforts must be made to complete them within the time
frame. Failure to do so will lead to increased costs and also affect the productivity and growth
of the Port.
III. MUMBAI PORT TRUST
42. The Chairman, Mumbai Port Trust stated before the Committee that the Port at Mumbai was
established in 1873 and is the second oldest of the 12 Major Ports of the country that has been providing
its continued service to the nation. The Port handles a total of 62.38 MMT of break bulk, dry bulk, liquid
bulk cargo. Of these, liquid cargo has the highest percentage share of cargo at 66 per cent of the total
cargo handled by the Port. Containers are entirely handled by Jawaharlal Nehru Port (JNPT). Mumbai
Port has a workforce of 8567 employees. Pilotage and other allied activities of the port are conducted
entirely by the employees of the Port and are not outsourced.
The operating results for the Port are as follows:
2017-18 Provisional
Operating income 1526.71
Operating Expenditure 1169.68
Net Surplus (Before tax) (-) 418.00
Contribution to Superannuation fund 707.05
(i) Port Infrastructure
43. The Committee was informed by the Chairman, MbPT that Indira Dock, commissioned in 1914,
has 26 berths, with a minimum draft of 7.0 metres (23.0 ft). Prince's Dock and Victoria Dock are semi-
tidal docks, with vessels docking and departing at high tide. Indira Dock has a lock-gate, enabling vessels
to enter or depart at any time. The Port has four jetties on Jawahar Dweep, an island in the harbour,
for handling Crude and petroleum and oil (POL) products. These jetties have a draft of 12.2 metres (40
ft). Liquid chemicals are handled from a jetty on Pirpau. Ballard Pier Extension has a passenger terminal,
including immigration clearance facilities for crews and passengers of cruise liners. The Port has a total
of 63 anchorage points.
44. The lock gate at Indira Port was constructed in 1942. The blueprint of the lock-gate, during its
construction, did not consider the progress which would be made in terms of ship- design and also in
the infrastructure of the Port. This has resulted in the gate being small in size for the present fleet of
(` in Crore)

10
modern-day ships, resulting in the inability to efficiently utilise the 26 berths of the Indira Dock. Only
small ships are able to call on the Port. The Port is equipped with fixed and mobile cranes with large
storage capacity. The Indira Dock upgradation consists of 22 works which will improve the look of
Indira dock which is the main cargo handling center of the Marine Oil terminal with capacity of 9MT.
Estimated at a total cost of ` 55 Crore, the project is designed to enhance the capabilities of the prime
cargo handling area of the Port.
45. Mumbai Port Trust has signed an MoU with Cochin Shipyard Limited to utilise the Indira Dock
facility at the Mumbai Port to set up a professional ship repair ecosystem that will be beneficial to India's
commercial and defense ship repair. This MoU provides for expansion of the ship repair capacity within
the Indira Dock that may include setting up a floating dry dock and upgrading the existing facility at
Hughes Dry Dock, thereby, enhancing the existing ship repair capacity in the Mumbai area.
46. Jawahar Dweep Island is the main hub of Petroleum and Oil (POL) products of the Port. The crude
oil from ONGC is unloaded and passed through the pipes on towards the refineries from this island. POL
forms approximately 61 percent of the total cargo handled by the Port and as such, is a primary source
of business for the Port. The Marine Oil Terminal has 5 Loading Arms. The berths are linked with
submarine pipelines which lead to the refineries on the mainland and marketing centers. A Tank Farm
project has been planned at Jawahar Deep. The tank farm will be built on reclaimed area. Dredged rock
material by JNPT will be utilized by MbPT for reclaiming 13 Ha of land in Jawahar Dweep. After
reclamation, the land will be used as a tank farm for the storage of Crude oil with an estimated capacity
of 3.6 lakhs KL capacity (6x60,000KL), pegged at a cost of ` 31 crores.
47. Next, is the Chemical berth at old Pir Pau Jetty, a new Pir Pau Jetty and a second chemical berth
is now complete with a draft of 7-11 meters. A floating storage and re-gasification unit through which
Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) and gas will be made available in a manner that does not disturb the city.
(ii) Port Performance
48. The Committee was informed that in terms of operating costs, the operating income is ` 1,526
crores; and operating expenditure is ` 1,169 crores and thereby, the operating profit is around 300 odd
crores. But, because the Port is giving a contribution of ` 707 crores for pension funds, overall, the Port
is making a loss of 418 crores. The actuarial value is around 12,000 crores. The Port has invested
approximately ` 8,000 crores there. So, they are making efforts now to fill it up so that it reaches
` 12,000 crores after which they can begin to register profits.
49. Bunkering is the supplying of fuel for use by ships and includes the shipboard logistics of loading
fuel and distributing it among available bunker tanks. The term originated in the days of steamships, when
the fuel, coal, was stored in bunkers. Nowadays, the term bunker is generally applied to the storage of
petroleum products in tanks and the practice and business of refueling ships. Bunkering operations are
located at seaports and they include the storage of "bunker" (ship) fuels and the provision of the fuel
to vessels. MbPT is now successfully equipped with bunkering terminals to cater to the needs of the
ships at sea. This is a major business in major shipping countries like Singapore, Hong Kong etc. With
this terminal, MbPT has marked its presence in the lucrative business of providing refueling facilities to

11
ships. The product capacity of proposed bunkering terminal - jetty No. 2 at Marine Oil Terminal (MOT)
under MbPT is given as under:
• Upto 2019 – 0.636 MMTPA
• 2019 - 2024 – 1.065 MMTP A
• 2024 - 2034 – 1.925 MMTP A
50. Sassoon Dock Fishing Harbour is one of the seven major fishing harbours in the country. The Port
has two fishing jetties at Sasson Dock and ferry Wharf for handling the fish traffic. The dock operates
around 1,000 fishing vessels and lands an average of 48,000 tonnes of fish annually under the management
of Mumbai Port Trust. The Committee was informed of the initiatives taken to modernise the fish
handling facilities in order to improve the hygiene and sanitation standards in the harbour and develop
a fully integrated fishing harbour with all modern amenities like ice plant, cold storage, modern auction
hall etc. This would help in maintaining sea food export quality as per the international quality requirements
and food safety standards. The old and new Sassoon Dock area is a major Fish Landing and marketing
centre of Mumbai metropolis which caters to the needs of both Domestic and Export market. The
Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT) would also be undertaking the work of dredging of the Sassoon dock basin
at a cost of `60.00 lakhs. MbPT has also taken the initiative in developing the Sassoon Dock Complex
and repairing of Gate House and clock tower. Setting up a Marine Food Park, Sea Food Restaurant and
an Art Gallery in the premises has also been proposed. The total proposed cost of the project is ` 52.17
Crore and will be funded in a convergence mode of implementation under Sagarmala Programme of
Ministry of Shipping and Central Sector Scheme on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and
Management of Fisheries of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. The remaining
50% of the project cost will be funded by the State Government of Maharashtra.
(iii) Connectivity
51. In terms of connectivity, the Port has its own railway system which is spread over a distance of
10 km, with 54 km of track length between the Docks and Wadala, the inter change point with the trunk
railways. The Railway system has been upgraded by re-laying track length. The Port has Rail Container
Depot for movement of containers to and from various ICD's. The dock trains suffer from constraints
of traffic hours as the lines are shared by city railway lines. To circumvent this, the work on the
construction of Wadala - Kurla railway link has commenced. This will ensure the 24 hour connectivity
of the Port via rail.
52. Mumbai roads are extremely congested and travelling from East to West takes a lot of time. In order
to reduce travel time, Ro- Pax [Roll on - Roll -off passenger] water transport has been started. This
mode of water transport for Mumbai city on the Eastern side is going from Mumbai to Navi Mumbai
to Nerul and from Mumbai to Mandwa. This will reduce travel time between Mumbai to Goa to two-
and a- half to three hours. The terminals at both ends have been completed and we are currently awaiting
the arrival of the ships, of which one is from Greece. The ship from Greece, upon arrival, will be able
to ferry around 250 cars between Mumbai and Mandwa. The City and Industrial Development Corporation
(CIDCO) terminal is yet to be completed. Once that is completed, the Eastern Water transport will start
its operations. Due to issues of draft, initially the ships will only be ferrying passengers and not cars.
It will have a capacity of approximately 200 passengers per trip.

12
53. Being a city port, the Mumbai Port also suffers from the issue of dock-road space congestion in
terms of traffic aggravated by the city traffic. The existing connectivity to the Port suffers from the fact
that vehicles pass through extremely congested city roads and are subjected to traffic restrictions to
facilitate movement of normal traffic. To remedy this, a project is tendered to select an operator to
provide a coastal movement of containers from JNPT to Mumbai instead of the containers coming by
road to Mumbai via Bhiwandi. Furthermore, in order to ease the traffic congestion in the Port, a special
drive for additional parking areas has begun at Mansion road, Cotton depot area etc., for parking slots
for 400 trucks/trailers.
54. The Chairman of the MbPT stated that the Port was moving away from cargo handling and
reinventing itself as an International Cruise Terminal. In the coming years, the Port would only cater to
cargo meant for the domestic consumption of Mumbai City. Majority of Container operations would be
re-directed towards JNPT.
55. The requirements of the island city will be served through the coastal route from JNPT to Mumbai.
Upon arrival at Indira Dock, they will receive a green channel. Provisions for godown space has been
made. From there, it can be distributed to the city. We are targeting about 72,000 TEUs per annum
initially. If this is successful, further arrangements can be made for this. This will save around 200
trailers from going to JNPT from Bhiwandi per day and about 600 trucks travelling from Bhiwandi to
Mumbai.
(iv) Development of Cruise Tourism
56. It has been observed that major city ports in the world such as Singapore, Miami, Vancouver,
Busan, Barcelona etc. have slowly reduced their cargo- handling activities and shifted towards placing
emphasis on CruiseTourism. These ports have one thing in common with Mumbai Port- they are all city
ports that are centered around the economic and commercial hub of the region and they have since
realigned their USP on cruise. A study was conducted which reported that Mumbai has a potential of
handling 32 lakh passengers and 700 ships could call on the Port if the correct infrastructure was
provided. This would include the construction of four terminals. Steps suggested by the study conducted
and the report thereon concluded that Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) must be set in place and
immigration rules, Customs, Carrier Security Fee (CSF), port infrastructure etc. must be addressed in
order to promote ease of business. A Monitoring Committee has been constituted to study the ease of
doing business at 5 international cruise ports, in order to implement the same in Mumbai Port.
57. Infrastructure development is integral to the development of this port. Hence, the present international
cruise terminal has been upgraded so that business can be initiated. The two godowns adjacent to the
present terminal have been demolished in order to create an international terminal, the construction of
which is underway. This is earmarked to become a very big cruise terminal inside the Mumbai Port. The
representative of Mumbai Port Trust apprised the Committee that Ro-Ro facilities for automobiles with
pre-dispatch inspection service is available at the port.
58. The Committee understands the constraints of Major Ports that are centered around major
cities and their limitations caused by various factors such as population, traffic etc. The Committee
notes various modernisation projects initiated by the Mumbai Port Trust. The Committee
recommends that a detailed and comprehensive study may be conducted to augment the cargo

13
capacity of Mumbai Port while addressing the various constraints faced by the Mumbai Port at
present. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the MbPT with regard to moving to Cruise
terminals due to their capacity constraints in cargo handling. The Committee notes that the
country has great potential for cruise tourism. In this regard, the Committee recommends that
the Ministry of Shipping must take steps to ensure that processes related to immigration, ease
of business in terms of Cruise shipping, licenses etc. are simplified; Standard Operating Procedures
(SOP), taxation etc. are in place and processes and permissions required in relation with PGA's
are simplified. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must pursue these
with the Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Finance etc. and every effort must be made to
modernise and expand the cruise terminals.
59. The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that MbPT has large land holdings which have
been encroached upon. The Committee is of the opinion that these land holdings are prime real
estate especially in a city like Mumbai which is subject to scarcity of space and such large
holdings are rare. The Committee recommends that the MbPT should take affirmative steps to
reposess the encroached land and utilise the said land holdings to construct schools, state- of -
the - art hospitals and specialty hospitals etc., to cater to the employees as well as the general
public.
IV. JAW AHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST
60. The Chairman of the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust stated before the Committee that JNPT is one
of the youngest ports in the country and that it is the number one container port in India. They have
3,052 hectares of land (approx.). The Port has a 39.54 kms long main harbor channel with a draught
of 14 kms. There are four dedicated terminals, of which one is run by the Port Authority itself, one is
run by Dubai Ports International (DP World), one is run by Gateway Terminals International (GTI) and
the fourth has been recently commissioned to the Singapore Authority Port. JNPT ranks 33rd among the
top 100 container ports in terms of TEUs in the world (ANNEXURE I) and the vision is that in the next
five years, JNPT should join the 10 million TEUs club. Then the rank will come to 15 or 16 globally.
Primarily, they handle 90 percent containers, but they also handle liquid and other cargo.
61. The terminals/berths at JNPT include the JNPT Container Terminal (JNPCT), Nhava - Sheva
International Container Terminal (NSICT), Gateway Terminals of India (GTI), Nhava - Sheva International
Gateway terminal (NSIGT), Bharat Mumbai Container Terminal Phase - I (BMCTPL Phase- I), Shallow
Berth and Liquid terminal. The total terminal capacity of all combined is re- rated at 118 MTP. The
JNPCT is a Government - owned terminal. The terminal performance has debunked the theory that
Government- owned operations do not perform well.
62. The Port will be undertaking dredging for deepening and widening of the existing channel from 14
mtrs. to 15 mtrs. at an estimated cost of US$ 313 Million ( ` 1,993.17 Crore). The length of Navigational
channel is 35 KMs and it is expected for completion by 31.03.2019. This project will ensure berthing
of larger vessels. Further, JNPT is involved in development of Chabahar Port in Iran.
(i) Port Performance
63. The Port handled a record cargo of 66 million tonnes of cargo in 2017-2018. This is the highest
ever in the history of JNPT. With regard to container shipments, the Port handled 4.83 million TEUs in

14
the fiscal year. Again, this is a record cargo handling since the inception of JNPT. The port grew by
7.41 percent in 2017-18. In terms of liquid cargo, the Port handled 7.19 million tonnes of liquid traffic
and recorded a growth of 5.98 per cent. They also handled 0.95 million tonnes of Cement and other
cargo with a registered growth rate of 13.28 per cent.
The performance of the Port for the year 2017-18 reads as per the following:
Sl. No. Performance parameter Port Account Non-Port
TRT Account
1. Average Turn Round Time of Vessels 1.61 Days 0.63 Days
(TRT): (38.64 Hrs) (15.12 Hrs)
2. Average Turn Round Time (TRT) 1.30 Days 0.22 Days
Container Vessels (31.20 Hrs) (5.28Hrs)
3. Avg Turn Round Time (TRT) of 2.27 Days 1.47 Days
Other than Container Vessels (54.48 Hrs) (35.28 Hrs)
4. Average Pre Berthing Delay Overall: 0.37 Days 0.63 Days
(8.88 Hrs) (15.12 Hrs)
5. Avg Output per Ship Berth Delay Overall: 23,417 Tonnes
6. Container vessels 31,516 Tonnes.
64. The Committee notes the increased efficiency of the Port in terms of containers handled
at 0.43 % and the increase in average output per ship Berth day overall at 1.50 % over the
previous years. The Committee commends the efficient management of the Port authorities in
improving the efficiency parameters of the Port in order to make it as competitive as some of
the best ports in the world.
65. The Port has achieved significant improvements in productivity parameters and is closing in on
international best standards.
Performance parameters Previous Year Present Year
(i) Average Import Dwell Time 75.8 Hrs in 2014-15 50.82 Hrs in
2017-18
(ii) A verage Export Dwell Time 91.4 Hrs in 2014-15 83.71 Hrs in
2017-18
(iii) The Berth productivity 69.46 moves/Hr 78.81 moves/Hr
in 2015-16 in 2017-18.
(iv) The Crane productivity 20.99 moves/Hr in 23.42 moves/Hr
2015-16 in 2017-18
(v) Average Pre-Berthing Detention Time on 9.86 Hrs in 2014-15 8.88 Hrs in
Port Account of Vessel 2017-18

15
Performance parameters Previous Years Present Year
(vi) A verage Turn Round Time of Vessel 2.44 days in 2015-16 2.24 days in
2017-18
(vii) Average Ship Berth per day Output 21,287 tonnes in 23,417 tonnes in
2015-16 To 23,417 2017-18
tonnes in 2017-18
The reduction of TRT is significant as it has been achieved despite increase in parcel size.
66. The Ministry of Shipping has introduced various initiatives under 'Ease of Doing Business' to
improve port eco-system efficiency parameters. JNPT has approached the matter via a three-pronged
approach. These are broadly categorized under the following:- (i) Improvement of Infrastructure;
(ii) Simplification of processes; and (iii) Digitisation of activities. JNPT handled 66.00 million tonnes of
total cargo during the financial year 2017-18. The containerized cargo was 57.87 million tonnes (87.67%),
liquid cargo was 7.19 million tonnes (10.89%) & remaining 0.95 million tonnes (1.44%) was miscellaneous
types of Dry Bulk Cargo (Cement) & Break Bulk.
67. The Committee applauds the steps taken to improve the infrastructure facilities of JNPT
and would urge upon the Government to further upgrade and modernise the Port to assure
improved performance benchmarking against global standards.
(ii) Container Traffic
68. JNPT handled 4.83 million TEUs of container traffic during the financial year 2017-18, increased
by 7.41% from the previous annual container handling of 4.50 million TEUs during the year 2016-17.
The container handling at JNPT constitute about 52.91% of total container traffic handled by all the
Indian Major Ports (9.14 million TEUs).
(iii) Improvement of Infrastructure
(a) Increase in Parcel Size
69. The global trend is now shifting towards an increase in parcel sizes. Big ships now carry bigger
parcel sizes, thereby, optimizing on the economies of scale, as bigger parcel sizes imply more efficient
utilisation of cranes, reduces the berthing - unberthing time of ships etc. JNPT previously ailed from poor
response time. Hence, more efficient shipping lines would not call on the Port which meant losing out
on prime business opportunities. The increase in the response time of the Port has resulted in the shipping
lines instilling confidence in the abilities of the Port. The increase in vacant hours made it possible to
increase the parcel size of the Port. The Average Parcel Size has increased from 2,727 TEUs to an
average of 6.77 per cent. The JNPT Terminal (Government Terminal) has recorded a parcel size of 3,532
TEUs (as per the last fiscal year 2017-18). The terminal is now the Port of call to some of the biggest
shipping lines in the world.
(b) Dry Port
70. Dry port/Dry Dock is a unique concept which is being developed by JNPT. This will facilitate
Cargo- aggregation in centers away from the Port. Wardha, Jalna, Nasik and Sangli (all in Maharashtra)

16
have been identified as the four sites. These will serve to connect the Ports to the hinterland. Goods will
be valued at the Dry docks and from there will be directly sent to JNPT for shipment. Easy connectivity
by rail and road and dependence on JNPT is critical for the success of a Dry Port/ Dock. The land
acquisition for the ports at Jalna and Wardha have been complete. Dry Ports as a concept aims to bridge
the gap between the ports and the industrial hubs. This is essential in order to reduce the uncertainty
that prevails in terms of transport and shipment of goods. The stuffing of cargo will be done at the dry
port itself. This will ensure that time is saved on stuffing whilst at the same time, lead to a reduction
on the cost of the transport of cargo to the docks. Once stuffed, the cargo will be brought to JNPT
for export. They will be connected by both road and rail. This will go a long way to resolve the hinterland
connectivity issue which was highlighted by CRISIL as one of the most critical issues.
71. The Committee appreciates the efforts of JNPT in increasing hinterland connectivity. The
Committee strongly feels that this connectivity must also be extended to other States, especially
the landlocked states in the North and North West of India and States in peninsular India for
eg., Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. This is integral to the 'Make in India' programme
of the Government. The Committee emphasizes the need for ensuring connectivity of the
hinterland to Major Ports in India via road and rail in a cost-efficient manner. This is made
possible through dry ports and docks which act as aggregation sites of manufactured commodities.
This will also promote economic activities throughout the country, instead of concentrating
economic activities to a particular region. Dry docks are also a solution to the problem of
transportation of perishable agricultural produce in the country. This will ensure increased
economic activity in the remotest corners of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry of Shipping, along with the JNPT, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and
the Ministry of Railways and the State Governments to work on increasing hinterland connectivity
via Dry Docks. This will go a long way in increasing containerization and trade activities of the
Port, all the while increasing employment opportunities in the hinterland.
(c) Railways
72. The rail share at JNPT has been declining over the past few years. The rail share with respect to
the throughput handled at JNPT has consistently declined from 26% in 2009-10 to 15.16% in the current
year 2017-18. In order to improve the rail share, JNPT has equalized the handling charges of road and
rail. On a market survey, it was noted that the cost of moving of containers by rail is on higher side
compared to the cost of moving by road. In order to reverse the declining trend, Railways need to
address the following issues:
(a) A reliable and frequent connectivity to various inland destinations at rates which are competitive
with that of road transport.
(b) Reducing the dwell time of import containers in the Port by ensuring faster evacuation. In
order to reduce the dwell time, the following action needs to be initiated by Railways:
(i) In case of destinations with smaller volumes Railways need to introduce smaller rakes
of 20 to 25 wagons.
(ii) CONCOR along with private train operators need to come together to club their cargo
to cater to destinations with less volume.

17
(iii) CONCOR and private train operators need to club three or more destinations with less
volume on a single train.
73. The Committee was informed that the Railways is working on a slew of new initiatives like re-
inventing the hub & spoke model, as the old model/ lines cannot carry the cargo load as the load on
the rails have increased. This is a by-product of the increase in the load on the roads.
74. Direct Freight Corridor (DFCC) is estimated to reach JNPT by 2019. Capacity addition is the
current need of the hour, in terms of cold storage and value addition industries. Vadhavan is a proposed
new port 140km north of Mumbai on the coast of Maharashtra. The port is to be built on 5000 acres
of land reclaimed from the sea near the town of Dahanu, Palghar district. Envisioned as India's first
foreshore port, the project is to be jointly administered by Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), which
has a 74% equity stake, and the Maharashtra Maritime Board, which holds the remaining 26%. The
Committee was informed that construction of the port is almost at its final stages. This is a port with
a natural draft of 20 meters and land reclamation is currently underway.
75. The Committee notes that Railways have the widest range of connectivity in the country.
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Shipping must make more concerted efforts with the
Ministry of Railways and State Governments in order to ensure that Railway lines are upgraded
to be able to carry the cargo load. Moreover, efficiency must be maintained in order to ensure
client trust in the Railways. The Committee takes notes of the proactive efforts made by JNPT
and the Ministry of Shipping in developing the Direct Freight Corridor. The Committee desires
that there should be fixed completion date which must be adhered to. This is necessary in order
to ensure the viability of the project and to prevent the project from running over the budget
and ensure that the funding is sufficient.
(d) Development of Centralized parking Plaza
76. Previously, the terminals were serviced by one road which resulted in the choking of the road.
Parking has since been allocated to respective terminals and it is now compulsory for the trucks to use
the assigned parking lots. The rates have been fixed at ` 60/- for eight hours. Furthermore, Customs
has been integrated into the parking spaces. Henceforth, the Customs verify and process the documents
in the parking area after which they make their entry into the port area.
77. In addition to the existing parking areas at JNPT, a Centralized Parking Plaza, measuring 45 ha is
being developed. The work of Centralized Parking Plaza commenced in March 2017. It is a 'state of the
art' integrated facility which includes Customs clearance, parking for undocumented container trailers,
dormitories for truck drivers and an Auto Repairs Zone.
(e) Creation of Customs Processing Zones
78. JNPT created parking yards for undocumented export containers for all terminals of JNPT. These
parking yards were converted to customs processing areas w.e.f. 05-12-2016 as facility for Customs
clearance and port documentation. The parking yard operation ensures that only containers that have
received approval from Customs and are fully documented proceed to the terminal gate. This has brought
in discipline at the port roads and contributed significantly in removing congestion and smooth entry for
export containers.

18
(f) Widening of Port Highways
79. To cater to the future traffic, JNPT signed a Special Purpose vehicle (SPV) with NHAI and CIDCO.
It has awarded the work of widening of 43.9 kms length of NH 4B, SH 54 and Amra Marg Linkages
to 6 / 8 lanes along with two lanes service roads. This project will be executed on Engineering
Procurement and Construction mode in 4 civil packages. The work for all four packages was awarded
in October 2015 and it is expected that the work will be completed by May 2019.
(g) Procurement of e-RTGCs
80. JNP Container Terminal has added 15 new electrical Rubber Tyred Gantry Cranes (RTGC's) by
replacing its 6 old RTGCs. This will enhance JNPCT's yard productivity in terms of increase in Berth
and Crane Productivity and reduction in Turn Round Time or otherwise, accommodate bigger parcel size
windows / vessels with the same fleet.
(h) Allotment of Lab and office space to Partner Government Agencies (PGAs )
81. In order to bring all regulators near port area, the Port has allotted the office space to PGAs like
Animal Quarantine, Textile Commission and Asst. Drug Controller. Port has also allotted required land
/ space for setting up their offices and laboratories within JNPT limits.
(iv) Simplification of Processes
82. Verification, documentation, checks and other procedural practices consume a huge chunk of
transport time. The reduction in processing time would lead to greater and more efficient flow of
transactions. The Port thus introduced various measures to reduce and simplify the process of the
various Partner Government Agencies (PGAs).
(a) Inter Terminal Transfer (ITT) of Tractor Trailers
83. JNPT was infamous for congestion of trucks. However, the introduction of inter- terminal transfer
of tractor trailers has been a monumental step in helping reduce the traffic. Most of the terminals on
JNPT are standalone terminals and are not connected to each other. Previously, a truck would drop off
an export container, exit and then wait in line at the other terminal to pick up an import container.
Sideways movement was introduced, whereby, instead of exiting, a virtual gate was created- to pick up
an import and then return- thus, essentially saving a distance of seven and a half kilometers. One truck
does 2 transactions essentially. To date, 5,42,000 trucks have used their facility and have completed
6,72,000 transactions. Saving ` 250 crores in trade.
84. Inter-terminal transfers facilitate tractors trailers to move from one terminal to another laterally
without exiting from first terminal. This ensures optimum use of TTs. This facility is used by 500 TTs
every day. This initiative has reduced the load off from the road. Further, it has led to saving of fuel
cost by avoiding about 7.5 km distance to enter from one terminal to adjacent terminal, reduce transportation
and cost logistic cost, pollution, long queuing on terminal approach roads during last 2 years. Till April
2018, 556,777 trucks availed this facility making 690,369 transactions. This has resulted in a gain to the
turn of ` 242 crores.

19
(b) Direct Port Delivery (DPD)
85. JNPT was constructed to cater to the Container Freight System (CFS). In the CFS system,
containers were disembarked and then immediately shifted to the CFSs. The CFSs would take about 8-
10 days to complete the process. The costs would be escalated to above 10,000 to 20,000 per container.
This resulted in prolonged delays of shipment, thereby, increasing the inventory cost as well.
86. Acting upon the recommendations of the 91st Report of this Committee on 'Modernisation of Ports',
an initiative was taken in 2014-15 to overcome the delays caused by CFSs. DPD was seen as a remedy
to the CFS problem. Under DPD, the containers are moved directly to consignee's factory/warehouse
without routing through CFSs. Port has waived theminimum volume criteria for taking DPD. A Special
Cell was created for DPD, registration process was made online, abolition of deposits and awareness
campaigns have increased the DPD clients and clearances. Direct Port Delivery of Import containers
increased from 3% in November 2016 to 39% in April-2018. The importers are currently benefited by
savings in cost of `8,000/- to `20,000/- and in time of average 5 days while clearing their containers
under DPD instead of routing through Container Freight Stations (CFSs). With initiatives like the Transport
solution to be implemented, the percentage of DPD will move towards 60%.
(c) Direct Port Entry (DPE)
87. Direct Port Entry facilitates entry of factory stuffed containers into the Port without routing through
CFSs. In JNPT, the percentage of Direct Port Entry of Export containers has increased from 60% to
80% in April 2018. Every factory stuff container was earlier required to proceed to CFS to get customs
approval and then proceed to terminal gates. Conversion of Parking Yards as Customs Processing Area
from 05-Dec.-2016 and facilitation of Customs operation led to higher percentage of DPE. The exporters
are currently benefitted by savings in cost of about `2,000/- and in time of 1 to 2 days while resorting
to DPE.
88. The Committee appreciates the quantum leaps taken by JNPT in simplifying the processes
of the Port and its functioning. These changes have been long pending and overdue. The Committee
recommends that DPD and DPE related pending projects are completed within the given schedule.
The systems employed by the Port may be carefully studied by the Ministry of Shipping for using
the same as a base for pilots in other Major Ports in the country, after tailoring them to suit
individual port's needs.
(v) Digitization of activities
89. Following the directives of the Ministry of Shipping, JNPT has implemented e- delivery, papers
required for the delivery of orders (containers) have been moved to an electronic platform. Hence e-
invoice, e- payment, e-delivery and this has been made mandatory. This is done to facilitate the early
clearance of cargo and reduced processing costs. This has been further complimented with the creation
of logistic data banks. JNPT has now become a paperless port, where documents are processed via web-
based portal. Furthermore, the customs for the Special Economic Zones (SEZ) has been integrated with
the Port system to facilitate seamless communication of critical messages without the need for hard-
copies. Tariffs for the shipping lines have also been listed on the Port website with links of the major
shipping lines. The aim is to make the JNPT website a one-stop shop for all a customers' shipping
requirements.

20
(a) Introduction of E-form 13
90. Form 13 is the only document by which the entry of containers in the terminals are regulated. E-
form 13 have been introduced to reduce gate transaction time and to avoid manual data feeding by
customars.
(b) RFID Based Terminal Gate transaction
91. Introduction of RFID based Gate Automation System has ensured that the Gate transaction time is
reduced from 10 minutes in April 2016 to 1 minute in March 2017. Every container that leaves the JNPT
is tagged with an RFID tag and a monthly report is published on the same to ensure visibility of the
movement of the shipment to the client. Thus, enabling him to track their and question authorities in the
event of delay. The RFID provides high security profile and gives the client a sense of security with
regards to the progress and safety of their shipments.
(c) Container tracking introduced for the first time in India
92. JNPT in association with DMICDC has commenced the tracking of containers moving towards
hinterland and cleared from the terminals of JNPT. Transit integrity is now ensured by tracking of
containers. The importers / exporters is now able to keep track of the container while in transit. The
Project commenced on 11thJuly, 2016. The system provides a Data Bank on Destination-Source matrix
for containers in transit. The project is started with western corridor coverage and from February, 2018
and has pan - India coverage.
(d) e-Delivery Orders (e-DO)
93. In a major initiative to bring in ease of delivery of import containers, JNPT has ensured that delivery
orders of all major Shipping Lines are fully online and integration with PCS is in progress. The E-do
facilitates quick, easier and paperless delivery and tends to reduce cost and time in the import supply
chain. The system is being upgraded to create e- invoicing and e-payment facility in customer transaction
with shipping lines.
94. The Committee lauds the effort of the JNPT towards digitisation of its activities. Lack of
digitisation was a major bottleneck to the increased productivity of the Port and often cited as
an area which needs greater implementation. The digitization of form 13, e-delivery, container
tracking and RFID based gate-entry and exit has been integral to the success of the digitisation
and the Port has reaped dividends stemming from this exercise. The Committee feels that the
digitisation of Ports and its allied services is integral to ensure the growth of the sector and
ensure the confidence of major ship-liners.
V. VISHAKHAPATNAM PORT
95. The Chairman of the Visakhapatnam Port stated before the Committee that the Port started its
operations in 1933 and is presently, the deepest container terminal among all the Major Ports with 16.5
meters of draft. The Port is divided into the Inner harbor and Outer harbor. The Inner harbor is a natural
harbor protected by two hills and does not require the construction of a breakwater. The Outer harbor
was commissioned in 1976 and has a draft of 18.1 meters. The Inner harbor presently has a draft of
14.5 meters. The inner harbor handles fully laden panamax vessels, while the Outer harbor is capable

21
of handling super cape sized vessels. The Port caters to the hinterland comprising of Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Odisha, Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh and parts of northern India including NCR.
The Port serves major sectors of Power, Steel, Petroleum, Mining, Fertilizer, Aluminum, Cement, Consumer
goods (Container) etc.
96. The Government of India has a long-term contract with Japan and South-Korea for exporting the
iron-ore, which is routed via Visakhapatnam Port. This has around 1,00,000 tonnes of loading capability
per day. The Port has also been declared as the second Port of Call to Nepal. Till recently, land-locked
Nepal could transact its trade only from Kolkata port. However, in 2016, the Centre had declared
Visakhapatnam Port as the second gateway port for Nepal-bound cargo after Kolkata-Haldia.
(i) Profitability
97. In terms of profitability, the total income of the Port in 2017-18 has been registered at Rs 1,066
crores in 2017-18. The operating surplus is ` 511 crores. Profit before tax is `249.69 crores. Profit after
tax `189.46 crores. The Port has 4000 workers and 13,000 pensioners on payroll and by the year end,
expected to fund the pension fund in its entirety.
98. The Committee takes note of the profit after tax to the tune of ````` 189.46 crores. However,
in order to assess the operational efficiency of the Port and its competitiveness as also to suggest
measures to improve its productivity, the Committee desires to be kept apprised of the Return
on Capital Employed (ROCE) for the Port.
(ii) Cargo Throughput
99. Visakhapatnam Port is equipped to handle all types of cargoes viz., Crude oil, petroleum products,
LP Gas, Coal, Iron Ore, Fertilizers, Alumina, liquid fertilisers, chemicals, cokes, Gypsum, Bauxite, Steel,
Granite, containers etc. The Port handled a cargo volume of 63.54 million tonnes in 2017-18 as against
61.02 million tonnes of last financial year, thereby, achieving an incremental cargo of 2.52 million tonnes
and a growth rate of more than 4%. The Port holds 4th position among Major Ports in terms of cargo
volume. Principal commodity wise cargo volumes handled at the Port during last three years is as under:
(million tonnes)
Sl. No. Commodity 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
1 POL 16.94 16.61 16.05
2 Iron ore 5.98 11.42 10.65
3 Thermal coal - (coastal loading to TNEB) 3.39 3.47 2.95
4 Coking coal (Import) 5.08 4.33 5.76
5 Steam coal (Import) 8.02 4.06 5.84
6 Fertilizers & Raw 2.80 2.66 2.87
7 Containers Tonnage (Lakh TEUs) 5.15 6.43 6.83
(2.93) (3.67) (3.87)
8 Others 9.68 12.05 12.59
9T
OTAL 57.03 61.02 63.54

22
(iii) Connectivity
(a) Road
100. Coming to road connectivity, the Port is connected to National Highway - 16 (formerly called as
NH-5) by 4 lane link road of 12 kms developed and maintained by a SPV constituted by NHAI as a JV
with VPT. The Port is contemplating augmentation of the connectivity into a 6-lane road. They have
completed phase-I through a joint venture with National Highways Authority of India by investing `114
crores in 2004. Phase-I, four-laning of 4.2 km balance length, was completed last year with an investment
of around `76. 93 crores. Almost 25 per cent of the cargo from the Port moves by pipelines. So, the
road movement, to that extent is very limited. The Port has taken up the following projects for augmentation
of road connectivity for hassle free movement of port traffic:
• Construction of Grade separator from H-7 area to Port connectivity road by-passing convent
junction at an estimated cost `59.91 crore under Sagarmala. Letter of Acceptance was issued
to the selected bidder on 10.05.2018
• Development of 4 lane road connectivity from East Break Water to Convent junction. DPR is
under preparation by NHAI.
• A proposal termed "Development of fly-over bridge from Sea Horses Junction area to Dock
Area at Visakhapatnam Port" has been approved by the Cabinet. The fly-over forms connectivity
from outer harbor to East and West docks. Bids for consultancy service for preparation of
DPR are invited by NHAI.
101. In accordance with the thrust of Bharatmala to improve the last mile connectivity to Port, following
five projects have been envisaged by Port of Visakhapatnam to be included in the Bharatmala scheme
and NHAI is taking up preparation of DPRs in respect of the following projects:
• Improvement/upgradation of four lane road to 6-lane road for the road connecting to the Port
at Sheela Nagar junction
• Development of Outer Ring Road to Sheela Nagar.
• Development of Mindi Y ard connectivity-Construction of Free on Board facility at Nathayyapalem
on NH-16.
• Coastal road from Gangavaram Port to Visakhapatnam Port.
• Development of adequate road connectivity from Visakhapatnam port -Direct Link from
Sheelanagar to Multimodel Logistic Park.
(b) Railway Lines
102. With regard to railway lines, the Port has good railway connectivity. With a track length of 184
kilometers, this is the maximum length of the railway infrastructure within any major port. They have
15 sidings as well as 20 open terminals. The rail coefficient is 43 per cent, which is one of the highest
in the port sectors. Above 43 per cent of the cargo moves by rail. Railway lines are a major constraint
to the increased viability of the Port. The Railways has already sanctioned the project of doubling of the

23
Vizianagaram- Raipur RV line. This is a critical line as our entire hinterland is predominantly Chhattisgarh,
Odisha, parts of Madhya Pradesh and parts of Maharashtra. The entire cargo has to move on the RV
line, about 90 percent of our rail cargo is on RV line, which is presently a single-unelectrified line. The
project is likely to be completed by December next year. This will go a long way in resolving one of
the major bottle-necks of the Port.
(iv) Eco Friendly Initiatives
103. This is the only port which runs entirely on solar energy. They have 100 percent solar energy and
whatever surplus energy is produced, it is sold to PPP operators. All of the water requirement of the
Ports is taken from treated sewage water, except for potable water which is taken from municipal
corporation. ThePort is ranked second in Swachhata Index. The Ministry of Shipping has commissioned
an independent study by the Quality Council of India.
(v) New Inititiatives
104. The Port has taken initiatives to promote trade competitiveness. Efforts have been made to reduce
the logistics cost on various elements. This has been done in response to competition from a nearby
private port. Cargo handling charges have been reduced and berth reservation scheme has been introduced.
Levy has been reduced from 400 per cent to 150 per cent. Demurrage charges have also been reduced.
Concessions have also been given to container vessels.
105. Their major challenge has been dust pollution and controlling the air quality as the Port is situated
amidst a bustling and growing city, with a population of around 2 million. The Port is restricted by the
proximity to the city in terms of pollution control and traffic.
106. The Committee notes that Visakhapatnam Port faces intense competition from neighboring
private ports like Gangavaram which employs predatory pricing and that it is an issue which
needs careful study and consideration. Tariff for the services rendered at Major Ports and the
terminals are regulated by the Tariff Authority at Major Ports (TAMP), where private ports are
not bound by the same regulations and are thus free to determine their tariff rates. This robs
the Major Ports of a level playing field in order to compete with the private ports. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Government should intervene to create a level playing field for the
Major ports and a supportive environment must be created in order to ensure that our Major
Ports like Vishakhapatnam Port can withstand the stiff competition.
(vi) Modernisation of Port Facilities
107. As far as cargo handling facilities are concerned, the Port has taken up close to 8 projects, under
the Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) to modernize the ports by installing the latest state-of-the-art facilities.
The Port has a rapid wagon loading system wherein one entire rake of 58 wagons can be loaded in 60
minutes.
108. An Iron-ore facility has been developed under PPP which was refurbished by investing around
` 580 crores under PPP. The Port is also equipped with a ship loader of 8,000 tonnes per day. They
have demonstrated 1,00,000 tonnes per day of loading of iron ore as well as pellets.
109. In the last 5 years, the Visakhapatnam Port Trust has made an investment of around `1,052 crores
on new terminals and mechanization. For deepening of channels and berths, an investment of around

24
` 510 crores have been made. Ongoing investments in the new terminals amount to ` 2,243 crores. Most
of the projects are nearing completion. Logistical investments to the tune of `341 crores have been made.
Some are currently underway.
110. The Committee was informed that the Visakhapatnam Port authorities have sought to implement
recommendations of this Committee with regards to the modernization of Ports and its facilities in its
91st report through PPP mode, which is a self-sustaining recommendable mode investment and has
proved to be successful for many Ports.
111. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the inflexible and rigid regulatory
framework viz., tariff and Concession Agreements in respect of the PPP projects do not facilitate
adaptation with the changing market environment. There are no provisions to cater and adapt
to measures such as changing the cargo profile, restructuring of tariffs at the PPP terminals etc.
In this regard, the Committee feels that the atmosphere around PPP needs to be more conducive
to this form of investment to encourage growth in terms of capital infrastructure without
stressing on the Government resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an
environment to nurture and encourage PPPs must be set in place. This is necessary to ensure
that the Major Ports are able to come into their own as profitable units. Whilst there is legislation
in place to encourage PPP, the present laws must be amended to keep room for changing
circumstances in the shipping sector and in the global scene.
(vii) Navigational Facilities
112. The existing navigational facilities in the two harbours  viz.,  inner quay and the outer quay are as
under:
Description Inner Harbour Outer Harbour
Water spread (Hectares) 100 200
Permissible Draft (in mtrs.) 14.5 18.1
Permissible Length of Ship (in mtrs.) 230 300
Vessel Class PANAMAX (up to CAPE (up to 2 lakh
80000 DWT) DWT)
No. of berths 18 6
(viii) Cargo Handling Facilities
113. The Port has fully mechanized facilities for handling coal, iron ore, crude, petroleum products, LPG,
liquid cargo, Aluminum, and Containers. The Eastern Quay-6 and Eastern Quay-7 berths located in the
inner quay are operated by the Port. These berths are capable of handling vessels of draft upto11 meters
and 14.5 meters respectively. The berths are equipped with one 100 tonne Mobile cranes and four
20tonne Electric Level Luffing Wharf cranes.
114. The Western Quay-1 to Western Quay-5 berths located in the inner quay are operated by the Port.
These berths are capable of handling Panamax vessels of draft up to 13 meters and equipped with Mobile

25
Harbour Crane. The Port has developed two new berths viz., Western Quay-7 and Western Quay-8 in
the inner quay through internal resources. The berths are capable of handling Panamax vessels of draft
upto 14.5 meters.
115. Development of two regular quay berths in the inner quay capable of handling Panamax vessels of
draft upto 14.5 meters by reconstruction of the existing old and shallow berths in the Eastern Quay -
2, 3, 4 and 5 taken up by the Port is likely to be completed in the current financial year. Expression
of Interest for operation of these berths for handling container cargo and clean cargo is invited. A project
for improving the capacity of the OR-1 and OR-2 berths in the inner quay for handling petroleum
products is taken up by the Port and the Letter of Intent was issued.
116. The Committee is pleased to note the steps and initiatives taken by the Visakhapatnam Port
in order to improve its efficiencies. Furthermore, being with sufficient draft, the Committee is
of the opinion that the hinterland connectivity must be improved via dry docks/ ports, which will
serve as assembly and stuffing units. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of
Shipping must encourage the State Government to create SEZs around these dry docks to
promote an environment of creating manufacturing units with easy access to the Port. The
Committee is also of the opinion that these are essential to encourage and promote the growth
of trade and industry in the country and also a necessary input for the success of the 'Make in
India' programme launched by the Government.
117. The Committee notes that the Visakhapatnam Port is a city port. While the rapidly increasing
city limits points to the rising economic prosperity of the city, it becomes a bottleneck for the
growth of the Port and reduces its efficiency. In this regard, the Committee feels that adequate
steps must be taken and a blueprint must be made to ensure that the growth of the city limits
does not impinge on the Port and its capacities. Mor eover, the Por t must devise exit roads and
inroads to service the Port, which are independent of city traffic. These are plans for the
foreseeable future which must be envisioned in order to ensure that the Port is not encumbered
by growing urbanization as is rampant in other major port cities.
VI. V .O. CHIDAMBARANAR PORT (TUTICORIN)
118. The Chairman of V.O. Chidambaranar Port Trust (VOCPT) stated before the Committee that
VOCPT is located at a vantage point close to all the international sea routes. Currently, most of the
container traffic is trans-shipped at Colombo. From there, feeder services come into various ports in
India. The Port has a rich history as a pearl fishing port, which is presently classified as Zone 'B'. Zone
'A' is the newer port which has been developed to handle modern ships and modern cargo profile.
119. The Port primarily aims to attract traffic through rate reduction, giving discounts and improving the
quality of services being offered by the Port. The goal is to ultimately reduce the cost for the customers
and the shipping companies.
(i) Port Capacity
120. The Port has 15 berths and the channel is around 3.8 kilometers long. The Port is hampered by
the small entrance of around 153 meters. The Port seeks to expand this or get it widened. The Port has
a total capacity of 66 million tonnes and has handled close to 36.6 million tonnes with an overall berth

26
occupancy of around 56 per cent. The Port has a limited deep drought for berths at 13.2 m draft for
handling multi cargo bulk vessel. In this regard, the Port has initiated action for deepening the dock basin
for (-)16.5m depth and entrance channel to (-)17.2m depth to handle fully laden Panamax vessels and
80000 TEUs to 14,000 TEU container vessels. Upon completion of the dredging, berths 1-6, 7-9, NCB-
I, II & III, CJ- I &II will have the capacity to handle 15.2 m draught vessels. The project was awarded
in August 2018 and is scheduled to be completed in October 2020.
121. The main cargoes handled in the Port are coal and thermal coal. The Port processed close to 13
million tonnes of thermal coal in 2016-17 and this dropped to around 10-11 million tonnes in 2017-18.
The primary reason for the decline in cargo could be attributed to the rise of renewable energy in Tamil
Nadu, leading to reduced demand from thermal power stations this is evinced in the fact that earlier, the
capacity utilization of the thermal power plants was upward of 70-80 per cent. This dropped to around
60 per cent in 2017-18.
(ii) Traffic
122. The traffic to the Port is extremely sporadic which is necessitated only when there is a shortage
of wheat in the country or shortage in stocks. These account for small traffic that comes and goes from
the port which depends on various external factors.
123. The Committee feels that the Port which was planned as a transhipment hub, to facilitate
container shipment, has now been reduced to a port which deals with bulk cargo. It is disheartening
to learnt that, at present, the Port subsists on the cargo of a small Company, the traffic of which
is far below the potential of the Port.
124. Moreover, the Committee feels that the proximity of ports, both private and major, along
the coast, cater to the same hinterland. The number of ports is far larger than the demand for
them. The supply exceeds the demand and this has resulted in the underutilization of the
economies of scale. The Committee fails to understand the lack of planning and foresight in the
operation of this port and the neglect of the Port by the Ministry of Shipping and the State
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must focus
its attention on the development of the Port as a transhipment hub. The Committee recommends
that the Port must reduce its reliance on bulk cargo in terms of coal etc. and change its business
model in order to attract more varied traffic.
(iii) Containerization
125. The Port has handled close to 6.98 TEUs in 2017-18 and this has been showing an upward trend.
In line with this demand for containers and increased containerization, the Ministry is looking at developing
VOCPT as an international transshipment hub to take away cargo from Colombo.
126. The Committee notes that the Zone B in VOCPT was planned as a transshipment hub, given
its favourable geographical position and deep draft levels. Mor eover, being a coastal port, it does
not face the challenges of silting and dredging which is a major drawback for most ports in the
country. However, after careful study, the Committee is of the opinion that the Port has largely
failed to attract container cargo shipments.

27
127. As stated by the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, the Port specializes in bulk cargo while Chennai
Port specializes in containerization. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Shipping must go back to the drawing board and prepare a DPR for the future course of the Port.
If it is intent on developing it as a transhipment hub, then it must look into the shortcomings
of the Port with regards to a transhipment hub. If not, it must restructure itself as a bulk port
or structure it otherwise. The Port is neither here nor there and the Committee strongly feels
that this is a waste of the massive potential of the VOCPT as a major Port in India.
(iv) Policy Initiatives
128. One of the major policy initiatives taken by the Ministry of Shipping was the relaxation of Cabotage
Laws, wherein they have allowed foreign shipping lines to carry costal cargo and this is primarily limited
to agricultural commodities and fertilizers. At present, a lot of cotton being produced in Maharashtra and
Gujrat moves to Tuticorin via road. With the relaxation of Cabotage Laws, it is expected that this would
start attracting traffic which primarily preferred road routes and divert them to the sea route.
(v) Connectivity
129. The hinterland of the VOCPT can be divided into three segments:
i. Immediate Hinterland -this covers import centers catering to Madurai, Sivakasi, Dindigul,
Tuticorin, Karur.
ii. Common Secondary Hinterland -this caters to import centers spread over Coimbatore, Tiruppur,
Salem and Erode.
iii. Distant Hinterland -this caters to import centers spread in and around Bangalore, Chennai.
(a) Road Connectivity
130. VOCPT has the advantage of good road connectivity and less traffic congestion. The Port is well
connected by four-lane NH- 45B to Madurai via Ettaiapuram, Aruppukottai and NH-7A to Tirunelveli. To
improve on the connectivity of the Port, a request has been submitted to the National Highways Authority
of India in December, 2017, to convert the existing four lane National Highway 7A to a six-lane one,
as close to 90% of cargo from the Port is evacuated by road.
131. Furthermore, the Port has proposed to widen the road from Tuticorin Thermal Power Plant (TTPS)
round about to link road round- about, which will include the widening of Korampallam Surplus Course
(KSC) Bridge and Rail Over Bridge (ROB) over rail track. The work has been awarded and a completion
date has been set for a period of 18 months from April 2018.
132. Railway fare for short distance operation is not viable for major users operating around the Port.
The issue has been taken up with the Ministry of Railways to reduce the fare for Short Distance
operation. The Committee desires that necessary follow up action may be taken in this regard and
the final outcome reported to the Committee in the Action Taken Reply.
(b) Rail Connectivity
133. A Broad-Gauge single line connects Madurai to Bangalore via Dindigul-Karur- Erode- Salem. The
Port is also connected by a Broad-Gauge single line connects Madurai- Tiruchirapalli- Chennai.

28
134. The Chairman of the Committee informed the Committee that the Siding Agreement between
VOCPT and Southern Railway is being framed under the EOL Concept and through the distance basis
with the continuation of assisted/private siding.
135. The Committee notes that the VOCPT is one of the better connected Major Ports in the
country. The Committee hopes that the issues with regards to highway construction and broadening
of existing roads are completed according to schedule and reinforces its suggestion that a timeline
must be fixed for the same. The Committee feels that the Port must also envision the urbanization
of its surrounding areas and must ensure the provision of planned evacuation channels. The
Committee recommends that the issue of Short Distance Operation costs must be taken up on
a priority basis with the Ministry of Railways.
(vi) Modernizaton of the Port
136. A truck parking terminal has been made functional with effect from March, 2018. A full - fledged
RFID project to ease the movement of vehicles was commissioned in February, 2018. Harbour mobile
cranes have now been deployed on the Port.
137. Given the mandate of the Port and its strategic position, the Committee is dismayed at the
level of modernization in the Port over the years. The Port is a far cry from its optimum
utilization. The underutilization of this Port is a great loss tothe country. The Committee
recommends that a detailed study must be conducted, to evaluate the needs and the requirements
of the port in order to ensure that the Port is efficiently utilized. Keeping in view the restricted
hinterland and the numerous ports that compete for the same cargo, it is essential that VOCPT
should devise its own business strategies.
VII. CHENNAI  PORT
138. The Chairman of the Chennai Port Trust stated that the Chennai port has completed 137 years of
commercial operations and is one of the oldest ports in India. It is the 3rd major port of the country
and is the gateway to the Coromandel coast. The Chennai Port is a multi- cargo port, handling Containers,
Liquid Bulk, Dry bulk and Break Bulk cargo. It comprises of 24 berths in 3 docks. The present capacity
of the Port is 133.6 MTPA.
139. The 3 distinct docks in the Port consist of Ambedkar Dock which has 8 berths for handling
Ro-ro and general cargo. Next is the Jawahar Dock with 6 berths and Bharati Dock which has 3 berths.
These seventeen berths are handled directly by the Port. In addition to the seventeen berths, there are
seven berths which handle containers. Two of the terminals are on the PPP mode. The first is Chennai
Container Terminal Private Limited, Terminal - 1, managed by Dubai Ports International (DPI). The
second is Chennai International terminal Limited, Terminal- 2 which is managed by the Port of Singapore
Authority. These 24 berths combined, handle an average of 52 million tonnes of cargo.
140. The automobile cargo of the Port is handled by Ro-Ro ships. The Port caters mainly to Hyundai,
which has a manufacturing unit at Sriperumbudur. Their export is entirely done through this port and
at present they handle about 1.5 lakh cars in a year.

29
(i) Connectivity
141. Chennai port being a city port, suffers from traffic congestion as a result of the city that has grown
around the Port. There are 10 gates available for entry and exit of which only 4 gates are utilized for
cargo and traffic of which only four gates are utilized for cargo traffic and of these four, only one is
operated round the clock. The other gates are operable only at night due to the traffic restrictions put
in place by the Chennai City traffic police. This has largely restricted cargo movement for the Port both
in and out of the Port at certain point.
142. Steps have been taken to ensure that the congestion is mitigated. Inside the Port premises, roads
have been widened, roads have been laned and stream-wise segregation cargo has been implemented
broadly under containerized and non- containerized cargo, also the gate complex have been modernized.
An 8 -lane gate complex at gate 1 has been commissioned to facilitate container traffic.
143. To further mitigate the external congestion, the Port has encouraged alternate modes of container
transportation - through rail and sea. Chennai Port has completely waived railway terminal handling
charges to improve the container traffic from March, 2018. Seven Direct Port Delivery trains and one
Direct Port Export trains were operated by CONCOR between Chennai Port and ICD/Tondiarpet.
(ii) Policy Initiatives
144. To encourage a modal shift from land to sea, Chennai Port has signed an MoU with the Government
of Puducherry to develop the Puducherry Port as a Satellite port to Chennai Port and enable the
transhipment of containers to and from the Puducherry Port. Trial runs from Chennai Port to Puducherry
/ Karaikal Ports was done in February, 2018.
145. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Chennai Port and lauds the steps taken by
them. The Committee feels that Puducherry Port must be developed as a Satellite port which can
take over the load of the Chennai Port. This makes complete sense considering the rapid
urbanization of Chennai City. Investments must be made in the infrastructure of the Port, with
an eye for the future coastal traffic and development.
146. The Chairman informed the Committee that a project was envisaged to have an elevated road from
Maduravoyal. However, the work had come to a halt due to objections raised by the State Government.
The State Government has since then recently issued a 'No objection Certificate' for the project and the
work is proposed to be taken up by the NHAI. The 19 kilometers elevated road is proposed to be the
lifeline of the Port. Another road, the Chennai Ennore Port Road Connectivity Project with a budget of
` 600 crore is currently underway and almost complete. A remaining segment measuring about 150
meters is proposed to be completed in a few months' time.
147. The Chennai Port is a very old port and the gates of the ports are closed because of the growth
of the city. The Chairman informed that the proposed elevated corridors would take care of the maximum
requirements. In addition to that, model shipment of cargo is underway. At present rail transit has been
incentivised and investments have been made to create rail facility inside the Port along with the
development of the Puducherry Port. Transportation costs for short distances are dearer by rail than
road. With this in mind, in order to make it lucrative for the transport of cargo by rail, the Port along
with the Ministry of Shipping is in talks with the Ministry of Railways to reduce the cost cargo shipment
for short distances.

30
148. Chennai Port, given its location, is suitable for the purposes of tourism as it has been a
gateway to the South. The Committee further recommends that the Port should follow the
example of the Mumbai Port Trust and re-design and develop cruise terminals for tourists/
passengers.
VIII. KAMARAJAR PORT LIMITED
149. The Chairman of Kamarajar Port Limited stated before the Committee that Kamarajar Port is the
12th major port in the country and functions on the 'Land Lord' model. This implies that the Port is not
involved in the operation itself but functions Public- Private- Partnerships. Initially, its work was to shift
the 'dusty cargo' from Chennai Port, which comprised mostly of iron-ore and coal berth. This was
therefore created as a satellite port of Chennai Port and was eventually made a separate entity.
150. The current capacity of the Port stands at 67.5 million tonnes and various capacity additions are
in process. There are 8 terminals in operation. The cargo processed at the Port primarily consists of coal
for the Tamil Nadu State Electricity Board with additions of liquid cargo, cars and a small proportion
of general cargo. General Cargo includes automobiles and project cargo. This is an extremely lean
organisation with an employee strength of less than a hundred.
Sl. No. Parameters T otal from April Total from April-
2017-Mar 2018 June 2018
1. Vessels handled (Nos.) 794 221
2. Avg. Pre-berthing Time (Port a/c) (Hrs) 0.010 0.001
3. Avg. Pre-berthing Time (Non Port a/c) (Hrs) 13.601 4.994
4. Idle time at berth (percentage) 12.34 12.23
5. Avg. Turn Round Time (Port a/c) (days) 39.409 41.528
6. Avg. Total Turn Round Time (Port + Non Port a/c) 52.858 46.423
(days)
7. Avg. Output per ship berthing (Tonnes) 24590 24,732
(i) Cargo Handling Mechanisms
151. Kamarajar Port has 8 terminals, of which 5 are BOT terminals, 2 are Captive user Terminals and
one Port owned terminal for the export/import of automobiles. All terminals are equipped with state-of-
the art infrastructure facilities with fully mechanized cargo- handline operations for faster evacuation and
is pollution- free. The RoRo terminals meant for automobile export/import do not require any cargo
handling equipments, since the automobiles are loaded/off-loaded to and from the vessels by the self-
drive method.
(ii) Modernization of Cargo Handling Facilities
152. Construction projects of Linkage- Conveyer System at North Chennai Thermal Power Station and
the replacement of the belt in the pipe Conveyer at NTECL plant has also been completed. Furthermore,
commissioning of additional pipelines for liquid terminals is nearing completion.

31
(iii) Connectivity and Evacuation
(a) Rail Connectivity
153. The Port is connected by a dedicated rail at Attipattu and Attipattu Pudunagar Stations located in
the Chennai- Gudur section of the Southern Railway on the Chennai- Delhi/Kolkata route. Kamarajar Port
Limited has undertaken the doubling of the existing railway siding, which is expected to increase its
capacity from 22 rakes per day to 44 rakes. Rail connectivity issues are minimal with regards to this
Port.
(b) Road Connectivity
154. The Kamarajar Port was envisaged to handle large volumes of bulk commodities, automobiles and
container traffic. A good network of capacity efficient roads is integral to support the movement of
goods to and from the Port. The Port is connected to the hinterland via National Highways NH-5, NH-
4& NH- 45. However, with the passage of time and the spread of urbanization, the roads are also getting
choked up. In order to improve the connectivity of the Port, the Kamarajar Port Limited has initiated
two projects, mainly, Proposed Southern Port Access Road (SPAR) and Proposed Northern Port Access
Road (NPAR).
155. The Committee is of the opinion that the development of infrastructure must be a joint
effort of the State Governments, the Ports and the Ministry of Shipping, including the Central
Government, as it is integral to the development and growth of the nation and integral to the
economic prosperity to the States concerned and the nation at large. In view of this, the Committee
applauds the efforts of the KPL authorities in bringing the various stakeholders to the table and
is an example that must be followed by other Major Ports in developing their hinterland connectivity.
IX. COCHIN PORT TRUST
156. Cochin Port is a major port on the Arabian Sea - Laccadive Sea - Indian Ocean sea-route in the
city of Kochi and is one of the largest ports in India. The Port lies on two islands in Kochi: Willingdon
Island and Vallarpadam, towards the Fort Kochi river mouth opening onto the Laccadive Sea. The
modern port was established in 1926 and has completed 91 years of active service. The International
Container Transshipment Terminal (ICTT), Vallapardam, is the largest container transshipment facility in
India. The Port is governed by the Cochin Port Trust (CPT), a government of India establishment.
157. The Kochi Port is one of a line of maritime-related facilities based in the port-city of Kochi. The
others are the Cochin Shipyard, the largest shipbuilding as well as maintenance facility in India; the SPM
(single point mooring) facility of the Kochi Refineries, an offshore crude carrier mooring facility; and
the Kochi Marina.
158. At Ernakulam Wharf, the Port has 5 general cargo berths and one dedicated berth for fertilizer
handling which is used by the Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore (FACT). At Mattacherry, the Port
has eight berths. Of these, six are general cargo berths, one is a Liquid berth and is used by the
Lakshadweep Administration.
159. Of the three-liquid terminal, the Cochin Oil Terminal is the main terminal which handles bulk of
crude oil at the Cochin Port Trust. It has a draft of 12.5m. The second being the North tanker Berth

32
and the South Tanker Berth have a draft of 9m. The LNG Terminal has a draft of 12.5 m draft and
another single point mooring facility which is used by the BPCL with a draft of 22.5m.
160. A draft of 38 ft is maintained in the Ernakulam channel along with berthing facilities, which enables
the Port to bring in larger vessels. In the Mattancherry channel a draft of 30 ft is maintained. The Port
provides round-the-clock pilotage to ships subject to certain restrictions on the size and draft.Cochin Port
handles Break and Dry Bulk Cargo (Steel Plates, Salt& Coal Etc.) conventionally which forms 1.64%
of the total volume of cargo.
(i) Port Performance
161. The Chairman of the Cochin Port Trust informed the Committee that the Port has taken a U-turn
since 2016-17, not only in terms of volume handled but also in terms of profit. In 2015-16 the volume
of cargo handled was 22.5 MMT, which rose to 25.07 MMT against the set target of 24.5 MMT.
Similarly, the volume of cargo handled was 29.38 MMT as against the target of 28.5 MMT. The Port
has set its target as 32 MMT and the Port expresses confidence in ability to handle a volume of 32 MMT.
162. The Committee was informed that as against the Average pre-berthing time of 10.31 Hrs. in
2017-18, the Port has been able to achieve an average of 7.61 hours in 2018. In terms of the Average
Turnaround time, the Port has been able to set an average of 1.46 days as against an average of
1.54 in 2017-18. The Port has also registered an Average Output per ship Berth of 23,3382 in 2018
tonnes as against 20,800 tonnes in 2017-18.
(ii) Modernization of Cargo Handling Mechanism
163. The ICTT is equipped with 6 quay cranes and 15 rubber tyred gantry. The cranes can handle 30
containers per hour which is at par with international standards. A truck enters the terminal and leaves
the terminal after completing all its operations within 27 minutes. This is at par again with international
standards. The terminal at Ernakulam is equipped with a mobile harbor crane which is capable of
handling a load of 40 tonnes and is a port - owned crane. The Port is also equipped with marine
unloading arms which is a fully mechanised facility along with quick release hooks.
164. At Petronet LNG , the Port is equipped with a state- of -the- art facility with a capacity of 5 MMT.
As far as cement establishments are concerned, primary operators have equipped the docks with hydraulic
suction facility as well as packaging facility. The mother client is situated in the north-west and the
cement reaches there by ships and it is handled mechanically, packaged and thereafter sold in Kerala.
165. The construction of multi user liquid terminal for handling LPG, other liquid cargo etc. with a
capacity of 4.10MMT including a barge berth at an anticipated cost of `749 crores including investment
by the PPP operator M/s IOCL.
166. Refurbi shment and capacity enhancement of coastal liquid terminal at a cost of `19.95 crores and
was completed in October, 2017. Another refurbishment in the South Tanker Berth at a cost of ` 29.22
crores is scheduled.
(iii) Digitisation of the Port
167. RFID has been fully implemented at Ernakulum Wharf and the ICTT. Upon entering the Port, the
driver need not get down from his truck. Everything is automated and the driver can complete all the

33
operations and leave the Port from the comfort of the driver seat. This has reduced the handling time
to 27 minutes. Installation of drive through scanners are underway at ICTT Vallarpadam and is scheduled
for completion in July 2018. It is estimated that thescanner can scan around 60 trucks within an hour
and trials are being conducted.
(iv) Connectivity
(a) Road
168. The Port is connected by National Highway 47 (544) and National highway 47- A (966B). the
construction of a flyoverin front of ICTT at a cost of `30 crores was competed in march, 2017.
Wellingdon Island is connected to National Highway -47 A(966B) through a 2- lane carriageway link of
length 5.9 km.
(b) Rail
169. The Ernakulam Wharf of the Port is well connected by rail. The route length of rail connectivity
of ICTTT project site at Vallarpadam is 8.86 km. National Highway connectivity to ICTT route length
is 17.20km. Construction of a rail over bridge, which forms a part of the rail connectivity to ICTT
replacing the temporary level crossing at a cost of `30 crores have been completed in April, 2018.
(v) Cruise Terminal
170. The Port is also equipped with a dedicated terminal at Mattancherry for cruise ships with the
capacity to handle 160 m Length Overall (LOA). The Port is equipped with 20 dedicated immigration
counters along with scanning facilities. The Port has a capacity of 2000 passengers at Samudrika,
Mattancherry facility. A New Passenger Terminal is to be constructed at Ernaulam Wharf at an estimated
cost of `25 crores, with the capacity for ships up to 420 m LOA. The New Terminal will be spread
over 2,285 square meters in terms of floor area with an estimated capacity of 3000-6000 passengers.
The terminal will be equipped with 30 immigration counters and also a set of scanners and buggies. The
terminal will be financed by the Ministry of Tourism with a grant of `25 crores.
171. The ICTT was described as a milestone in logistic infrastructure development. But what
followed in the years to come has proven to be problems replete with negative consequences. The
Committee feels that the terminal has not lived up to the perceived expectations which
subsequently ran aground since the projections were so full of loopholes that they have failed
to hold water. First and foremost was the inability of the terminal to accommodate large cargo
vessels due to chronic siltation. At present, very little business is taking place at the ICTT, with
the terminal functioning at 35% of its capacity. On the contrary, it has proved to be a drain on
Cochin Port's exchequer which is already cash strapped with huge debts, running to the tune of
over `````700 crore to be repaid.
171A. The Committee is pleased to note the steps taken by the Port in developing a passenger
cruise terminal. This is a neglected aspect of shipping in India and is a major source of revenue
in other nations. Cruise Tourism must be pursued with greater vigor and the Committee is
pleased to know that the Ministry of Tourism is cooperating with the Ministry of Shipping to
develop Cruise Terminals.

34
X. DEENDAYAL PORT TRUST (KANDLA PORT)
172. Deendayal Port is a seaport in the Kutch District of Gujarat state in western India, near the city
of Gandhidham. Located on the Gulf of Kutch, it is one of the Major Ports on the west coast. Deendayal
Port was constructed in the 1950s as the chief seaport to serve western India, after the partition of India.
173. Deendayal Port (DPT) is located some 256 nautical miles southeast of the Port of Karachi in
Pakistan and over 430 nautical miles north-northwest of the Port of Mumbai (Bombay). It is the largest
port of India by volume of cargo handled. Kandla Port Trust, India's busiest major port in recent years,
is gearing to add substantial cargo handling capacity with private sector participation. The west coast
port handled 72,225 million tonnes of cargo in 2008-09, over 11% more than the 64,920 million tonnes
handled in 2007-08. Much of this growth has come from handling of crude oil imports, mainly for Essar
Oil's Vadinar refinery in Gujarat. The Port is also taking measures to boost non-POL cargo. Kandla Port
was renamed as Deendayal Port under the Indian Port Act of 1908.
174. The Port has 14 nos. of Dry Cargo Berths, 6 nos. of Oil Jetties, 4 nos. of Moorings for mid- stream
handling of cargo and 1 nos. of Barge Jetty at Kandla.
175. The Port is equipped with 12 Electrical Level Luffing Cranes (ELL) with a capacity of 12-25 tonnes
capacity at berth no. 2,3,4 and 10. In addition, the Port has also procured 2 nos. Mobile Harbour Cranes
of 64 tonnes in 2011 for Cargo Handling. Vadinar is small coastal town located in Devbhoomi Dwarka
district of the state of Gujarat, India. The offshore oil terminal of the Deendayal Port Trust is located
in Vadinar and contributes in a large way to the total earnings of this major port.
Financial Performance
Particulars 2015-16 2016-17 RE 2017-18 Provisional Upto
Dec,17
Cargo Handled (MMT) 100.051 105.44 109.5 81.12
No. of Vessels Handled (in NO) 2513.00 2568 2809 2081
Operating Income (in Cr) 982.14 1383.15 1500.18 1075.56
Operating Exp. (in Cr) 621.58 658.79 692.28 472.3
Operating Surplus (in Cr) 360.56 724.36 807.90 603.26
Operating Ratio (in %) 63.29 47.63 46.15 43.91
176. The Chairman, DPT informed the Committee that of the traffic handled at the Port, 60 per cent
of the cargo is oil and 40 per cent constitutes general cargo. Recently, two berths have been given to
JM Bakshi Group through Public Private Partnership. A study was conducted recently which shows the
draft available is much better than before.
177. The total imports of the Port amounted to `812 crore and the export is 811 crores. This has
remained nearly stable. The exports have increased from 238 to 288.4 MMT as per last year. The imports
largely consist of coal and timber. Timber is special because this is a timber hub. There are 2400 saw
mills; the timber, both soft and hard is aggregated at the Port from where it is distributed all over the
country.

35
(i) Modernization of Cargo Handling Mechanism
178. As per the report of the Boston Consulting Group commissioned by the Ministry of Shipping, the
issue of higher rake turnaround time at Deendayal Port and measures to reduce the same were discussed
during various inter-ministerial meetings. The above initiative of reducing the fertilizer rake loading by
way of mechanization was aimed to achieve a targeted turn round time of 6 hrs. The installation of an
automated rake loading plant to reduce the rake turnaround time from 10-12 hours to 6 hours was
recommended. It was reported that this would reduce the cost of handling to `160/ton which is a
reduction of `45/ton. The mechanized bagging and rake loading facility at NG 34 of Deendayal port
includes 20 nos. of bagging machines and 20 nos. wagon loaders with a design capacity to handle 1.4
MMTPA fertilizer cargo. This project is pegged at an estimated cost of ` 122 crores which includes a
capital cost of `14 crores, O&M cost of 8 years amounting to ` 108 crores. The work order for the
same was issued to M/s Rishi Shipping Gandhidham in March 2017. All 20 units have been erected and
testing and trials are underway.
179. As per the Master Plan devised by AECOM (construction company), full scale mechanization for
handling fertilisers has been suggested in one berth to reduce the turn around time of ships, rake
turnround time, etc. Currently, the process of handling fertilizer and cargo at Kandla, involves multiple
movements and CFS for the unloading and delivery of cargo to the end users. The Port has undertaken
the setting up of fully mechanized handling facility exclusively for fertilizer cargo (Urea, MOP, DAP) at
the Deendayal Port. Under the proposed system, all cargo related activities from the unloading of bulk
fertilizer cargo from ships to loading them into bagged fertilizer onto the wagons will be mechanized.
180. The project is estimated at a total cost of ` 338.51 crores, to be met from internal resources, with
an estimated capacity of 4.5 MMTPA. The Chairman, DPT stated that the Ministry of Shipping has
already approved the Standing Finance Committee Proposal. Tender documents are under scrutiny and
the project is scheduled to be awarded during the 2018-19 Financial Year and completed by October
2020.
181. The project will feature 2 Mobile harbor cranes with mobile hoppers, a conveyer system up to the
storage shed, with a shed measuring 38,500 Sq. mts, 40 bagging units and wagon loaders including 2
rakes, which can be handled simultaneously on either side of the shed. These will ensure efficient
operation due to end to end mechanization. This will ensure minimal contamination of fertilizer cargo due
to dedicated mechanization and closed Pre-Engineered Building Shed. This will eliminate the need for
internal vehicular movement for transfer of cargo. This being automated will reduce the need for labour
at the docks. A Mechanized Dust Suppressor will also be in place to ensure dust- control at the Port.
182. In order to improve its overall efficiency, the port has procured 2 Nos. of Mobile Harbors Cranes
(MHC's). The flexibility of the MMHC's enable faster handling of cargo at non- crane berths. The
upgradation is pegged at an estimate cost of `71 crores (excluding IGST) and O& M costs of `20 crores
for 5 years. The cranes have an estimated capacity of 3.5 MMTPA. The cranes have been commissioned
in May, 2018 and are presently operational. These cranes have been deployed between berths no. 7 to
9 of the Deendayal Port.

36
(ii) Connectivity
(a) Road
183. The Port boasts of a fully developed network of roads in and around the port area to facilitate the
efficient movement of cargo. Cargo Jetty complex has four gates. Of the four gates, NH - 8A extends
right up to one of the gates and the remaining gates are also connected with the NH- 8A through four
lane roads. Furthermore, the Oil Jetty Complex is also directly connected with the NH- 8A by a 4- laned
road. Both the Oil jetty areas and the Cargo jetty area complex are connected with each other by a
4- laned road which bypasses the Gandhidham city. A 4 - lane road extends from Dry Khari Rohar Salt
Junction to cargo Berth no. 16 at Kandla. The NH- 114 extends right up to the Port's main gates.
(b) Rail
184. The Port is connected by broad gauge railway lines with Railways Sidings near the godowns to
facilitate easy access and transportation. The total distance of the railway network inside the cargo jetty
areas measures about 13kms. in total.
Financial Performance
Sl. No. Parameters 2016-17 2017-18
1. Traffic Handled (MMT) 105.44 110.9
2. Operating Income ( ` in crore) 1383.15 1475.35
3. Operating Expenses ( ` In crore) 658.79 677.99
4. Operating Surplus ( ` In crore) 724.36 797.36
5. Operating Margin (%) 52.37 24.05
6. Net Surplus ( ` in crore) 693.86 546.45
7. Net Margin (%) 44.14 31.47
8. Cost per Ton ( `) 62.48 61.58
185. The Chairman of the Deendayal Port deposed before the Committee that with regards to financial
performance, the traffic handled at the Port has been the highest till at 110.9 MMT as compared to 105
MMT in the previous year. The operating income has increased to `1,475 crore from ` 1,385 crore,
while the operating surplus has increased from ` 724 crore to ` 797 crore. In five years, the Port has
nearly doubled the profit and the operating income. The Net surplus shows lower than previous years
due to the contribution to the Pension Fund.
186. The road from Dry Khari Rohar Salt Junction to Cargo Berth no. 16 needs to be converted into
an 8- lane in order to reduce the congestion inside and outside the Port to ensure free access to cargo
jetty no. 1 to 16.
(iii) Problems and Bottlenecks
187. The Chairman of Deendayal Port informed the Committee of the issue ofunavailability of sufficient
number of rakes for the timely and efficient evacuation of cargo. He stated that since the Port was

37
situated in a creek, it was prone to heavy siltation. Maintenance dredging is required at regular intervals
throughout the year, which is a major hinderance to the optimum capitalization of the Port's facilities and
becomes a hinderance in the efficient utilisation of the economies of scale as ships with big drafts cannot
call on the Port, not to mention the burden on the Port's exchequer for the dredging requirements.
188. Being situated on the Gulf of Kutch, expansion projects of the Port face hurdles in term of licenses
and permissions. The Port has been delayed in its expansions due to issues with environmental clearance
for projects on un-used land area due to Coastal Regulatory Zone.
189. The Committee takes note of the hurdles faced by the Portand desires that the Port must
take up the issues of connectivity projects with the NHAI and the State Government in order
to ensure that projects are completed on time without delays.
190. The Port, being on a creek, will suffer from issues of siltation. The Committee observes that
this is an issue that the Port must deal with regularly in order to ensure the smooth functioning
of the Port.
191. The Committee takes note of the issues of Environmental Clearance Certificates with
regards to projects of the Port. The Committee feels that the developmental needs of the
Deendayal Port should not be ignored while considering Coastal Regulations. The Committee
recommends that the required concessions and permissions may be given to the Port as it is in
the larger economic interest of the nation and its people.
XI. NEW MANGALORE PORT TRUST
192. New Mangalore Port is a deep-water, all weather Port at Panambur, Mangalore in Karnataka State
in India which is the deepest inner- harbor on the west coast. It is the only major port of Karnataka
and is operated by the New Mangalore Port Trust (NMPT). It is to the north of confluence of Gurupura
(Phalguni) river to Arabian sea. It is 170 nautical miles (310 km.) south of Mormugao Port and 191
nautical miles (354 km.) north of Kochi Port. The Port serves the hinterland of Karnataka state and to
some extent the State of Kerala. The major commodities exported through the Port are iron ore concentrates
and pellets, iron ore fines, manganese, granite stones, coffee, cashew and containerized cargo. The major
imports of the Port are crude and petroleum products, LPG, wood pulp, timber logs, finished fertilizers,
liquid ammonia, phosphoric acid, other liquid chemicals, and containerized cargo.
193. The Chairman of the New Mangalore Port Trust informed the Committee that over the years, the
Port has grown from handling less than a lakh tonnes of traffic to 42.05 million tonnes handled during
the last financial year 2017-18. The major commodities imported through the Port are POL Crude for
MRPL (Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemical Limited), wooden logs, bentonite powder, Cement, coal,
fertilizer, edible oil, liquid chemicals, containerized cargo etc. and the major export cargo are Iron Ore
Pellets, granite stone, Maize, POL products, containerized cargo like coffee, cashew kernels, etc. The
Port also handles the cargo of mega Industries like MRPL-ONGC (Oil and Natural Gas Corporation),
KIOCL (Kudremukh Iron Ore Company), Elf Gas Limited, MCF( Mangalore Chemical & Fertilizers),
HPCL (Hindustan Petroleum), IOC (Indian Oil Corporation), UPCL (Udupi Power Corporation Ltd (UPCL)
etc. The Port is also the first port in India to introduce Electronic Delivery Order (e-DO) in the port
sector for bulk and liquid cargo.

38
194. The Chairman, New Mangalore Port Trust (NMPT) deposed before the Committee that the Port
in the previous year had an operating income of ` 504 Crores and a net surplus of ` 190 Crores. The
Port handled 42 million tonnes of cargo as against 40 million tonnes in the previous year. Further, the
Committee was informed that the Port had set a target of 44 million tonnes, which the Port is confident
it will achieve. With regard to container traffic, the Chairman of the Mangalore Port deposed before the
Committee that for the past 4 years, the Port has witnessed a year-on year growth of almost 23 per cent.
In the past four years container cargo have gone up from 28,000 TEUs to 1,15,000 TEUs. The projected
container traffic is 1.6 lakh TEUs for the upcoming fiscal year.
195. In reply to a pointed query on the cost of the solar plant at the Port, the Chairman NMPT replied
that the land-based 4MW solar plant cost ` 24 crores and the roof top with 1.2 MW is pegged at
` 6 crores, adding to approximately ` 30 crores, against which the Port saves about ` 4 crores per
annum in terms of power bills.
(i) Modernsiation of Cargo Handling Mechanism
196. The New Mangalore Port, in its endeavor to meet international standards and increase cost
effectiveness, plans to develop its infrastructure in a phased manner by giving importance to logistics.
In order to provide economies of scales to the user, the Port has to look forward for the cost-effective
developments. The main objective of the logistics is to ensure that customers should have a competitive
advantage through superior logistic services, live up to their expectations and service levels through
dedicated professionals with knowledge, experience and effective communication skills.
197. The present capacity of the Port stands at 68.90 MTPA. The commissioning of mechanisation of
Berth. No.18 which is now under construction, will add another 5 Million tonnes. The Chairman of the
New Mangalore Port trust (NMPT) informed the Committee that a dedicated Coal Berth (Berth No. 15)
with a modern state-of-the-art unloading facility, with conveyors, stacker cum reclaimers, wagon loading
system etc. was established under Captive Basis on Build, Own, Operate and Transfer Basis on PPP
Mode. The Project was commissioned and commercial operations started during the year 2012. The
Committee was informed that the Port had taken up modernization and implementation of infrastructure
projects and cargo handling equipments on the PPP mode.
198. The Chairman of the NMPT apprised the Committee that the Port is also taking up various projects
towards improving port facilities, like increasing the covered storage area for general cargo and liquid
bulk, storage area for containers, outsourcing of equipment's, flotillas, etc. in order to attract more cargo
to the Port. Presently, it has 15 fully operational berths of which 9 are general cargo berths, 5 oil berths,
1 coal berth (fully mechanized) and one SPM. All the oil berths are provided with mechanical loading/
unloading arms. Berth No. 15 (Coal berth) is equipped with unloading arms. In addition to the above,
Berth Nos. 4&5 are equipped with unloading arms for unloading liquid ammonia and bulk cement
respectively. Berth No.8 (KIOCL) berth is also provided with loading arms for handling iron ore.
199. The status of completion of infrastructure Modernisation Projects undertaken by the NPMT is
stated in the table below:
Infrastructure Modernisation Project Status
1. Construction of State-of-the art V essel Traffic Management System Completed.
(VTMS) to ensure safe navigation facilities for the vessels calling
on the Port.

39
Infrastructure Modernisation Project Status
2. Construction of Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) for recycling and Nearing Completion
re-use of the waste water for optimum utilization of the sewage
generated by the Port.
3. Mechanisation of bulk cargo handling facilities at the newly Work in Progress
constructed berth (No.18) with environment safety measures for
handling coal.
4. Green Port Initiatives like planting tree saplings and maintains 33% of Work in Progress
the port area as green belt. As part of generating non-conventional
energy, 5.19 MW solar power is commissioned and 95% of the Port's
power requirement is met from it.
5. Construction of Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) for recycling and Work in Progress
re-use of the waste water for optimum utilization of the sewage
generated by the Port.
6. In order to provide adequate storage facility both covered and open, Nearing Completion
the Port has recently added 4 covered sheds inside the Port and
added additional container stack yards. In addition to the above,
30 acres of the land inside the Port is being converted as stackyard
for storage of Ro-Ro cargo.
200. The Committee takes note of the efforts taken by the NMPT to improve and modernize the
infrastructure of the Port in order to increase the efficiency of the Port. The Committee
understands that the infrastructure projects of the Port such as creating additional storage area
got affected due to limited land availability within the specified area of the Port.
201. The Committee understands that the Port has a draft restriction which becomes a major
cause of concern with regard to handling new generation vessels. Deep drafts with a minimum
depth of 14 meters is the prescribed global standards. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the NMPT, along with the Ministry of Shipping, must work together to ensure that the Draft
level is maintained, if not improved upon, in order to ensure that the Port maintains its viability.
202. The Committee was also informed that the limited water front is an impediment to the
future expansion of the Port. The Port, with a total land area of 2,290 acres, presently has a
capacity of 15 berths and one SPM is already saturated. This greatly limits the ability of the Port
to expand in terms of infrastructure. The Committee recommends that studies must be conducted
to find a solution to the logistical and infrastructural bottlenecks that the Mangalore Portfaces,
to ensure that the future growth and expansion of the Port is done in a scientific and systematic
manner.
(ii) Road Connectivity
203. The Chairman, NMPT informed that great strides were taken in the development of road connectivity
to and from the Mangalore Port. The Port is connected with 3 National Highways.

40
(iii) Cruise Terminal
204. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Ministry of Shipping has taken serious steps to
promote Cruise Tourism in India. At New Mangalore Port, a full- fledged cruise terminal is functioning
with facilities for customs, immigration, port health, banking services, facilitation centers, duty-free
shops and boutiques etc. Foreseeing the growth in cruise traffic, the Port has constructed a modern
cruise passenger lounge neat the berth with an area of 2150 sq. meters and is operational with facilities
like money exchange, locker room, medical officer room duty free shops, cafeteria, conference hall etc.
The Ministry of Shipping has provided for 10 counters in the Immigration halls of five ports to facilitate
e-visa.
205. The Committee notes the steps taken by the Port to augment the facilities in terms of
Cruise tourism. Mangalore, with its beautiful coast and pristine beaches, is ideal as a cruise
destination. The Committee recommends that more must be done to fulfill the potential of the
Port as a major cruise terminal and a gateway to Peninsular India. In terms of infrastructure,
draft levels must be maintained to facilitate the participation of major cruise liners. The Committee
further recommends that the Ministry of Shipping and the NMPT should work together with the
Ministry of Tourism, tour operators and the respective State Tourism Boards to promote New
Mangalore Port as a cruise terminal. Simultaneously, the Ministry of Shipping and NMPT must
ensure that the facilities at the passenger terminals must be at par with global standards.
206. Nestled amidst the Western Ghats in peninsular India, construction of roads and railway
lines to connect the Port, is fraught with geographical obstacles. As a result, this has reduced
the popularity of the Port due to the relatively high transportation costs and time taken. The
Committee recommends that given the availability of advanced technology, new technology and
research must be harnessed to devise a way to circumvent the geographical bottlenecks that ail
the Port.
207. While most Major Ports in India are suffering from congestion, the New Mangalore Port is
struggling to achieve even 50 per cent of its capacity utilization. The only lifeline between the
New Mangalore Port and its hinterland is the rail line provided by the Hassan- Mangalore Rail
Development Company Ltd. (HMRDC). Rail cargo has remained consistent at 7 lakh MT in the
last two financial years, indicating a case of stagnancy. The Committee recommends that the
Government may consider improving rail connectivity with NMPT.
208. Karnataka has 8 minor ports- Kundapura, Honnavar, Belekeri, Tadri, Bhatkal, Hangarakatta,
Malpe and Padubidri. These are located on the State's 300 km coastline. Hence, coastal shipping
would and should be an ideal alternative to the lack of proper road connectivity. However, the
shared hinterland implies competition for the same cargo. Also, this mode of transportation
continues to remain unexplored. Coast-to-coast mode of transportation can change the fortunes
of Indianmarine logistics. It is a pity that its potential remains untapped. The example of China
may be studied, where the Chinese Government is using its coastline to connect one city to
another. This mode of transportation has proven to be cost effective and can result in faster
movement of consignments.

41
XII. MORMUGAO PORT TRUST
209. One of India's natural harbours, the Mormugao port is a premier hub of maritime trade in Goa. With
its location at the mouth of the Zuari River, the Mormugao port is a crucial component in the flourishing
export industry of the State. The origin of the Port dates back to the Portuguese era and is a result of
the Treaty of Lisbon in 1878 between the British and the Portuguese Governments.
210. Ever since it was accorded the status of a Major Port in 1963, the Mormugao Port has contributed
immensely to the growth of maritime trade in India. It is the leading iron ore exporting port of India with
an annual throughput of around 24.50 million tonnes of iron ore traffic. The Mormugao Port accounts
for about 32% of India's iron ore export.
211. The Chairman of the Mormugao Port Trust informed the Committee that at present, the Mormugao
Port has 9 berths and 6 mooring dolphins at its disposal for handling different commodities. Till
2010-11, iron ore was the major commodity handled with about 80% share. However, due to a ban
imposed on extraction, transportation and export of iron ore by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the year
2012, the Port switched to other general commodities.
212. The Port has acquired two Harbour Mobile cranes, one owned and the other on a hire/lease basis
with a capacity of 100 tonnes and above. The Port also has setup two additional rail lines, Line no. 7
and 8, with cargo landing space for EXIM cargo. A dedicated berth is earmarked for cruise berth facility
with a LOA of 294 meters and berthing draft capacity of 8.5mts. The Chairman stated that the Mormugao
Port has two berths leased on 30 years concession, on a Public Private Partnership basis for the coal
handing operated by M/s. South West Port Limited (6A) and M/s. Adani Murmugao Port Terminal Private
Limited (Berth No.7).In addition, one General Cargo Berth (5A) is also operated by M/s South West Port
Ltd. on PPP basis. The handling of coal at these berths is carried out mechanically with the help of quay
cranes, dust free hoppers, closed conveyors, stackers, reclaimers and silos. The coal from the ship is
unloaded by the quay cranes and loaded in the hoppers, the coal is further transferred from the hoppers
to stackyards by closed conveyors. The stacks are covered temporarily till they are further transported
to the destination by rail or road. The online wagon handling system is in place. The loading of the cargo
is carried out by reclaimers connected to the closed conveyors and further connected to silos for loading
into the wagons. The truck loading is also done for small quantities which are to be transported within
the State. Mormugao Port railway yard is equipped with efficient sidings supporting the transportation
of cargo to the hinterland destinations and is provided with Distributed Electronic Interchange (DEI)
supported signaling system.
213. The Committee was informed that the whole operation of loading/unloading the coal is supported
by the efficient dust suppression system right from the hopper till the stackyards. The roads in the
vicinity are swept and watered regularly to minimize the dust emission. Wind shields are also provided
to reduce the dust emission from the stackyards. The loading of wagon at berth No.6 operated by
M/s. SWPL & berth 7 operated by M/s Adani is done through SILOs having capacity of 4000 MTH each.
(i) Performance
214. The Committee understood that the suspension of iron ore mining in Goa has resulted in a loss of
almost 20 million in terms of cargo throughput and consequently the coal imports have also been

42
drastically reduced (4.8+4.8MTPA = 9.6 Metric Tonnes Per Annum) due to restrictions imposed by Goa
State Pollution Control Board on the quantity of coal that can be handled. The Chairman of the Mormugao
Port Trust informed the Committee that the financials and performance of the Port have suffered due
to the fact that iron ore leases have been cancelled in Goa by the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide its
judgment dated February 7th, 2018.
The financial and traffic figures for the Mormugao Port are as under:
Particulars FY 14-15 FY 15-16 FY 16-17 FY 17-18 FY 18-19
(Projected)
Traffic (million tonnes) 14.71 20.78 33.18 26.90 18.00
Operating Income ( ` Cr) 286.75 342.85 443.59 425.67 391.47
Operating Expenses ( ` Cr) 246.95 239.23 267.98 273.84 295.48
Operating Surplus ( ` Cr) 39.80 103.62 175.61 151.83 95.99
Operating margin (%) 13.88 30.22 39.59 35.67 24.52
Net surplus before tax ( ` Cr) -33.73 5.69 59.12 2.21 -32.72
215. The Committee notes the efforts of the MPT in increasing the efficiency of the Port, given
the constraints imposed on the Port. The Committee understands the need for development of
infrastructure of the port. The Committee was informed by various stakeholders of the shipping
industry in Goa that there is an urgent need for improvement in the rail and road connectivity
in MPT in order to ensure faster evacuation of cargo, better connectivity to the hinterland and
avoid the movement of vehicles carrying cargo through congested city roads. They emphasized
the need to make the amenities given to cruise tourists at par with global standards. They
stressed on the need for doubling of railway line in Mormugao Port. The stakeholders also
highlighted the need to compensate the Port for any monetary loss that the Port might incur for
the grant of any concessional tariff for the promotion of cruise tourism. They impressed upon
the need to ensure that the facilities provided with regards to Cruise Tourism are made world
class so as to imprint a good image of Goa in the minds of the tourists.
216. Given the popularity of Goa as an international tourist destination, the Committee
recommends that the MPT should realign its focus at developing itself as a Passenger Port,
catering to Cruise Ships. Tours and Packages for the same must be worked out with the Ministry
of Tourism and the Ministry of Shipping. Necessary infrastructural requirements must be developed
in order to harness the full potential of the Port as a Passenger Port. This will ensure that the
Port is maintained as a profitable and viable venture whilst ensuring the preservation of the
environment in keeping with the orders of the Supreme Court.
MAJOR ISSUES AILING CARGO MANAGEMENT IN THE MAJOR PORTS
(i) Capacity Utilization
217. Given the sluggish growth in term of cargo handled at Major Ports, and addition of capacity in recent
years, the capacity utilisation at India's Major Ports have fallen steadily from 85% in 2010-11 to 67% in

43
2014-15 and 56% in 2016-17. Capacity Utilisation at India's Major Ports was in excess of 90% between
the years 2004-05 to 2009-10 leading to port congestion. The capacity utilisation measured as the ratio of
cargo handled to designed capacity for the major port shows great variation during 2016-17. As stakeholders
seek alternative cargo transportation gateways, a spill-over of cargo from Major Ports to medium-sized,
non-Major Ports is taking place. These non-Major Ports tend to be better placed in terms of infrastructure
and capacity. This has resulted in non-Major Ports in Gujarat, mainly Mundra and Pipavav to absorb excess
cargo traffic. The capacity of Major Ports in 2016-17 was 1066 MTPA.
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
Cargo Capacity CU Cargo Capacity CU Cargo Capacity CU
Kolkata 46.29 70.85 65.34 50.29 86.99 57.81 50.31 96.10 52.30
Paradip 71.01 119.80 59.27 76.39 126.94 60.18 89.0 143.44 62.0
Visakhapatnam 58.00 96.76 59.94 57.03 107.75 52.93 61.00 1 10.75 55.1
Kamarajar 30.25 37.00 81.76 32.21 45.00 71.58 30.00 57.00 52.7
Chennai 52.54 86.04 61.06 50.06 93.44 53.57 50.2 93.44 53.70
Chidambaranar 32.41 44.55 72.75 36.85 59.26 62.18 38.5 65.90 58.4
Cochin 21.60 49.66 43.50 22.10 49.66 44.50 25.0 56.37 44.20
New Mangalore 36.57 77.77 47.02 35.58 77.77 45.75 39.90 87.63 45.60
Mormugao 14.714 43.76 33.62 20.77 48.79 42.57 33.20 50.04 66.3
Mumbai 61.66 44.53 138.47 61.11 49.33 123.88 63.00 62.33 96.50
JNPT 63.80 79.37 80.38 64.03 89.37 71.65 62.2 89.37 69.60
Kandla 92.50 121.43 76.18 100.05 131.06 76.34 105.40 150.26 64.48
Overall 581.34 871.52 66.70 606.47 965.36 62.82 647.80 1065.83 60.80
(ii) Container Traffic
218. Indian ports handled more than 10 million (mn) TEU container traffic in 2016-17. Container traffic
has grown at 8 percent over the past decade as the level of containerization has increases from 60
percent in 2004-05 to 67 percent in 2013-14. Going forward, it is estimated that container traffic will
grow at the rate of 6.5 percent under "business as usual" and reached 21.5 mn TEU by 2025. Including
the impact of programs like "Make in India" and development of industrial corridors, the estimated
container traffic has an approximate growth potential of 24-25 mn TEU. In addition, the Committee was
informed that the final report for Sagarmala V ol I (FRS I) has identified two sources of additional growth,
the first being around 3-5 mn TEU growth from improved competitiveness of industries in the hinterland
due to lower cost and reduced export time. The second, around 4-6 mn TEU growth due to setting up
port-based, export-oriented manufacturing clusters for industries like electronics, apparel, footwear,
automotive and auto-parts.

44
Particulars 2018-2019 2018-2019 2018-2019 2018-2019
(Revised) (RFD) (B.E.) Actuals
Traffic (Million Tons) ( ` in crores) 18.00 19.00 37.50 26.90
Operating Income ( ` in crores) 391.47 398.00 545.33 425.67
Operating Expenditure ( ` in crores) 295.48 295.00 321.45 273.83
Operating Surplus ( ` in crores) 95.99 103.00 223.88 151.84
F&M Income ( ` in crores) 20.00 20.00 10.30 26.61
F&M Expenditure ( ` in crores) 148.71 165.00 165.71 176.24
Net Surplus/Deficit ( ` in crores) 32.72 42.00 68.47 2.21
Operating Cost per Tonne ( ` in crores) 164.16 155 85.72 101.80
219. The Committee is of the opinion that existing and new ports should align their capacity
expansion in line with the projected increase in coastal shipping volumes. Provision of a dedicated
berth for coastal shipping should also be looked into in order to promote coastal shipping.
(iii) Draft Limitations
220. Indian ports are on an average quite small-most lack the necessary draft to handle cape sized
vessels. The relatively low draft level at Indian ports does not meet International standards. The average
size of container vessels calling at Indian ports is around 5,000 TEUs where China maintains draft levels
of 12,000 TEUs. At JNPT- India's biggest container port- the draft is 14 metres, while a cape sized vessel
requires upwards 16 metres. Around 25 percent of India's container cargo is transshipped through
international transshipment ports. The inadequate draft at Indian Ports results in elevated costs and
increased transport time as cargo, both inbound and outbound is routed through transshipment ports like
Columbo and Singapore. As vessels keep getting bigger, Indian ports need deeper drafts which call for
increased investments on capital dredging.
221. Dredging capacity and adequate turning circles are increasingly important to port access. Vessel
draft is only one aspect of the technological changes to ships that affect port infrastructure requirements.
Additional aspects are ship length and breadth. The former determines the quay length and berth layout
required to accommodate ships. The latter is a key indicator for superstructure requirements in ports,
especially the reach of ship-to-shore- cranes. Indian ports need to adjust the available draft level to 15m
and above against the currently prescribed minimum draft level of 14m upto 17m.
222. The Committee was informed that a minimum draft availability of 14 meters in Major Ports was
targeted for achievement by the end of the 12th plan period. Most Major Ports already have a minimum
draft of 14 meters and the remaining Major Ports have plans to achieve this level. In view of the draft
limitations, at present, Visakhapatnam Port can handle all types of vessels/ships with a draft level of up
to 18.1 meters. Chennai Port is handling tankers which require a draft of 17 meters during high waters
at Bharathi Dock and Kandla Port has the capacity to handle ships that require 17 meters of draft at Tuna
Tekra Terminal and at Vadinar. The table showing existing and proposed draft availability of vessels is
attached at ANNEXURE II.

45
223. The Committee has observed that the relatively low draft at Indian ports do not measure
upto internationally set standards. Presently, vessels greater than 11,000 TEU are in service. The
movement towards larger ships is driven by economies of scale. It follows that in case of
containership for 1,000 TEU capacities, the average draft is 8.3 metres, which increases to 15.5
metres for ships above 11,000 TEU capacities. Container vessels with a capacity of 4,000 TEU
requires a minimum draft of 12.5 metres.
224. The Committee feels that there is a need to maximize the utilization of these vessels, which
will in turn lead to reduction in the number of port calls on major routes and push for the
development of global mega ports served by fully integrated global network. Most Major Ports
in India have minimum draft under 12m, except for a few of the younger ports which have draft
of more than 14m. Insufficient draft at Indian Ports leads to increased costs and time taken as
cargo originating from and those that are bound for India gets routed through transshipment
ports like Colombo and Singapore. The Committee feels that as vessels keep getting bigger,
Indian ports need deeper drafts, which call for increased and greater investments in capital
dredging.
225. The Committee recommends that new terminals at Tuticorin, Ennore etc. must be developed
with a renewed zeal and vigour in a careful and strategic manner, so that they will act as active
competitors to operational container ports in Sri Lanka.
(iv) Role of Tariff Regulations at India's Major Ports
226. The Committee was informed that during its existence, TAMP had developed five sets of guidelines
(1998, 2005, 2008, 2013 and 2015). The first guideline was based on fixing Scales of Rates during the
period 1998-2005, under which a normative cost, plus assured rateassured rate of Return on Equity
(RoE) of 20% was permitted. Under the guidelines of 2005, applicable for a five-year period, the assured
rate of return was based on a return on capital employed (RoCE) of 16% (pre-tax, current). For projects
bid before July 2003, royalty quoted by the next highest bidder was allowed as a pass-through cost, with
the balance to be borne by the operator from the operating surplus. Also, efficiency gains are mopped
up for 50% in the subsequent review period (after three years) under the 2005 guidelines. This in one
way does not reward (but rather penalizes) operational efficiency. As tariff is based on the estimated
number of volumes of cargo handled, measures that would help the terminal increase its throughput
could result in lowering of the tariffs during the next revision. A tariff based on the estimated number
of TEUs/cargo handled which increase over time could result in lowering of the tariffs in the next
revision. There are multiple guidelines in operation which are applicable to different terminals/ports.
Depending on their date of commercial operation which results in terminals in a given major port being
subject to different tariff rules giving different tariffs e.g., container terminals at the JNPT.
227. The Committee feels that the Port sector in India is facing certain tariff- related uncertainties
due to multiplicity of regimes. The non-Major Ports do not come under any tariff jurisdiction and
price their services based on market and competition. But the major ones (including private
terminals therein) fall under the jurisdiction of a regulator viz., Tariff Authority for Major Ports
(TAMP). This anomaly and the lack of a level playing field have long been a debated issue.

46
228. The Committee notes that the objective of tariff regulation is to limit monopoly profits through
regulation of price and rate of return. However, in the current Indian situation, where the key challenge
is to increase port capacity, this may not be the right approach. The primary objective of regulation is
development of new port and terminal infrastructure through greater public-private participation with
optimal risk sharing and to ensure that terminal operators meet minimum performance standards through
provisions in the concession agreements. Not only is the notion of tariff regulation by a central authority
unsuitable for development of the Port sector, but the methodology followed for tariff setting also needs
to be re-examined.
229. In view of the considerable loss of business opportunities for the Major Ports due to the
provision of certain tariff related uncertainties as ascertained by TAMP, the Committee
recommends that the anomalies in the TAMP rules must be made reasonable in order to make
it lucrative for ships to call on Major Ports against private ports. The Committee further
recommends that the role of the TAMP must be redefined and that a strategic and market
oriented system of tariff must be set in place.
(v) Efficiency of the Port Sector Operations
230. It has been noted that Indian ports are short on many performance parameters against international
ports. Benchmarking Indian ports against Chinese and US ports shows that India lags behind significantly
in port infrastructure. Seven of the top 10 ports (cargo & container) in the world today (by throughput)
are Chinese, while no Indian ports figure in the top 20 (ANNEXURE IV). Most Indian ports don't have
the draft to handle cape sized vessels. The average size of a container vessel calling at Indian ports is
around 5,000 TEUs while for China it is around 12,000. At JNPT—India's biggest container port—draft
by volume is 14 m while a cape size vessel requires upwards of 18 m. Around 25 per cent of India's
container cargo is transshipped through international transshipment ports due to the lack of infrastructure
to handle larger vessels at Indian ports. Average turnaround time at Indian ports is much higher- 4.5 days
as compared to just one day in China.
231. The Committee feels that low productivity and high vessel turnaround time at Indian ports
are due to: (i) Low level of mechanisation and insufficient draft; (ii) Skewed handling capacity
for different types of cargo; and (iii) Infrastructure constraints in hinterland connectivity. It has
been observed that lagging behind other countries on performance parameters pushes up the cost
of trade and renders Indian ports less competitive. Non-Major Ports have fared well, ensuring
quicker turnaround by investing in the infrastructure to handle larger vessels. Considering the
strategic location of India's Major Ports and their importance to trade, there is an opportunity
to improve their performance to meet global benchmarks. Most of the Major Ports have high
Turnaround Times even while the utilisation level is low and only a few have the ability to handle
bigger cape-size vessels. The shipping industry is moving towards cape-size vessels. So, it is
important that India develops cape handling capability at its key ports to ensure economies of
scale for the trade.
(a) Vessel turn-round time
232. Primary measures of port performance are the average turnaround time per ship, and the tonnage
handled per ship-day in port. This is the time needed for loading, discharging and servicing a vessel from

47
berthing until its departure. The main parties involved in vessel turnaround are the Port authority and the
terminal operators. Seamless communication between these parties and the ship operators is essential for
a quick vessel turnaround process. Important drivers of vessel turnaround time are the amount of traffic
to be loaded or unloaded, distance from anchor point to berth, efficiency of port authority in pilotage/
tugging and the efficiency of terminal operator in handling the vessel.
233. The ship turnaround reflects the rate at which cargo is handled and the duration that cargo stays
in port prior to shipment or post discharge. It is calculated from the time of the ship's arrival to the time
of its departure. Traditionally expressed in days, it is now common to find turnaround time in hours
across best performing ports. The average turnaround time per ship is determined by dividing the total
hours by the total number of ships calling at the Port. In its basic form, ship turnaround time does not
mean much, as the length of stay is influenced by a number of factors: the volume of cargo, the facilities
made available, and the composition of the cargo itself. Thus, it becomes necessary for the Port to
further break down the basic ship turnaround time according to type of ship: tankers, bulk carriers,
container vessels, and general cargo vessels. These may be subdivided further into domestic trade,
regional trade, and oceangoing vessels. In compiling data to determine ship turnaround time or the
tonnage handled per ship-day (or ship-hour), a port would normally split total time in port into "time at
berth" and "time off the berth." Within each of these and for each service activity, the amount of delay
(idle time) would be recorded as well as the reasons for the delay. In particular, the ratio between waiting
time for berth and the time spent at berth, known as the waiting rate, is a significant indicator of possible
congestion status. Indian ports have huge potential to reduce the average time a vessel spends in the Port
as compared to international best practices. To a certain extent, scale plays a role here. But even ports
of the scale of JNPT and Chennai have 50 to 100 per cent higher turnaround times than international
best practice ports like Singapore and Rotterdam.
234. The Committee feels that the seaports are the interface between two modes of transport
viz., land and sea and recommends that its efficiency is directly related to the connectivity
covering both the modes of transport and as such, Container terminals should provide rapid
transit facilities for containerized cargo (similar to an Airport where passengers arrive and
depart with ready luggage / cargo). This would enable the Ports to plan and utilize land optimally
for the benefit of the ships and not for storage for which CFS / ICD are planned.
(b) Average turnaround time
235. The Committee observes that this parameter has improved significantly during the past one and half
decades for all the Major Ports. Average TRT for all Major Ports improved from 8.10 days in 1990-91
to 3.63 days in 2005-06. Thereafter the TRT has increased steadily to 5.29 days in 2010-11 after which
it declined to 3.43 during 2016-17. However, the TRT varied in the range between 1.99 days at Cochin
Port to 4.99 at Paradip Port during 2016-17. Amongst the 12 Major Ports, improvement in TRT during
2016-17 in comparison to the year 2015-16 is discernible for most of the Major Ports except Kolkota,
Haldia DC, Paradip, Chidambarar and Marmugao. Average TRT (in days) reported during 2016-17:
Kolkata (4.7), Haldia (3.4), Paradip (5.0), Chidambarar (4.4), Visakhapatnam (3.8), Ennore-Kamarajar
(2.7), Chennai (2.5), Cochin (2.0), New Manglore (2.4), Marmugao (4.5), JNPT (2.0), Mumbai (3.3)

48
and Kandla (4.4). Average Turn Round Time at Major Ports for select years since 2010-11 to 2016-17
is presented in the figure given below:
Major Ports Average Turn Round Time
(c) Average Pre Berthing Detention Time
236. The average overall pre-berthing detention time for all Major Ports fell continuously from 2.3 days
in 2010-11 to 1.5 days in 2013-14 and edged upto 1.6 days in 2014-15 and then resumed its downward
course to 1.3 days in 2015-16. The Average PBDT on port account has seen a steady decline from 0.50
day in 2012-13 to 0.16 day in 2015-16, but edged up to 0.24 in 2016-17. However, overall improvement
in PBD (on port account) is marked with greatly reduced variation across Major Ports during 2016-17.
This is now nil at Kamarajar& Chennai, 0.9 day at Haldia, 0.6 day at Paradip and around 0.4 days at
JNPT and Mormugao. The trajectory of weighted average of pre berthing detention time at Major Ports-
total and on port since 2010-11 is shown in the figure given below:
(Pre-Berthing Detention - The time for which a ship waits before getting entry into berth)
(d) Average Output per Ship Berth-day
237. The Committee is pleased to note that during the last 25 year this indicator has been a tremendous
improvement. Average Output per Ship-berth day has increased to more than four times from 3,372


49
tonnes in 1990-91 to 14,576 tonnes in 2016-17. However, the average output per ship berth day during
2016-17 is marked by substantial variation across Major Ports ranging from a high 23,727 tonnes in case
of Paradip Port to a low of 4,200 tonnes at Kolkata Dock System.
237A. This variation reflects the type of cargo being handled, level of mechanization and labour practices.
Amongst the 12 Major Ports, improvement in average output per ship berth-day during 2016-17 over
2015-16 was posted in all the ports, except Kamarajar, Mormugao and Haldia. The average output per
ship-berth-day for the selected years between 2010-11 to 2016-17 is presented in the figure given below:
(vi) Automation/Digitisation of Port Management
238. The Committee is of the opinion that Ports are required to provide a wide range of services, from
the movement of ships in the port to the movement of cargoes to and from ships, the onward movement
by various modes of transport and the compliance with custom and Phyto-sanitary procedures. Ports
must be able to efficiently allocate berths, terminals and jetties, monitor, track and trace cargo movement/
containers. There is need to explore the use of information technology for meeting the challenges facing
India's port sector. These include, amongst others, the fully integrated use of Port Community Systems
(PCS) with all stakeholders, both for Major Ports and for Non-Major Ports; Vessel Traffic Management
Systems (VTMS) for all ports handling import and export cargoes, advanced security systems in the
Ports with surveillance and Closed-Circuit Television (CCTV), Radio Frequency Identification Data
(RFID) and Optical Character Reading (OCR).
239. The Committee understands that Port Community Systems (PCS) integrate the electronic flow of
information between all the stakeholders and has inherent major advantages, such as saving time and
money, improving the speed of services and offering gains in tracking of shipments and service visibility.
The development of the IT Strategy and Programme Management by JNPT have set examples that all
Indian ports should follow to upgrade their services to meet upcoming technological changes. Shipping
efficiency can be enhanced through the use of technologies that track vessels and manage traffic flow
and by improving systems for collecting and disseminating real-time data on tides, currents and other
environmental conditions. European ports have invested heavily in these shore-based surveillance and
communications systems. But Indian investments have fallen short in this aspect.
240. The Committee notes that Commercial Operation of Logistics Data Bank (LDB) Project has been
operationalized at JNPT since July, 2016 on a pilot basis. The logistics Data Bank Service would bring


50
efficiency in the current Logistics and Supply Chain environment through use of information technology
that would be helpful for tracking and viewing the movement of containers across the Port. This will
provide visibility and transparency in EXIM containers movement and will help in reducing overall lead
time of the container movement across the western corridor and lower the transaction cost incurred by
the shippers and consignees as a result of predictability and optimization achieved through Logistics Data
Bank (LDB) services Each container is tagged with RFID tag at JNPT and the same can be tracked
through different RFID readers installed at different locations. This will provide visibility and transparency
in EXIM container movement. This would also help in reducing overall lead time of the container
movement across the western corridor and lower the transaction cost incurred by the shippers and
consignees as a result of predictability and optimization achieved through Logistics Data Bank (LDB)
services.
241. The Committee feels that traffic congestion at port gates is another critical problem as it
presently has little or no automation. The entry and exit of vehicles and drivers through the
gates of container terminal should be automated. In this regard, the Committee recommends
that Optical Character Recognition (OCR) system can be installed at the terminal gates and
driver's biometric identity and their authentication documents could be stored in a smart card
which he can flash at the counter to gain entry. Furthermore, it would also be useful to implement
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) solutions which are driven by an integrated suite of software
that supports the basic internal business process of any organisation. More importantly, a Port
Community System (PCS), in terms of a single technology-based platform, which will bring
together all stakeholders and shares information is essential. An 'e-custom' solution could also
be developed later. While implementation of PCS has been already initiated, its rollout has not
been very successful. Thus, before embarking on such plans, focus should be on building the
foundation and developing stakeholder capabilities.
242. The Committee is pleased to note the progress of the Logistics Data Bank project, to bring
efficiency in the current Logistics and supply chain environment through the use of information technology
that will enable tracking and viewing the movement of containers across the Port to the ICD and to the
end users. The Committee applauds the cooperative partnership between the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial
Corridor Development Corporation (DMICDC) and NEC Corporation, Japan, jointly working on the
project namely, DMICDC, which will provide RFID tag on each container and the same will be tracked
through different RFID readers installed at different locations. The logistic data bank service will provide
the visibility and transparency of the EXIM container movement starting from the Port and covering the
entire movement through rail or road till the ICDs and CFSs. This project will help in reducing overall
lead time of the container movement across the western corridor and lower the transaction cost incurred
by the shippers and consignees as a result of predictability and optimization achieved through Logistics
Data Bank (LDB) services. Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) has entered into an agreement with
DMICDC logistics Data Service Ltd. The Logistic Data Bank project will cover all the four-existing
terminal at Jawaharlal Nehru Port namely Jawaharlal Nehru Port Container Terminal (JNPCT), Nhava
Sheva International Container Terminal (NSICT), Nhava Sheva (India) Gateway Terminal (NSIGT) and
Gateway Terminals India Pvt. Ltd (GTIPL) and any other new terminal that will come up at Jawaharlal
Nehru Port. All Major Ports have undertaken the process of completion of RFID system. Implementation

51
of RFID system will eliminate manual checking of documents at port gate and will facilitate real time
tracking of movement of vehicles, personnel and materials. This would reduce congestion and also cost
of operations at Ports. JNPT, Cochin, Ennore and Mormugao ports have already made the system
operational.
(vii) Emerging Constellation of Container Terminals  In South India
243. The Committee was informed of the proposal to establish a Container Transshipment Port at
Colachel in Tamil Nadu. Vizhinjam near Thiruvananthapuram (16 Kms away from Thiruvananthapuram)
is another container transshipment port under construction located at about 105 nautical miles south of
V allarpadam Container Transshipment Terminal. Colachel will be the third container transshipment terminal
to come up about 27 nautical miles south from Vizhinjam. In other words, all the three container
transshipment terminals will come up within a radius of about 130 nautical miles from Vallarpadam (Jose
Paul). The proposed Vizhinjam port (owned by State Government of Kerela) is just 10 nautical miles from
the International Shipping Lane. The Vizhinjam port is endowed with a natural seawater depth of 20 m
as close as one nautical mile from the seacoast. Due to this natural depth, Vizhinjam can attract the
largest container vessels currently operating in, also the future mega container carriers. The Vizhinjam
port is a Greenfield port.
244. Cochin Port which is located around 50 nautical miles from the international shipping routes
between (i) Europe and Far East /Australia and (ii) Gulf and Far East/Australia, has the potential to attract
international transshipment cargo traffic. The International Container Transhipment Terminal (ICTT) at
Vallarpadam under Cochin Port is the world's fourth biggest container port operator majority owned by
the Dubai Government. To make the Terminal successful, the Government has created supportive
infrastructure in terms of a 17.2 km 4 lane road for container trucks to reach the terminal from the
National Highway (NH) 47, and NH 17 without getting into the city roads. Also, the terminal is connected
by 8.6 km long railway link line connecting the terminal to the national grid. The Terminal handled
491000 twenty-foot equivalents units (TEUs) in the year 2016-17, the highest since starting operations
in February, 2011 compared with 420,000 in 2015-16. ICTT, V allarpadam was conceived as a transshipment
hub, into which smaller feeder vessels bring cargo which then gets loaded onto larger ships for transportation
to final destinations. Larger vessels bring about economies of scale, and lower the cost of operations
for shipping lines, which then translates into lower freight rates for exporters and importers. Vallarpadam
was designed to cut India's dependence on neighboring hub ports such as Colombo in Sri Lanka,
Singapore, Salalah and Jebel Ali in Dubai, Tanjung Pelepas and Port Klang in Malaysia to send and receive
container cargo, thus saving time and cost for exporters and importers. About 2 million standard
containers originating in and destined for India gets transshipped at Sri Lanka's Colombo port every year.
245. The Committee is of the view that more ports do not necessarily bring in more cargo. The
extent of a country's EXIM trade is a function of its policies and its openness to international
commerce. A cost-effective way of augmenting port capacity to meet demand is to upgrade
capacity of existing ports. Certainly, public investment is needed to augment port capacity. But,
a careful choice needs to be made in choosing investment between major and non-Major Ports.
246. Investment in smaller new ports in India can yield much better returns as they would
service vessels on coastal and inland waterway. The Committee feels that the three ports coming

52
up within a distance of about 130 nautical miles, need to be developed and strategised in such
a manner that all the three receive sufficient cargo to ensure profitable operations. The Committee
thus recommends that infrastructure development of one port should not be at the cost of the
development of another nearby port.
247. The Committee recommends that efforts must be concentrated on the development and
expansion of infrastructure that would make water transport more attractive, instead of prioritizing
road transport and turn already over-crowded highways into death traps. More emphasis must be
placed on the coast route and inland waterways as a mode of transport for hinterland cargo
connectivity and its development must be made a priority.
(viii) Cargo Evacuation from Indian Ports in terms of Transport Mode
248. The Committee is of the view that Ports are nodes of interchange amongst various modes of
transport and a vital element in the global logistics chain. It is, therefore, critical to provide connectivity
and other infrastructure to enable quick evacuation within the ports as well as to the external hinterland
and to enable the commodity to reach the consumer from the source of production in the shortest
possible time and in the most cost-effective manner. Connectivity to a port can be through all three
modes—rail, road and inland waterways. To a limited extent, inland waterway connectivity exists in
Kolkata, Mormugao and Kochi. Ideally, each Major Port should have a four-lane road and double-line rail
connectivity within a fixed timeframe. Four-lane road connectivity has already been achieved or is in an
advanced stage of completion at JNPT, Paradip, Tuticorin, Kochi, New Mangalore, Kandla and Haldia.
At Mumbai, Vishakapatnam, Chennai and Ennore, four-laning is in progress. At Mormugao, certain
sections of the planned stretch remain to be four-laned, but work has been stuck. Kolkata is the only
port where four-lane connectivity has not been provided. Overall, all Major Ports have reasonable road
connectivity linking various highways. However, special focus is needed on the reorganization/overhauling
of approach roads of Mumbai and Kolkata ports and their linkage with the national highway network.
249. In this regard, the Committee notes that JNPT, Vishakapatnam, Tuticorin, Haldia, Chennai, and
Paradip Ports are connected to double-line rail tracks, whereas at Kandla and Cochin, the doubling work
is underway. Although Mumbai, Ennore and Kolkata ports are linked by double-line rail tracks, the lines
require doubling, New Mangalore and Mormugao ports are connected only to single-line rail tracks. A
serious effort is needed to improve hinterland connectivity, especially by rail. The Committee is of the
view that an efficient and modern intermodal system is crucial to any port's success. This requires
transfer between ship, rail and truck as seamless as possible.
250. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that ports must continuously take measures
to help their shipping lines and other partners within the port system to battle increased competition
and adjust to new trends in world trade. Dedicated Freight Corridors hold key to intermodal
transport and hence need to be completed on priority basis. Moreover, the inland waterways
system needs to be renovatedas cargo evacuation by water is cheaper and cleaner, which reduces
costs and port congestionand brings in efficiency. The shifting of cargo from road to train and
waterways will be environment-friendly and will also help to lower carbon emissions.
251. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and the
Ministry of Railways should ensure that all the projects linked to port connectivity be given the

53
highest priority and projects should be executed within the scheduled time period to make the
port operations viable and profitable.
252. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that evacuation of cargo to and from the port
areas have to be properly synchronized so that the inter-modal network functions smoothly. Road
and rail connectivity form an integral part of the port infrastructure as inefficient evacuation of
cargo can undermine the entire operation of a port. In particular, containerization of cargo
presupposes a seamless link with the road and rail network in an 'end to end' transport system.
Congestion at ports results in delayed evacuation of cargo due to inadequate road and rail
capacity. This adversely impacts the competitiveness of Indian industry. Port connectivity has
ramifications that go beyond the operation of a port per se.
253. There is a need to allocate the regional distribution of cargo to different modes of land
transport. Though in certain cases of bulk cargo, it is easy to identify the mode for a particular
cargo at a particular port and assumptions regarding percentage split have to be made in respect
of cargo such as POL, LPG , fertilizer, fertilizer raw material, other bulk cargo, containers and
break-bulk cargo. These assumptions need to be made depending upon the features of the
respective regions, nature of cargo, quantum of cargo and the spread of hinterland.
(ix) Containerization
254. The Committee notes that as stated by the Chairmen of the various Ports, a major bottleneck that
shipping faces in India is the subject of lesser containerization. Lesser containerization may be attributed
to the fact most industries are predominantly small and middle scale. The Chairman, JNPT stated before
the Committee that in terms of agriculture, our farmers have small land holdings, hence overall quantities
are lesser in comparison - hence we are unable to harness the benefits of economies of scale.
255. There is a need to increase containerization, but this must be accompanied by increasing the
capacity of terminals from 14 million at present to 30- 40 million. JNPT has not indulged in any capacity
addition project in the past 6-7 years.
256. Total containerized cargo volume for the whole of India's Major Ports was estimated at close to
8.5 million TEUs. India has just two ports which handled cargo beyond 100 MT, viz, Kandla (105 MT)
and Mundra (110 MT).
257. The Committee understood that in addition to the above, Indian ports record the higher rate of
empty containers shipped out. This reflects three main factors that characterize the Indian shipping
industry:- (i) high volumes of unprocessed exports which do not require containerization; (ii) low volume
of manufactured exports; and (iii) its heavy dependence on manufactured imports. This reflects a
fundamental trade imbalance for the Continent.
258. The Committee feels that the use of containers is imperative to promote multi modal transportation.
These containers can travel across all modes. Moreover, Containers serve as both transport and logistics
units and save handling costs when freights must be transferred from one mode to another (e.g., from
ships to trucks or truck to rail); this calls for cost effective models with ready infrastructure. Spurred
by the growth in containerized cargoes, the need for ports to offer increased berth size and state-of-

54
the-art container-handling activity has expanded. Most Indian ports cannot receive ships exceeding 4,500
TEUs, even though ships of up to 15,000 TEUs are now sailing the major international routes. Most of
the Major Ports in India function well below international benchmarks for container movements per hour
(40 per hour in the region), turnaround time, dwell time, etc. which in turn affects the cost competitiveness
of the port.
259. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the need of the hour is to have infrastructure
that can support seamless movement of cargo across all modes without any delay. We need to
create common user facilities where these models can be executed efficiently at a competitive
price. To harness the full potential of inter modal transport, a legal framework and financial/
regulatory incentives need to be put in place.
(x) Cabotage Laws
260. As per the Cabotage Laws, India's coastal trade (shipping cargo between different local ports) is
reserved for ships registered in India and foreign ships can be hired only when Indian ships are not
available after taking permission from the country's maritime regulator. This restriction was one of the
main factors that discouraged mainline foreign vessels from calling at Vallarpadam ICTT. The Committee
was informed that in September 2012, the cabotage policy was eased for the terminal by allowing foreign
registered vessels to ship export-import (EXIM) containers out or in through the ICTT in order to help
it emerge as an international transshipment hub. The primary objective of relaxation in cabotage policy
was to attract cargo destined for Indian ports to ICTT which were being transshipped at Colombo and
other foreign ports. However, of the total volumes handled at ICTT, the transshipment volumes are still
in the range of a paltry 7-8 per cent. Capacity utilization of the terminal is still running below 50%.
261. The Committee recommends that a study must be conducted on the effects of Cabotage
Laws in the shipping sector of the country. The Committee feels that research must be conducted
as to why, given the reduction of the Cabotage laws, the Ports have witnessed a paltry level of
transhipment. The policy of the Ministry in this regard must be scientifically monitored and
solutions to the same must be devised. The Committee extends its full cooperation in this matter
as it feels that the success of transshipment hubs in the country is essential for the growth of
Ports in India.
(xi) Environmental Issues with Regards to Coastal Regulatory Zones (CRZ) and National Green
Tribunal (NGT)
262. The Committee was informed of the various impediments faced by the Major Ports in developing
and expanding port activities and its infrastructure due to various policy measures which are regulated
by the Coastal Regulatory Zone and the National Green Tribunal. The Chairmen of various Ports, while
deposing before the Committee, stated that various Port projects for infrastructure augmentation &
development involve CRZ/Environmental Clearances before their execution. The Major Ports have been
obtaining CRZ clearances from the concerned State Governments/Union territories for their related
projects. The National Green Tribunal order dated 22.11.2017 directed that environmental clearance
would not be granted until States without default and delay submit the Coastal Zone Management Plans
(CZMP) to the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) to respective States for
fixation of hazard line and CZMP covering the entire coastal area.

55
263. The Ministry of Shipping submitted to the Committee that the expansion of Port capacity through
well-conceived infrastructure projects remains the highest priority of the Ministry of Shipping. The
above-mentioned order can pose as great obstacles in the case of Port projects which are on the verge
of acquiring environmental clearance. As part of the EIA studies, ports also undertake studies on shoreline
changes, High Tide Line (HTL) and Low Tide Line (LTL) demarcation. Many of the proposed projects
are within the short operational area itself and falls in CRZ III and CRZ IV areas where such developments
are permitted. Therefore, a blanket restriction may not be advisable as delays lead to time and cost
overruns particularly for PPP projects where there is a danger of the PPP operator abandoning the
project. The Ministry has collated a list of 25 ports projects which would adversely get affected as a
result of the aforesaid NGT order.
264. The Committee feels that the development of Port infrastructure is necessary to the economic
health of the nation. Steps need to be taken to obviate the adverse impact of the order of NGT
on the port projects pending approval of the Coastal Zone Management Plan of the States by the
MoEF&CC. The Committee further recommends that the MoEF&CC must take steps to ensure
that the States/ Union Territories must take it upon themselves to prioritise the CZMPs and
submit the same to the MoEF&CC at the earliest, in order to ensure that necessary rules and
regulations may be instituted for the same.
265. The Committee recommends that an advisory be issued by the MoEF&CC to the States/ UTs
that have not yet submitted their CZMPs to the MoEF&CC, impressing upon them to submit
them immediately and get the same approved. The Ministry of Shipping may also take it upon
itself to ensure that it keeps a track of the same and impress upon the respective State
Governments and their corresponding ports to submit their plans at the earliest. The delay may
cost huge economic loss to the country's Shipping sector and such policy related delays should
be avoided.
266. The Committee, however, feels that the issue of Coastal Regulation is an important and sensitive
issue and much thought and consideration must be put into it. Our coastal ecosystems provide protection
from natural disasters such as floods and tsunamis to the 250 million people who live in our coastal areas.
Coastal waters are a source of primary livelihood to 7 million households and any changes made to the
coastal regions would directly or indirectly affect them. Most importantly, our marine ecosystems are
a treasure trove of biodiversity, which we are only beginning to discover and catalogue.
267. The Committee, however, feels that coastal infrastructural projects involving wetlands include
various players whose interests will be affected in one way or another. The Committee, in this
regard, recommends that the stages included by the MoEF&CC whilst granting environmental
clearance, eg: Expert Appraisal Committee, Public hearings, Term of Reference etc. are speeded
up to ensure that ports are getting necessary clearances without hinderances. Given the
development in science and technology, the Committee is of the opinion that effective solutions
can be found for the developmental needs of the Ports.
268. The Committee was informed that an issue in Environments Compliance and Enforcement in Major
Ports was that there is no uniform procedure/ process for enforcement of environmental compliance in
Ports by the State Pollution Control boards. Various State Pollution Control Boards adopt different

56
mechanisms/ standards and there is no one established Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) that has
been laid down which Ports can adhere to neither are there any penal provisions for its non- compliance.
This often leads to a comparison with the wrong standard, or a standard not prescribed by the Centre,
resulting in a skewed interpretation and does not reflect the true picture.
269. The Committee is of the opinion that many of the Major Ports are suffering due to the
absence of a Standard Operating Procedure. The Committee is dismayed to note that many of
the projects of the Major Ports have been stalled due to the same reason, while operations in
some Ports have been shut down as a result of Court orders, which could have been avoided had
these guidelines been set in place. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping
must coordinate with the concerned States, the respective State Pollution Control Boards and the
MoEF&CC to formulate a set of procedures/ processes that are largely uniform across all the
States, keeping room for modifications according to the special requirements that are State or
Region specific.
270. Furthermore, it was observed that there is no proper Standard Operating Procedure for the Consent
to Operate for Port operations similar to the one issued for industries. It has come to the knowledge
of the Committee that the Ports are using the form prescribed for the CTO renewal of industries as there
are no prescribed formats for CTO applications in case of the Port Sector.
271. The Committee is of the opinion that this a major shortcoming in the port sector. The
Consent to Operate for Ports is a necessary instrument. With the expansion of the Sagarmala
Project, this will be a necessity for small riverine docks that will come up as result of this project.
This is a flaw that must be remedied at the earliest as it leaves the Ports vulnerable to unnecessary
litigation and law suits. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping
must coordinate with the concerned Ministries & Agencies and format a 'Consent to Operate'
specifically for Ports at the earliest.
(xiii) Public Private Partnerships (PPP)
272. The Committee understood that with the liberalization of the Indian Economy, the Government of
India has allowed for Private participation in the Major Ports to infuse funds, induct latest technology,
improve management practices and for addition of capacity. The Government has been encouraging
private sector participation since 1996. These include construction of cargo handling berths, container
terminals and warehousing facilities, installation of cargo handling equipment, construction of dry docks
and ship repair facilities, etc. The preferred route for private sector participation is through open
competitive bidding.
273. In this regard, the Committee was informed that a number of initiatives have been taken to
encourage foreign investors as well as domestic investors to facilitate investment in port projects. These
include:
(i) Bidding documents like Request for Qualification (RFQ), Request for Proposal (RFP) and
model Concession Agreement (MCA) have been standardized.
(ii) Up to 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) under the automatic route allowed for Port
Development projects.

57
(iii) Income tax incentives allowed under the Income Tax Act, 1961. Income tax exemption of
100% available for a period of 10 yea ` However, it is expected that the removal of Tax
Exemptions after alignment to the GST will not affect the PPP projects as they are joint
financing models and they have no nexus with GST exemptions.
(iv) A Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee (PPPAC) under the Chairmanship of the
Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs and the Ministry of Finance to appraise the
proposals under the PPP mode has been constituted.
(v) Tariff Setting Mechanism has been modified with the tariffs being set upfront by the TAMP
before the projects are bid upon, on a revenue sharing model.
(vi) Land policy has been reviewed and fresh guidelines have also been issued.
(vii) Security Clearance Guidelines have been streamlined.
(viii) Major Port Trust, 1963 is being redrafted to give more autonomy and flexibility to the Major
Port Authorities.
274. The Committee was appraised by the Ministry of Shipping that the Model Concession Agreement
(MCA), 2008 has been revised and approved by the Government in January, 2018. At present, there are
41 PPP projects operational and 16 PPP projects which are under construction/ implementation.
Stage No. of Projects Investment Capacity
(` in crores) (MTPA)
Operationalized 41 20822.91 368.05
Under Construction 16 20577.88 219.83
T
OTAL 57 41400.79 587.88
275. The table above states the preset status of PPP in the Shipping sector in the country, as submitted
by the Ministry of Shipping.
276. The Committee notes the efforts of the Ministry of Shipping towards the development of
port infrastructure through the PPP model. The Committee recommends that as far as possible,
the same model must be utilised in all the Major Ports to ensure the development of Port
infrastructure in the country. Steps must be taken in tandem with the State Governments
concerned in order to ensure smooth and speedy implementation of the PPP projects.
(xiii) Development/ Promotion of Cruise Facilities at Ports
277. Cruise vessels visit five Major Ports in India viz., Mumbai Port, Mormugao Port, New Mangalore
Port, Cochin Port and Chennai Port. The status of construction of terminals at these ports is given below:
(i) Cruise terminal at Chennai was developed with ultramodern facilities and completed on 31.7.2017.
(ii) Mormugao Port has constructed state of the art, three storied new cruise terminal building
having the facility for Custom, immigration, Duty free shop for passengers and was inaugurated
on 22.12.2016.

58
(iii) Mumbai Port has also taken initiative to upgrade the existing terminal to match the International
standard and work has started which will cost ` 197 crores approximately and is likely to be
completed by December, 2019.
(iv) It is proposed to upgrade the cruise terminal in Cochin at Ernakulum wharf at a cost of `25.72
crores with central financial assistance from the Ministry of Tourism. The project consists of
construction of an international cruise terminal building of approximate area 2253 m2 with all
connected facilities. It is proposed to construct a new terminal building by March, 2019.
(v) At New Mangalore port a full-fledged cruise terminal is in function with facilities for customs,
immigration, port health, banking service, facilitation centers, duty free shop and boutique.
Foreseeing the growth in cruise traffic, the Port has constructed a modern cruise passenger
lounge near the berth with an area of 2150 sq. mtrs. and put into operation with facilities like
money exchange, locker room, medical officer room duty free shops, cafeteria, conference
hall etc.
(vi) The Ministry of Shipping has provided 65 counters at five ports in the immigration halls of
the ports to facilitate e-visa (15 each for Mumbai, Cochin and Goa and 10 each for Mangalore
and Chennai).
(vii) Costa Neo Classica cruise ship for the first time made Mumbai Port as home port involving
embarkation and disembarkation of approx. 1400 passengers per voyage in 2016. Seven
voyages were done once in every fortnight with the 1st voyage on 22nd December, 2016 to
7th voyage on 18h March, 2017. The Costa Neo Classica ship was deployed again for
Homeporting in 2017-18. For 2018-19, bigger cruise ship is proposed to be deployed by
Carnival Corporation Limited.
278. The Committee understood that the following measures have been undertaken to promote cruise
tourism in India:
(i) A task force was constituted in November, 2015 with the Secretary (Tourism) as the Chairman
and Secretary (Shipping as the Co-chairman to create a conducive eco- system for the
development of cruise tourism in India.
(ii) Foreign- flag vessels carrying passengers have been allowed to call on Indian Ports with effect
from 6th February, 2009 for a period of 10 years without the need for licenses from the
Director General of Shipping. This facility has been further extended or a period of 5 years
upto 5th February, 2024.
(iii) Standardized Operating Procedures (SOP's) for cruise vessels have been revised and
operationalized w.e.f. November, 2017 at all Major Ports.
(iv) E- visa facility has been extended to five sea ports namely viz. Mumbai, Goa, Mangalore,
Chennai and Cochin. Immigration counters have been set up at 5 Major Ports visited by cruise
ships.
(v) The port charges have been reduced and all Major Ports are to charge a single uniform rate
of $0.35 per Gross Registered Tonnage (GRT) for first 12 hours of stay. Ports will not charge

59
any other rate like berth hire, port dues, pilotage, passenger fee etc. from cruise liners. The
above rate has been made effective from 3rd November, 2017 and will remain in force for
a period of three years.
(vi) The Ports do not levy any priority/ousting/shifting charges for berthing the cruise vessel.
(vii) Walk-in berthing/preferential berthing to homeport cruise without the burden of permits and
paperwork.
(viii) To address manpower, coordination and logistic issues for handling cruise vessels at ports,
Port Level Committees with chairman of the respective Major Port Trust as Chairman, Secretary
Tourism of the concerned state Vice-Chairman and Regional Director of the respective region
of Ministry of Tourism as Convener have been constituted.
279. The Committee is pleased to note the proactive steps taken by the Ministry of Shipping in
tandem with the Major Ports to promote Cruise tourism in the nation. With the growing population
and infrastructure constraints especially in city based Major Ports, the Committee is of the view
that Cruise Shipping is an important and viable alternative to help promote the growth of the
economy by way of tourism in the country. The Committee further recommends that given the
nascent stage of its development, the policies with regards to Cruise Shipping in the country
must be regularly updated and modified to keep in tune with the changing global economic
scenario. The Committee further recommends that taxation policies in this regard must be
formulated in a manner which helps facilitate its growth.
280. The Committee was informed that charging cruise ships on the basis of their tonnage,
rather than on the number of passengers, is a dampner. The Committee recommends that cruise
terminals may be developed in all the city based ports to attract foreign licenses and promote
cruise tourism.
(xiv) Promotion of Ro-Ro Operations
281. The Committee was informed that the Ministry of Shipping has taken following steps to promote
Ro Ro shipping in the country:
(a) Cabotage Law has been relaxed for specialized vessels such as RO-RO, Ro-PAX, Hybrid Ro-
Ro, Pure Car carriers, Pure Car and Truck carriers, LNG , vessels and Over-Dimensional cargo
or Project cargo carriers for 5 years with effect from 2nd Sept., 2015.
(b) In order to promote coastal Ro-RO ship service at Major Ports, it has been decided that all
Major Ports will provide 80% discount for two years on Vessel Related Charges (VRC) and
Coastal Related Charges for coastal transportation of vehicles through RO-RO ships  vide order
No.16(88)/2016-PD-VII dated 20h September, 2016. To make the discount sustainable, the
Ports may carry out intensive marketing exercise for demand generation.
(c) To bring thrust in the transportation of automobile cargo through waterways, apart from
relaxing cabotage for Roll-on-Roll-off vessels, the wharfage charges on per unit basis, instead
of on ad volarem basis, have been introduced in Major Ports.

60
282. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of Shipping in developing Ro-Ro
operations and services in the country. The Committee, however, feels that more needs to be
done as RoRo services are integral to the economic prosperity of the nation and serve as a
wonderful means of transport by utilizing the inland waterways in the country. In this regard,
the Committee recommends that the Ministry must pick up the speed of the Sagarmala Project
in order to make it viable and operational in the country. This will go a long way in improving
the hinterland connectivity, reducing transport costs and reducing travel time in terms of cargo
management in the country.
(xv) Promotion of Solar Energy Generation
283. The Committee could understand from newspaper reports that the Green Port Initiative launched
by the Government has been widely implemented in the Major Ports of the country. The funds required
for the development of the solar plants will be arranged by the Ports from their own resources, with
no contribution from the Government.
284. The Committee feels that the initiative would also offset the cost of purchasing power from the
grid, and would help to meet the Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation (RPO), set by the government,
mandating a certain percentage of renewales into the total energy mix. In addition, installing solar PV
(module) at ports will help states to meet the government's Renewable Purchase Obligations (RPOs),
which are State-specific targets for the uptake of renewable energy.
285. The Committee was informed that Indian Ports, mainly in Visakhapatnam, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata,
and New Mangalore, have already set up a capacity of 6.84 MW, and a further 16 MW of capacity in
the pipeline is expected for commissioning by March of next year. The Port plans are a part of the Green
Port Initiative undertaken by India's Shipping Ministry, which aims to cut the cost of purchasing power
from the grids.
286. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Major Ports should make use of the large
tracts of unused land available to them in order to ensure the implementation of the Green Port
Initiative. Apart from being an efficient way of utilizing the space available, the income generated
from the sale of the energy generated can be used to further augment the development of the
Port and its ancillary services.
(xvi) Ecological Considerations
287. The Ports also have a certain responsibility to ensure the sustainability of the ecological
resources that surround them. The Committee strongly feels that it is the responsibility of the
Port Authorities and the Ministry of Shipping by extension to nurture and preserve the environment.
The recent reports of recurrent oil spills are a cause of concern for the flora and fauna and the
environment in general. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping
must ensure that the Ports have set guidelines to prevent incidents of oil spills in the future and
steps must be taken to ensure that the oil spills are cleaned up. Promotion of eco- friendly
business is the need of the hour and must be considered an important parameter when considering
the annual performance of a port. This must also extend to the private and small ports as well,
as a matter of policy.

61
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
PARADIP PORT
Port Performance
The Committee notes that in order to improve berthing facilities, Eastern Quay-I, II & III
berthing projects have been taken up for capacity augmentation with an investment of ````` 3500
Crores and execution timeline of December 2019. The Committee is not aware of the initially
approved cost of the project and original timeline for its completion. It has often been seen that
infrastructure development projects experience time and cost overruns. The Committee would
therefore like to be apprised whether the Eastern Quay-I, II and III projects have witnessed any
time overrun and concurrent cost escalation as compared to the initially estimated project costs.
(Para 11)
The Committee also recommends that a stringent monitoring mechanism be put in place so
that there are no instances of tardiness and inefficiencies inexecution and the project is executed
within the approved cost and designated time-frame. (Para 12)
The Committee understands that the world is moving increasingly towards renewable energy
and it is now popular practice to attempt to reduce the dependency on fossil fuels and coal.
Renewable energy is the call of the hour. Whilst applauding the efforts of industries to go green,
its effect on cargo movement and traffic movement cannot be ignored. In this regard, the
Committee desires that the Paradip Port must find a way to move away from old business models
and try and cater to a new market that is garnered to creating and using clean and efficient
energy. (Para 15)
The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Paradip Port to create a synergized
unit of economic activity in the Port. However, for the modernization to succeed, these must be
completed within a stipulated timeframe and the economies of scale must also be considered in
order to ensure the cost effectiveness for all the stakeholders involved. Connectivity is an issue
which must be given utmost importance and must be taken into serious consideration. Increased
State-Centre coordination, along with inter- Ministerial coordination, with the Ministry of Railways
and Ministry of Road Transport & Highways is the need of the hour. (Para 17)
CONNECTIVITY
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Port to increase its evacuation capacities.
Ports are integral to the increased economic activity of an area and play a major role in the
prosperity of a region. In this respect, the connectivity of a port to and from the various
industrial units in the hinterland is an issue of grave importance. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of Shipping should take up the issues pertaining to 42- 82 kms of Haridaspur-
Paradeep Line with the State Government of Odisha and Ministry of Railways for removing the
local level obstacles. The Committee desires that a dedicated mechanism be put in place for
coordination and expeditious completion of 42-82 kms of Haridaspur-Paradeep Railway Line. The
Committee hopes that the Angul-Sambalpur Railway line doubling work will be completed on
time. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must strive for greater
61

62
coordination between the State Government concerned and the Ministry of Railways to ensure
seamless connectivity with regards to maintenance of the railway lines and regular upgradation
of the lines. (Para 20)
Kolkata Port and Haldia Dock Complex
The Committee understands that these pre-independence era ports could not have envisioned
the great strides in shipping during their inception. The infrastructure of the ports needs constant
upgradation. Considering the fact that this was part of the mandate of modernisation of Major
Ports in India, the Committee notes the efforts made by the Port authorities. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ports may be upgraded and modernized to suit the present
needs, but with an outlook on future growth as well. The Committee hopes that work related
to modernisation of rail network, Ro-Ro service between Kolkata and Howrah side, proposed ship
repairing facility, development of parking area, modernisation of container berths, development
of outer terminals and the doubling of railway line between Haldia and Durgachak would be
completed within the targeted time frame. The decision on the Lock- gates and other constraints
must be taken up with urgency and trials must not be delayed. Mor eover, the modernization
projects must have fixed target dates and efforts must be made to complete them within the time
frame. Failure to do so will lead to increased costs and also affect the productivity and growth
of the Port. (Para 41)
MUMBAI PORT TRUST
The Committee understands the constraints of Major Ports that are centered around major
cities and their limitations caused by various factors such as population, traffic etc. The Committee
notes various modernisation projects initiated by the Mumbai Port Trust. The Committee
recommends that a detailed and comprehensive study may be conducted to augment the cargo
capacity of Mumbai Port while addressing the various constraints faced by the Mumbai Port at
present. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the MbPT with regard to moving to Cruise
terminals due to their capacity constraints in cargo handling. The Committee notes that the
country has great potential for cruise tourism. In this regard, the Committee recommends that
the Ministry of Shipping must take steps to ensure that processes related to immigration, ease
of business in terms of Cruise shipping, licenses etc. are simplified; Standard Operating Procedures
(SOP), taxation etc. are in place and processes and permissions required in relation with PGA's
are simplified. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must pursue these
with the Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Finance etc. and every effort must be made to
modernise and expand the cruise terminals. (Para 58)
The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that MbPT has large land holdings which have
been encroached upon. The Committee is of the opinion that these land holdings are prime real
estate especially in a city like Mumbai which is subject to scarcity of space and such large
holdings are rare. The Committee recommends that the MbPT should take affirmative steps to
reposes the encroached land and utilise the said land holdings to construct schools, state- of -
the - art hospitals and specialty hospitals etc., to cater to the employees as well as the general
public. (Para 59)

63
JAW AHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST PORT PERFORMANCE
The Committee notes the increased efficiency of the Port in terms of containers handled
at 0.43 %and the increase in average output per ship Berth day overall at 1.50 % over the
previous years. The Committee commends the efficient management of the Port authorities in
improving the efficiency parameters of the Port in order to make it as competitive as some of
the best ports in the world. (Para 64)
The Committee applauds the steps taken to improve the infrastructure facilities of JNPT
and would urge upon the Government to further upgrade and modernize the Port to assure
improved performance benchmarking against global standards. (Para 67)
IMPROVEMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE
The Committee appreciates the efforts of JNPT in increasing hinterland connectivity. The
Committee strongly feels that this connectivity must also be extended to other States, especially
the landlocked states in the North and North West of India and States in peninsular India for
eg., Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. This is integral to the 'Make in India' programme
of the Government. The Committee emphasizes the need for ensuring connectivity of the
hinterland to Major Ports in India via road and rail in a cost-efficient manner. This is made
possible through dry ports and docks which act as aggregation sites of manufactured commodities.
This will also promote economic activities throughout the country, instead of concentrating
economic activities to a particular region. Dry docks are also a solution to the problem of
transportation of perishable agricultural produce in the country. This will ensure increased
economic activity in the remotest corners of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry of Shipping, along with the JNPT, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and
the Ministry of Railways and the State Governments to work on increasing hinterland connectivity
via Dry Docks. This will go a long way in increasing containerization and trade activities of the
Port, all the while increasing employment opportunities in the hinterland. (Para 71)
The Committee notes that Railways have the widest range of connectivity in the country.
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Shipping must make more concerted efforts with the
Ministry of Railways and State Governments in order to ensure that Railway lines are upgraded
to be able to carry the cargo load. Moreover, efficiency must be maintained in order to ensure
client trust in the Railways. The Committee takes notes of the proactive efforts made by JNPT
and the Ministry of Shipping in developing the Direct Freight Corridor. The Committee desires
that there should be fixed completion date which must be adhered to. This is necessary in order
to ensure the viability of the project and to prevent the project from running over the budget
and ensure that the funding is sufficient. (Para 75)
SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCESSES
The Committee appreciates the quantum leaps taken by JNPT in simplifying the processes
of the Port and its functioning. These changes have been long pending and overdue. The Committee
recommends that DPD and DPE related pending projects are completed within the given schedule.
The systems employed by the Port may be carefully studied by the Ministry of Shipping for using

64
the same as a base for pilots in other Major Ports in the country, after tailoring them to suit
individual port's needs. (Para 88)
DIGITIZATION OF ACTIVITIES
The Committee lauds the effort of the JNPT towards digitisation of its activities. Lack of
digitisation was a major bottleneck to the increased productivity of the Port and often cited as
an area which needs greater implementation. The digitization of form 13, e-delivery, container
tracking and RFID based gate - entry and exit has been integral to the success of the digitisation
and the Port has reaped dividends stemming from this exercise. The Committee feels that the
digitisation of Ports and its allied services is integral to ensure the growth of the sector and
ensure the confidence of major ship- liners. (Para 94)
VISHAKHAPATNAM PORT PROFITABILITY
The Committee takes note of the profit after tax to the tune of Rs. 189.46 crores. However,
in order to assess the operational efficiency of the Port and its competitiveness as also to suggest
measures to improve its productivity, the Committee desires to be kept apprised of the Return
on Capital Employed (ROCE) for the Port.
NEW INITIATIVES
The Committee notes that Visakhapatnam Port faces intense competition from neighboring
private ports like Gangavaram which employs predatory pricing and that it is an issue which
needs careful study and consideration. Tariff for the services rendered at Major Ports and the
terminals are regulated by the Tariff Authority at Major Ports (TAMP), where private ports are
not bound by the same regulations and are thus free to determine their tariff rates. This robs
the Major Ports of a level playing field in order to compete with the private ports. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Government should intervene to create a level playing field for the
Major ports and a supportive environment must be created in order to ensure that our Major
Ports like Vishakhapatnam Port can withstand the stiff competition. (Para 106)
MODERNISATION OF PORT FACILTIES
The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the inflexible and rigid regulatory
framework viz., tariff and Concession Agreements in respect of the PPP projects do not facilitate
adaptation with the changing market environment. There are no provisions to cater and adapt
to measures such as changing the cargo profile, restructuring of tariffs at the PPP terminals etc.
In this regard, the Committee feels that the atmosphere around PPP needs to be more conducive
to this form of investment to encourage growth in terms of capital infrastructure without
stressing on the Government resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an
environment to nurture and encourage PPPs must be set in place. This is necessary to ensure
that the Major Ports are able to come into their own as profitable units. Whilst there is legislation
in place to encourage PPP, the present laws must be amended to keep room for changing
circumstances in the shipping sector and in the global scene. (Para 111)
CARGO HANDLING FACILITIES
The Committee is pleased to note the steps and initiatives taken by the Visakhapatnam Port
in order to improve its efficiencies. Furthermore, being with sufficient draft, the Committee is
of the opinion that the hinterland connectivity must be improved via dry docks/ ports, which will

65
serve as assembly and stuffing units. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of
Shipping must encourage the State Government to create SEZs around these dry docks to
promote an environment of creating manufacturing units with easy access to the Port. The
Committee is also of the opinion that these are essential to encourage and promote the growth
of trade and industry in the country and also a necessary input for the success of the 'Make in
India' programme launched by the Government. (Para 116)
The Committee notes that the Visakhapatnam Port is a city port. While the rapidly increasing
city limits points to the rising economic prosperity of the city, it becomes a bottleneck for the
growth of the Port and reduces its efficiency. In this regard, the Committee feels that adequate
steps must be taken and a blueprint must be made to ensure that the growth of the city limits
does not impinge on the Port and its capacities. Mor eover, the Por t must devise exit roads and
inroads to service the Port, which are independent of city traffic. These are plans for the
foreseeable future which must be envisioned in order to ensure that the Port is not encumbered
by growing urbanization as is rampant in other major port cities. (Para 117)
V .O. CHIDAMBARANAR PORT (TUTICORIN)
TRAFFIC
The Committee feels that the Port which was planned as a transhipment hub, to facilitate
container shipment, has now been reduced to a port which deals with bulk cargo. It is disheartening
to learnt that, at present, the Port subsists on the cargo of a small Company, the traffic of which
is far below the potential of the Port. (Para 123)
Moreover, the Committee feels that the proximity of ports, both private and major, along
the coast, cater to the same hinterland. The number of ports is far larger than the demand for
them. The supply exceeds the demand and this has resulted in the underutilization of the
economies of scale. The Committee fails to understand the lack of planning and foresight in the
operation of this port and the neglect of the Port by the Ministry of Shipping and the State
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must focus
its attention on the development of the Port as a transhipment hub. The Committee recommends
that the Port must reduce its reliance on bulk cargo in terms of coal etc. and change its business
model in order to attract more varied traffic. (Para 124)
CONTAINERIZATION
The Committee notes that the Zone B in VOCPT was planned as a transshipment hub, given
its favourable geographical position and deep draft levels. Mor eover, being a coastal port, it does
not face the challenges of silting and dredging which is a major drawback for most ports in the
country. However, after careful study, the Committee is of the opinion that the Port has largely
failed to attract container cargo shipments. (Para 126)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must go back to the
drawing board and prepare a DPR for the future course of the Port. If it is intent on developing
it as a transhipment hub, then it must look into the shortcomings of the Port with regards to
a transhipment hub. If not, it must restructure itself as a bulk port or structure it otherwise.
The Port is neither here nor there and the Committee strongly feels that this is a waste of the
massive potential of the VOCPT as a major Port in India. (Para 127)

66
CONNECTIVITY
The Committee desires that necessary follow up action may be taken in this regard and the
final outcome reported to the Committee in the Action Taken Reply. (Para 132)
The Committee notes that the VOCPT is one of the better connected Major Ports in the
country. The Committee hopes that the issues with regards to highway construction and broadening
of existing roads are completed according to schedule and reinforces its suggestion that a timeline
must be fixed for the same. The Committee feels that the Port must also envision the urbanization
of its surrounding areas and must ensure the provision of planned evacuation channels. The
Committee recommends that the issue of Short Distance Operation costs must be taken up on
a priority basis with the Ministry of Railways. (Para 135)
MODERNIZATON OF THE PORT
Given the mandate of the Port and its strategic position, the Committee is dismayed at the
level of modernization in the Port over the yea ````` The Port is a far cry from its optimum
utilization. The underutilization of this Port is a great loss to the country. The Committee
recommends that a detailed study must be conducted, to evaluate the needs and the requirements
of the port in order to ensure that the Port is efficiently utilized. Keeping in view the restricted
hinterland and the numerous ports that compete for the same cargo, it is essential that VOCPT
should devise its own business strategies. (Para 137)
CHENNAI PORT
POLICY INITIATIVES
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Chennai Port and lauds the steps taken by
them. The Committee feels that Puducherry Port must be developed as a Satellite port which can
take over the load of the Chennai Port. This makes complete sense considering the rapid
urbanization of Chennai City. Investments must be made in the infrastructure of the Port, with
an eye for the future coastal traffic and development. (Para 145)
Chennai Port, given its location, is suitable for the purposes of tourism as it has been a
gateway to the South. The Committee further recommends that the Port should follow the
example of the Mumbai Port Trust and re-design and develop cruise terminals for tourists/
passengers. (Para 148)
KAMARAJAR PORT LIMITED
CONNECTIVITY AND EV ALUATION
The Committee is of the opinion that the development of infrastructure must be a joint
effort of the State Governments, the Ports and the Ministry of Shipping, including the Central
Government, as it is integral to the development and growth of the nation and integral to the
economic prosperity to the States concerned and the nation at large. In view of this, the Committee
applauds the efforts of the KPL authorities in bringing the various stakeholders to the table and
is an example that must be followed by other Major Ports in developing their hinterland connectivity.
(Para 155)
COCHIN PORT TRUST
CRUISE TERMIANL
The ICTT was described as a milestone in logistic infrastructure development. But what

67
followed in the years to come has proven to be problems replete with negative consequences. The
Committee feels that the terminal has not lived up to the perceived expectations which
subsequently ran aground since the projections were so full of loopholes that they have failed
to hold water. First and foremost was the inability of the terminal to accommodate large cargo
vessels due to chronic siltation. At present, very little business is taking place at the ICTT, with
the terminal functioning at 35% of its capacity. On the contrary, it has proved to be a drain on
Cochin Port's exchequer which is already cash strapped with huge debts, running to the tune of
over `````700 crore to be repaid. Para 171)
The Committee is pleased to note the steps taken by the Port in developing a passenger
cruise terminal. This is a neglected aspect of shipping in India and is a major source of revenue
in other nations. Cruise Tourism must be pursued with greater vigor and the Committee is
pleased to know that the Ministry of Tourism is cooperating with the Ministry of Shipping to
develop Cruise Terminals. (Para 171A)
DEENDAYAL PORT TRUST (KANDLA PORT)
PROBLEMS AND BOATTLENECKS
The Committee takes note of the hurdles faced by the Port and desires that the Port must
take up the issues of connectivity projects with the NHAI and the State Government in order
to ensure that projects are completed on time without delays. (Para 189)
The Port, being on a creek, will suffer from issues of siltation. The Committee observes that
this is an issue that the Port must deal with regularly in order to ensure the smooth functioning
of the Port. (Para 190)
The Committee takes note of the issues of Environmental Clearance Certificates with
regards to projects of the Port. The Committee feels that the developmental needs of the
Deendayal Port should not be ignored while considering Coastal Regulations. The Committee
recommends that the required concessions and permissions may be given to the Port as it is in
the larger economic interest of the nation and its people. (Para 191)
NEW MANGALORE PORT TRUST
MODERNISATION OF CARGO HANDLING MECHANISM
The Committee takes note of the efforts taken by the NMPT to improve and modernize the
infrastructure of the Port in order to increase the efficiency of the Port. The Committee
understands that the infrastructure projects of the Port such as creating additional storage area
got affected due to limited land availability within the specified area of the Port. (Para 200)
The Committee understands that the Port has a draft restriction which becomes a major
cause of concern with regard to handling new generation vessels. Deep drafts with a minimum
depth of 14 meters is the prescribed global standards. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the NMPT, along with the Ministry of Shipping, must work together to ensure that the Draft
level is maintained, if not improved upon, in order to ensure that the Port maintains its viability.
(Para 201)
The Committee was also informed that the limited water front is an impediment to the
future expansion of the Port. The Port, with a total land area of 2,290 acres, presently has a
capacity of 15 berths and one SPM is already saturated. This greatly limits the ability of the Port

68
to expand in terms of infrastructure. The Committee recommends that studies must be conducted
to find a solution to the logistical and infrastructural bottlenecks that the Mangalore Portfaces,
to ensure that the future growth and expansion of the Port is done in a scientific and systematic
manner. (Para 202)
CRUSE TERMINAL
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Port to augment the facilities in terms of
Cruise tourism. Mangalore, with its beautiful coast and pristine beaches, is ideal as a cruise
destination. The Committee recommends that more must be done to fulfill the potential of the
Port as a major cruise terminal and a gateway to Peninsular India. In terms of infrastructure,
draft levels must be maintained to facilitate the participation of major cruise liners. The Committee
further recommends that the Ministry of Shipping and the NMPT should work together with the
Ministry of Tourism, tour operators and the respective State Tourism Boards to promote New
Mangalore Port as a cruise terminal. Simultaneously, the Ministry of Shipping and NMPT must
ensure that the facilities at the passenger terminals must be at par with global standards.
(Para 205)
Nestled amidst the Western Ghats in peninsular India, construction of roads and railway
lines to connect the Port, is fraught with geographical obstacles. As a result, this has reduced
the popularity of the Port due to the relatively high transportation costs and time taken. The
Committee recommends that given the availability of advanced technology, new technology and
research must be harnessed to devise a way to circumvent the geographical bottlenecks that ail
the Port. (Para 206)
While most Major Ports in India are suffering from congestion, the New Mangalore Port is
struggling to achieve even 50 per cent of its capacity utilization. The only lifeline between the
New Mangalore Port and its hinterland is the rail line provided by the Hassan- Mangalore Rail
Development Company Ltd. (HMRDC). Rail cargo has remained consistent at 7 lakh MT in the
last two financial years, indicating a case of stagnancy. The Committee recommends that the
Government may consider improving rail connectivity with NMPT. (Para 207)
Karnataka has 8 minor ports- Kundapura, Honnavar, Belekeri, Tadri, Bhatkal, Hangarakatta,
Malpe and Padubidri. These are located on the State's 300 km coastline. Hence, coastal shipping
would and should be an ideal alternative to the lack of proper road connectivity. However, the
shared hinterland implies competition for the same cargo. Also, this mode of transportation
continues to remain unexplored. Coast-to-coast mode of transportation can change the fortunes
of Indian marine logistics. It is a pity that its potential remains untapped. The example of China
may be studied, where the Chinese Government is using its coastline to connect one city to
another. This mode of transportation has proven to be cost effective and can result in faster
movement of consignments. (Para 208)
MORMUGAO PORT TRUST
PERFORMANCE
The Committee notes the efforts of the MPT in increasing the efficiency of the Port, given
the constraints imposed on the Port. The Committee understands the need for development of
infrastructure of the port. The Committee was informed by various stakeholders of the shipping

69
industry in Goa that there is an urgent need for improvement in the rail and road connectivity
in MPT in order to ensure faster evacuation of cargo, better connectivity to the hinterland and
avoid the movement of vehicles carrying cargo through congested city roads. They emphasized
the need to make the amenities given to cruise tourists at par with global standards. They
stressed on the need for doubling of railway line in Mormugao Port. The stakeholders also
highlighted the need to compensate the Port for any monetary loss that the Port might incur for
the grant of any concessional tariff for the promotion of cruise tourism. They impressed upon
the need to ensure that the facilities provided with regards to Cruise Tourism are made world
class so as to imprint a good image of Goa in the minds of the tourists. (Para 215)
Given the popularity of Goa as an international tourist destination, the Committee
recommends that the MPT should realign its focus at developing itself as a Passenger Port,
catering to Cruise Ships. Tours and Packages for the same must be worked out with the Ministry
of Tourism and the Ministry of Shipping. Necessary infrastructural requirements must be developed
in order to harness the full potential of the Port as a Passenger Port. This will ensure that the
Port is maintained as a profitable and viable venture whilst ensuring the preservation of the
environment in keeping with the orders of the Supreme Court. (Para 216)
MAJOR ISSUES AILING CARGO MANAGEMENT IN THE MAJOR PORTS
CONTAINER TRAFFIC
The Committee is of the opinion that existing and new ports should align their capacity
expansion in line with the projected increase in coastal shipping volumes. Provision of a dedicated
berth for coastal shipping should also be looked into in order to promote coastal shipping.
(Para 219)
DRAFT LIMITATIONS
The Committee has observed that the relatively low draft at Indian ports do not measure
upto internationally set standards. Presently, vessels greater than 11,000 TEU are in service. The
movement towards larger ships is driven by economies of scale. It follows that in case of
containership for 1,000 TEU capacities, the average draft is 8.3 metres, which increases to 15.5
metres for ships above 11,000 TEU capacities. Container vessels with a capacity of 4,000 TEU
requires a minimum draft of 12.5 metres. (Para 223)
The Committee feels that there is a need to maximize the utilization of these vessels, which
will in turn lead to reduction in the number of port calls on major routes and push for the
development of global mega ports served by fully integrated global network. Most Major Ports
in India have minimum draft under 12m, except for a few of the younger ports which have draft
of more than 14m. Insufficient draft at Indian Ports leads to increased costs and time taken as
cargo originating from and those that are bound for India gets routed through transshipment
ports like Colombo and Singapore. The Committee feels that as vessels keep getting bigger,
Indian ports need deeper drafts, which call for increased and greater investments in capital
dredging. (Para 224)
The Committee recommends that new terminals at Tuticorin, Ennore etc. must be developed
with a renewed zeal and vigour in a careful and strategic manner, so that they will act as active
competitors to operational container ports in Sri Lanka. (Para 225)

70
ROLE OF TARIFF REGULATIONS AT INDIA'S MAJOR PORTS
The Committee feels that the Port sector in India is facing certain tariff- related uncertainties
due to multiplicity of regimes. The non-Major Ports do not come under any tariff jurisdiction and
price their services based on market and competition. But the major ones (including private
terminals therein) fall under the jurisdiction of a regulator viz., Tariff Authority for Major Ports
(TAMP). This anomaly and the lack of a level playing field have long been a debated issue.
(Para 227)
In view of the considerable loss of business opportunities for the Major Ports due to the
provision of certain tariff related uncertainties as ascertained by TAMP, the Committee
recommends that the anomalies in the TAMP rules must be made reasonable in order to make
it lucrative for ships to call on Major Ports against private ports. The Committee further
recommends that the role of the TAMP must be redefined and that a strategic and market
oriented system of tariff must be set in place. (Para 229)
EFFICIENCY OF THE PORT SECTOR OPERATIONS
The Committee feels that low productivity and high vessel turnaround time at Indian ports
are due to: (i) Low level of mechanisation and insufficient draft; (ii) Skewed handling capacity
for different types of cargo; and (iii) Infrastructure constraints in hinterland connectivity. It has
been observed that lagging behind other countries on performance parameters pushes up the cost
of trade and renders Indian ports less competitive. Non-Major Ports have fared well, ensuring
quicker turnaround by investing in the infrastructure to handle larger vessels. Considering the
strategic location of India's Major Ports and their importance to trade, there is an opportunity
to improve their performance to meet global benchmarks. Most of the Major Ports have high
Turnaround Times even while the utilisation level is low and only a few have the ability to handle
bigger cape-size vessels. The shipping industry is moving towards cape-size vessels. So, it is
important that India develops cape handling capability at its key ports to ensure economies of
scale for the trade. (Para 231)
The Committee feels that the seaports are the interface between two modes of transport
viz., land and sea and recommends that its efficiency is directly related to the connectivity
covering both the modes of transport and as such, Container terminals should provide rapid
transit facilities for containerized cargo (similar to an Airport where passengers arrive and depart
with ready luggage/cargo). This would enable the Ports to plan and utilize land optimally for the
benefit of the ships and not for storage for which CFS / ICD are planned. (Para 234)
AUTOMATION/DIGITISATION OF PORT MANAGEMENT
The Committee feels that traffic congestion at port gates is another critical problem as it
presently has little or no automation. The entry and exit of vehicles and drivers through the
gates of container terminal should be automated. In this regard, the Committee recommends
that Optical Character Recognition (OCR) system can be installed at the terminal gates and
driver's biometric identity and their authentication documents could be stored in a smart card
which he can flash at the counter to gain entry. Furthermore, it would also be useful to implement

71
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) solutions which are driven by an integrated suite of software
that supports the basic internal business process of any organisation. More importantly, a Port
Community System (PCS), in terms of a single technology-based platform, which will bring
together all stakeholders and shares information is essential. An 'e-custom' solution could also
be developed later. While implementation of PCS has been already initiated, its rollout has not
been very successful. Thus, before embarking on such plans, focus should be on building the
foundation and developing stakeholder capabilities. (Para 241)
EMERGING CONSTELLATION OF CONTAINER TERMINALS IN SOUTH INDIA
The Committee is of the view that more ports do not necessarily bring in more cargo. The
extent of a country's EXIM trade is a function of its policies and its openness to international
commerce. A cost-effective way of augmenting port capacity to meet demand is to upgrade
capacity of existing ports. Certainly, public investment is needed to augment port capacity. But,
a careful choice needs to be made in choosing investment between major and non-Major Ports.
(Para 245)
Investment in smaller new ports in India can yield much better returns as they would
service vessels on coastal and inland waterway. The Committee feels that the three ports coming
up within a distance of about 130 nautical miles, need to be developed and strategised in such
a manner that all the three receive sufficient cargo to ensure profitable operations. The Committee
thus recommends that infrastructure development of one port should not be at the cost of the
development of another nearby port. (Para 246)
The Committee recommends that efforts must be concentrated on the development and
expansion of infrastructure that would make water transport more attractive, instead of prioritizing
road transport and turn already over-crowded highways into death traps. More emphasis must be
placed on the coast route and inland waterways as a mode of transport for hinterland cargo
connectivity and its development must be made a priority. (Para 247)
CARGO EV ACUATION FROM INDIAN PORTS IN TERMS OF TRANSPORT MODE
The Committee, in this regard, recommends that ports must continuously take measures
to help their shipping lines and other partners within the port system to battle increased competition
and adjust to new trends in world trade. Dedicated Freight Corridors hold key to intermodal
transport and hence need to be completed on priority basis. Moreover, the inland waterways
system needs to be renovated as cargo evacuation by water is cheaper and cleaner, which reduces
costs and port congestion and brings in efficiency.  The shifting of cargo from road to train and
waterways will be environment-friendly and will also help to lower carbon emissions.
(Para 250)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and the
Ministry of Railways should ensure that all the projects linked to port connectivity be given the
highest priority and projects should be executed within the scheduled time period to make the
port operations viable and profitable. (Para 251)

72
Furthermore, the Committee recommends that evacuation of cargo to and from the port
areas have to be properly synchronized so that the inter-modal network functions smoothly. Road
and rail connectivity form an integral part of the port infrastructure as inefficient evacuation of
cargo can undermine the entire operation of a port. In particular, containerization of cargo
presupposes a seamless link with the road and rail network in an 'end to end' transport system.
Congestion at ports results in delayed evacuation of cargo due to inadequate road and rail
capacity. This adversely impacts the competitiveness of Indian industry. Port connectivity has
ramifications that go beyond the operation of a port per se. (Para 252)
There is a need to allocate the regional distribution of cargo to different modes of land
transport. Though in certain cases of bulk cargo, it is easy to identify the mode for a particular
cargo at a particular port and assumptions regarding percentage split have to be made in respect
of cargo such as POL, LPG , fertilizer, fertilizer raw material, other bulk cargo, containers and
break-bulk cargo. These assumptions need to be made depending upon the features of the
respective regions, nature of cargo, quantum of cargo and the spread of hinterland.
(Para 253)
CONTAINERIZATION
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the need of the hour is to have infrastructure
that can support seamless movement of cargo across all modes without any delay. We need to
create common user facilities where these models can be executed efficiently at a competitive
price. To harness the full potential of inter modal transport, a legal framework and financial/
regulatory incentives need to be put in place. (Para 259)
CABOTAGE LAWS
The Committee recommends that a study must be conducted on the effects of Cabotage
Laws in the shipping sector of the country. The Committee feels that research must be conducted
as to why, given the reduction of the Cabotage laws, the Ports have witnessed a paltry level of
transhipment. The policy of the Ministry in this regard must be scientifically monitored and
solutions to the same must be devised. The Committee extends its full cooperation in this matter
as it feels that the success of transshipment hubs in the country is essential for the growth of
Ports in India. (Para 261)
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES WITH REGARDS TO COASTAL REGULATORY ZONES (CRZ) AND
NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL (NGT)
The Committee feels that the development of Port infrastructure is necessary to the economic
health of the nation. Steps need to be taken to obviate the adverse impact of the order of NGT
on the port projects pending approval of the Coastal Zone Management Plan of the States by the
MoEF&CC. The Committee further recommends that the MoEF&CC must take steps to ensure
that the States/ Union Territories must take it upon themselves to prioritise the CZMPs and
submit the same to the MoEF&CC at the earliest, in order to ensure that necessary rules and
regulations may be instituted for the same. (Para 264)

73
The Committee recommends that an advisory be issued by the MoEF&CC to the States/ UTs
that have not yet submitted their CZMPs to the MoEF&CC, impressing upon them to submit
them immediately and get the same approved. The Ministry of Shipping may also take it upon
itself to ensure that it keeps a track of the same and impress upon the respective State
Governments and their corresponding ports to submit their plans at the earliest. The delay may
cost huge economic loss to the country's Shipping sector and such policy related delays should
be avoided. (Para 265)
The Committee, however, feels that coastal infrastructural projects involving wetlands include
various players whose interests will be affected in one way or another. The Committee, in this
regard, recommends that the stages included by the MoEF&CC whilst granting environmental
clearance, e.g. Expert Appraisal Committee, Public hearings, Term of Reference etc. are speeded
up to ensure that ports are getting necessary clearances without hinderances. Given the
development in science and technology, the Committee is of the opinion that effective solutions
can be found for the developmental needs of the Ports. (Para 267)
The Committee is of the opinion that many of the Major Ports are suffering due to the
absence of a Standard Operating Procedure. The Committee is dismayed to note that many of
the projects of the Major Ports have been stalled due to the same reason, while operations in
some Ports have been shut down as a result of Court orders, which could have been avoided had
these guidelines been set in place. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping
must coordinate with the concerned States, the respective State Pollution Control Boards and the
MoEF&CC to formulate a set of procedures/ processes that are largely uniform across all the
States, keeping room for modifications according to the special requirements that are State or
Region specific. (Para 269)
The Committee is of the opinion that this is a major shortcoming in the port sector. The
Consent to Operate for Ports is a necessary instrument. With the expansion of the Sagarmala
Project, this will be a necessity for small riverine docks that will come up as result of this project.
This is a flaw that must be remedied at the earliest as it leaves the Ports vulnerable to unnecessary
litigation and law suits. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping
must coordinate with the concerned Ministries and Agencies and format a 'Consent to Operate'
specifically for Ports at the earliest. (Para 271)
PUBLIC PRIV ATE PARTNERSHIPS (PPP)
The Committee notes the efforts of the Ministry of Shipping towards the development of
port infrastructure through the PPP model. The Committee recommends that as far as possible,
the same model must be utilised in all the Major Ports to ensure the development of Port
infrastructure in the country. Steps must be taken in tandem with the State Governments
concerned in order to ensure smooth and speedy implementation of the PPP projects.
(Para 276)
DEVELOPMENT/ PROMOTION OF CRUISE FACILITIES AT PORTS
The Committee is pleased to note the proactive steps taken by the Ministry of Shipping in
tandem with the Major Ports to promote Cruise tourism in the nation. With the growing population

74
and infrastructure constraints especially in city based Major Ports, the Committee is of the view
that Cruise Shipping is an important and viable alternative to help promote the growth of the
economy by way of tourism in the country. The Committee further recommends that given the
nascent stage of its development, the policies with regards to Cruise Shipping in the country
must be regularly updated and modified to keep in tune with the changing global economic
scenario. The Committee further recommends that taxation policies in this regard must be
formulated in a manner which helps facilitate its growth. (Para 279)
The Committee was informed that charging cruise ships on the basis of their tonnage,
rather than on the number of passengers, is a dampner. The Committee recommends that cruise
terminals may be developed in all the city based ports to attract foreign licenses and promote
cruise tourism. (Para 280)
PROMOTION OF RO-RO OPERATIONS
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of Shipping in developing RoRo
operations and services in the country. The Committee, however, feels that more needs to be
done as Ro-Ro services are integral to the economic prosperity of the nation and serve as a
wonderful means of transport by utilizing the inland waterways in the country. In this regard,
the Committee recommends that the Ministry must pick up the speed of the Sagarmala Project
in order to make it viable and operational in the country. This will go a long way in improving
the hinterland connectivity, reducing transport costs and reducing travel time in terms of cargo
management in the country. (Para 282)
PROMOTION OF SOLAR ENERGY GENERATION
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Major Ports should make use of the large
tracts of unused land available to them in order to ensure the implementation of the Green Port
Initiative. Apart from being an efficient way of utilizing the space available, the income generated
from the sale of the energy generated can be used to further augment the development of the
Port and its ancillary services. (Para 286)
ECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The Ports also have a certain responsibility to ensure the sustainability of the ecological
resources that surround them. The Committee strongly feels that it is the responsibility of the
Port Authorities and the Ministry of Shipping by extension to nurture and preserve the environment.
The recent reports of recurrent oil spills are a cause of concern for the flora and fauna and the
environment in general. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping
must ensure that the Ports have set guidelines to prevent incidents of oil spills in the future and
steps must be taken to ensure that the oil spills are cleaned up. Promotion of eco-friendly
business is the need of the hour and must be considered an important parameter when considering
the annual performance of a port. This must also extend to the private and small ports as well,
as a matter of policy. (Para 287)

75
MINUTES

XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 26th April, 2018 in Committee Room B, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Praful Patel
4. Kumari Selja
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan
8. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
9. Shri Rajesh Pandey
10. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri Swarabji B., Director.
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Shipping
Shri Gopal Krishna, Secretary
Shri Rabindra Agarwal, Joint Secretary (Ports)
Shri Rajat Sachar, Adviser (E)
Shri A.K. Saran, Director
Shri D.K. Rai, Director
Ms. Shipra Sharma, Director
77

78
Kolkata Port Trust
Shri Vinit Kumar, Chairman
Paradip Port Trust
Shri Rinkesh Roy, Chairman
Indian Ports Association
Shri A. Janardhana Rao, Managing Director
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. He informed them that the
Committee will hear the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and the Chairmen of the Kolkata Port Trust and
Haldia Dock Complex and Paradip Port Trust on the subject 'Cargo Handling in Kolkata Port, Haldia Dock
Complex and Paradip Port'. After that, the Committee observed a minute's silence as a mark of respect
to the victims of a bus accident in Kushinagar.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and the Chairmen of
Kolkata Port Trust & Haldia Dock Complex and Paradip Port. He called upon the Secretary and the
Chairmen of the Ports, to shed light on the issues relating to Cargo handling, berth management and
connectivity issues in these ports. He requested them to present the status of tonnage supply in India,
issues related to it and its comparisons with global standards amongst others.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping proceeded to enumerate on the background and provided a
broad framework with regards to Cargo handling and its management in the two ports. He informed the
Committee that the projects earmarked were gaining ground and presented the highlights of these two
ports. He remarked that the two ports have singularly stellar performances as evinced in the increase
in capacities in these ports, which have risen by over 55 per cent compared to the previous three years
Moreover, overall efficiency measures have increased and the three ports of Kolkata, Haldia and Paradip
have been registering positive growth.
5. The Chairman, Paradip Port Trust proceeded to present before the Committee the performance of
the port. He stated that the performance of any port was adjudged on three major factors. The first being
shipping, followed by berth- management and the third being facilities and capabilities of the port. He
stated that the port had singularly registered a jump of more than 60 per cent growth in the last five
years and at 65 million tonnes of dry- bulk cargo handled annually, is currently the largest dry- bulk
handling port in the country. He, however, pointed out that amongst the Eastern ports, Paradip Port was
lacking in containerized facilities. He apprised the Committee that the port had acquired a new clean cargo
berth, which was set to be operationalized. Having received a provisional certificate of completion, it is
expected to begin handling its first shipment of containers in the first or second week of May. He stated
that the expected timeline for completion of mechanization of cargohandling at the port was 2019-20,
for which the roadmap has been laid for the future of port infrastructure and is presently involved in
removing the bottlenecks that stall its completion. The construction of the outer harbor has been kept
on hold due to market constraints. A multi model logistic park has already been awarded to CONCOR
andit is expected to complete the project of state-of-the-art warehousing facilities, which would go a long
way in helping the modernization of port facilities.

79
6. He further stated that currently, Paradip Port can handle panama size vessels of around 14.5 metes
draft and that it is proposed to handle the fully laid in capes of around 180,00, DWT to 200,000 DWT
which would put them at par with the best ports in the country which have the deepest draft. He apprised
the Committee that a new project called the Haridaspur-Paradeep line has been sanctioned which is closed
to 82 km and that the matter of increasing the pace of this project has been taken up with the Ministry
of Railways. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping assured the Committee that a status note in this regard
will be furnished to the Committee in two weeks.
7. Thereafter, the Chairman of Kolkata Port Trust and Haldia Dock Complex presented a brief background
on the ports of Kolkata and Haldia. He elaborated that the Haldia Dock Complex recorded the highest
growth at 18.61 per cent and was ranked the third major port handling container shipment. The growth
on the container site has reached 1.56 lakh containers whereas previously, it was 1 lakh and the growth
had been marked at around 4 per cent. He pointed out that issues of draft persisted which inhibits the
entry of larger vessels to the port.
8. He further stated that the Kolkata Port is mainly concentrated on container shipment. Plans have
been made to add another berth on the mechanization side in order to encourage more container handling.
The Kolkata Dock being a city port, is ailed with issues of congestion and there is restriction of seven
hours for movement of cargo by road. However, Ro-Ro services from Kolkata side to the Howrah side
has been developed as a suitable alternative in order to move vessels efficiently and solve the traffic-
problem.
9. The Committee was informed that the dock at Khidirpur in Kolkata predominantly caters to smaller
barges. However, due to the draft constraints, a new model is being attempted wherein the ships with
bigger loads are handled at Sagar and Diamond Harbor to a certain extent, due to a draft advantage of
one extra meter. He proceeded to explain the workings of the system that had been devised. He further
stated that doubling the line from Haldia to Durgachak is being done and that a parking facility for four
hundred trucks is being constructed.
10. Members of the Committee also raised various queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The
Chairman directed that written replies to the points not answered, may be sent within three weeks.
11. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The meeting adjourned at 4.01 P.M.

80
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 22nd May, 2018 in Committee Room No. 2, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extn. Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Shatrughan Sinha — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prabhakar Kore
3. Kumari Selja
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
6. Shri Vinod Chavda
7. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan
9. Shri P. Kumar
10. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
11. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
12. Shri Rajesh Pandey
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
14. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri Manoj Tiwari
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri Gopal Krishna, Secretary
2. Shri Rabindra Agarwal, JS (Ports)
80

81
3. Shri Kailash Aggarwal, JS (SM)
4. Shri Rajat Sachar, Adviser (E)
5. Shri A.K. Saran, Director
6. Ms. Shipra Sharma, Director
Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT)
7. Shri Sanjay Bhatia, Chairman
8. Shri K.G . Nath, FA & CAO
9. Shri A.K. Bose, Traffic Manager
10. Capt. A.W. Karkare, Dy. Conservator
11. Shri R. Murugadoss, Chief Engineer
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT)
12. Shri Neeraj Bansal, Chairman-in-charge
13. Dr. C. Unnikrishnan Nair, Chief Manager (Traffic)
2. In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee, Shri Shatrughan Sinha was voted to Chair.
3. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. He informed them that the
Committee will hear the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Chairman of the Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT)
and Chairman- in-charge of the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) on the subject 'Cargo Handling in
Mumbai Port and Jawaharlal Nehru Port'.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Chairman of the Mumbai
Port Trust and Chairman-in-charge of the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust to the meeting. He called upon
the Secretary and the Chairmen of the Ports to shed light on the issues relating to Cargo handling, berth
management and connectivity issues in these ports. He requested them to present the status of matters
related to berth management, dredging, tonnage, taxes, status of the MoU signed between Cochin
Shipyard and MbPT and the status of pending litigation, if any.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping give a brief introduction on the working of the two ports. He
stated that the two port systems are also intertwined port systems and highlighted the achievements of
the ports in terms of growthand Cargo management and touched upon the issues faced by the individual
ports.
6. The Chairman, Mumbai Port Trust gave a brief introduction about the status of the Port and
informed that it is the oldest port in India after the Kolkata Port. He stated that Jawahar Dweep Island
and Pir Pau fall under this port andthat the Marine oil terminal for Petroleum Oil Liquid (P.O.L.) is at
Jawahar Dweep and Chemical terminal for liquid chemicals is handled at Pir Pau. The MbPT handles
62.83 MMT of break bulk, dry bulk and liquid bulk cargo. The Port provides all services in-house
ranging from pilotage to berthing, storage to delivery of cargo and ancillary services like port railways.

82
It has successfully provided Ro-Ro facilities for automobiles with pre-dispatch inspection services. He
pointed out that containers were not handled there as all containers were routed towards JNPT. Furthermore,
he stated that MbPT was in the process of changing its operations from a Cargo- container port towards
becoming a full-fledged Cruise Terminal. The MbPT was in the process of aligning itself along the lines
of Port cities such as Singapore, Miami, Florida etc. Heinformed the Committee that the operations had
commenced andsteps were being taken to implement the suggestions of a consulting firm in order to
establish MbPT as a full-fledged Cruise terminal and make it a home-port for many cruises. In terms
of operational cost and profit, he explained that the high operational cost was only due to the pensions
that were paid to its employees.
7. He further stated that a part of the plan of reinventing itself also included handling cargo only for
the Mumbai city limits. Plans have also been made for a floating storage and re-gasification unit through
LNG. Moreover, construction of bunkering terminal has been completed; this is a venture that is a major
business in countries like Singapore and MbPT is entering this business now. The Indra Port which is
a dry dock under MbPT was facing certain issues. The Port has since signed an MoU with Cochin
Shipyard for the latter to take over the ship-repair operations, for which they are to be paid ` 14 crores.
A modern fishing harbour at Sassoon dock is also planned. An East-to-West trans-harbour link is also
in the pipeline. The Committee noted that no proper timelines have been given and have requested for
the same. Also, water transport for the Mumbai city on the Eastern side, going from Mumbai to Navi
Mumbai to Nerul and from Mumbai to Mandwa is planned. The Committee noted that no proper timelines
have been given and have requested for the same which would cut down travel time between Mumbai
and Goa.
8. The Chairman of MbPT proceeded to elaborate on the plans for a Port terminal dedicated to Cruise.
He stated that the suggestions put forth in the report by Bermello and Ajamil were being implemented.
A major hindrance was the issue of Customs and taxation which were being resolved by the Ministry
of Shipping with the Department of Revenue. A Monitoring Committee has been constituted to oversee
the development of the Cruise terminal which is looking into the parameters of ease of doing business.
To facilitate the Cruise Terminal, a new International Cruise Terminal is being constructed inside the
Mumbai Port premises itself which is expected to be completed by mid- next year. He informed the
Committee that efforts are also being made to build relations with the 5 major cruise operators in the
world in order to encourage home- porting. Simultaneously, a Marina and a Jetti are being developed,
similar to those in Miami, Bussan and Vancouver. These run parallel to the Cruise business and help boost
its growth.
9. Thereafter, the Chairman -in-charge of Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) presented a brief
background on Jawaharlal Nehru Port. He stated that JNPT is one of the youngest ports consisting of
four terminals occupying an area of 3,052 acres. Of the four ports, one is Jawaharlal Nehru Port
Container Terminal (JNPCT) which is run by the Port Authority itself, the others are run by Dubai Ports
World (DP World), Gateway Terminals India (GTI) and recently, the Port of Singapore Authority's port
has been commissioned. The current market share of JNPT is 53 per cent of Major Port container traffic
and is ranked 33r amongst the top 100 Container terminals world over and is expected to join the 10
million Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit (TEU) club in five years. The Port handled a record cargo of
66 million tonnes in the previous year, the highest ever in the history of JNPT. It recorded a growth
of 7.41 per cent and handled a record of 4.83 million TEUs of container cargo.

83
10. He then proceeded to elaborate on the operational logistics of the Port. JNPT, following the orders
of the Ministry of Shipping, has slowly shifted its operations towards Direct Port Delivery System (DPD)
for imports and Direct Port Export System (DPE) for exports and is reaping its rewards. Through the
DPD, an importer can pick up the container directly from the Port instead of routing it through the
Container Freight System (CFS) agents. This has reaped rich dividends and has resulted in economic
benefits. On the export side, the DPE has facilitated for export containers to reach the Port directly. He
explained that the practice has resulted in a significant reduction of Dwell Time, 112 hours reduced to
50 hours for imports to exit the port gate and similarly, it has been reduced to 83 hours for exports.
This includes cargo aggregation time and the eight hours required for planning and loading time. Further,
he informed the Committee that steps are being taken to convert the Container Freight Company's (CFC)
spaces into warehouses and convert their services into those of warehousing facilities, to solve the
problem of floor space index and issues of space constraints.
11. He informed the Committee of the status of the modernization of the Jawaharlal Nehru Port. He
apprised the Committee that Inter-terminal movement of Tractor Trailers has been initiated in order to
decongest the Port traffic. RFID based Gate Automation system has been implemented where a truck
which enters to deposit a box, picks up an export box on its way back, saving a distance of seven-and-
a-half kilometer. Parallel to this, parking zones have been created in the Port. Parking has been allotted
to individual terminals and it has been made mandatory for the trucks to use the respective parking. The
rates have been kept minimal, at `60 for eight hours to facilitate parking and this has gone a long way
in regulating the traffic. The Customs have also been brought to the parking area so that the document
processing is done in the parking area itself before they enter the Port. A 45-hectare centralized parking
plaza is under construction. The plan is to place the best player in the operational area where each truck
would come. This place will be equipped with a central Customs office, restaurants, dormitories, medical
facilities etc. All regulatory agencies' laboratories would also be housed here to ensure that all shipment
requirements are placed under one roof.
12. While elaborating on the operational performance of the Port, the Chairman of JNPT stated that the
Average Parcel Size at Jawaharlal Nehru Port Container Terminal (JNPCT) has increased to 3,532 TEUs
against the average of 2,727 TEUs of JNPT. This has resulted in increased productivity due to decreased
berthing and un-berthing times and the increase in response time has reposed confidence in the terminal
among the efficient shipping lines. Furthermore, the Pre-Berthing Delay has been reduced and Average
Berth Productivity has increased, thus, resulting in increased container terminal efficiency.
13. The Committee was informed that a unique concept of Dry Port is being introduced to facilitate
cargo-aggregation. Wardha, Jalna, Nasik and Sangli have been identified as the four stations in Maharashtra.
These will act as stations of the ports in the hinterland, where the value of the shipment will be
calculated. Future projects similar to this will be undertaken for areas that share connectivity with JNPT.
However, the connectivity of rail, road and dependence upon JNPT are critical factors for this to be a
success. This will greatly reduce the cost incurred during stuffing to improve connectivity to the
hinterland. DFCC projects including the Western DFC from Dadri to JNPT (1,504) K.m. and the Eastern
DFC from Ludhiana to WB (1,856 K.m.), are also underway and are expected to be completed by June
2019.

84
14. The Committee was apprised that JNPT is promoting a Special Economic Zone (SEZ) of 277
Hectares which would provide key advantages towards promotion of Shore based manufacturing, Plug
and Play, Common infrastructure provision etc. This SEZ is ideal for Import- process and Export format
and will be benefitted by its proximity to Industrial Clusters and Multi-modal connectivity. The role of
JNPT in developing the Container Handling Facilities at Chabahar Port in Iran, through an MoU signed
between the two countries will greatly boost economic activity in the Port.
15. Furthermore, the Chairman-in-charge of JNPT stated that following the direction from the Ministry
of Shipping, the paperwork related to issuing delivery orders has been moved to an e-platform. It is now
an e-invoice, e-payment and e-delivery, and this has been made mandatory. This move, whilst improving
efficiency, has also led to the creation of logistic data banks. JNPT is now a paperless port and all
documentation is processed through a web-based portal. The Custom SEZ has been integrated with the
port system to facilitate the exchange of critical messages and hard copies are not required. He stated
that tariff of shipping lines have been made available online on the JNPT website. Moreover, efforts have
been made to shift container evacuation from road to rail. The rates of road and rail have been equalized
and the gate window time has been reduced from four to three days. He also stated that JNPT is working
with the National Cyber Cell in order to prevent threats to its cyber security. The Indian Ports Association
(IPA) has taken a lead in that to ensure that all twelve major ports have similar kind of cyber security.
16. Members of the Committee also raised various queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The
Chairman directed that written replies to the points not answered, may be sent within two weeks.
17. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
18. The meeting adjourned at 4.21 
P.M.

85
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 28th June, 2018 in Committee Room B, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Kumari Selja
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
6. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
7. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
9. Shri Vinod Chavda
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan
11. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
12. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
14. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
16. Shri Manoj Tiwari
SECRETARIAT
Shri Swarabji B., Director.
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
85

86
WITNESSES
Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri Gopal Krishna, Secretary
2. Shri Shambhu Singh, AS & FA
3. Shri Rabindra Kumar Agarwal, Joint Secretary (Ports)
4. Shri Kailash Aggarwal, JS (SM)
5. Shri Rajat Sachar, Adviser (Eco)
6. Shri Arvind Choudhry, Director
7. Shri A.K. Saran, Director
8. Ms. Shipra Sharma, Director
Indian Port Rail Corporation Limited
9. Shri Anoop Kumar Agrawal, MD
Indian Ports Association
10. Dr. Abhijit Singh Executive, Director
Chennai Port Trust
11. Shri P. Raveendran, Chairman
Kamarajar Port Limited
12. Shri P. Raveendran, CMD
Cochin Port Trust
13. Shri A.V. Ramana, Chairman (I/c)
V .O. Chidambaranar Port Trust
14. Shri Rinkesh Roy, Chairman
15. Shri S. Natarajan, Deputy Chairman
Deendayal Port Trust
16. Shri Sanjay Bhatia, Chairman (I/c)
17. Shri Saroj Kumar Das, CME
18. Shri S. Kirupanandasamy, Traffic Manager (I/c)
Mormugao Port Trust
19. Shri I. Jeyakumar Chairman

87
New Mangalore Port Trust
20. Shri Suresh P. Shirwadkar, Chairman (I/c)
Visakhapatnam Port Trust
21. Shri M.T. Krishna Babu, Chairman
22. Shri P.M. Raju, Supdt. Engineer (Civil)
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. He informed them that the
agenda of the Committee is to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and the Chairmen of the Chennai
Port Trust, Kamarajar Port Limited, Cochin Port Trust, V .O. Chidambaranar Port Trust, Deendayal Port
Trust, Mormugao Port Trust, New Mangalore Port Trust and Visakhapatnam Port Trust on the subject
'Cargo Handling in Major Ports'.
3. The Chairman, V .O. Chidambaranar Port Trust informed the Committee that the Port is strategically
located on the international sea route and that steps are being taken to develop the Port as an international
trans-shipment hub. He apprised the Committee that the Port has 15 berths and that the channel is around
3.8 k.m. long. He stated that one of the main issues in the Port is the small entrance of around 153m
and that it is getting widened. While elaborating upon the cargo handling capacity of the Port, he stated
that the Port handled around 10-11 million tonnes thermal coal in 2017-18 and that 6.98 lakh Twenty
Foot Equivalent Units (TEUs) containers were handled in 2017-18. He drew attention of the Committee
to the policy initiative taken by the Ministry of Shipping in relaxing cabotage loss wherein foreign
shipping lines have been allowed to carry coastal cargo. He further stated that one state-of-the art truck
parking terminal and a full fledged Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) system have been introduced
in the Port.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping elucidated upon the steps taken to bring the cargo back to
Indian ports. He stated that foreign lines are now allowed to move cargo within Indian ports and that
the restrictions on Indian companies to charter foreign lines have been removed.
5. The Chairman, Chennai Port Trust apprised the Committee that the Port mainly handles containers,
liquid bulk, dry bulk and break bulk. He stated that the Port has 24 berths which handle about 52 million
tonnes of cargo and that the port has automobile cargo handled in Ro-Ro ships. He also stated that the
roads inside the Port have been widened and laned and that the gate complex has been modernised. He
informed the Committee that investment has been made in creation of rail facility inside the Port and that
a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was entered with Puducherry Government to develop Puducherry
Port as a satellite port.
6. The CMD, Kamarajar Port Limited, while making the presentation, stated that the Port is a landlord
port and that the Port has eight terminals. He further stated that all the terminals are equipped with state-
of-the-art infrastructure facilities with fully mechanized cargo handling operations for faster evacuation
and that the Port has got excellent rail connectivity. He narrated the steps being taken to improve road
connectivity of the Port and informed the Committee that a state-of-the-art cruise terminal has been set
up at Chennai Port.

88
7. The Chairman, Cochin Port Trust informed the Committee that in 2017-18, the Port handled 29.38
million metric tones (MMT) as against the target of 28.5 MMT. He apprised the Committee that the
average pre-berthing detention time was 7.61 hours in 2018 and that the average turn around time was
1.46 days in 2018. He explained the healthy sustainable growth of the Port in terms of container volume.
He stated that drive-through scanners which can scan around 60 trucks in one hour have been installed
and that the trucks which enter the International Container Transshipment Terminal (ICTT) can leave the
facility in 27 minutes.
8. The Chairman, Deendayal Port Trust informed the Committee that the traffic handled by the Port
in the last year was 105 metric tons (MT) and that the profit and the operating income have nearly
doubled in the last 5 years. He apprised the Committee that the existing berths in the Port are 31 and
that 10 more are being added. He explained to the Committee that development of cargo berth number
14 and berth number 16 have been taken up and that construction of oil jetty number 7 has also been
taken up.
9. The Chairman, Mormugao Port Trust informed the Committee that the iron ore leases in Goa have
been cancelled by the Supreme Court and that it has impacted the cargo exports of the Port. He explained
to the Committee that 20 million tonnes of iron ore was handled by the Port in a year and that cargo
would not be available from 2018. The issue is being dealt at the State Government level.
10. The Chairman, Visakhapatnam Port Trust while highlighting the major features of the Port, stated
that it is the only major port with 18.1 m draft which can handle super cape size vessels with 2 lakh
Dead Weight Tonnage (DWT) category and that it is the deepest container terminal among all the major
ports with 16.5 m draft. He informed the Committee that the Port runs entirely on solar energy and the
entire water requirement of the Port, except potable water, is taken from sewage treatment. He apprised
the Committee that in the last 5 years, an investment of around ` 1052 crores was made on new
terminals and mechanisation and that ` 510 crores was spent on deepening of channels and berths.
11. The Chairman, New Mangalore Port Trust informed the Committee that the Port has entered into
an agreement with Chettinad for development of coal terminal of 6 million tonnes costing ` 469.46 crores
and that the construction of 1.2 millions of litres per day (MLD) sewage treatment plant has been
completed. He pointed out that one of the bottlenecks faced by the Port is its limited water front and
stated that the growth of container traffic has been almost 23% for the last four years. He apprised the
Committee that the cost of the land based 4 mega watt (MW) solar plant was ` 24 crores and that the
cost of the roof top 1.2 MW solar plant was ` 6 crores.
12. The Chairman of the Committee desired that the Ministry of Shipping may furnish a detailed note
on the issues given below, within a week's time:
• Steps to be taken by the ports to become competitive with International ports such as
Singapore, Colombo and Jebel Ali;
• Public Private Partnership in the ports;
• Alternatives in the wake of closure of the Sterlite company in Tamil Nadu;
• Using the economies of scale;

89
• Ro Ro facility;
• Investment of `5,000 crore by National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) for improving
road connectivity of Chennai Port Trust;
• International Benchmarking for turnaround time; a comparative statement indicating the
parameters of various Indian Ports;
• Steps being taken and desired steps to prevent oil spills;
• Steps taken by various Ports and the Ministry of Shipping to promote cruise tourism and
cruise ships;
• National Green Tribunal (NGT) order as a result of which a number of projects of various
ports were put on hold;
• Latest financial figures of the Ports; and
• Issues related to conservation of energy (solar energy).
13. Members of the Committee also raised various queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The
Chairman directed that written replies to the points not answered, may be sent within three weeks.
14. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
15. The meeting adjourned at 4.58 
P.M.

90
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 19th December, 2018 in Committee Room
No.-62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
5. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Ramcharan Bohra
9. Km. Arpita Ghosh
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan
11. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
12. Shri Rajesh Pandey
13. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He
informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the following Reports:—
(i) *    * *
(ii) Draft Report on the Subject 'Cargo Handling at the Major Ports'.
90
***Relate to other Matters.

91
(iii) *    * *
(iv) *    * *
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the above stated draft Reports and adopted them after a brief
discussion.
4. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 21st
December, 2018. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar, M.P. and in his
absence, Dr. L, Hanumanthaiah, M.P. and in his absence Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati, M.P. to present the
Reports in Rajya Sabha. Kumari Arpita Ghosh, M.P . and in her absence, Shri Rajesh Pandey, M.P. was
authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2018.
5. * * *
6. The meeting adjourned at 10.23 A.M.
***Relate to other Matters.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
List of witnesses who appeared before the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
26th April, 2018
Ministry of Shipping
Sh. Gopal Krishna Secretary
Sh. Rabindra Agarwal Joint Secretary (Ports)
Sh. Rajat Sachar Adviser (E)
Sh. A.K. Saran Director
Sh. D.K. Rai Director
Ms. Shipra Sharma Director
Kolkata Port Trust
Sh. Vinit Kumar Chairman
Paradip Port Trust
Sh. Rinkesh Roy Chairman
Indian Ports Association
Sh. A. Janardhana Rao Managing Director
22nd May, 2018
Ministry of Shipping
Sh. Gopal Krishna Secretary
Sh. Rabindra Agarwal JS (Ports)
Sh. Kailash Aggarwal JS (SM)
Sh. Rajat Sachar Adviser (E)
Sh. A.K. Saran Director
Ms. Shipra Sharma Director
Mumbai Port Trust
Sh. Sanjay Bhatia Chairman
Sh. K.G . Nath FA & CAO
Sh. A.K. Bose Traffic Manager
95

96
Capt. A.W. Karkare Dy. Conservator
Sh. R. Murugadoss Chief Engineer
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust
Sh. Neeraj Bansal Chairman-in-charge
Dr. C. Unnikrishnan Nair Chief Manager (Traffic)
28th June, 2018
Ministry of Shipping
Shri Gopal Krishna Secretary
Shri Shambhu Singh AS & FA
Shri Rabindra Kumar Agarwal Joint Secretary (Ports)
Shri Kailash Aggarwal JS (SM)
Shri Rajat Sachar Adviser (Eco)
Shri Arvind Choudhry Director
Shri A.K. Saran Director
Ms. Shipra Sharma Director
Indian Port Rail Corporation Limited
Shri Anoop Kumar Agrawal MD
Indian Ports Association
Dr. Abhijit Singh Executive Director
Chennai Port Trust
Shri P. Raveendran Chairman
Kamarajar Port Limited
Shri P. Raveendran CMD
Cochin Port Trust
Shri A.V. Ramana Chairman (I/c)
V .O. Chidambaranar Port Trust
Shri Rinkesh Roy Chairman
Shri S. Natarajan Deputy Chairman
Deendayal Port Trust
Shri Sanjay Bhatia Chairman (I/c)

97
Shri Saroj Kumar Das CME
Shri S. Kirupanandasamy Traffic Manager (I/c)
Mormugao Port Trust
Shri I. Jeyakumar Chairman
New Mangalore Port Trust
Shri Suresh P. Shirwadkar Chairman (I/c)
Visakhapatnam Port Trust
Shri M.T. Krishna Babu Chairman
Shri P .M. Raju Supdt. Engineer (Civil)

98
ANNEXURE-II
Port League Top 50, 2012-2016 (1000TEU) {Table 3}
Table Port Name Country 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Growth
Rate (2016/
2012)
1 2 3 4 567 89
1. Shanghai China 3 2,529 33,617 35,304 36,537 37,133 114%
2. Singapore Singapore 31,649 32,240 33,869 30,922 30,904 98%
3. Shenzhen China 22,940 23,278 24,037 24,204 23,979 105%
4. Ningbo-Zhoushan China 15,670 16,774 19,430 20,620 21,560 138%
5. Busan Korea 17,046 17,686 18,683 19,469 19,850 116%
6. Hong Kong China 23,117 22,367 22,283 20,073 19,813 86%
7. Guangzhou China 14,743 15,309 16,626 17,625 18,858 128%
8. Qingdao China 14,503 15,520 16,624 17,510 18,010 124%
9. Dubai UAE 13,270 13,641 15,249 15,592 14,772 111%
10. Tianjin China 12,300 13,010 14,050 14,090 14,490 118%
11. Port Klang Malaysia 10,000 10,350 10,946 11,887 13,170 132%
12. Rotterdam Netherlands 1 1,865 11,621 12,297 12,235 12,385 104%
13. Kaohsiung China (Taiwan) 9,781 9,938 10,593 10,264 10,465 107%
14. Antwerp Belgium 8,633 8,578 8,978 9,654 10,037 116%
15. Dalian China 8,060 9,912 10,128 9,450 9,614 119%
16. Xiamen China 7,201 8,008 8,572 9,183 9,614 134%
17. Hamburg Germany 8,863 9,302 9,729 8,821 8,910 101%
18. Los Angeles USA 8,078 7,869 8,340 8,161 8,857 110%
19. Tanjung Pelepas Malaysia 7,700 7,628 8,524 9,120 8,281 108%
20. Laem Chabanq Thailand 5,830 6,041 6,583 6,780 7,227 124%
21. Long Beach USA 6,045 6,730 6,821 7,192 6,775 112%
22. New York/New USA 5,529 5,467 5,772 6,372 6,252 113%
Jersey
98

99
1 2 3 4 567 89
23. Yingkou China 4,851 5,301 5,611 5,922 6,086 125%
24. Ho Chi Minh City V ietnam 5,060 5,542 5,369 5,788 5,987 118%
25. Colombo Sri Lanka 4,180 4,306 4,908 5,185 5,735 137%
26. Bremen/ Germany 6,115 5,831 5,780 5,480 5,535 91%
Bremerhaven
27. Tanjung Priok Indonesia 6,200 6,590 5,900 5,201 5,515 89%
28. Algeciras Spain 4,114 4,501 4,556 4,516 4,761 116%
29. Valencia Spain 4,469 4,328 4,442 4,616 4,722 106%
30. Lianyunqanq China 5,020 5,490 5,005 5,009 4,703 94%
31. Tokyo Japan 4,751 4,861 4,895 4,629 4,700 99%
32. Manila Philippine 3,705 3,770 3,810 3,976 4,523 122%
33. Jawaharlal Nehru India 4,260 4,162 4,450 4,480 4,518 106%
34. Khorfakkan UAE 3,996 3,800 3,800 4,142 4,330 108%
35. Taicang China 4,014 2,170 3,101 3,760 4,081 102%
36. Felixstowe U K 3,700 3,740 4,100 3,980 4,000 108%
37. Jeddah Saudi Arabia 4,738 4,561 4,218 4,188 3,957 84%
38. Piraeus Greece 2,734 3,164 3,585 3,330 3,737 137%
39. Savannah USA 2,966 3,034 3,346 3,737 3,645 123%
40. Donqquan/Humen China 1,100 1,893 2,892 3,363 3,640 331%
41. Seattle/Tacoma USA 3,519 3,456 3,394 3,529 3,616 103%
42. Santos Brazil 3,171 3,446 3,685 3,645 3,394 107%
43. Tanjung Perak Indonesia 2,849 3,001 3,106 3,154 3,355 118%
44. Salala Oman 3,620 3,340 3,034 2,569 3,325 92%
45. Mundra India 1,724 2,390 2,720 2,895 3,320 193%
46. Colon Panama 3,519 3,356 3,287 3,577 3,258 93%
47. Marsaxlokk Malta 2,540 2,750 2,869 3,064 3,084 121%

100
1 2 3 4 567 89
48. Nanjing China 2,300 2,670 2,760 2,940 3,084 134%
49. Port Said Egypt 3,631 4,100 3,959 3,462 3,036 84%
50. Rizhao China 1,749 2,027 2,420 2,810 3,010 172%
S. T OTAL 399,947 412,466 434,440 438,708 447,613 112%
Share of Top 50 ports among 68.1% 66.0% 66.7%
world total (%)
WORLD T OTAL 587,484 624,480 651,201 N/A N/A
(1) "Containerisation International Yearbook"2012. 2013-2014 "The Top 100 Ports of 2014 of Containerisation International"
2015-2016 "The Top 100 Ports in 2016 of Lloyds List Containers"
(2) Highlighted ports achieved 150%+ increase in 5 years.
(3) World Total 2010-2014 were based on UNCTAD "Review of Maritime Transport". No World Total data in UNCTAD
"Review of Maritime Transport 2016/2017"

101
ANNEXURE-III
Name of Port Existing draft (mtrs.) Proposed draft Expected time
(mtrs.)
Kolkata 7.2-7.5 No proposal to Major riverine port
increase draft at which suffers from
present  perennial siltation coupled
with morphological
changes.
Paradip 14.5 18.0 December 2017
Visakhapatnam Inner Harbour: 14.5 No proposal to
Outer Harbour: 18.1 increase draft at
present
Kamarajar (Ennore) 13.5 - 16.0 18.0 March 2017
Chennai Inner Harbour: 14.5 No proposal to
Outer Harbour: 18.1 increase draft at
present
V .O. Chidambarnar 9.7 to 12.8 No proposal to
(Tuticorin) increase draft at
present
Cochin 14.5 No proposal to
increase draft at
present
New Mangalore 14.0 No proposal to
increase draft at
present
Mormugao 14.4 19.8 December, 2016
Mumbai 14.0 Proposal to increase December 2016
draft of Fifth oil berth
at Jawahar Dweep to
16.1 meters
Jawaharlal Nehru 14.0 15.0 December, 2017
Kandla Kandla 13.0; Tuna No proposal to Transloading in practice
15.0 increase draft at
present
101

102
Port Distance from Draft (in Mtrs.) Designed/Actual depth Available
Harbour Entrance at berths (in Mtrs.)
(in k.m.) Min. Max.
Kolkata 232 7. 2-7.5 7.2 13.7
Haldia 115 7. 2-7.5 Subject to Tidal variations
Paradip 2.2 14.5 11.50 27.50(SPM)
Visakhapatnam IH-2.0 IH-14.5 9.75 18.10
OH-3.1 OH-18.1
Kamarajar 3.775 16 12.00 18.00
Chennai 6.7 IH-13.0 OH-17.0 8.50 17.40
V .O. Chidambaranar 4.0 12.8 8.60 12.80
Cochin 13.0 14.5 9.70 30.00 (SPM)
New Mangalore 7.5 14 7.00 14.00
Mormugao 4.6 14.4 13.10 14.10
Mumbai 9.6 14.0 7.00 14.30
JNPT 10.0 14.0 8.00 16.5
Deendayal 25 13.0 Tuna: 15.0 9.0 30.00(SPM)
Port Proposals
Mumbai Port Trust Dredging of Channel for BPX and BPS
Mormugao Port Trust Capital Dredging of approach channel
VOC Port Trust Capital dredging of the dock basin inn front of Coal JettyOI, coal Jetty-
II, Berths 3&4, Berth07, NCB-II and NCB-III upto (-) 16.50 m depth
and approach Channel up to (-) 17.20 m depth for a length of 10,350
m and Widening of Port entrance channel from existing 153 m to 230
m
Kamarajar Port Trust Capital Dredging Phase-V for IOCL, Captive jetty, LNG , 2nd RoRo
Berth and MLT-II
Paradip Port Trust Deepending and optimization of Inner Harbour facilities including
development of Western Dock captive berth (two nos.1 to handle capsize
vessels

103
ANNEXURE-IV
Top 20 Ports, ranked by 10-Y ear Increase Ratio, 2007-2016 (1000 TEU)
Rank Port 2007 2016 10 Y Growth Rate Country
(2016/2007)
1. Dalian 4,642 9,614 207% China
2. Xiamen 4,627 9,614 208% China
3. Ningbo-Zhoushan 10,653 21,560 202% China
4. Qingdao 9,462 18,010 190% China
5. Guanzhou 10,257 18,858 184% China
6. Port Klang 7,312 13,170 180% Malaysia
7. Tianjin 8,176 14,490 177% China
8. Laem Chabang 4,627 7,227 156% Thailand
9. Tanjun Pelapas 5,500 8,281 151% Malaysia
10. Busan 13,270 19,850 150% Korea
11. Shanghai 26,150 37,133 142% China
12. Dubai 10,79.1 14,722 136% UAE
13. Rotterdam 9,900 12,385 125% Netherlands
14. Los-Angeles 7,103 8,857 125% USA
15. Antwerp 8,355 10,037 120% Belgium
16. Shenzhen 21,099 23,979 114% China
17. Kaohsiung 9,200 10,465 114% China (Taiwan)
18. Singapore 27,936 30,904 114% Singapore
19. Hamburg 9,360 8,910 95% Germany
20. Hong Kong 23,998 19,813 83% China
S. T OTAL 232,418 317,879 137%
Share among 60.7%
Total (%)
WORLD T OTAL 382,622 N/A
2007 "Containerisation International Yearbook" 2016 'The Top 100 ports in 2016 of Lloyds List Containers"
103