 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
349
_ 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty Seventh Report on the subject ‘Connectivity and 
Tourist Terminal Facilities at Ports’  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty Seventh Report on the subject ‘Connectivity and Tourist 
Terminal Facilities at Ports’  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-28 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   29 
6. ANNEXURES         30-53 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
54-56 


i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer  

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Forty Ninth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Twenty Seventh Report on the subject ‘Connectivity and Tourist Terminal Facilities 
at Ports’. 
2. The Three Hundred Twenty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th June, 2022 and thereafter was presented to the Parliament on 
the 8th December, 2022. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Twenty Seventh Report were received from the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways on 15th March, 19th April and 26th April, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  20th 
July, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
July 20, 2023                                                            Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Asadha 29, 1945 (Saka)                                    Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AP Andhra Pradesh 
BHU Banaras Hindu University 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CEZs Coastal Economic Zones 
CoPA Cochin Port Authority 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CPCP Comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan  
DBFOT Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Transfer 
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EGoS Empowered Group of Secretaries 
EMRIP Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
EXIM Export Import 
FY  Financial Year 
FLS Final Location Survey 
GRT Gross Registered Tonnage 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HLAC High Level Advisory Committee 
IC Independent Charge 
IBP  Indo-Bangladesh Protocol  
IOB Iron Ore Berth 
ISCKON International Society for Krishna Consciousness 
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
JMVP Jal Marg Vikas Project 
JNPT Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
KFTZ Kandla Free Trade Zone 
KIOCL Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited 
KM/Km Kilometer 
LC Level Crossing 
LOA Letter of Authorization 
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
LNG Liquefied Natural Gas 
MbPA Mumbai Port Authority  
MDR Major District Road 
MgPA Mormugao Port Authority 
MIV Maritime India Vision  
MMC Multi Modal Committees 
MMLP Multi Modal Logistic Parks 
MMT Million Metric Tonnes 
MMTPA Million Metric Tonnes Per Annum 

iv 
 
MoPS&W Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
MoT Ministry of Tourism 
MSDC Maritime Shipping Development Council 
MV Motor Vessel 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHLML National Highways Logistics Management Limited 
NICDIT National Industrial Corridor Development and Implementation Trust  
NLP National Logistics Portal  
NMP National Monetization Pipeline  
NMPA New Mangalore Port Authority  
NMPT New Mormugao Port Trust 
NPP National Perspective Plan 
NW National Waterways 
OM Office Memorandum 
PCS Port Community System 
PET Preliminary Engineering cum Traffic  
PMG Project Monitoring Group 
PPA Paradip Port Authority 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSW Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
R&D Research & Development 
RET Reconnaissance Engineering cum Traffic  
Ro-Ro/Ro-Pax Roll on - Roll off Passenger 
RoB Road Over Bridge 
SDCL Sagarmala Development Company Limited 
SEZ Special Economic Zone 
SH State Highway 
SPSR Serial Peripheral Status Register 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
TKM Tonne-Kilometer 
TN Tamil Nadu 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UT Union Territory 
VAT Value Added Tax 
VOC V. O. Chidambaranar 
VOCPT V. O. Chidambaranar Port Trust 
VPA Vishakhapatnam Port Authority 
VPT Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
WB West Bengal 
 
 

Page 1 of 53 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three 
Hundred and Twenty Seventh Report on ‘Connectivity and Tourist Terminal Facilities at 
Ports’ which was presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th June, 2022 and 
thereafter to both the Houses of Parliament on 8th December, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 15 th March, 19th April 
and 26 th April, 2023 in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Report. The replies have been categorized as follows:- 
  
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 21, 22, 26, 35, 39 
Total: 5 
  
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 5, 6, 19, 25, 27, 37, 38, 40, 41, 43, 45 
Total: 11 
  
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 23, 36 
Total: 3 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil. 
Total: Nil. 
 

Page 2 of 53 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
INITIATIVES UNDERTAKEN BY MOPS&W TO EXPEDITE IMPLEMENTATION OF 
PORT CONNECTIVITY PROJECTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the various Ministries to expedite the 
implementation of the Port Connectivity Projects. It also notes that the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and NHAI has also carried out a detaile d prioritization exercise and 
had shortlisted 38 road connectivity projects which are at DPR stage and likely to be 
awarded by the F.Y. 2022. The Committee is of the opinion that such a capital -intensive 
infrastructure project which seeks to improve port, rail and road connectivity involving 
various ministries, State Governments can be successful, only if all the concerned agencies 
give utmost attention to the time bound completion of the portion of work allocated to each 
one and maintain close coordination  cooperation amongst themselves. The Committee hopes 
that all out efforts would be made by all the stakeholders to complete the work allocated 
within the time schedule. The Committee also desires to know the status of the award of work 
relating to the 38 road connectivity projects and the percentage of work completed. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 NHAI, in their report dated 04.03.2021, had prioritized 38 port -road connectivity 
projects which are at different stages of DPR and planned for award by FY22. 
1.2 However, after the latest exercise of Comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan (CPCP) 
prepared by DPIIT and shared in September 2022, 55 port road connectivity projects under 
MoRTH were prioritized. The status of these projects as shared by MoRTH is giv en in 
Annexure-1. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee further notes that a SPV under NHAI viz. National Highways 
Logistics Management Ltd. (NHLML) has been incorporated in 2020 to develop Multimodal 

Page 3 of 53 
 
Logistic Parks (MMLPs) and works related to National Highways connectivity to ports. The 
Committee is of the firm opinion that the MMLPs is a step in the right direction and such 
parks, if planned at strategic locations in the country would bring down logistics costs and 
boost the national economy. The parks will enable the shift from a point -to- point to a hub –
and-spoke model in logistics sector, eventually helping to bring down logistics costs and 
enabling more efficient movement through new -generation vehicles. The importance of a 
modern and effic ient logistics network cannot be overemphasized. Poor connectivity across 
various logistics modes not only increases the wear and tear of transport means and damages 
to goods, but also leads to uncertainty in supply chains leading to further decrease in th e 
route utilization by trade and thus, increasing transportation costs for the remaining users. 
Sagarmala aims at construction of wider roads for connectivity of Ports to another point. 
However, unfortunately, the Committee noticed that in some cases the S agarmala Projects 
are undertaken only up to major crossroads on the route and thereafter no effort is made to 
construct road up to point envisaged in the Sagarmala Project. The Committee is constrained 
to note that in such a situation the wider roads/conne ctivity between the Port and the point 
envisaged in the Sagarmala Project beyond the point of cross roads will remain unfulfilled. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the point –to–point Sagarmala connectivity 
envisaged may be implemented irrespective  of the fact that there exists major cross roads in 
between. The Committee stresses that road connectivity under Sagarmala should not be only 
point to point but encompass the entire peripheral network of roadways interlinking nearby 
towns, villages, servic e roads, important tourist places, national monuments etc. for the 
overall development of the areas. The Committee emphasizes that service roads should be 
included in the DPR itself, and given as much importance. 
(Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The suggestions of the Committee are noted. Further, it is submitted that better port 
connectivity facilitates efficient cargo movement between ports and their respective 
hinterlands minimizing overall logistics cost of the country. The Ministry of Ports, Shippin g, 
& Waterways endeavours to enhance road and rail connectivity to all ports having sizeable 
traffic. The enhancement of port connectivity is an ongoing and continuous process. Under 
PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan, more infrastructure gaps are identif ied to link the ports 
end-to-end with the existing/ upcoming major economic zones/ industrial clusters/ nodes/ 
corridors with an objective to holistically integrate all the multimodal connectivity projects 

Page 4 of 53 
 
and remove missing gaps for seamless movement of people, goods, & services. 
  
ISSUES WITH CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that Vishakhapatnam Port is one of the largest Major Ports in 
the country handling 75 MTPA with a 60% rail co -efficient, and is largely dependent on the 
Indian Railways for transportation of its EXIM cargo. The delay in electrification and 
doubling work on this rail route is causing severe congestion at Port and also on railway 
lines. The Committee recommends that necessary steps should be  taken to rectify the 
problem. 
(Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Visakhapatnam Port is connected to east coast railway from R&D yard and ore 
exchange yard of Port. The port maintains its own Railway system connected to the East 
coast Railway zone. Electr ification of 45 TKM in VPA has already been completed and 
electrification of 38 TKM is in progress which is expected to be completed by January 2024.  
3.2 Further, to decongest the lines and better capacity utilization of the port, 5 rail 
connectivity proj ects are under implementation by Indian Railways for improving 
connectivity to Vishakhapatnam Port: 
(i) Kirandul-Jagdalpur doubling; 
(ii) Jagdalpur-Koraput doubling; 
(iii) Vizianagram-Titlagarh-Sambalpur; 
(iv) Kottavalasa-Jagdalpur-Koraput; and 
(v) Rail Connectivity between Koraput-Singapur Road. 
3.3 These projects are made part of CPCP prepared and shared by DPIIT in September 
2022. Further, it is directed by DPIIT to monitor these projects through the PMG mechanism 
for quick resolution of issues and faster implementation. 
 
CRUISE TOURIST TERMINAL FACILITIES AT PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee appreciates the various actions being taken by the Ministry of Ports, 

Page 5 of 53 
 
Shipping & Waterways in coordination with the Ministry of Tourism to develop the required 
infrastructure and facilities for cruise tourism and for promotion of the same in India. The 
Committee, however, feels that cruise tourism is still in its nascent stage in India and 
requires well thought out, concerted efforts of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Water ways, 
and the Ministry of Tourism to tap the full potential of cruise tourism in India and reap the 
economic benefits thereof. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Task Force on 
Cruise Tourism comprising MoPS&W and MoT may continue to hold its mee tings regularly 
and if required, the Task Force may seek consultations from international experts in the 
cruise tourism sector to prepare a comprehensive action plan for the development of cruise 
tourism in the country. 
(Para 35) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 In line with the recommendations of the Committee and as decided in the first 
Incredible India International Cruise Conference held in May 2022 in Mumbai, the Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping & Waterways vide OM No. SW - 17011/11/2022 CS (CN 353059) dated 
25.10.2022, constituted a High Level Advisory Committee (HLAC) to advise the Task Force 
on Cruise Tourism with the following scope: 
(i) To advise the Task Force on measures considered necessary for the fast growth of the 
Cruise Tourism in India; 
(ii) To brief and update the Task Force on the global best practices in the international 
arena, including the regulatory matters of Immigration Customs, GST (VAT), liquor 
related taxes; and 
(iii) To advise on the latest technological development for quick and smooth passenger 
flow though Terminal, Ports, destinations etc. 
4.2 The said Committee comprises of Chairmen of Major Ports, CEOs of various 
International and domestic Cruise Lines and Ministry Officials from MoPS&W, Revenue, 
Tourism, IWAI etc. 
4.3 The Task Force meetings are held on regular interval basis. 
4.4 First HLAC meeting was also held on 18.01.2023, when various issues related to 
Infrastructure requirements at Cruise Ports, sustainable practices in cruise tourism, 
immigration policies, taxation policies, training, and skill  development in hospitality sector, 
etc were discussed and deliberated. The issue of development of infrastructure at Major and 
Minor cruise ports was discussed in the HLAC meeting and it was decided that the necessary 

Page 6 of 53 
 
inputs shall be obtained from the Tou r Operators and the same will be shared with the 
respective state governments to help design the cruise circuits as well as infrastructure 
improvement. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
5. With regard to the ongoing development of Cruise Terminals at various Po rts, the 
Committee recommends that it may be ensured that all such terminals being developed are 
equipped with state -of-the-art facilities and amenities including comfortable passenger 
lounge, immigration counters, sign boards in various relevant languages , clean washroom 
facilities etc. for the tourists, to offer them a comfortable experience. The development of 
terminals may be planned with a long -term analysis of the estimated capacity requirements 
so as to be able to efficiently handle a large number of tourists in the upcoming years. 
(Para 39) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Mumbai Port Authority (MbPA)  is constructing International Cruise Terminal at 
Indira Dock with all state-of-the-art facilities. 
5.2 Cochin Port Authority (CoPA)  has two dedicated cruise terminals and has hosted 
among the largest and most luxurious of cruise ships. Cochin Port Cruise Terminal 
‘Samudrika,’ constructed with a financial assistance of the Ministry of Tourism (₹27 crore) 
was completed in the year 2015.  This terminal has 1800 m 2 space and is fully equipped with 
all facilities required to handle large cruise ships carrying around 2000 passenger per call. 
Mattancherry channel, where Samudrika Cruise Terminal is located had LOA restriction of 
260 m for ships, and some of the most prestigious cruise ships calling at Cochin had the LOA 
of 320 m and above, and therefore, berthed at Ernakulam Wharf without any facilities for 
passengers. Accordingly, a new International Cruise Terminal ‘Sagarika’ with an area of 
2253 m2 with connected facilities was constructed inside Ernakulam Wharf area with the 
financial assistance of the Ministry of Tourism (₹23.26 crore) to cater to the cruise 
passengers. The Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, Sri Narendra Modi has inaugurated the 
International Cruise Terminal ‘Sagarika,’ on 14.02.2021. The berth adjacent to ‘Sagarika’ can 
berth largest of the cruise vessels afloat and has large space in front for ease of movement of 
guests. 
5.3 Cochin Port Trust to provide a variety in shopping  experience for the Foreign Cruise 

Page 7 of 53 
 
Passengers, Cochin Port is developing ‘Kochi Haat’, a replica of ‘Dilli Haat’ wherein local 
vendors will be permitted to sell souvenirs, ethnic products, apparels, ayurvedic products, 
spices etc. A plot of land measuring 71.50 cents opposite to the New Cruise Terminal will be 
developed with facility for putting up stalls and showcase Kerala products. 
5.4 New Mangalore Port (NMPA) is receiving cruise vessels during the season of April 
every year. On an average, 20 -22 vessels are calling at the Port and the Port is extending all 
the facilities for receiving these cruise vessels and its passengers. Berth No.4 is earmarked for 
berthing these vessels. The Port has provided a full -fledged cruise lounge near the cruise 
berth equipped with Immigration counter, foreign exchange counter, duty -free shops, toilets, 
tourist information counter, locker rooms, conference hall, handicrafts shop, meditation 
center etc. As part of providing additional facilities, the number of immigration cou nters 
inside the cruise lounge will be enhanced from 35 to 75. In addition to the above, a dedicated 
gate exclusively for the cruise passengers will be constructed which is under tendering stage. 
5.5 Mormugao Port Authority (MgPA)  has planned Development of International and 
Domestic Cruise Terminal and allied facilities such as Ro -Ro and Ro -Pax facility, ferry 
services etc. at Mormugao Port. An International and Domestic Cruise Terminal and 
Ancillary Commercial Building will be developed by refurbishing existing structures on EPC 
mode. The terminal will be operated and maintained on PPP mode for 30 years. 
5.6 The construction work was awarded in March, 2022 and the likely date of commercial 
operation is March, 2024. 
  
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 

Page 8 of 53 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee is aware that ports have been centers of commerce for centuries and 
they remain crucial to the economy even today. Every year, hundreds of billions of rupees 
worth of products move through ports. Ports generate substantial business activity through 
their operations. The Committee notes that nation’s Major Ports are an important part o f our 
national economy and transportation system. Over 95% of India’s trading by volume and 
65% by value is done through maritime transport. In addition to their impact on the national 
economy, ports also have an impact on local and regional economies of t he states on which 
the ports are situated. The Committee is also of the opinion that a substantial portion of 
business activity in a variety of industries is driven by international trade, and the value of 
foreign trade has risen substantially over the yea rs. Although trade volumes are affected by 
global economic conditions and have decreased slightly over the past few years due to 
COVID pandemic, trade volumes are expected to rise in the future, increasing the importance 
of ports and waterways in terms of export and import. The Committee recommends that at 
this crucial juncture of expected increase in global maritime trade, appropriate policy 
measures may be taken to increase maritime trade through port connectivity to boost the 
economy of the country. 
(Para 5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Connectivity is one of the critical enablers for ports as it is the end -to-end 
effectiveness of the logistics system that drives competitiveness for industry. India's 
hinterland connectivity is mainly based on road and rail n etworks. Railway is the mainstay 
for carrying long lead distance and bulk cargo. But the expansion of rail network has not been 
able to keep up with the growing demand. Hence, the implementation of road and rail 
connectivity projects attains importance for enhancing the country's overall freight efficiency. 
1.2 The Sagarmala Programme has identified connectivity between ports and domestic 

Page 9 of 53 
 
production and consumption centres, through rail, road, and domestic waterways (Coastal 
Shipping and Inland Waterways) a s one of the key pillars of this initiative. Under the port 
connectivity pillar of Sagarmala, there are 209 projects (₹1.42 lakh crore) of which 69 
projects (₹32,000 crore) have been completed. 
1.3 Bharatmala Pariyojana is a flagship programme of Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways. Bharatmala focuses on enhanced effectiveness of already built infrastructure, 
multi-modal integration, bridging infrastructure gaps for seamless movement and integrating 
National and Economic Corridors. Bharatmala Pariyojana P hase-I includes development of 
about 24,800 km NH network such as Economic corridors, Inter -corridor & feeder roads, 
National Corridors Efficiency Improvements, Border and International Connectivity roads, 
Coastal and Port Connectivity roads & Expressways. 
1.4 Apart from Sagarmala and Bharatmala Schemes to enhance Port connectivity across 
all Major and Non-Major Ports, Government of India has introduced PM Gati Shakti National 
Master Plan which aims to provide systematic, multi modal connectivity to various  economic 
zones for seamless movement of people, goods & services resulting in efficient conduct of 
logistics and economic activities. In line with Gati Shakti, MoPS&W carried out an extensive 
exercise to find the port connectivity gaps in consultation wit h Major Ports and State 
Maritime Boards through State Multimodal Committees. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee observes that with the increase in port capacity to handle heavier 
cargo volumes and bigger size of container vessels in near future,  there will be a need for 
development of modern terminal development, which will also challenge the ability of 
terminals to handle increasing cargo volumes. The Committee recommends that appropriate 
guidelines and coordination mechanisms may be formulated to facilitate the development of 
modern terminals to handle increased cargo volumes and bigger container vessels in near 
future which will decrease the challenges of terminal operators as well. 
(Para 6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The government had given a strong push to port modernization, mechanization and 
digitalization, with a number of ease of doing business initiatives. Port modernization include 
the introduction of web -based e -forms and direct port delivery, installation of container 

Page 10 of 53 
 
scanners and Radio Frequency Identification -based systems for gate automation, 
digitalization of land records, launch of a single -window interface for facilitating trade, and 
integration of more seaports with the PCS1x/NLP(Marine). Enhancement of Port productivity 
at Major Ports is a continuous process. Port Projects such as installation of state -of-the-art 
equipment, mechanization of cargo handling system, etc. help in increasing the maritime 
trade at Major Ports. The Government is regularly moni toring the progress of Port 
modernization/mechanization projects. 
2.2 India is in the process of upgrading their infrastructure to accommodate large 
container ships in the future. Government intends to convert Major Ports into Mega Ports in 
the coming year s. However, it will depend on the feasibility of the same. To develop global 
standard ports in India, Maritime India Vision (MIV) 2030 has identified initiatives such as 
developing world-class Mega Ports, transshipment hubs and infrastructure modernization  of 
ports. MIV 2030 estimates the investments to the tune of ₹1,00,000 -1,25,000 crore for 
capacity augmentation and development of world-class infrastructure at Indian Ports. 
  
RAIL CONNECTIVITY 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that the Go vernment has taken up large number of projects to 
remove the bottlenecks in road and rail connectivity to ports. The Committee has no doubt 
that once the projects are implemented, the connectivity problems may be resolved to a great 
extent. However, despite the enormous importance of the connectivity of ports, the Committee 
feels that the pace of work under the Port, Rail and Road connectivity Projects have been 
slow. The Committee is of the opinion that more coordinated efforts are required to complete 
the connectivity projects by involving Railway Authorities/NHAI etc., addressing all technical 
aspects. The Committee emphasizes that interconnectivity of roads, ports, airports, railways, 
waterways etc. should be part of the infrastructure planning process, right from inception 
stage. The Committee is also of opinion that approach to a port from hinterland can be 
critical enough to make or mar a Terminal, because it determines the turn round time and 
evacuation time-vital to the functioning of the port. Evacu ation is a vital component of any 
port project as the capacity and efficiency of the port vitally depend on the rate at which the 
cargo can be evacuated from the terminal. The efficiency, viability and business depend on 
how well connected the port is. The  Committee, therefore, recommends that the plans for the 

Page 11 of 53 
 
connectivity of a port to the roads and railway networks, to airports, to service roads 
connecting nearby towns and villages should be an essential component of the project from 
the its formulation s tage itself and should be a part of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) so 
that the integrated infrastructure can be developed with proper connectivity and interlinking. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 To streamline and coordinate efforts towards effecti ve and efficient monitoring and 
execution of port connectivity projects, MoPS&W has constituted State -wise Multimodal 
Committees for port connectivity with Major Ports, Maritime Boards, MoRTH, MoR 
representative as members for assessing project wise feasib ility, funding arrangement, 
timelines, implementing agencies etc. 
3.2 Government of India has launched the Gati Shakti – National Master Plan for 
Multimodal Connectivity. Gati Shakti - a digital platform - will bring 16 Ministries including 
Railways and Roadways together for integrated planning and coordinated implementation of 
infrastructure connectivity projects. 
3.3 Further, in the 3 rd EGoS meeting on PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan held on 
22nd June, 2022 under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary it was directed that MoPS&W, 
MoR, MoRTH, and DPIIT to jointly finalize a comprehensive action plan for port 
connectivity on PM Gati Shakti framework. This should include prioritization of projects, 
clearances required and timelines. Special Secretary, Logistics, DPIIT to coordinate this 
exercise. 
3.4 In line with the directions of the Cabinet Secretariat, meetings were held between 
MoPS&W, MoR, MoRTH, and DPIIT under the Chairmanship of Secretary (PSW)  on 
26.05.2022, 01.06.2022, 03.06.2022, and 12.08.2022 and data shared with MoRTH, MoR, 
and DPIIT in their respective formats for preparation of Port Connectivity Master Plan. 
Priority of various projects was also identified. State -wise meetings with Multi modal 
Committees by DPIIT were held in August 2022 for finalization of Port Connectivity Plan. 
The Comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan (CPCP) was shared by DPIIT in September 2022. 
  
 
 

Page 12 of 53 
 
ISSUES WITH CONNECTIVITY TO PORT 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Com mittee notes the specific instances of connectivity issues. It notes with 
concern the lack of road connectivity from railway sidings at Paradip Port to iron -ore mines 
at places like Nuagaon, Gandhamardan and Gonua, which leads to higher road 
transportation cost. It also notes the lack of railway line to reduce mine -port distance at 
Nayagarh. While at places like Sukinda - Jaroli, iron-ore rake movement is decreased due to 
delay in environmental clearance for doubling projects. The Committee is of the opinio n that 
since railways is the fastest transport mode and can transport huge quantity of ore at one go 
and also causes less environmental pollution as compared to road transport, all out efforts 
should be made to hasten the Mine -to-port road projects in the said projects. Environmental 
Clearances should also be fast tracked to expeditiously complete the projects. The Committee 
also recommends that necessary steps may be taken to develop railway sidings near mines 
and for obtaining necessary statutory clearanc es to maximize the rail movement of iron ore. 
The Committee notes that some of the Rail and Road projects connecting the Paradip Port 
are pending for years due to various reasons. The Committee recommends that the Ministries 
of Railways; Ports, Shipping & Waterways; and State Governments should make concerted 
efforts to complete the projects at the earliest. Secretary, Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways may take the initiative to complete the projects without delay. 
(Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 To address the road and rail infrastructure gaps, a Comprehensive Port Connectivity 
Plan (CPCP) has been prepared and shared by DPIIT in September 2022, based on 
consultation with Major Ports, State Maritime Boards, MoRTH/NHAI, MoR/Indian 
Railways, through coordinated efforts made by all stakeholders. CPCP incorporates total 298 
port connectivity projects, of which 191 are Sagarmala Projects (101 road and 90 rail 
projects), and an additional 107 road and rail connectivity infrastructure gaps (61 road and 46  
rail). The CPCP includes projects to improve road and rail connectivity to Paradip port. 
4.2 As pointed out, due to lack of direct rail connectivity up to iron ore mines, rail 
transportation of iron ore to Paradip Port is impacted. Hence, direct rail conn ectivity up to 
important iron ore mines, to avoid road transportation to rail sidings from mines and capacity 

Page 13 of 53 
 
augmentation of Nayagarh and Jakhapura line is required. These projects are being taken up 
by Ministry of Railways. In this regard, the lists of i mportant ongoing railway projects and 
new projects initiated by Railways are attached as Annexures - IA & IB. 
4.3 To streamline and coordinate efforts towards effective and efficient monitoring and 
execution of port connectivity projects, MoPS&W has constituted State wise Multi Modal 
Committees (MMCs) for port connectivity with Major Ports, Maritime Boards, MoRTH, 
MoR representative as members for which reviews the port connectivity projects periodically 
and takes up issues with the relevant authority. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee is aware that Odisha is the largest iron ore producing Indian State 
playing a crucial role in the development of iron and steel industries across the nation as 
well as development of transportation system, ai rcraft industry, automobile industry, real 
estate and building industry etc. The Committee recommends that all out efforts should be 
made to ensure quick movement of iron ore from Paradip Port and connecting roads should 
be repaired in a time bound manner and policies should be framed in this regard, to ensure 
growth of aforesaid industries, which will result in economic growth of the country. 
(Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Paradip Port Authority has two well equipped and fully mechanized iron ore handling 
facilities. IOB berth with a draught of 13 meters of 15.6 MMTPA capacity and two nos. of 
Wagon Tipplers with a storage area of 1 lakh sqms. The second terminal with a draught of 16 
meters under PPP mode having capacity of 10 MMTPA with two nos. of Wagon Tipplers and 
storage area of 82,125 square meters. 
5.2 As far as improving road connectivity is concerned, the 4 lane 77 Kms. long Paradip -
Chandikhole section of NH -53 road is the connecting link between Paradip Port and the 
mines & industries located in Odisha, Chhattisgarh & Jharkhand. The Iron ore cargo moving 
to Paradip is the major driver of traffic on the above road. The project for widening this 4 
lane road to 8 lanes is being implemented by NHAI and is in tendering stage. Early 
completion of the project by NHAI is crucial for smooth and congestion -free road 
transportation of Iron ore from the Mines to Paradip Port. 

Page 14 of 53 
 
CRUISE TOURIST TERMINALS AT PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee recommends that MoPS&W, in co -ordination with MoT, may examine 
the feasibility for development and promotion of river tourism activities on rivers besides 
Brahmaputra and Ganga as well, and take concerted efforts to this end by developing Inland 
Waterways and connecting them to port terminals. Cruise termin als/Jetties may be 
constructed wherever feasible by the Government of India in coordination with the State 
Governments and the necessary budgetary allocation may be made for the purpose. The 
Government may also take measures to increase the depths of the d raft by undertaking 
dredging operations wherever required and feasible. If required, possible commercial 
exploitation of dredged material (sand) may also be explored in coordination with the State 
Governments. 
(Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Feasibility for development and promotion of river tourism activities on rivers besides 
the Brahmaputra (NW-2) and the Ganga (NW -1) is found existing on other NWs like NW -3 
(West Coast Canal), NW -8 (Alappuzha - Kottayam Canal), NW -9 (Alappuzha - 
Changanaserry Canal) & NW-59 (Kottayam- Vaikom Canal) in Kerala, NW-5 in Odisha, and 
NWs in Goa. List of tourist destinations on these NWs is at Annexure- 3. 
6.2 Study on tourism: IWAI has engaged WAPCOS Limited as consultants for 
preparation of an Action Plan & detailed Road M ap for development of river cruise tourism 
in India.  
6.3 The study has identified 34 National Waterways as having a potential for 
development of river cruise tourism in India. 
6.4 In order to develop river cruise tourism on a wider scale, development of a ppropriate 
navigational channels with navigational aids, dredging in some NWs, construction of 
berthing, boarding and alighting facilities at multiple points and development of an 
ecosystem for promoting heritage sites and tourist attractions should be imp lemented on all 
the identified NWs. 
6.5 The study has recommended that- 

Page 15 of 53 
 
(i) IWAI, Ministry of Tourism, State government, River Cruise Operators and other 
stakeholders should be tied up to make joint strategy for development of river cruise 
tourism; 
(ii) Development of infrastructures at untapped identified tourism location through 
stakeholder’s consultation, acquiring land for terminal development for river cruise 
tourism, construction basic terminal infrastructure and development of proper 
approach road to the terminals; 
(iii) Provision of adequate depth for navigation of cruise vessel by performing 
maintenance dredging at regular intervals; 
(iv) Easing of the procedure of immigration and custom clearance in case of IBP 
movement; 
(v) Local communities to enhance their skills to contribute to river tourism. For example - 
Local boat operator, local hoteliers, local tourists guide etc.; 
(vi) Measures for safety and security of passengers at terminals and onboard; and 
(vii) MV Ganga Vilas was flagged of on 13 th January, 2023 by the Hon'ble Prim e minister 
at Varanasi. The voyage will be the longest River Cruise in the world covering a 
distance of about 3200 km from Varanasi to Dibrugarh in Assam via the Indo 
Bangladesh Protocol route. The flagging off of the above cruise by Hon'ble PM has 
given a wide publicity to the world of river cruise tourism in India and will also likely 
give a fillip to the development of river cruise tourism industry ecosystem in the 
country by popularizing river cruises and opening of additional river cruise tourism 
circuits in various waterways covering luxury and budget cruises of both longer and 
shorter duration. 
6.6 19 NWs provide hinterland connectivity with Major Ports which are likely to 
contribute to their development. The NWs on which development taken up/proposed linking 
the land locked States with Ports in the coastal States are detailed at Annexure - 4. Works 
have been taken up on Sl. No. 1 to 3 by Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI). 
6.7 Government has taken up Arth Ganga  concept under Jal Marg Vikas Project for 
Construction of 5 pairs of Ro -Ro terminals and 62 community Jetties and Modernization of 
existing jetties on the river Ganga to catalyze economic development in the Ganga basin in 
the States of UP, Bihar, Jharkhand, and WB. This program will lead to cost -effective and 

Page 16 of 53 
 
environment friendly transportation of cargo; provide improved logistics and wi der choice of 
mode for cargo movement along with economic benefit to the farmers, locals including 
tourists, traders, boatmen, small scale industries and ferry operators. 
6.8 Maintenance dredging has been taken up on NW -1 for 3m assured depth in Farakka -
Kahalgaon, Sultanganj -Mahenderpur and Mahenderpur -Barh stretches of the Ganga to 
increase the depths of draft scheduled for completion by December 2023 under Jal Marg 
Vikas Project (JMVP).  
6.9 The matter of excavation of dredged matter comes under State sub ject. With IWAI’s 
dredging experiences in NW -1 & 2, it is observed that the dredged sand is of different 
qualities and all of these may not be utilised for construction sector. In addition, disposal of 
such dredged matter is to done as per the ecology and public sentiments of those places. 
Especially in case of NW -3, the cost of transportation of dredged matter for disposal comes 
out to be more than the cost of the dredging contract. However, IWAI shall try our best to 
work on it considering the feasibility/viability in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee further points out that the potential of augmenting tourism through 
Sagarmala Project, over and above the transportation of goods cannot be underestimated 
and recommends that Tourist T erminals should exist in every port to promote transportation 
facilities for tourists. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should vigorously pursue 
the matters with the concerned Ministries/Departments and hold regular meetings with them 
in this reg ard to ensure that these connectivity projects are completed within a reasonable 
time frame. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Sagarmala Scheme also pushes forward Blue Economy tourism development in India. 
Focused primarily on development of ports and p ort-led infrastructures, port -based 
industrialization and port led logistics. Additionally, the Sagarmala scheme aids the 
development of cruise tourism through the development of ports. 
7.2 The Standard Operating Procedures of Cruises, which are a set of g uidelines for 
operating cruises in India, have been relaxed to aid cruises tourism by reducing taxes, 

Page 17 of 53 
 
providing priority berthing and facilitating on arrival visas. 
7.3 Cruise vessels visit five Major Ports in India namely Mumbai Port, Mormugao Port, 
New Mangalore Port, Cochin Port and Chennai Port. Under Sagarmala Scheme, Ministry is 
providing financial support to the Major Ports for development of Cruise Terminals. 
7.4 In line with the Committee’s recommendations for terminal development through 
linkages with tourist places and coastal communities, MoPS&W has planned Infrastructure 
development and enhancement at select 12 ports for domestic and international cruise 
terminal development. Apart from the existing cruise terminals at Mumbai, Mormugao, New 
Mangalore, Cochin, Visakhapatnam, and Chennai, six new locations – Kolkata, Porbandar, 
Ganpatipule, Diu, Somnath, and Konark - have been identified for promoting cruise 
operations. Moreover, to activate cruise demand - development of ecosystem has also been 
planned at 4 theme -based coastal destination circuits - Gujarat, West Coast, South Coast and 
East Coast. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee further notes that the tourist terminal/ cruise facilities being 
developed at present are for the Government controlled port terminals only. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may devise ways to promote the development of cruise tourist 
terminals at privately managed ports as well, as there are many existing and upcoming 
private ports, which have the potential to attract tourists due to their opportune location. 
(Para 40) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 MoPS&W is making efforts to develop and promote ferry tourism, seaplane tourism, 
and cruise tourism across the country. 
8.2 Under Sagarmala Programme, Ministry has prime focus on promotion of passenger 
transport, Ro-Ro ferry, and Ro-Pax movement across several routes in the Coastal States. All 
the ferry routes in Gujarat viz. Pipavav, Okha, Mandvi, Mudra Muldwarka, Vadinar and 
Hazira has been examined and a series of meetings were held at the level of Secretary and 
Hon’ble MoPS&W for feasibility and assessment. Ministry has sanctioned development of 
the ferry routes at Pipavav and Muldwarka and as the ecosystem builds up, other ferry routes 
will be looked up. Furthermore, Ministry issued direction to all the Major Ports to exempt the 

Page 18 of 53 
 
vessel related charges for the period of 6 months, further extending it to next 1 year till 
21.01.2024. 
8.3 Additionally, the Sagarmala Scheme will aid the development of cruise tourism 
through the development of ports. The Standard Operating Procedures of Cruises, which are a 
set of guidelines for operating cruises in India, have been relaxed to aid cruises tourism by 
reducing taxes, providing priori ty berthing and facilitating on arrival visas. Cruise vessels 
visit five Major Ports in India namely Mumbai Port, Mormugao Port, New Mangalore Port, 
Cochin Port, and Chennai Port. Under Sagarmala Scheme, Ministry is providing financial 
support to the Major Ports for development of Cruise Terminals. 
8.4 During the meeting of the High Level Advisory Committee (HLAC) held on 
18.01.2023, Industry experts raised concerns over the Infrastructure development at various 
cruise destinations like Ganpatipule Port, Ma harashtra, Kadmat, and Agatti Islands at 
Lakshadweep, Havelock Island at Andaman and the most preferred cruise destination 
Puducherry. It was decided that the issue needs to be taken up at the Ministry level and Joint 
Secretary or an official from Ministry  of Home affairs, who looks after Union Territories, to 
be included in the Committee. Further, during this meeting the Industry Experts were 
requested to forward the difficulties faced at Lakshadweep and Havelock Islands to consider 
the same while formulating Master Plan designed by L&T Infra. Further, it was suggested to 
obtain inputs from the Tour Operators so that the Committee can coordinate with different 
state governments to help design the Cruise Circuit as well as infrastructure improvements. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
9. From the data furnished by MoPS&W with regard to pre -Covid and post -Covid 
scenario of cruise ships/passengers handled by Indian Ports, the Committee notes that while 
there was a discernible pattern of growth in terms of cruise shi ps/passengers handled by 
Indian Ports from FY 2016-17 to FY 2019-20, the onset of the Coronavirus pandemic has had 
a substantial deterrent effect on the number of vessels/passengers handled. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & W aterways and Ministry of Tourism may 
undertake necessary remedial measures to boost the revival of the cruise tourism sector over 
and above the pre-Covid levels, at the earliest. 
(Para 41) 
 

Page 19 of 53 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 As a part of initiatives taken by the Mi nistry of Port Shipping & Waterways to 
promote cruise tourism, the composite port charge of $0.35 per GRT for the first 12 hours 
was introduced across all Major Ports to have uniformity in rate. It was assured that Ports will 
not charge any other rate like Berth Hire, Port Dues, Pilotage, Passenger fees etc. 
9.2 In the wake of COVID pandemic, considering the deterrent effect on the number of 
vessels/passengers handled, the composite rate was reduced to $0.085 per GRT (fixed rate) 
and $6 per passenger as Head Tax, for the first 12 hours stay. 
Further, rebate at 10%, 20% and 30% are extended for the cruise ships making 1 -50 calls per 
year, 51-100 calls per year and above 100 calls per year respectively. 
  
MARITIME INDIA VISION (MIV) 2030 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee notes that the ports and port –terminals, situated near industries and 
tourist sites/monuments, will play a vital role in shaping key theme of Maritime India Vision, 
2030 through their capabilities to handle bulk cargo and heavy to urist traffic simultaneously. 
The Committee recommends that terminals be developed under the MIV 2030 through 
linkages with modern transport system, globalized supply chains, tourist places and coastal 
communities and also by taking the views of stakeholde rs for improvement of terminal 
designs. 
(Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 MoPS&W aims to propel its focus on port -led industrialization to harness the benefits 
of a coastline that is more than 7,500 km long. It envisions to derive the optimal benefits 
arising due to port-based industrial and logistics activities. 
10.2 National Industrial Corridor Development and Implementation Trust (NICDIT) under 
the administrative control of Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
(DPIIT), Ministry of Commerce & Industry in partnership with respective State Governments 
has planned to develop various industrial corridor projects as part of National Industrial 
Corridor Programme which is aimed at development of Greenfield industrial region/nodes in 

Page 20 of 53 
 
India. 
10.3 For achieving synergy and avoid duplication of efforts of Government of India, 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has proposed that DPIIT in coordination with 
NICDIT plan to include and develop the available land at Major Ports as a part of ind ustrial 
corridors/nodes in the industrial corridor program. NICDIT is further coordinating with 
Major Ports for seeking their necessary inputs for further examination. 
10.4 Therefore, NICDIT under the administrative control of DPIIT, Ministry of Commerce 
& Industry will spearhead development of industrial node/integrated manufacturing cluster or 
any other project including CEZs under NICDIT framework with collaborations from other 
relevant Ministries and State Governments. 
10.5 This is aimed at promoting th e development of port -proximate industrial clusters, 
encourage port-led development, reduction of logistics costs and time for the movement of 
goods, and enhance the global competitiveness of the Indian manufacturing sector. It is 
envisioned to facilitate export-led coastal economy based on labour-intensive sectors and will 
result in employment creation. It shall increase export growth since large manufacturing 
industries are assisted by ancillary industries. 
10.6 Further, in line with the Committee’s recommendations for terminal development 
through linkages with tourist places and coastal communities, MoPS&W has planned 
Infrastructure development and enhancement at select 12 ports for domestic and international 
cruise terminal development. Apart from t he existing cruise terminals at Mumbai, 
Mormugao, New Mangalore, Cochin, Visakhapatnam, and Chennai, six new locations - 
Kolkata, Porbandar, Ganpatipule, Diu, Somnath, and Konark - have been identified for 
promoting cruise operations. Moreover, to activate cruise demand- development of ecosystem 
has also been planned at 4 theme based coastal destination circuits - Gujarat, West Coast, 
South Coast and East Coast. 
  
Transshipment Hubs 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee appreciates the new policy of the Government to create transshipment 
hubs across the country, which will create connectivity to the areas near the coastal regions 
and also bring about growth in economy and generate employment. The Committee welcomes 
the development of Andaman & Nicobar  Islands as transshipment hub and the development 

Page 21 of 53 
 
of Vadhavan Port. The Committee also notes that Lakshadweep Islands is strategically 
placed near the busiest worldwide commercial shipping routes. The Committee therefore 
desires that the Ministry may explo re the possibility of setting up a transshipment hub at 
Lakshadweep Islands. This will also give a boost to the tourism, besides creating job 
opportunities for the youth. 
(Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The Vizhinjam Port project  is under State Govern ment of Kerala and the  Vizhinjam 
International Transshipment Deep Water Multipurpose Seaport  is being  developed in 
landlord model with a Public Private Partnership component on a Design, Build, Finance, 
Operate and Transfer (DBFOT) basis. The proposed Port  at Vizhinjam falls in close 
proximity to the international East -West shipping route. The main competition of the port is 
with Colombo Port, Sri Lanka. Kovalam being a major tourist destination in India can be 
leveraged to attract cruise vessels at Vizhinjam. 
11.2 The Proposed Vadhavan Port is located near Dahanu, abutting northern boundary of 
Maharashtra, Palghar District, and 150 Kms from Mumbai. The proposed Vadhavan Port has 
a potential to cater the vast hinterland region covering states of: Maharashtra , Gujarat, 
Western parts of Madhya Pradesh and North Indian States.  
11.3 The objective of the proposed Vadhavan Port is to augment and develop Greenfield 
Port to handle growing traffic demand of Major Ports at West Coast. The new port at 
Vadhavan will be developed as a deep draught Port to cater to large container, bulk, and 
crude vessels. 
11.4 The holistic development of Great Nicobar Island is formulated ‘To leverage the 
locational advantage of being on International sea route and develop Great Nicobar a s a 
sustainable, green, global destination for business, trade, and leisure’. Development of 
Transshipment terminal at South Bay would attract existing traffic of ports along East Coast 
of India, Bangladesh, and Myanmar as they form primary catchment for T ransshipment 
terminal. An international airport at Great Nicobar is planned to improve connectivity to 
Great Nicobar and open up the island to Tourism. 
11.5 In view of the three major projects undertaken along the east and west sea coast and 
another mega project at Andaman Nicobar Island, it would not be viable to undertake another 

Page 22 of 53 
 
mega project at Lakshadweep Islands in the Arabian sea in the western side where there is a 
major seaport namely JNPT and another Port viz. Vadhavan Port which is under construction. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

Page 23 of 53 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
SAGARMALA PROGRAMME 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that SDCL was incorporated on 31 st August, 2016 for 
implementation of Sagarmala and currently out of 802 projects, 202 projects have been 
completed, 216 projects are under implementation, while 384 are under various stages of 
development. Hence, only about 25% of the to tal projects under Sagarmala are complete as 
on date. The Committee expresses serious concern at the slow progress of work and 
recommends that Sagarmala, being a crucial step in the progress of India’s shipping sector, 
which seeks to bring about port conne ctivity needs to be expedited. The Committee also 
desires to know whether there has been cost escalation and time overrun as compared to 
original cost and timeline of the projects. The Committee while underlining the speedy 
implementation of the Sagarmala projects, also desires to know the precise reasons for 
delays, port-wise and concrete steps taken to address the delays. 
(Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 It may be noted that the initial source of project list for inclusion of projects in 
Sagarmala was National Perspective Plan (NPP) prepared along with Master Planning of 
Major Ports. Additional projects were derived from subsequent meetings of National and 
State Steering Committees of Sagarmala and in consultation with Major Ports and different 
State ag encies. Besides, project proposals were also received for funding from various 
implementing agencies. Projects aligned with Sagarmala objectives were made part of the 
Programme. 
1.2 Up to March 2021, there were 505 projects at an estimated investment of mo re than 
₹3.59 lakh crore were being monitored for implementation under Sagarmala Programme. 
1.3 Further, 294 projects worth ₹1.44 lakh crore were identified for implementation and 
included in monitoring framework of Sagarmala Programme, in 2021, after due approval of 
Hon’ble Minister of State (IC). 

Page 24 of 53 
 
1.4 As on date, 220 projects worth ₹1.12 lakh crore have been completed and 231 projects 
worth ₹2.20 lakh crore are under implementation. 
1.5 Responsibilities related to project development & implementation inclu ding 
preparation of DPRs, subsequent appraisal and sanction, funding arrangements, execution as 
per timeline, etc. rests with the implementing agencies. Tracking and monitoring of all 
projects carried out through recording updates received from respective implementing 
agencies. 
1.6 Ministry is monitoring scope of development on all projects and plans possible 
handholding including financial assistance through grant in aid or equity investment by 
SDCL. 
1.7 Ministry is in regular consultation with all the Major Ports, State Maritime Boards and 
Line Ministries through Maritime States Development Council (MSDC) meetings held 
periodically that is being chaired Hon’ble Ministers of Ports, Shipping & Waterways. During 
these meetings, timely implementation of port c onnectivity projects is taken up as one of the 
key agenda points. MoPS&W requests all the Line Ministries and other stakeholders to raise 
any major policy related issues that needs intervention to expedite projects under Sagarmala. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.8 The Committee reiterates that that the Ministry should furnish the port wise list 
of projects under Sagarmala experiencing time overrun/cost escalations and the precise 
reasons for the same. The Committee also desires to know the status of  the 231 projects 
presently under implementation.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee appreciates the initiative of the MoPS&W under the PM’s “Gati 
Shakti” Programme, to carry out an intensive exercise to find connectivity gaps and that 52 
last mile road connectivity projects have been identified in consultation with Major Ports and 
State Maritime Boards. The requirement of these projects has been conveyed to MoRTH for 
assessment and development on 1 st April, 2022. The Committee may be furnished the 
information regarding the on -ground implementation of these road connectivity projects. 
Similarly, the Committee desires to know the status of sanction surveys to be conducted by 

Page 25 of 53 
 
Ministry of Railways (MoR) to determine the feasibility of rail connectiv ity to ports which 
have sizeable freight traffic but are still not connected by rail. 
(Para 23) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Based on the consultation with Major Ports and State Maritime Boards, initially 52 
last mile road connectivity projects were identifie d and conveyed to MoRTH in April, 2022 
for assessment and development. 
2.2 However, after the Comprehensive Port Connectivity Plan (CPCP) was prepared by 
DPIIT, total of 61 road connectivity infra gap projects were identified for assessment and 
evaluation by MoRTH. Status of the on -ground implementation of these new road 
connectivity projects is given in Annexure-2. 
   
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.3 The Committee desires to know whether the Ministry has launched a Dashboard 
to monitor the progress o f the 61 port road connectivity projects and whether the 
Committee can be given access to the same for appraisal of project status.  
2.4 The Committee also reiterates its desire to be apprised of the status of the 
sanction surveys to be conducted by the Mo R to determine the feasibility of rail 
connectivity to ports which have sizeable freight traffic but are still not connected by 
rail. 
 
CRUISE TOURIST TERMINAL FACILITIES AT PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes from the projections regarding the potential for cruise shipping 
in India, that the potential of Mumbai has been projected to be 3.2 million while the overall 
potential of India has been shown as 4 million. The Committee is surprised to note that 
Mumbai has been projected to h ave 80 percent of the total potential of India in terms of 
number of cruise passengers. The Committee recommends that a thorough study may be 
made to fully understand the potential of cruise tourism across other ports in the country so 
as to able to devise focused policies with the aim to tap such potential in the other States too. 

Page 26 of 53 
 
(Para 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 In line with the recommendations of the Committee and as decided in the first 
Incredible India International Cruise Conference held in May 202 2 in Mumbai, the Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping & Waterways vide OM No. SW - 17011/11/2022 CS (CN 353059) dated 
25.10.2022, constituted a High Level Advisory Committee (HLAC) to advise the Task Force 
on Cruise Tourism with the following scope: 
(i) To advise the Task Force on measures considered necessary for the fast growth of the 
Cruise Tourism in India; 
(ii) To brief and update the Task Force on the global best practices in the international 
arena, including the regulatory matters of Immigration Customs, GST (VAT), liquor 
related taxes; and 
(iii) To advise on the latest technological development for quick and smooth passenger 
flow though Terminal, Ports, destinations etc. 
3.2 The said Committee comprises of Chairmen of Major Ports, CEOs of various 
International and domestic Cruise Lines and Ministry Officials from MoPS&W, Revenue, 
Tourism, IWAI etc. 
3.3 The Task Force meetings are held on regular interval basis. 
3.4 First HLAC meeting was also held on 18.01.2023, when various issues related to 
Infrastructure requirements at C ruise Ports, sustainable practices in cruise tourism, 
immigration policies, taxation policies, training, and skill development in hospitality sector, 
etc were discussed and deliberated. The issue of development of infrastructure at Major and 
Minor cruise ports was discussed in the HLAC meeting and it was decided that the necessary 
inputs shall be obtained from the Tour Operators and the same will be shared with the 
respective state governments to help design the cruise circuits as well as infrastructure 
improvement. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.5 The Committee notes that out of the overall potential of the country in 
generating cruise traffic, Mumbai, with the projected 3.2 Million share is the only 
emerging cruise destination. The Committee feels that the cruise potential of other 

Page 27 of 53 
 
states like Kera la, Gujarat, West Bengal, Goa etc. should also be explored. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may furnish details as to the steps being 
taken to understand and explore the potential of cruise tourism across other ports in the 
country.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 28 of 53 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
 
-Nil.- 
  
  
* * * * 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Page 29 of 53 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
SAGARMALA PROGRAMME 
The Committee reiterates that that the Ministry should furnish the port wise list 
of projects under Sagarmala experiencin g time overrun/cost escalations and the precise 
reasons for the same. The Committee also desires to know the status of the 231 projects 
presently under implementation.  
 (Para 1.8) 
 
INITIATIVES UNDERTAKEN BY MOPS&W TO EXPEDITE IMPLEMENTATION  OF 
PORT CONNECTIVITY PROJECTS 
 
The Committee desires to know whether the Ministry has launched a Dashboard 
to monitor the progress of the 61 port road connectivity projects and whether the 
Committee can be given access to the same for appraisal of project status.  
(Para 2.3) 
 
The Committee also reiterates its desire to be apprised of the status of the 
sanction surveys to be conducted by the MoR to determine the feasibility of rail 
connectivity to ports which have sizeable freight traffic but are still not connected by 
rail. 
(Para 2.4) 
 
CRUISE TOURIST TERMINAL FACILITIES AT PORTS 
The Committee notes that out of the overall potential of the country in 
generating cruise traffic, Mumbai, with the projected 3.2 Million share is the only 
emerging cruise destination. The Committee feels that the cruise potential of other 
states like Kerala, Gujarat, West Bengal, Goa etc. should also be explored. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may furnish details as to the steps being 
taken to understand and explore the potential of cruise tourism across other ports in the 
country. 
(Para 3.5) 
 
* * * * 
 

Page 30 of 53 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 31 of 53 
 
Annexure-1 
Status of 55 port road connectivity projects under MoRTH / NHAI 
 
S 
No. Project Name Port 
Name State 
Leng
th 
(km) 
Cost 
(₹ 
crore) 
DPR & 
Bidding 
Status 
Appraisa
l & 
Approval 
Status 
Awar
d 
Date 
Estimat
ed 
Comple
tion 
Date 
1 
NH 216 from 2 
lane to 4 lane 
Digamarru to 
Ongole 
Gangavar
am 
Andhra 
Pradesh 246 2,436 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY23 
2 
4 laning of 
Kakinada 
Anchorage Port 
Uppada beach road 
connecting NH -16 
in East Godavari 
District 
Kakinada Andhra 
Pradesh 41 1,394 
Bids 
invited, yet 
to be 
received 
Appraised
, yet to be 
approved 
FY23 FY25 
3 
6 lane road to 
Krishnapatnam 
Port from 
Naidupeta in AP 
(Pkg-IV) 
Krishnapa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 35 1399 Bids under 
evaluation Approved FY23 FY25 
4 
Construction of 4 -
laning of Chilakaru 
crossroad to Turpu 
Kanupuru 
Krishnapa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 36 909 Bids under 
evaluation Approved FY23 FY25 
5 
4 laning of road 
from Nellore city 
to Krishnapatnam 
port to NH 5 
Krishnapa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 24 700 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY25 
6 
4 to 6 laning of 
road connecting 
Krishnapatnam 
Port to NH 5 in 
SPSR Nellore 
District 
Krishnapa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 18 315 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY24 
7 
Upgradation of the 
proposed NH -67 
From Bellary -
Karnataka to 
Krishinapatnam  
Krishnapa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 425 6,857 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY24 
8 
Upgradation of the 
hinterland road 
From Naidupeta -in 
Nellore District of 
AP to Krishnagiri -
in TN 
Krishnapa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 258 5,039 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY24 
9 Development of Vishakha Andhra 4 55 Appointed, Awarded   FY24 

Page 32 of 53 
 
Four Lane Road 
Connectivity from 
East Breakwater up 
to Convent 
Junction 
patnam Pradesh Under 
Implement
ation 
10 
Improvement 
works for 
Visakhapatnam 
Port Road 
Vishakha
patnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 13 23 
Bids 
invited, yet 
to be 
received 
Appraised
, yet to be 
approved 
FY23 FY25 
11 
Improvement/upgra
dation of 4 lane 
road to 6 lane road 
for the port 
connectivity road 
from Convent 
Junction to Sheela 
Junction 
Vishakha
patnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 10 686.33 
Bids 
invited, yet 
to be 
received 
Appraised
, yet to be 
approved 
FY23 FY25 
12 
Construction of 
flyover/underpass 
at Vizag airport 
junction to ensure 
flow of container 
trailers to/from 
MMLP setup at 
NH-16 
Vishakha
patnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 5 58.73 
Bids 
invited, yet 
to be 
received 
Appraised
, yet to be 
approved 
FY23 FY25 
13 
Single Lane to 4 
Lane Road 
connecting Dhubri 
and NH-37 (NW-2) 
Dhubri Assam 8.0 200 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24   
14 
Double Lane to -4 
Lane Road 
connecting Gaighat 
Jetty and NH-19/82 
(NW-1) 
Gaighat 
Jetty Bihar 2 125 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY23 FY25 
15 Trapaj - Manar Alang Gujarat 6 70 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY24 
16 
Yekkambi-Haveri 
(Sirsi-Yekkambi-
Haveri) 
Belekeri Karnatak
a 134 746 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY24 
17 
Bypass road from 
NH to Belekeri 
Port and rail 
connectivity from 
Harwada to 
Belekeri 
Belekeri Karnatak
a 7 43 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY25 
18 
Road connectivity 
from Kasarkad side 
of Honnavar Port 
to NH 
Honnavar Karnatak
a 4 131 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY24 

Page 33 of 53 
 
19 
Providing ramps to 
the 6 -lane elevated 
highway being 
developed from the 
Alappuzha beach 
(Earlier - Road 
from SH -
Alappuzha bypass 
intersection) 
Alappuzh
a Kerala 1.5 533 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY23 FY26 
20 
Azhikkal Port - 
Proposed NH – 
Bypass and 
widening of 2 km. 
Azhikkal Kerala 13 306 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY26 
21 
Upgrading SH -164 
from Jaigad Port to 
NH 17 at Niveli 
Jaigad Maharash
tra 42 235 
DPR 
completed, 
Bids yet to 
be invited 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 - 
22 
Linking of NH -4 
and NH -8 by -
passing Mumbra 
JNPT Maharash
tra 20 2,000 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY25 
23 Madkhol - 
Sankeshwar Redi Maharash
tra 104 2,600 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY24 
24 
Road connectivity 
to Dhamra port 
(four laning of 
Jamujhadi Dhamra 
Road) 
Dhamra Odisha 58 1148 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY26 
25 
Road Connectivity 
from Chattrapur on 
NH-16 to Gopalpur 
Port 
Gopalpur Odisha 5 250 
Bids 
invited, yet 
to be 
received 
Appraised
, yet to be 
approved 
FY23 FY25 
26 
Elevated road from 
Chennai port to 
Maduravoyal 
Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 21 5,612 
Bids 
invited, yet 
to be 
received 
Appraised
, yet to be 
approved 
FY23 FY25 
27 
Road connectivity 
from Cuddalore 
port to NH -45A 
with RC over 
bridge 
Cuddalor
e 
Tamil 
Nadu 5.4 125 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY25 
28 4 to 6 laning of 
NH-45B & NH-7A 
Tuticorin 
(V.O.C. 
Port) 
Tamil 
Nadu 6 200 
Bids 
invited, yet 
to be 
received 
Appraised
, yet to be 
approved 
FY23 FY26 
29 
2 lanes to 4 Lane 
Road connecting 
Ibrahimpatnam and 
NH-65/30 (NW - 
4) 
Ibrahimpa
tnam 
Telangan
a 1 25 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY26 

Page 34 of 53 
 
30 
Double lane road 
connecting 
Varanasi Multi 
Modal Terminal 
and NH -7 with 
elevated merging at 
NH Intersection 
(NW - 1) 
Varanasi 
MMT 
Uttar 
Pradesh 1 45 
Bids 
invited, yet 
to be 
received 
Appraised
, yet to be 
approved 
FY23 FY25 
31 
Double Lane to 4 
Lane Road 
connecting Haldia 
Multi Modal 
Terminal and NH -
116 (NW - 1) 
Haldia 
MMT 
West 
Bengal 6 924 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY26 
32 
Two Lane to Four 
lane road 
connecting 
Kolaghat to NH -41 
(NW - 86) 
Kolaghat West 
Bengal 4 110 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY26 
33 
Road Puducherry - 
Marakkanam - 
Sadaras - Kovalam 
- Coromandel - 
Chennai -NH -32 
Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 159 3,057 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded     
34 EMRIP Chennai Tamil 
Nadu 29 600 Completed Complete
d 
Compl
eted 
Complet
ed 
35 
JNPT - 6 to 8 
laning of NH -4B- 
SH-54 and Amra 
Marg 
JNPT Maharash
tra 44 2,052 Completed 
Complete
d 
Compl
eted Complet
ed 
36 
6 laning of Pune -
Satara section of 
NH 4 
JNPT Maharash
tra 140 1,725 Completed 
Complete
d 
Compl
eted Complet
ed 
37 
2 to 4 laning of 
Panvel to Indapur 
section of NH 17 - 
Phase 3 
JNPT Maharash
tra 84 943 Bids under 
evaluation Approved FY23 Complet
ed 
38 
Belagavi-Panjim- 
NH-4A Upgrading 
to 4 lanes 
Mormuga
o Goa 53 1,332 
DPR 
completed, 
Bids yet to 
be invited 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY27 
39 
4 Laning of Shiradi 
Ghat Road - 
Concretizing for 
smoothening of 
traffic road. 
New 
Mangalor
e 
Karnatak
a 26 1,200 
DPR 
completed, 
Bids yet to 
be invited 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY25 
40 
2 to 4 laning of 
NH-169 from 
Mangalore to 
Mudabidri to 
Karkala 
New 
Mangalor
e 
Karnatak
a 45 1,067 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY25 

Page 35 of 53 
 
41 
Connectivity of 
Vadhavan to NH 8 
through Tarapur -
Boisar or 
Chinchani-
Vangaon or 
Dahanu 
Vadhvan Maharash
tra 25 3,400 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY26 
42 
Road Connectivity 
of VPT to NH -16 -
Phase II 
Vishakha
patnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 4 77 Completed Complete
d 
Compl
eted 
Complet
ed 
43 
2 to 4 laning of 
port road 
connectivity to NH 
– 5 -Phase II 
Vishakha
patnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 8 77 Completed Complete
d 
Compl
eted 
Complet
ed 
44 
Construction of 
grade separator 
from H -7 area to 
Port connectivity 
Road by passing 
Convent Junction - 
Visakhapatnam 
Port 
Vishakha
patnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 1 60 Completed Complete
d 
Compl
eted 
Complet
ed 
45 
2 to 4 laning of 
NH-206 Tumakuru  
-Honnavar Port 
Honnavar Karnatak
a 217 500 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY23 
46 
2 to 4 laning of 
road connecting 
Achampeta 
Junction to joining 
NH 16 at Kathipudi 
in East Godavri 
District in AP  
Kakinada Andhra 
Pradesh 28 480 Completed Complete
d 
Compl
eted 
Complet
ed 
47 
2 to 4 laning of 
road connecting 
Kakinada port to 
NH 16 at 
Rajanagaram in 
Godavri District - 
package 1 
Kakinada Andhra 
Pradesh 40 1,000 Completed Awarded     
48 
2 to 4 laning of 
road connecting 
Kakinada port to 
NH 16 at 
Rajanagaram in 
Godavri District - 
package 2 - 
Samalkota to 
Achampeta 
Kakinada Andhra 
Pradesh 12 674 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
ation 
Awarded   FY25 
49 
2 to 4 laning of 
road connecting 
Kakinada port to 
Kakinada Andhra 
Pradesh 13 149 
Appointed, 
Under 
Implement
Awarded   FY24 

Page 36 of 53 
 
NH 16 at 
Rajanagaram in 
Godavri District - 
package 3 - 
Achampeta to 
Kakinada 
ation 
50 
Development of 4 
to 6 lane highway 
connectivity 
project connecting 
Visakhapatnam 
port container 
terminal with NH 
16 at Bhogapuram 
via Rushikonda and 
Bhimli 
Vishakha
patnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 65 1,625 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY26 
51 
Widening of 23 km 
approach road to 
all whether 
Navlakhi Port in 
Gujarat 
Navlakhi Gujarat 42 509 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY25 
52 
Guntur-
Narakoduru-
Tenali-Chandole-
Nizampatnam Port 
Road 
Nizampat
nam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 61 1,525 DPR in 
progress 
Yet to be 
appraised FY24 FY26 
53 
4 to 8 laning of 
NH-53 connecting 
Paradip port 
Paradip Odisha 77 3,600 
Bids 
invited, yet 
to be 
received 
Yet to be 
appraised FY23 FY25 
54 
Greenfield road 
connecting north 
and south industrial 
cluster of 
Khandaleru Creek 
near 
Krishnapatnam 
port 
Krishnapa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 16 604 Bids under 
evaluation Approved FY23 FY25 
55 
Upgrading of NH 
65 from 
Vijayawada to 
Machilipatnam 
Port 
Machilipa
tnam 
Andhra 
Pradesh 65 1462 Completed Complete
d 
Compl
etd 
Complet
ed 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 

Page 37 of 53 
 
Annexures-1A and 1B 
ANNEXURE 1A - PARADIP PORT - LIST OF IMPORTANT ONGOING RAILWAY 
PROJECTS 
SI.No. Name of Projects Project 
Cost (Rs. 
Cr.) 
Length 
(Km) 
TDC Remarks 
1 Doubling of Banspani -
Daitari-Tomka-Jakhapura 
1552.26 180 31.03.2023 Physical 
Progress: 
88% 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 1B - PARADIP PORT - LIST OF NEW PROJECTS INITIATED BY 
RAILWAYS WITH REGARD TO TRANSPORT TO PARADIP 
SI.No. Name of Projects Anticipated 
Cost (Rs. In 
Cr.) 
1 Final Location Survey ( FLS) for construction of Flyover between 
Siju and Paradeep coaching yard to avoid surface crossing (7km) 
0.14 
2 Final Location Survey ( FLS) for 4 th line from Jakhapura to 
Haridaspur (32 km) 
0.64 
3 Preliminary Engineering cum Traffic ( PET) survey for Nayagarh - 
Jakhapura 3rd Line (156 km) 
0.78 
4 Final Location Survey (FLS) for 3rd and 4th line between Jakhapura 
to Nayagarh (168.5 km) 
3.37 
5 Reconnaisance Engineering cum Traffic ( RET) survey for rail 
connectivity to iron ore mines between Nayagarh -Bansapani (50 
km) 
0.075 
6 Final Location Survey (FLS) for Gandhamardan Iron Ore Mines to 
Naranpur Railway Station (25 km) 
0.75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 38 of 53 
 
Annexure-2 
Status of 61 new port road connectivity infra gap projects received from MoRTH 
S. 
No. State Port Category Name of Project Status 
Expected 
Time 
frame for 
project 
evaluation 
and 
planning in 
NMP 
Target 
Award 
Year 
1 Tamil 
Nadu 
VO 
Chidambar
am 
Very 
Important 
Widening of 4 to 6 
lanning (VOC Port to 
Junction of NH 138 
& NH 38) 
Bids 
invited for 
project 
execution 
Mapping in 
NMP shall 
be carried 
out by Dec. 
2023 
FY22-
23 
2 Odisha Paradip Critical 
Project 
Widening of 
Chandikhole-Paradip 
National Highway 53 
as an 8-lane highway  
Bids 
invited for 
project 
execution 
3 Tamil 
Nadu Chennai Very 
Important 
New Road over 
bridge from the 
proposed Goods shed 
to NH 179A 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
DPR is 
likely to be 
awarded by 
March 2023 
& Mapping 
in NMP 
shall be 
carried out 
by Dec. 
2023 
FY23-
24 
4 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Bhavanapa
du 
Critical 
Project 
4-Lane Road 
connectivity to NH 
16 from 
Bhavanapadu Port 
DPR 
award in 
process 
5 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Machlipat
nam 
Critical 
Project 
Alternate alignment  
 to connect NH 216A 
to NH -65 bypassing 
Machilipatnam town 
DPR 
award in 
process 
6 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Ramyapat
nam 
Critical 
Project 
Port boundary to 
Chevuru 
Road Jn. Connecting 
to NH -16. (4 L road 
in initial phase of 5.5 
km length) 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
7 Gujarat Kandla Important 
Construction of Road 
Over Bridge (ROB) 
at LC -233* The 
Kandla port is getting 
connected with two 
other ROB at LC-235 
& LC235 (SPL) 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
8 Gujarat Bhavnagar Very 
Important 
Road Connectivity to 
Bhavnagar Port 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
9 Gujarat Kandla Very 
Important 
Upgradation of Tuna 
Road from Two lane 
to four lane 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 

Page 39 of 53 
 
10 Kerala Cochin Critical 
Project 
Four laning of NH 
966 B connecting 
W/Island to 
Kundanoor (8 KMs) 
to be implemented by 
NHAI 
DPR 
award in 
process 
11 Maharas
htra Mandwa Critical 
Project 
Separate alignment is 
proposed for 
connectivity road 
from Mandwa to 
Alibaug 
DPR 
award in 
process 
12 Maharas
htra Dighi Very 
Important 
Upgradation of 
existing road 
connectivity's 
(NH548A & 
NH753F) from 2 lane 
to 6 lane till NH66 to 
both sides 
(Agardanda side & 
Dighi side) 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
13 Maharas
htra Dighi Very 
Important 
3 Grade Separators at 
Kolad, Indapore & 
Mangaon 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
14 Maharas
htra Jaigad Very 
Important 
Upgradation/ 
expansion of 42 kms. 
SH-164 from Jaigad 
to Nivali to 4 lane 
road. 
DPR 
completed
, bids yet 
to be 
invited 
 Mapping 
in NMP 
shall be 
carried out 
by Dec. 
2023 
15 Maharas
htra Karanja Very 
Important 
New alignment 
proposed - 12 kms. 
Karanja jetty to JNPT 
road (SH-348) 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
DPR is 
likely to be 
awarded by 
March 2023 
& Mapping 
in NMP  
shall be 
carried out 
by Dec. 
2023 
16 Karnata
ka 
New 
Mangalore 
Very 
Important 
Construction of 4 
lane flyover bridge 
from KIOCL 
junction to 
Balkampady along 
NH-66 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
17 Odisha Paradip Critical 
Project 
Flyover between 
Siju-Paradip 
This 
project is 
under the 
scope of 
State 
Govt. 
 
NA 
FY24-
25/ later 
as per 
DPR/ 
Site 
situatio
n 
18 Odisha Astaranga Important 
Astaranga Port Road 
connectivity from 
Phulnakhara junction 
on NH -16 to 
Astaranga via Chari 
Chak (SH -60/MDR-
81) 
DPR in 
progress 
Mapping in 
NMP shall 
be carried 
out by Dec. 
2023 

Page 40 of 53 
 
19 Gujarat Bedi Important 
Road Widening at 
Sachana Ship 
Recycling Yard 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
DPR is 
likely to be 
awarded by 
March 2023 
& Mapping 
in NMP 
shall be 
carried out 
by Dec. 
2023 
20 Karnata
ka Bhatkal Important Road Connectivity to 
Bhatkal Port 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
21 Tamil 
Nadu Cuddalore Important 
New Alignment of 
Road from Cuddalore 
Portto Ch: 70+167 in 
NH32 (NH45A) 
Proposed Road 
DPR in 
progress 
 Mapping 
in NMP 
shall be 
carried out 
by Dec. 
2023 
22 Maharas
htra Dharamtar Important 
Expansion of 
Existing Road from 
Dharamtar Port to 
Wadkhal 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
DPR is 
likely to be 
awarded by 
March 2023 
& Mapping 
in NMP 
shall be 
carried out 
by Dec. 
2023 
23 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Gangavara
m Important 
Gangavaram Port 
Gate to integrate with 
Sheelanagar - 
Sababvaram VPT 
Road at Tunglam 
DPR yet 
to be 
awarded 
24 Karnata
ka 
Hangarkatt
e Important 
From Manipal End 
Point to Hangarkatte 
Port 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
25 Karnata
ka 
Hangarkatt
e Important Road connectivity to 
Hangarkatte 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
26 Gujarat Kandla Important 
Widening & 
improvement of 
existing 2/4/6 lanes 
KK ROAD into 6 
lane road.   (NH-141 
to NH -8A (Chainage 
at 354 KM) 
implemented by 
NHAI 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
27 Gujarat Kandla Important 
Construction of 6 -
lane link road 
connecting to KK -
Road to NH-8A (NH-
141 to NH -8A 
(Chainage at 349.5 
KM)) 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
28 Maharas
htra Korlai Important 
Upgradation of road 
from Korlai to Kolad 
and Korlai to Vadkal 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
29 Karnata
ka Kundapur Important A separate road 
alignment is being 
DPR 
Award in 

Page 41 of 53 
 
proposed to connect 
the port under 
concept development 
Process 
30 Karnata
ka Malpe Important 
Separate alignment is 
proposed for 
connectivity road of 
proposed Malpe Port 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
31 Karnata
ka Manki Important 
Separate alignment is 
proposed for 
connectivity road of 
proposed Manki Port. 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
DPR is 
likely to be 
awarded by 
March 2023 
& Mapping 
in NMP 
shall be 
carried out 
by Dec. 
2023 
FY24-
25/ later 
as per 
DPR/ 
Site 
situatio
n 
32 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Machlipat
nam Important 
4-Lane Road 
connectivity to NH 
216 from Port *The 
Machlipatnam port is 
getting connected by 
Project: to connect 
NH 216A to NH -65 
bypassing 
Machilipatnam town 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
for project 
marked in 
star 
33 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Machlipat
nam Important 
Upgradation of 
existing 4 -lane 
highway from 
Vijayawada to 
Machilipatnam (NH -
65) to 6 -lane 
highway 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
34 Karnata
ka 
Old 
Mangalore Important 
The existing road is 
to be upgraded to 4 
lane road which will 
also help the NMPT 
on the northern end 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
35 Karnata
ka 
Old 
Mangalore Important 
Gurupura River 
Waterway from Old 
Mangalore Port till 
Kuloor Bridge near 
NMPT 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
36 Karnata
ka Pandubidri Important 
Separate alignment 
of road connectivity 
to Pandubidri Port is 
proposed. 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
37 Maharas
htra Redi Important 
Upgradation/ 
expansion of 25 kms. 
SH-123 from Redi 
Port to Satarada  to 4 
lane road would aid 
for transportation of 
bulk cargo, LNG, 
LPG and other liquid 
cargos 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
38 Karnata
ka 
Sadashivg
ad Important Proposed Road 
Construction from 
DPR 
Award in 

Page 42 of 53 
 
(Karnataka
) 
Kali River 
Sadashivgad Jetty via 
Kalika Mata Temple 
to Katne 
Process 
39 Gujarat Sikka Important 
Valsura Marine 
Police Station to 
Gulabnagar Over 
bridge (Jamnagar) * 
Sikka port is getting 
connected by the port 
connectivity project: 
Construction of 
highway from State 
Highway (SH -6A) to 
Jamnagar Port   
providing 
connectivity to 
National Highway 
from Rajkot (NH-8E) 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
for project 
marked in 
star 
40 Karnata
ka Tadadi Important Road Connectivity to 
Tadadi 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
41 Maharas
htra Vijaydurg Important 
Upgradation of two 
lane to four lane - 54 
kms Vijaydurga to 
Talere 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
42 Karnata
ka Belekeri Very 
Important 
Road connectivity to 
Belekeri * The 
Belekeri Port i s 
getting connected by 
Project: 
(i)Connectivity to 
Keni-Belekeri Port & 
(ii)Yekkambi -Haveri 
(Sirsi – Yekkambi –
Haveri) 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
for project 
marked in 
star 
43 Tamil 
Nadu Chennai Very 
Important 
Widening of existing 
narrow lane in 
railway land and 
widening of 
Natrampalli - 
Jolarpet 2 lane road 
to 4 lane road 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
44 Gujarat Dahej Very 
Important 
Conversion of minor 
roads into Highway 
for better 
connectivity of Dahej 
to Hazira. 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
45 Maharas
htra Dighi Very 
Important 
Bridge over creek 
near Waral, 
Connecting Both 
Terminal Access 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 

Page 43 of 53 
 
Road. 
46 Maharas
htra Dighi Very 
Important 
4 Lane (Bitumen 
Road), Connecting 
Roha to Both 
Terminals 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
DPR is 
likely to be 
awarded by 
March 2023 
& Mapping 
in NMP 
shall be 
carried out 
by Dec. 
2023 
FY24-
25/ later 
as per 
DPR/ 
Site 
situatio
n 
47 Maharas
htra Dighi Very 
Important 
12 Kms 4 Lane Road 
Connecting Both 
Ports to Pune 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
48 Maharas
htra Dighi Very 
Important 
108 KM, 6 Lane 
Road, Connecting 
Port to Pune from 
Indapur 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
49 Maharsh
tra Dighi Very 
Important 
20 kms 4 Lane Road 
from DIGHI to 
Agardanda Terminal 
Access 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
50 Gujarat Kandla Very 
Important 
Construction of ROB 
in lieu of Existing 
LC-1A at Km 
363.625 on NH -8A, 
KFTZ to Kandla 
Road in the State of 
Gujarat. 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
51 Karnata
ka Keni Very 
Important 
Separate alignment 
of road connectivity 
to Keni, Karnataka * 
The Keni Port is 
getting connected by 
the Project: 
Connectivity to Keni-
Belekeri Port  
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
for project 
marked in 
star 
52 Gujarat Mundra Very 
Important 
Proposed Road 
Mokha to Vadala 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
53 Gujarat Mundra Very 
Important 
Proposed Road from 
Luni to Vadala will 
connect SH-6 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
54 Karnata
ka 
Pavinakur
ve 
Very 
Important 
Separate alignment 
of road connectivity 
to Pavinakurve, 
Karnataka 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
55 Maharas
htra Revdanda Very 
Important 
Upgradation of roads 
from Sanegaon to 
Wakan and Sanegaon 
to Kolad 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
56 West 
Bengal SPM Very 
Important 
New alignment from 
SH. From Balagarh -
to-Balagarh Island 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
57 West SPM Very New alignment DPR 

Page 44 of 53 
 
Bengal Important proposed for 
improving port 
connectivity of Port 
to NH -06. 
Underground Tunnel 
/ RoB from NS Dock 
Area of Kolkata 
Dock System to 
Salap, Howrah 
connectivity to NH -
06 
Award in 
Process 
58 West 
Bengal SPM Very 
Important 
"Upgradation 
proposed for 
improving 
connectivity to  
(a) Diamond Harbour  
(b) Falta SEZ 
(c) Connectivity to 
Raichak 
DPR 
Award in 
Process 
59 Maharas
htra Vadhavan Very 
Important 
Connectivity of 
Vadhavan Port to 
NH-8 at Tawa 
DPR in 
progress 
Mapping in 
NMP shall 
be carried 
out by Dec. 
2023 
60 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Vishakhap
atnam 
Very 
Important 
Improvement/upgrad
ation of 4 lane road 
to 6 lane road from 
East Breakwater to 
convent junction 
Appointed
, Under 
Implemen
tation 
61 Kerala Vizhinjam Very 
Important 
Road Connectivity to 
NH 66 from Vizhin 
jam International Sea 
Port 
This 
project is 
in the 
scope of 
Port 
Concessio
naire. 
NA 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 45 of 53 
 
 
Annexure-3 
a) Identified Tourist Spots in hinterland of U.P & Bihar around NW-1 
 
Sr No. State Districts Type of Places Tourist Place 
Distance 
from River 
(Km) 
1 UP Prayagraj Museum Allahabad Museum 4.8 
2 UP Prayagraj Garden & Park Khusro Bagh 7 
3 UP Prayagraj Tourism Place Kumbh Mela & Sangam River Bank 
4 UP Prayagraj Garden & Park ChandraShekhar Park 5 
5 UP Varanasi Religious Places Kashi Vishwanath Temple 0.3 
6 UP Varanasi Ghat Dashashwamedh Ghat River Bank 
7 UP Varanasi Ghat Assi Ghat River Bank 
8 UP Varanasi Religious Places Tibetan Temple 7.5 
9 UP Varanasi Ghat Manikarnika Ghat River Bank 
10 UP Varanasi Monuments Ramnagar Ghat 0.3 
11 UP Varanasi Monuments Chunar Fort 0.6 
12 UP Mirzapur Garden & Park Tanda Waterfall 17.4 
13 UP Ghazipur Monuments Lord Cornwallis Tomb 1.7 
14 Bihar Buxar Religious Places Bihari Ji Temple 20.4 
15 Bihar Bhojpur Monuments Babu Kunvar Singh Ka Kila 28.1 
16 Bihar Patna Religious Places Patna Sahib Gurudwara 0.7 
17 Bihar Patna Museum Jalan Museum 0.6 
18 Bihar Patna Museum Shrikrishna Science Centre 2.2 
19 Bihar Patna Museum Golghar 1.9 
20 Bihar Patna Museum Bihar Museum 4.6 
21 Bihar Patna Museum Indira Gandhi Planetarium 3.1 
22 Bihar Patna Museum Gandhi Sangrahalaya 1.2 
23 Bihar Begusarai Sanctuary Kanwar Lake Bird Sanctuary 36.4 
24 Bihar Munger Sanctuary Bhimbandh Wildlife Sanctuary 48.8 
25 Bihar Munger Monuments Munger Fort 0.85 
26 Bihar Bhagalpur Religious Places Ajgaivinath Temple 3.1 
27 UP Prayagraj Tourism Place New Yamuna Bridge River Bank 
28 UP Varanasi Religious Places Kashi Vishwanath Temple 
(BHU) 3.7 
29 UP Varanasi Religious Places Nepali Temple River Bank 
30 UP Varanasi Ghat Kedar Ghat River Bank 
31 UP Varanasi Religious Places Bharat Mata Temple 3.7 
32 UP Varanasi Religious Places BHU Temple 1.5 

Page 46 of 53 
 
33 UP Varanasi Ghat Manmandir Ghat River Bank 
34 UP Mirzapur Garden & Park Lakhaniya Hills & Waterfall 31.4 
35 UP Chandauli Dam Latif Shah Dam 48.1 
36 UP Chandauli Garden & Park Rajdari Waterfall 60.7 
37 UP Chandauli Garden & Park Devdari Waterfall 59.9 
38 UP Balia Monuments Surha tal 20 
39 Bihar Saran Garden & Park Kumhrar Park 3.4 
40 Bihar Patna Ghat Gandhi Ghat River Bank 
41 Bihar Patna Monuments Kesariya Buddha Stupa 5 
42 Bihar Patna Monuments Buddha Smriti Park 6 
43 Bihar Vaishali Garden & Park Japanese Peace Pagoda 45.5 
44 Bihar Begusarai Monuments Ajatshatru Fort 73.5 
45 Bihar Munger Ghat Kashta Harni Ghat River Bank 
46 Bihar Banka Hill Mandar Hill 56 
 
b) Identified Tourist Spots in hinterland of Jharkhand & W.B around NW-1 
 
Sr 
No. 
State Districts Type of Places Tourist Place Distance 
from 
River 
(Km) 
1 Jharkhand Sahibganj Monuments Moti Jharna 0.4 
2 Jharkhand Sahibganj Garden & Park Fossils Park Mandro 31.9 
3 West Bengal Malda Monuments Dakhil Darwaza 34.2 
4 West Bengal Malda Religious Places Chika Masjid 36.4 
5 West Bengal Malda Museum Malda district 
Museum 
26 
6 West Bengal Murshidabad Monuments Hazarduari Palace 0.1 
7 West Bengal Murshidabad Religious Places Futi Masjid 1.4 
8 West Bengal Murshidabad Monuments Wasif Manzil River Bank 
9 West Bengal Murshidabad Garden & Park Motijheel Park 0.5 
10 West Bengal Nadia Religious Places ISKCON Mayapur 1 
11 West Bengal Nadia Sanctuary Betuadahari Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
10.6 
12 West Bengal Hooghly Religious Places Bandel Church 0.7 
13 West Bengal Hooghly Religious Places Hooghly Imambara 0.16 
14 West Bengal Howrah  Religious Places Belur Math 0.35 
15 West Bengal Howrah  Museum Rail Museum  0.1 
16 West Bengal North 24 
Parganas 
Religious Places Dakshineswar River Bank 
17 West Bengal North 24 
Parganas 
Religious Places Annapurna Temple 0.13 
18 West Bengal South 24 
Parganas 
Island Henry Island River Bank 
19 West Bengal South 24 
Parganas 
Museum Bhagabatpur 
Crocodile Sanctuary 
0.8 
20 West Bengal South 24 Garden & Park Sundarban National River Bank 

Page 47 of 53 
 
Parganas Park 
21 West Bengal South 24 
Parganas 
Museum Lothian Island 
Wildlife Sanctuary 
River Bank 
22 West Bengal South 24 
Parganas 
Museum Jambudwip island River Bank 
23 West Bengal Malda Monuments Firoz Minar 35.9 
24 West Bengal Malda Garden & Park Adina Deer Park 36.5 
25 West Bengal Malda Religious Places Boro Sana Masjid 35.1 
26 West Bengal Malda Religious Places Lotan Masjid 37.9 
27 West Bengal Purba 
Bardhaman 
Religious Places 108 Shiv Mandir 0.9 
28 West Bengal Howrah  Religious Places Swami Vivekananda 
Mandir 
1.8 
29 West Bengal Howrah  Religious Places The Great Banyan 
Tree 
0.6 
30 West Bengal Howrah  Museum Smaranika Tram 
Museum 
1.1 
31 West Bengal North 24 
Parganas 
Ghat Gandhi Ghat River Bank 
32 West Bengal North 24 
Parganas 
Monuments Clive House 5.8 
 
c) Identified Tourist Spots in Assam around NW-2 
 
Sr 
No. 
State Districts Type of Places Tourist Place Distance 
from 
River 
(Km) 
1 Assam Barpeta Religious Places Barpetasatra namghar 7 
2 Assam Barpeta Hill Stations Baghbar Hills River Bank 
3 Assam Biswanath Religious Places Biswanath Markaz Mosjid River Bank 
4 Assam Bongigaon Gardens & Parks KoyaKujiya Eco Park 16 
5 Assam Bongigaon Others Abhyapuri 20 
6 Assam Bongigaon Boat Ride Boat Ride River Bank 
7 Assam Dhubri Religious Places Mahamaya Mandir Bgribari 25 
8 Assam Dhubri Religious Places Gurdwara Sri Guru Teg 
Bahadur Sahib 
0.8 
9 Assam Dibrugarh Gardens & Parks Dibru Saikhowa National Park River Bank 
10 Assam Dispur Gardens & Parks Assam State Zoo cum 
Botanical Garden 
6 
11 Assam Dispur Religious Places Srimanta Sankaradeva 
Kalakshetra 
11 
12 Assam Dispur Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Regional Science Centre & 
Museum 
12 
13 Assam Dispur Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Basistha Mandir 15 
14 Assam Dispur Religious Places Assam State Museum 0.6 
15 Assam Dispur Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Guwahati Planetarium 0.5 
16 Assam Dispur Religious Places Kamakhya Temple 0.7 

Page 48 of 53 
 
17 Assam Dispur Religious Places Navgraha Temple 0.8 
18 Assam Goalpara Monuments Jain Rock Cut Caves 2 
19 Assam Goalpara Others Sri Surya Pahar 3 
20 Assam Golaghat Religious Places Negheriting Shiva Doul 10 
21 Assam Golaghat Religious Places Deo Pahar Temple Ruins 14 
22 Assam Jorhat Monuments Sukapha Samannay Kshetra 14 
23 Assam Jorhat Island Majuli Island 15 
24 Assam Jorhat Gardens & Parks Kokochang Parking 18 
25 Assam Kamrup Religious Places Shri Hayagriv Madhav Mandir 11 
26 Assam Kamrup Religious Places Madan Kamdev Temple 0.7 
27 Assam Kamrup Gardens & Parks Saraighat War Memorial River Bank 
28 Assam Kamrup Religious Places Athabari Fishery of Ahom 
Kingdom 
River Bank 
29 Assam Kamrup Religious Places DoulGovinda Temple River Bank 
30 Assam Majuli Religious Places GarmurSatra 8 
31 Assam Majuli Religious Places DakhinpatSatra, Majuli River Bank 
32 Assam Majuli Religious Places KamalabariSatra River Bank 
33 Assam Morigaon Gardens & Parks Deosal, Jagiroad River Bank 
34 Assam Morigaon Sanctuary Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary River Bank 
35 Assam Nagaon Religious Places Bordoa Satra 15 
36 Assam Nagaon Gardens & Parks Kaziranga National Park 0.5 
37 Assam Nalbari Sanctuary Laokhowa Wildlige Sanctuary 0.5 
38 Assam Sivasagar Religious Places Billeswar Temple 16 
39 Assam Sivasagar Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Tai Museum 11 
40 Assam Sivasagar Religious Places Siva Dol 13 
41 Assam Sivasagar Monuments Rang Ghar 15 
42 Assam Sivasagar Monuments Talatal Ghar 20 
43 Assam Sivasagar Religious Places Gaurisagar Pukhari 23 
44 Assam Sivasagar Monuments Kareng Ghar 25 
45 Assam Sivasagar Others Athabari Fishery of Ahom 
Kingdom 
25 
46 Assam Sonitpur Religious Places Mahabhairab Temple 2 
47 Assam Sonitpur Gardens & Parks Chitralekha Udyan River Bank 
48 Assam Sonitpur Hill Stations Agnigarh Hill River Bank 
49 Assam Sonitpur Hill Stations Bamuni Hills River Bank 
50 Assam Tinsukia Religious Places Bordubi 25 
51 Assam Tinsukia Others Sadiya River Bank 
 
d) Identified Tourist Spots in Kerala around NW-3 
 
Sr 
No. 
State Districts Type of Places Tourist Place Distance 
from 
River 
(Km) 
1 Kerala Kozhikode Beach Beypore Beach 0 
2 Kerala Kozhikode Beach Kozhikode Beach 2 
3 Kerala Kozhikode Others Mananchira Square 3 
4 Kerala Kozhikode Religious Places Mishkal Mosque 3 
5 Kerala Kozhikode Religious Places ThiruvachiraSree Krishna 3 

Page 49 of 53 
 
Temple 
6 Kerala Kozhikode Religious Places Thalikkunu Shiva Temple 4 
7 Kerala Kozhikode Others Regional Science Centre 5 
8 Kerala Kozhikode Religious Places Azhakodi Devi Temple 5 
9 Kerala Kozhikode Gardens & Parks Lions Park 5 
10 Kerala Kozhikode Gardens & Parks Sarovaram Bio Park 7 
11 Kerala Kozhikode Gardens & Parks Malabar Botanical Garden  7 
12 Kerala Kozhikode Beach Kamburam Beach  7 
13 Kerala Kozhikode Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Krishna Menon Museum  8 
14 Kerala Kozhikode Beach Varrakkal Beach 8 
15 Kerala Kozhikode Others Mananchira 10 
16 Kerala Malappuram Backwaters TirurPuzha Backwaters 0 
17 Kerala Malappuram Beach Ponnani Beaches 0 
18 Kerala Malappuram Beach Padinharekara & 
Parappanangadi Beach 
0 
19 Kerala Malappuram Others Kadalundipuzha 3 
20 Kerala Malappuram Beach Vallikunnu Beach 4 
21 Kerala Malappuram Others Marancherry 4 
22 Kerala Malappuram Beach Tanur Beach 12 
23 Kerala Ernakulam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Hilli Palace Museum 8 
24 Kerala Ernakulam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Muziris Heritage Museum River Bank 
25 Kerala Ernakulam Religious Places Bolgatty Palace River Bank 
26 Kerala Ernakulam Religious Places Edapally St. George 
Forane Church 
6 
27 Kerala Ernakulam Bird Sanctuary Mangalavanam Bird 
Sanctuary 
River Bank 
28 Kerala Ernakulam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
The Museum of 
Mattancherry  
River Bank 
29 Kerala Ernakulam Island Vypeen Island River Bank 
30 Kerala Ernakulam Beach Cherai Beach  River Bank 
31 Kerala Ernakulam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
David Hall Art Gallery River Bank 
32 Kerala Ernakulam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Folklore Museum River Bank 
33 Kerala Ernakulam Others Santa Cruz Basilica  River Bank 
34 Kerala Kollam Others Thevalli Place River Bank 
35 Kerala Kollam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Tsunami Museum River Bank 
36 Kerala Kollam Beach Kollam, Thangassery and 
Kappil Beach 
River Bank 
37 Kerala Kollam Religious Places Temples and Churches  River Bank 
38 Kerala Alappuzha Backwaters Alapphuzha River Bank 
 
e) Identified Tourist Spots in Kerala around NW-8 
 
Sr 
No. 
State Districts Type of Places Tourist Place Distance 
from 

Page 50 of 53 
 
River 
(Km) 
1 Kerala Alappuzha Backwaters Alleppey Boathouse 0 
2 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places MullackalRajarajeshwari 
Temple 
1 
3 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places Sabarimala Sri Dharmasastha 
Temple 
3 
4 Kerala Alappuzha Backwaters The Great Backwaters 3 
5 Kerala Alappuzha Parks and 
Gardens 
Vijay Beach Park 4 
6 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places SreeVallabha Temple 9 
7 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places AmbalappuzhaSree Krishna 
Temple 
15 
8 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places KaviyoorMahadeva Temple 15 
9 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places Kalloorkad St. Mary's Basilica 
Church, Champakulam 
16 
10 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places Sri Subrahmanyaswamy 
Temple 
22 
11 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places Karumadikuttan 25 
12 Kerala Alappuzha Hill Station Charalkunnu / Charal Mount 25 
 
f) Identified Tourist Spots in Kerala around NW-9 
 
Sr 
No. 
State Districts Type of Places Tourist Place Distance 
from River 
(Km) 
1 Kerala Alappuzha Backwaters Venbanad Lake On Shore 
2 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places MullackalRajarajeshwari 
Temple 
12 
3 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places Kalloorkad St. Mary's 
Basilica Church 
16 
4 Kerala Alappuzha Museum & Art 
Gallery 
International Coir museum 21 
5 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places ChakkulathukavuSree 
Bhagavathi Temple 
28 
6 Kerala Alappuzha Religious Places St. Andrew's Basilica 39 
7 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places St George Knanaya Catholic 
Forane Church 
0 
8 Kerala Kottayam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Mozart Art Gallery  1 
9 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Thallyil Mahadeva Temple  1 
10 Kerala Kottayam Parks and 
Gardens 
Municipal Jublee Park 3 
11 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Thirunakkara Mahadev 
Temple 
3 
12 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Ettumanoor Mahadeva 
Temple  
12 
13 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Malliyoor 5ri Maha 
Ganapathi Temple  
15 
14 Kerala Kottayam Museum & Art Bay Island Driftwood 16 

Page 51 of 53 
 
Gallery Museum  
15 Kerala Kottayam Bird Sanctuary Kumarakom Bird Sanctuary 17 
16 Kerala Kottayam Island Pathiramanal Island 24 
17 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Changanassery Temples 27 
 
g) Identified Tourist Spots in Kerala around NW-59 
 
Sr 
No. 
State Districts Type of Places Tourist Place Distance 
from 
River 
(Km) 
1 Kerala Kottayam Sanctuary Kumarakom Bird Sanctuary 1 
2 Kerala Kottayam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
Bay Island Driftwood 
Museum 
2 
3 Kerala Kottayam Island Island of Pathiramanal 4 
4 Kerala Kottayam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
 Mozart Art Gallery 4 
5 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Thazhathangadyluma 
Masjid 
5 
6 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Thirunakkara Mahadev 
Temple 
6 
7 Kerala Kottayam Parks and Gardens Municipal Jubilee park 6 
8 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Pallippurathukavu temple 7 
9 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places St Mary's Forane Church 8 
10 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Malliyoor Sri Maha 
Ganapathi Temple 
9 
11 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places St. Andrew's Basilica 12 
12 Kerala Kottayam Museum & Art 
Gallery 
International Coir Museum 13 
13 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Mullakkal Vishnu Temple 18 
14 Kerala Kottayam Religious Places Mullackal Rajarajeshwari 
temple 
19 
 
h) Identified Tourist Spots in Odisha around NW-5 
 
Sr 
No. 
State Districts Type of Places Tourist Place Distance 
from River 
(Km) 
1 Odisha Angul Monument Talcher palace River Bank River Bank 
2 Odisha Angul Sanctuary Satkosia Gorge Sanctuary 84 
3 Odisha Dhenkanal  Religious Places Kapilas 29.8 
4 Odisha Dhenkanal  Religious Places ‘Astashambhu Temple, 
Kualo 
8.8 
5 Odisha Dhenkanal  Religious Places ‘Anantashayana Vishnu, 
Saranga 
4.9 
6 Odisha Jajpur  Museum Archacological Museum, 
Ratn: 
3.9 
7 Odisha Jajpur  Religious Places Chandikholechandi Temple 18.8 
8 Odisha Jajpur  Religious Places Biraja Temple 8.5 

Page 52 of 53 
 
9 Odisha Jajpur  Monument Langudi Hills 14.2 
10 Odisha Jajpur  Monument Udaygiri Monastery & 
Maha Stupa 
13.8 
11 Odisha Kendrapara  Sanctuary Gahirmatha Marine 
Sanctuary 
29.1 
12 Odisha Kendrapara  Monument Hukitola NA 
13 Odisha Kendrapara  Gardens & Parks Bhitarkanika National Park 2.7 
14 Odisha Bhadrak  Religious Places Akhandalamani Mahadev 
Temple, Aradi 
1.6 
15 Odisha Bhadrak  Religious Places Maa Bhadrakali Temple, 
Aharapada 
75.5 
16 Odisha Bhadrak  Religious Places Maa Dhamarai Temple, 
Dhamra 
River Bank 
17 Odisha Baleshwar  Religious Places Jagannath Temple, Remuna 11.2 
18 WB Purba 
Medinipur 
Monument Mahishadal Rajbari River Bank 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 53 of 53 
 
 
Annexure - 4 
Major Ports connectivity to hinterland through National Waterways 
S.No.. Major Ports Connectivity with National Waterways (NWs) 
1. Haldia Port and 
Shyama Prasad 
Mookerjee Port 
Authority, 
Kolkata 
1. NW -1 (Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly river system – 1620 km) with 
Farakka (WB) -Sahibganj (Jharkhand) -Patna (Bihar) -Varanasi (UP) and 
Prayagraj (UP). 
2. NW -2 (river Brahmaputra – 891 km) with NW-97 (Sunderbans-172 
km) (WB) via Indo-Bangladesh Protocol route through Bangladesh (741.6 
km) - Dhubri (Assam) – Pandu, Guwahati (Assam) – Jogighopa (Assam) – 
Neamati (Assam) and Sadiya (Assam). 
3. NW-86 (river Roopnarayan 72 km) in WB. 
2. Cochin Port 
Authority 
NW-3 (West coast canal from Kozhikode to Kollam, Champakara canal & 
Udhoygamandal canal – 205 + 165 km), NW-8 (Alappuzha-
Chenganassery Canal - 29 km) & NW-9 (Alappuzha – Kottayam – 
Athirampuzha canal – 40 km) in the State of Kerala.  
3. Mormugao Port 
Authority 
NW- 27 (Cumberjua canal), NW-68 (river Mandovi), NW-111 (river 
Zuari) and NW-25 (Chapora river) in the State of Goa. 
4. Ennore Port 
Authority 
Kakinada Port 
(Minor Port) 
NW-4 (Godavari, Kakinada canal, Eluru canal Krishna river, 
Commamurcana 
l, Buckingham – Puducherry canal - 2890 km) in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu and U.T. of Puducherry.   
5. Paradip Port 
Authority 
(PPA) 
NW-5 (Brahmani- Kharsua - Tantighai- PanduaNala – Dedhei Nala- Kani 
Dhamra- river System, Geonkhali - Charbatia Stretch of East Coast canal, 
Charbatia - Dhamra Stretch of Matai river and Mahanadi Delta rivers 
(588)/Odisha) 
6. Jawaharlal 
Nehru Port 
Authority 
(JNPA) 
NW-10 (Amba river (45) / Maharashtra), 
NW-28 (Dabhol Creek-Vashisti river (45) / Maharashtra) 
NW-85 (Revadanda Creek- Kundalika river (31) / Maharashtra) 
NW-73 (Narmada river (227) / Maharashtra & Gujarat) 
NW-100 (Tapi river (164) / Maharashtra & Gujarat) 
7 Karwar Port 
(Minor Port) NW 52 (River Kali -10 Km) 
 
 
* * * * 
 

54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXIX 
TWENTY NINTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  11:00 A.M. on  Monday, the 19th July, 2023 in Committee Room -
D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A.A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11. Shri Prince Raj 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
14. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. 
He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the  following 
Reports:- 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its 327 th Report on the subject ‘Connectivity and Tourist 
Terminal Facilities at Ports’; 
(ii) *     *    *    * 
(iii) *     *    *    * 

56 
 
2.       *     *    *    * 
 
3.       *     *    *    * 
 
4.       The Committee authorized Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P., and in his absence, Shri 
C.M. Ramesh, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 24 th July, 2023. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Prince Raj, M.P. and in his absence, Shri  Tirath Singh Rawat, 
M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
5.       *     *    *    * 
 
6.       *     *    *    *1 
 
7.        The Meeting adjourned at 12:02 P.M. 
                                                                                                                                       
New Delhi,                                                                                                       Sumant Narain  
19th July, 2023                                                                                                   Joint Secretary  
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                             
  
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matters 