 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
310
_ 
THREE HUNDRED TENTH REPORT  
Functioning of Central Libraries in the country  
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TENTH REPORT  
 
Functioning of Central Libraries in the country 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii 
 4. REPORT                                 1-14 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   15-20 
  
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
6. MINUTES 21-36
7. ANNEXURES 37-38

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Tenth Report on ‘Functioning of Central Libraries in the 
country’.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture on the subject 
on 1st November, 2021. The Committee heard the views of Additional Sec retary, Ministry of 
Culture; Prof. Alok Tripathi, Additional Director General; Archaeological Survey of India; 
Shri T. J. Alone, Joint Director  General; Archaeological Survey of India; Adv. A.D.N. Rao, 
Senior Advocate on the panel of Supreme Court of India; and Adv. Jayant Tripathi, President 
Legal Advisor to ASI, on the subject on 9 th December, 2021. The Committee heard the views 
of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture on the subject on 6th January, 2022.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Culture and 
Domain Experts for placing before the Committee , the material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  31st 
January, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
January 31, 2022                                                     Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
DOB Delivery of Books 
CSL Central Secretariat Library 
DL District Library 
ICT Information and Communication Technology  
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IT Information Technology 
KBOPL Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library  
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training 
NDLI National Digital Library of India  
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NML National Mission on Libraries  
PPP Public–Private Partnership  
RRRLF Raja Rammohun Roy Library Foundation  
SCERT State Council of Educational Research And Training 
SCL State Central Library  
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UT Union Territory 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
Libraries exist in our country from ancient times. The world famous universities like 
Nalanda and Taxasila had magnificent libraries with a massive collection of manuscripts 
covering the universe of knowledge. However,  the modern concept of public library has its 
origin in the provincial and British colonial period when many public libraries got established 
across the country. In the post -independence era, the main  focus was on building knowledge 
society. Public libraries were considered to be very helpful in achieving this goal. Public 
library is a catalyst  to the society. 
2. A public library acts as a social institution  which caters to the information needs of 
the society without any discrimination. In a developing country like ours, special emphasis is 
laid on literacy, adult education, formal and informal education. The UNESCO defines Public 
Library as "the local gateway to knowled ge, provides a basic condition for lifelong learning, 
independent decision making and cultural development of the individual and social groups".  
3. Given the crucial role played by the Central Libraries across the country in 
dissemination of knowledge amo ng students, research scholars as well as the general public, 
the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture decided to take up the subject ‘Functioning of Central Libraries in the country’ for 
detailed examinatio n and report. The Committee had its deliberation with the Secretary, 
Ministry of Culture on this subject on 1 st November, 2021 and 6 th January, 2022. The 
Committee also heard various representatives of the Ministry and domain experts on the 
subject in its meeting held on 9th December, 2021. 
4. In India, t he public library scenario has improved considerably during the post -
independence period. The Delhi public library was founded in 1951 as the first UNESCO 
Public Library Pilot Project under the joint auspic es of UNESCO and Government of India. 
The purpose of t his library was to adapt “modern techniques to Indian conditions” and to 
serve as a model public library for Asia. 
5. As per the Seventh Schedule under Article 246 of Constitution of India, Libraries is  
enlisted in the State List. Ministry of Culture, however, because of historical and legal 
reasons, has been the  custodian of select major public libraries of national importance in the 
country. 
6. The following are the 7 Libraries/Organisations financed by Ministry of Culture. 
Budget is allocated to these organisations/offices every financial year for their administration 
and to ensure organisational goal: 

2 
 
1) National Library, Kolkata (Subordinate Office) 
2) Central Reference Library, Kolkata (Subordinate Office) 
3) Central Secretariat Library, Delhi 
4) Delhi Public Library, Delhi (Autonomous org.) 
5) Rampur Raza Library, Rampur, Uttar Pradesh (Autonomous Org.) 
6) Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library, Patna, Bihar (Autonomous Org.) 
7) Raja Rammohun Roy Library Foundation, Kolkata (Autonomous Org.) 
 
National Library, Kolkata 
7. The National Library, Kolkata is an “Institution of National Importa nce” under 
Article 62 in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. 
8. The library is designated to collect, disseminate and p reserve printed material 
produced within India. All forms of published materials in India are to be deposited at the 
National Library under the Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954 , 
subsequently amended in 1956 (Newspapers an d periodicals). It is also a legal depository 
library of the country and a largest repository body of Government Of India. It is a storehouse 
of 26,41,615  printed books, more than 125000 e -books, 7000 e-journals, about 88162 maps, 
5744 manuscripts, 147331  bound printed periodicals titles, 598 foreign print journal, 905 
newspaper titles comprising of more that 11000 newspapers bound volumes, 104388 
microfilms roles, 97000 mircrofiches and over 21425 digitized books covering over 72 lakh 
pages. 
9. The Nation al Library , Kolkata is one of the four designated libraries entitled to 
receive a copy of every publication published anywhere in the country, under the Delivery of 
Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954. The National Library is a permanent 
depository of all reading and printed materials produced in India, or written by any foreigner, 
wherever published and in whatever language both in printed and digital format. 
10. One of the domain experts who appeared before the Committee on the subject , 
commented about this library as under:- 
 Federation of Indian Publishers have estimated tha t more than one lac printed book s, 
journals, monographs, etc., are published in India every year. But the National 
Library is estimated to receive only about one -third of the publications under DOB 
Act. 

3 
 
 There is no provision in the National Library yet to receive and create database of 
digital publication published in the country. 
 This means the nation has almost lost its intellectual property of about   65% in 
printed form and 100% in digital form for more than 50 years. 
11. The Committee finds that there is no proper preservation of books/manuscripts 
in the National library in printed and digital format. The library is also not receiving 
copies of printed as well as digital publications published in the country. The 
Committee finds it extremely important that the Ministry of Culture and National 
Library, Kolkata come up with a mechanism for collection , preservation of material 
and digital publications and making  them accessible not only to general public but also 
to posterity since the objective of the National Library being a permanent depository of 
all reading material produced in India cannot be achieved. It is understood that a 
project has been submitted to develop Repository of Indian publications ensuring 
almost 100% of delivery under D elivery of books Act,1954 amended subsequently in 
1956 and 2005. The project has been approved by M inistry of Culture.  The Committee 
would like to know how the Ministry is ensuring this.  
12. The well trained and adequate number of staff can play a dominant role in providing 
effective and efficient services to the users of the public library. At present, there is 
inadequacy of trained and competent staff to render effective p ublic library services, forcing 
most services to be operated by semi and non -professional staff, which damages information 
organization and services. The problem of educated and competent professionals preferring to 
work in special and academic libraries r ather than public libraries, also needs to be resolved. 
Some of the libraries don't even have administrative staff. The National Library doesn't have 
a Director General for the last few years. 130 posts in national Library have been abolished. 
13. The Committee fails to comprehend how the National Library could be expected 
to function to its maximum potential when the top -level post of Director -General of the 
Library has been lying vacant for several years on the run. The Committee recommends 
that the post of the Director-General post in the National Library should not be  kept 
vacant for such a long time and steps be taken to fill it  up immediately. The Committee 
strongly recommends that urgent action  needs to be taken  for filling up the hum an 
resource requirements of the National Library . 
14. The Committee also recommends that the Executive Head of Library should be 
an eminent Library and information Science professional with strong technical 

4 
 
background. He/she may be appointed in the grade of Dire ctor General  at -least for 
three years for  taking up  the responsibility. 
 
CENTRAL SECRETARIAT LIBRARY, DELHI 
15. Central Secretariat Library (CSL), Ministry of Culture (MoC) is one of the largest 
Government Libraries in the country. CSL’s resources are an amalgamation of number of 
libraries of pre-independent India and many other old institutions such as Imperial Secretariat 
Library. Indian and Foreign Official Documents Sections are a valuable part of its c ore 
collection. It performs the function of a Secretariat Library with its collection of Government 
Reports and Gazettes.  
16. Central Secretariat Library mainly caters to the needs of all the 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. Non -official users such as research 
scholars, academicians, students and others can also become a member of this Library. As on 
date, total collection of the library is 8.41 lakh documents which include books, government 
publications, reports and gazettes.  
17. The Committee notes tha t Central Secretariat Library,  a premier library 
situated in the heart of the capital,  is a big attraction for politicians, bureaucrats and 
scholars. In view of its locational advantage , the Committee is of the view that CSL 
should undertake the role of advising decision makers on matters of library information 
services. The Committee also desires that CSL should play a lead role to coordinate 
with national and international agencies, associations, Non-Governmental 
Organizations ( NGOs), publishers and other stakeholders for the development of 
library services in the country  and for deriving benefit from  huge collections of 
Government reports and gazettes . 
 
 
RAJA  RAMMOHUN ROY LIBRARY FOUNDATION, KOLKATA  (RRRLF) 
(Autonomous Org.) 
 
18. Raja Rammohun Roy Library Foundation (RRRLF), was set up in May 1972 with the 
objective to promote and support the public library movement in the country, providing 
financial and technical assistance for development of Public Library System and Services 
under its schemes, inculcating reading habits among the masses with the active cooperation 
of the State/ U.T. Library Authorities and Voluntary Organizations operating in the field of 

5 
 
library services.  RRRLF has its Head Office Located in Kolkata and small zonal offices 
located in Delhi, Mumbai, Guwahati and Chennai. RRRLF promotes library movement and 
develop public library service all over the country through the implementation of two types of 
schemes – Matching and Non-Matching, to provide assistance towa rds building up of stocks 
of books and reading materials, modernization of library services, providing furnitures, 
storage items, digitization etc. 
19. Raja Ram Mohan Roy Library Foundation (RRRLF) was established in May, 1972 by 
the Ministry of Culture, G ovt. of India to spread library services all over the country in 
cooperation with State Governments, Union Territory Administration and Organizations  
working in the field. 
20. It is an autonomous organization fully financed by the Ministry of Culture, 
Government of India. It is registered under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961. 
The basic idea behind establishing the foundation was to take the library movement not only 
to small towns and villages but also to the remotest corner, in cooperati on with the state 
governments, union territory administrations and other organizations engaged in the library 
service and mass education.  
21. The Committee, therefore, recommends that central government, state 
governments and RRRLF should come forward and  take initiative for proper 
development of public library system in India. They should devise a master plan to 
revive India's public libraries to cater to needs of special groups like children , 
differently abled, elderly people and ethnic minorities and  achieve the goal of 
information for all.  
 
DELHI PUBLIC LIBRARY, DELHI (Autonomous Org.) 
 
22. The Delhi Public Library was established as a part of UNESCO project in 1950 and 
has developed into a major public library system and serves the entire metropolis. Delhi 
Public Library provides services to adult and child readers without any gender, religi on, caste 
and class discrimination, as a form of social education. It provides platform to meet the 
recreational needs of the readers to highlight their hidden talent. The library has a central 
library, 3 branches, 19 sub-branches, 1 community library, 8 r ehabilitation colony libraries, a 
Braille library, 144 mobile library service centers (including 25 Braille mobile library 
services) and 33 book reading centers in the capital Delhi. Delhi Public Library is expanding 
its services as a centre of knowledge dissemination and culture. 

6 
 
23. However Committee notes that membership of Delhi Public Library has 
witnessed decrease in recent times , one of the reasons being Covid-19 pandemic. It has 
come down to 1.5 lakh membership from what it was prior to corona perio d i. e. 1.85 
lakh. Being a model library created in 1951 in Asia with UNESCO’s technical, financial 
assistance, it should lead other libraries in country and extend all possible help  in their 
growth.  Delhi Public Library should make all out efforts to increase its membership/ 
viewership in the interest of general public. 
 
RAMPUR RAZA LIBRARY, RAMPUR, UTTAR PRADESH (Autonomous Org.)   
24. The Rampur Raza Library was founded by Nawab Faizullah  Khan in 1774. It was 
taken over by the Government of India in 1975 by an Act of Parliament. Honorable Governor 
of Uttar Pradesh is the Chairman of the Rampur Raza Library Board. The Rampur Raza 
Library has a collection of approximately 17,000 manuscripts & rare items including 150 
illustrated manuscripts with 4000 illustrations, 1,000 miniature paintings in 35 albums, 2,000 
specimens of Islamic calligraphy in 84 calligraphy albums, 300 Art objects, 1300 historical 
coins and approximately 62,000 printed books. 
 
KHUDA BAKHSH ORIENTAL PUBLIC LIBRARY, PATNA, BIHAR (Autonomous Org.) 
25. Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library (KBOPL) has evolved out of a personal 
collection of Mohammad Bakhsh of Chhapra, Bihar. His son, Khuda Bakhsh enriched the 
collection further and converted it into a public library in 1891, with the then Govt. of Bengal 
as its Trustee. In December, 1969 an Act of Parliament, declared the Library as an Institution 
of National Importance and from July, 1970 it is functioning as an autonomous insti tution 
governed by a Board constituted by the Government of India with the Governor of Bihar as 
its ex-officio Chairman. 
26. KBOPL possesses about 21,000 manuscripts of rare value mainly in Arabic, Persian 
and some in Turkish, Urdu, Hindi and Sanskrit lang uages, 3,00,000 printed books (including 
a large collection of Journal of Rare values) and about 2,000 original paintings of the 
Mughal, Rajput, Oudh, Iranian and Turkish schools.  
27. The Committee noted that there was no regular Director in the library for the 
period 2014 to April 2019 and there was also no board in 2018. Board has been 
reconstituted in the year 2020. The Committee is dismayed to note that under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Culture, the said library had been running 
without a  permanent Director for a few years which must affect the functioning and 

7 
 
decision-making process adversely. The Committee recommends that Ministry of 
Culture should shed this apathetic attitude in the interest of Libraries and general 
public. 
 
28. Budget Provisions made for all these 7 Libraries/Organizations financed by the 
Ministry of Culture, for F.Y 2021-22 are as under : 
 
S.No.  Name of Organizations  Total Budget Allocated 
1.   National Library  Rs. 4628.36 Lakh 
2.  Central Reference Library  Rs. 558.21  Lakh 
3.  Rampur Raza Library  Rs. 702.00 Lakh 
4.  Khuda Bakhsh Oriental 
Public Library  
Rs.632.50 Lakh 
5.  Delhi Public Library  Rs. 3627.00 Lakh 
6.  Central Secretariat 
Library   
Rs. 166.00  Lakh 
7.  Raja Rammohun Roy 
Library Foundation  
Rs. 2707.00 Lakh 
 
National Mission on Libraries 
29.  In order to revamp the Public Library System & Services, and to provide 
digital content based services to the citizens at large, this Ministry launched the scheme of 
‘National Mission on Libraries’ (NML) in 2014. This scheme consists of following four 
components:  
(i)  Creation of National Virtual Library of India, (Now known as Indian Culture Portal) 
(ii) Setting up of NML Model Libraries  (01 Central State Library an d 01 District Library 
per State and Six MoC Libraries) 
(iii) Quantitative and Qualitative Survey, 
(iv)  Capacity Building. 
30.  Indian Culture Portal was launched on 10.12.2019. It is being managed and 
maintained by Indian Institute of Technology ( IIT) Bombay. For other 03 components 
RRRLF is the nodal agency for administrative, logistic, planning and budgeting purposes.  
The Scheme has been extended for 05 years till 31.03.2026. 

8 
 
 
31.  Progress made so far under NML: 
 Indian Culture Portal  (Formerly known as National Virtual of India) 
i. It has total of about 2.5 Lakh digital artefacts with metadata. It also has more than 
9 Lakh bibliographic entries. 
ii. The content is presented in 17 categories such as rare books, e-books, archives, 
paintings and union catalogues. 
iii. It has also 10 categories of content such as stories, snippets, historical cities and 
forts. 
iv. The portal is currently available in English and Hindi. 
v. The portal can be accessed through an App called Indian Culture available on both 
Android phones and iPhone.  
vi. The portal is present through the Umang App also. 
 
 Setting up of NML Model Libraries : Under this component till date,  40 Libraries (14 
State Central Library (SCL); 21 DL ; 05 MoC Libraries) have been financed so far.  
 Capacity Building :  33 Trainings organized till now. 
 
32. The Committee has been given to understand that many public libraries in India are in 
a state of despair and remain largely underdeveloped. Besides lack of funds, another reason 
cited for the shutting down of libraries is the shrinking number of visitors w ho, in turn, 
complain of the despairing conditions of libraries. Libraries in India don't offer inviting and 
inspiring spaces. Also, with time, the book collection in a library grows, which takes up 
visitors' space, as an increasing number of shelves are r equired to accommodate the growing 
collection. Many libraries fail to implement the periodic weeding policy, wherein old and 
rarely used books are disposed of. In many developed nations, public libraries are places 
where  youngsters visit to realise their goals. In India, due to lack of policy and resources 
support, both at the central and state levels, public libraries are unable to match the 
expectations of the young population. 
33. The Committee is of the view that public libraries have been neglected fo r a long 
time now and any change would need substantial time and effort from all directions - 
State, community, private sector and non -governmental organisations. The Committee 
recommends that public library system in India should be modified while keeping  in 
mind the latest developments in the field of Information and Communication 

9 
 
Technology (ICT) so as to provide minimum network based services for the urban and 
rural populace . Libraries should be developed as Community Information Centre 
models and computerisation of libraries should be taken up fast to upgrade them.  
 
CHALLENGES 
34. There are a number of challenges ahead which prevents the libraries from achieving  
the goal of ‘information for all’. Some of the challenges are listed below; 
a. Legislation  
b. Organisational structure  
c. Financial resources   
d. School education  
e. Low literacy rate  
f. E-learning  
g. Online membership and Drives to boost membership  
h. Infrastructural improvements 
 
 Legislation 
35. The growth and development of public libraries in India as on date is uneven. Some of 
the States have enacted library legislations  and they are doing extremely good in the 
development of public libraries. O ther states are lagging behind. All the South Indian States 
are having well -structured public library sys tem; whereas North -Indian States, such as Uttar 
Pradesh are having very poor infrastructure as well as less number of public libraries when 
compared with the size and population of the State. 
36. The Committee observes that i n the growth and development of  public library system 
the public library legislation plays a very fundamental and crucial role. It gives framework 
for the system, but in India out of 2 8 states and 8 Union Territories only some states and 
Union territories have enacted public library acts. Even after completion of several decades of 
India’s independence, some states and UTs are yet to enact Public Library Acts. 
37. The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the Ministry should bring 
pressure on state governments  to enact  library legislation in the states where it has not 
been enacted  covering all aspects like structure of buildings, s taff requirement, 
preservation of valuable manuscripts  etc. for their proper growth. Libraries in 
Southern States may be emulated in this regard. 
 

10 
 
 Organizational Structure 
38. The Seventh Schedule to the Co nstitution defines and specifies  allocation of powers 
and functions between Union and States. It contains three lists i.e. (i) Union List (ii) State 
List and (iii) Concurrent List. As per the Constitution, library  forms  part of the State List. It 
means that maintenance and upgradation of libraries falling under the jurisdiction of state 
have to be taken care of by the State.  
39. The Committee finds that library being a State subject, every State has created their 
own organizational structure. The Committee observes that public library system differs from 
one State to another, so there is no uniformity in the organizational structure of public library 
system; each State has developed its own system. The Committee notes that For example 
some States have established only District  Libraries on the other hand some States have 
established District Central Library and City Central Library in accordance with the 
provisions made in the act. 
40. The Committee feels that there is a need for uniformity in this area. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that there is an urgent need to set up a Committee 
to draft National Policy on library and information system. A Committee on National 
policy on library and information system was set up on October 7, 1985 under the 
Chairmanship of Prof. D.P. Chattopadhyay and its Report was submitted on 31 st May, 
1986. It is more than three decades and the recommendations made then 0may have 
outlived its utility. So there is an urgent need to look into it. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that a Committee for drafting a National Policy on Library and 
Information System may be set up by the Ministry of Culture at the earliest. 
 
 Financial Resources 
41. The Committee notes with concern that finance is one of  the biggest constraint in the 
development of public libraries. The financial resources play an indispensable role in the 
growth and development of public libraries.The present scenario shows a dismal picture of 
the public library system in the country. The public libraries are not not being attended  with 
adequate funds either by state government or by Union Government.The The Committee is 
dismayed to note that money being collected in the name of libraries by way of municipalities 
and panchayats through taxes, is not being spent on their development. 
42. The Committee, therefore, recommends that  the State Governments may be 
guided to frame rules/amendments in t he Act in a manner that money collected for t he 

11 
 
purpose is utilized properly and  spent only for the li braries. It should not go to  other 
State accounts and be used for other purposes.  
43. Further, the current system of financing of public libraries in Indi a is highly diverse. 
Even among the states which have enacted library acts, there are a lot of variations regarding 
the financial allotment. For instance , some of the States have introduced library cess  in the 
States but in the majority of the States it is missing. 
44. The Committee , therefore,  recommends that a provision should be made for 
collection of library cess in the legislation itself, otherwise the libraries  have to fully 
depend upon State Government grants as finance remains the main hurdle for the 
development of public libraries in India.  
 
 School Education 
45. The Committee notes that o ne of the great challenges for public library is to provide 
library services to the primary and secondary school children, because in India , many schools 
do not have any library especially schools which are run by government. In such a situation,  
the existence of a Public Library will be of  great help for school going children in their 
formal as well as informal education.In the fast changing scenario Library's role is pivotal for 
providing online education with  technological innovations like live streaming, digitized 
availability of print media, video conferencing, etc. 
46. As l ibrary is a growing organism, not physically but virtually ,  new roles, 
challenges and opportunities for libraries are coming up now. The Committee 
recommends that facilities may be provided for online/virtual learning for school 
children. The Ministry should come up with guidelines for  large scale digitization of 
various books, journals, manuscripts and many other library resources for catching 
attention of children , especially in  the light of Coronavirus pandemic . A  great 
opportunity exists today to increase the reading habit of general public, academicians, 
students, scholars and researchers in different fields by making various knowledge 
resources available through a single platform  of virtual library . Technical expertise to 
make reading resources available with Central Libraries  should be shared with the 
state libraries. If need be, Public-Private Partnership ( PPP) model for libraries can be 
explored. 
47. The Committee  also recommends that in order to keep the interest of school 
children growing, textbooks can be uploaded on the internet. Like the e National 
Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) books, State Council of 

12 
 
Educational Research and Training (SCERT)  books may also be made available on the 
internet. Many school going children are not having textbooks or they cannot afford 
textbooks. Fu rther, copyrights of some of expensive books can be bought from the 
authors and digital version of these textbooks can be uploaded and put on dedicated 
sites. Students from all over the country will benefit from it.  
48. A lot of emphasis has been laid by the Central Government on sharing of ancient 
Indian knowledge, teaching -learning systems and also digitization of various such valued 
resources to broadbase our education system.  By making s uch resources available to the 
citizens of this country in different Indian languages, the concept of - One Nation - One 
Comprehensive learning platform may be realised , and technologically enhance the 
user's experience in these Libraries, earlier understood in common p arlance as footfall 
in libraries.  
 
 Low Literacy Rate 
49. Even though literacy rate has shown increase over a period of time  (52.21 in 1991, 
64.83 in 2001, 74.04 in 2011 , 63.4% in 2021 ) still a considerable percentage of our  
population is illiterate, adding to that  is the problem of  awareness about public libraries 
among the people. 
50. The Committee observes that it is really a challenge for public libraries to attend 
to the needs and requirements of every user in the fast developing knowledge society. In 
this regard, the Committee wishes to point out that young people are more tech savvy so 
they would like to use technology oriented services in libraries.  
51. National Mission on Libraries i.e., a High Level Committee, was set up by Ministry of 
Culture, Government of India, dated 4th May, 2012 in pursuance of National Knowledge 
Commission recommendations for sustained attention for development of Libraries and 
Information Science Sector. National Mission on Libraries set up four workin g groups and 
after deliberating on the recommendations of the working groups formulated the scheme 
"National Mission on Libraries (NML) for upgradation of libraries providing service to the 
public. 
52. The Committee emphasises that i f the goal for National  Mission on Libraries 
(NML) is to be achieved, libraries will have to be upgraded at State and UT level  by 
strengthening them. Only then, the  target of 100% literacy and  improvement in  
standard of higher education in the country can be realised. 
 

13 
 
 E-learning 
53. The Committee observes that major infrastructural and technological improvements 
are needed in the libraries across the country to enable them to match with best international 
standards. This should be equipped with educational portals to benefit the students from all 
categories. The Committee is happy to note that National Mission on Education through 
Information and Communication Technology has sponsored the National Digital Library of 
India (NDLI) project by funding through Ministry of Education. The textbooks of NCERT 
are now available for the common public without any charge. The National Virtual Library is 
also there where thousands of rare books are available.  The Committee recommen ds that 
the opportunity should be utilized to create a web portal for interlinking of National 
Digital Library of India (NDLI)  with international-library portals so as to benefit the 
masses across the whole country. 
 
 Online Membership and Drives to Boost Membership 
54. The Committee is of the strong view that to keep up with the times, Central 
Libraries across the country should permit the general public to join/ renew/ cancel the 
membership of the Library via submission of an online form along with the online 
payment of membership fees. The Committee feels that doing so would give a major 
boost to the membership figures of all the Central Libraries. The Committee further 
recommends that the Libraries may conduct special Membership drives at local schools, 
universities, NGOs etc. in order to get students and researchers to join the library. This 
would permit increased utilization of the resources available at the Central Libraries. 
 
 Infrastructural improvements 
55. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may carry out a special exercise 
across all the Central Libraries in the country in order to assess the need for 
infrastructural improvement therein. The Committee feels that having good facilities in 
the form  of well-lit comfortable sitting areas, reading rooms, computer facilities with 
good internet connectivity, etc. is a pre cursor to increase  the usage of library resources 
in our country. The Ministry should come up with budgetary requirements for carrying 
out infrastructural improvements at the public libraries and  approach  the Ministry of 
Finance to grant special one-time grant in order to finance the same. 

14 
 
56. The Committee also recommends that public libraries in India should focus on 
Reader services by making use of vast Information Technology ( IT) resources already 
available throughout the country. Libraries can no longer work in isolation e ither 
geographically or by sector. Their existence is being relatively challenged by new 
services or products like Google, Wiki, Quora, Social Media, E -Resources, etc. Indian 
libraries cannot remain untouched with these phenomena. The Ministry ,therefore, 
should endeavor to  keep reinventing, reshaping services, redesigning spaces and above 
all, de-learning age old practices before adopting new models of providing information 
services. 
 
CONCLUSION 
57. In India, there has been uneven growth of public libraries among the different States 
or regions and even with local library system. India is yet to achieve goal of information for 
all. The regions that are economically backward are badly served. The public libraries in rural 
areas are in bad shape as compared to urban areas. In addition to this the needs of special 
groups like children, differently abled, elderly people, and ethnic minorities have been largely 
left unaddressed and they must to be addressed on priority basis. 
58. The established fact is that the public libraries can play a vital role in the development 
of states as well as a nation. Public libraries have a social mission and are devoted to the 
development of the community. It has been providing infor mation, education, leisure and 
entertainment for decades and will continue  these functions for many more years to come. In 
order to ensure that the public libraries play this role in the best possible manner, it is 
imperative that the Ministry play a proactive role in improving the condition of Central 
Libraries in the country, as well as devise a plan to assist State Gove rnments in revamping  
State-financed Libraries.  

15 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
National Library, Kolkata 
 The Committee finds that there is no proper preservation of books/manuscripts 
in the National library in printed and digital format. The library is also not receiving 
copies of printed as well as digital publications published in the country. The 
Committee finds it extremely important that the Ministry of Culture and National 
Library, Kolkata come up with a mechanism for collection , preservation of material 
and digital publications and making  them accessible not only to general public but also 
to posterity since the objective of the National Library being a permanent depository of 
all reading material produced in India cannot be achieved. It is understood that a 
project has been  submitted to develop Repository of Indian publications ensuring 
almost 100% of delivery under D elivery of books Act,1954 amended subsequently in 
1956 and 2005. The project has been approved by M inistry of Culture.  The Committee 
would like to know how the Ministry is ensuring this.  
(Para 11) 
 The Committee fails to comprehend how the National Library could be expected 
to function to its maximum potential when the top -level post of Director -General of the 
Library has been lying vacant for several years on the run. The Committee recommends 
that the post of the Director-General post in the National Library should not be kept 
vacant for such a long time and steps be taken to fill it  up immediately. The Committee 
strongly recommends that urgent action  needs to be taken for filling up the hum an 
resource requirements of the National Library. 
(Para 13) 
 The Committee also recommends that the Executive Head of Library should be 
an eminent Library and information Science professional with strong technical 
background. He/she may be appointed in the grade of Direct or General  at -least for 
three years for  taking up  the responsibility. 
(Para 14) 
 
Central Secretariat Library, Delhi 
 The Committee notes tha t Central Secretariat Library,  a premier library 
situated in the heart of the capital , is a big attraction for politicians, bureaucrats and 
scholars. In view of its locational advantage , the Committee is of the view that CSL 

16 
 
should undertake the role of advising decision makers on matters of library information 
services. The Committee also desires that CSL should play a lead role to coordinate 
with national and international agencies, associations, Non-Governmental 
Organizations ( NGOs), publishers and other stakeholders for the development of 
library services in the country  and for deriving benefit from huge collections of 
Government reports and gazettes. 
(Para 17) 
 
Raja  Rammohun Roy Library Foundation, Kolkata (RRRLF) (Autonomous Org.) 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that central government, state 
governments and RRRLF should come forward and take initiative for proper 
development of public library system in India. They should devise a master plan to 
revive India's public libraries to cater to needs of special groups like children, 
differently abled, elderly people and ethnic minorities and achieve the goal of 
information for all.  
(Para 21) 
 
Delhi Public Library, Delhi (Autonomous Org.) 
 However Committee notes that membership of Delhi Public Library has 
witnessed decrease  in recent times , one of the reasons being Covid-19 pandemic. It has 
come down to 1.5 lakh membership from what it was prior to corona period  i.e. 1.85 
lakh. Being a model library created in 1951 in Asia with UNESCO’s technical, financial 
assistance, it should lead other libraries in country and extend all possible help  in their 
growth.  Delhi Public Library should make all out efforts to increase its membership/ 
viewership in the interest of general public. 
(Para 23) 
 
Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library, Patna, Bihar (Autonomous Org.) 
 The Committee noted that there was no regular Director in the library for the 
period 2014 to April 2019 and there was also no board in 2018. Board has been 
reconstituted in the year 2020. The Committee is dismayed to note that under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Culture, the said library had been running 
without a permanent Director for a few years which must affect th e functioning and 
decision-making process adversely. The Committee recommends that Ministry of 

17 
 
Culture should shed this apathetic attitude in the interest of Libraries and general 
public. 
(Para 27) 
 
 
National Mission on Libraries 
 The Committee is of the view that public libraries have been neglected for a long 
time now and any change would need substantial time and effort from all directions - 
State, community, private sector and non -governmental organisations. The Committee 
recommends that public library  system in India should be modified while keeping in 
mind the latest developments in the field of Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) so as to provide minimum network based services for the urban and 
rural populace . Libraries should be develope d as Community Information Centre 
models and computerisation of libraries should be taken up fast to upgrade them.  
(Para 33) 
 
CHALLENGES 
 The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the Ministry should bring 
pressure on state governments  to enact  library legislation in the states where it has not 
been enacted  covering all aspects like structure of buildings, s taff requirement, 
preservation of valuable manuscripts  etc. for their proper growth. Libraries in 
Southern States may be emulated in this regard. 
(Para 37) 
 
 Organizational Structure 
The Committee feels that there is a need for uniformity in this area. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that there is an urgent need to set up a Committee 
to draft National Policy on library and information system. A Committee on National 
policy on library and information system was set up on October 7, 1985 under the 
Chairmanship of Prof. D.P. Chattopadhyay and its Report was submitted on 31 st May, 
1986. It is more than three decades and the recommendations made then may have 
outlived its utility. So there is an urgent need to look into it. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that a Committee for drafting a National Policy on Library and 
Information System may be set up by the Ministry of Culture at the earliest. 

18 
 
(Para 40) 
 
 Financial Resources 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that  the State Governments may be 
guided to frame rules/amendments in t he Act in a manner that money collected for t he 
purpose is utilized properly and  spent only for the li braries. It should not go to  other 
State accounts and be used for other purposes.  
(Para 42) 
 The Committee , therefore,  recommends that a provision should be made for 
collection of library cess in the legislation itself, otherwise the libraries  have to fully 
depend upon State Government grants as finance remains the main hurdle for the 
development of public libraries in India.  
(Para 44) 
 
 School Education 
 As l ibrary is a growing organism, not physically but virtually ,  new roles, 
challenges and opportunities for libraries are coming up now. The Committee 
recommends that facilities may be provided for online/virtual learning for school 
children. The Ministry should come up with guidelines for  large scale digitization of 
various books, journals, manuscripts and many other library resources for catching 
attention of children , especially in  the light of Coronavirus pandemic . A  great 
opportunity exists today to increase the reading habit of general public, academicians, 
students, scholars and researchers in different fields by making various knowledge 
resources available through a single platform  of virtual library . Technical expertise to 
make reading resources ava ilable with Central Libraries  should be shared with the 
state libraries. If need be, Public-Private Partnership ( PPP) model for libraries can be 
explored. 
(Para 46) 
 The Committee  also recommends that in order to keep the interest of school 
children growing, textbooks can be uploaded on the internet. Like the e National 
Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) books, State Council of 
Educational Research and Training (SCERT)  books may also be made available on the 
internet. Manyschool going children are not having textbooks or they cannot afford 

19 
 
textbooks. Further, copyrights of some of expensive books can be bought from the 
authors and digital version of these textbooks can be uploaded and put on dedicated 
sites. Students from all over the country will benefit from it.  
(Para 47) 
By making s uch resources available to the citizens of this country in different 
Indian languages, the concept of - One Nation - One Comprehensive learning platform 
may be realised , and technologically enhance the user's experience in these Libraries, 
earlier understood in common parlance as footfall in libraries.  
(Para 48) 
 
 Low Literacy Rate 
 The Committee observes that it is really a challenge for public libraries to attend 
to the needs and requirements of every user in the fast developing knowledge society. In 
this regard, the Committee wishes to point out that young people are more tech savvy so 
they would like to use technology oriented services in libraries.  
(Para 50) 
 The Committee emphasises that i f the goal for National Mission on Libraries 
(NML) is to  be achieved, libraries will have to be upgraded at State and UT level  by 
strengthening them. Only then, the  target of 100% literacy and  improvement in  
standard of higher education in the country can be realised. 
(Para 52) 
 
 E-learning 
The Committee recommends that the opportunity should be utilized to create a web 
portal for interlinking of National Digital Library of India (NDLI)  with international-
library portals so as to benefit the masses across the whole country. 
(Para 53) 
 
 Online Membership and Drives to Boost Membership 
 The Committee is of the strong view that to keep up with the times, Central 
Libraries across the country should permit the general public to join/ renew/ cancel the 
membership of the Library via submission of an online form along with the online 
payment of membership fees. The Committee feels that doing so would give a major 

20 
 
boost to the membership figures of all the Central Libraries. The Committee further 
recommends that the Libraries may conduct special Membership drives at local schools, 
universities, NGOs etc. in order to get students and researchers to join the library. This 
would permit increased utilization of the resources available at the Central Libraries. 
(Para 54) 
 
 Infrastructural improvements 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may carry out a special exercise 
across all the Central Libraries in the country in order to assess the need for 
infrastructural improvement therein. The Committee feels that having good facilities in 
the form of well-lit comfortable sitting areas, reading rooms, computer facilities with 
good internet connectivity, etc. is a pre cursor to increase the usage of library resources 
in our country. The Ministry should come up with budgetary requirements for carrying 
out infrastructural improvements at the public libraries and  approach the Ministry of 
Finance to grant special one-time grant in order to finance the same. 
(Para 55) 
 The Committee also recommends that public libraries in India should focus on 
Reader services by making use of vast Information Technology ( IT) resources already 
available throughout the country. Libraries can no longer work in isolation either 
geographically or by sector. Their existence is being relatively challenged by new 
services or products like Google, Wiki, Quora, Social Media, E -Resources, etc. Indian 
libraries cannot remain untouched with these phenomena. The Ministry , therefore, 
should endeavor to  keep reinventing, reshaping services, redesigning spaces and above 
all, de-learning age old practices before adopting new models of providing information 
services. 
(Para 56) 
 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

II 
SECOND MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 11:00 AM on Monday, the 1 st November, 2021 in the Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
2. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Margani Bharat 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
14. Shri Prince Raj 
15. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
18. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
19. Shri. Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
 Witnesses: - 
 *   *1    *    * 
 Ministry of Culture 
i. Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary, Ministry of Culture. 
ii. Shri Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma, Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Culture. 
iii. Ms. V. Vidyavathi, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). 
iv. Shri Alok Tripathi, Addl. Director, ASI 
                                                           
1 * Relates to other matters 
21

v. Shri Ajay Yadav, Director, ASI 
vi. Shri T.J. Alone, Jt. Director General, ASI. 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the first meeting 
of the reconstituted Committee and apprised them of the agenda of the meeting, i;.e. (i)  
 * * * and (ii) oral evidence of Secretary M/o Culture on the subjects - 
"Functioning of Central Libraries" and   *i  *  *. 
(i)*    *2    *   * 
2.          *   *   *   * 
3.          *   *   *   * 
4.          *   *   *   * 
5.          *   *   *   * 
6.          *   *   *   * 
 (The Committee reassembled after a lunch break) 
  
               (ii) Oral Evidence of Secretary, M/o Culture 
7.         The meeting resumed at 02:30 P.M. to hear the views of Secretary, Ministry of Culture 
on the ‘Functioning of Central Libraries in the Country’ and   *  *  *  
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed that a background note on  
‘Functioning of Central Libraries in the Country’ and    *3  *  * has been 
circulated. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and the senior officials of the 
Ministry of Culture, invited them to make a presentation on the subject - Functioning of Central 
Libraries in the country, inter-alia highlighting the measures undertaken for the up -gradation and 
                                                           
2 * Relates to other matters 
 
22

modernization of Central Libraries across the country as well as the progress made in digitization 
and recruitment of staff in these libraries. 
8.         *    *4    * Similarly, up -gradation of 
libraries should also be done out of money collected by the State Governments in the name of 
libraries.    *    *    * 
9.         The Secretary, Ministry of Culture during the course of his presentation apprised the 
Committee that Ministry of Culture has no authority over state – funded libraries as it manages 
central govt. – funded libraries i.e. (i) The National Library, Kolkata; (ii) the Central Reference 
Library, Kolkata; (iii) The Rampur Raza Library , Rampur; (iv) the Khuda Baksh Oriental 
Library, Patna; (v) the Delhi Public Library, Delhi; (vi) the Central Secretariat Library, Delhi; 
and, (vii) Raja Rammohun Roy Library, Kolkata. *   *   * 
Thereafter, the Committee was informed that National Mission on Libraries (NML) ensures 
sustainable development and easy accessibility of libraries across the country to all. NML 
performs several functions  viz. Creation of Indian Culture Portal, setting up of NML model 
libraries in each State, Ministry of Culture Li braries; Quantitative and qualitative survey and 
capacity building. The Indian Culture Portal managed and maintained by IIT Bombay has 
comprehensive database, curated content from leading repositories based on rigorous research 
and provides access to archi val resources which contains 6300+ Manuscripts, 32,600+ Rare 
Books and e -books, 1,29,300+ Archival Images, 1,500+ Paintings, 19,000+ Museum 
Collections, 1,700+ Gazeteers, 25,61,000+ Union Catalogues, 55+ Intangible Cultural Heritage, 
18,700+ Reports & Proc eedings, UNESCO Content, Indian National Bibliography, along with 
In-House content  Viz. Stories, Snippets, Photo Essays, Indian Forts, Historic cities, Musical 
Instruments, Food and Culture, Virtual Walk-throughs & Freedom Archives. 
                                                           
4 * Relates to other matters 
23

10.       The Secretary  further informed that intervention of central government regarding 
judicious utilization of funds and their allocation for development of state -funded libraries is a 
herculean task for the Ministry.   *   *   * 
11.       Members raised various queries on digitally uploading the school textbooks, * 
 *  *  *   software development for easy accessibility 
of libraries,    *    *    * 
attractive library promotion schemes to increase footfall of the general folk, interconnecting 
small libraries with the world e-library portal,  *   *   * 
12.       The Secretary of Ministry of Culture replied to some of the queries raised by the 
Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman directed him to furnish written replies 
to the remaining queries/points/issues raised by the Members wh ich remained unanswered, 
within a week's time. 
(The witnesses then concluded their remarks withdrew) 
13.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
14.       The meeting adjourned at 3:20 P.M.  
                                                           
i * Relates to other matters 
24

 
 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9 th December, 2021 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Anto Antony 
5. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
6. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
7. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
8. Shri Dushyant Singh 
9. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
10. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
11. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
12. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary  
  
  
 Witnesses: - 
  
Domain Expert 
1. Dr. R. K. Chadha Former Additional Secretary, Parliament Library 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and Dr. R.K. 
Chadha, former Additional Secretary, Parliament Library to the meeting on the subject 
‘Functioning of Central Libraries in the country’. 
25

 
 
2.         The Chairman stressed upon the important role played by the Central Libraries in 
providing access to rich sources of knowledge and information, and enquired about the major 
issues and challenges being faced by the Central Libraries in o ur country and the proposed 
solutions for the same. 
3.         Dr. R.K. Chadha began his deposition by informing the Committee that the post of 
Director General at the National Library (NL), Kolkata has been lying vacant for the last nine 
years and that 130 posts in the NL have been abolished. He stated that online journals have been 
discontinued at the NL. He submitted that while the NL should receive all the publications which 
are published in the country, only 30 -35 percent of the books are being receive d at NL, while 
there is no provision for receiving digital publications published in the country at all. He 
suggested that the law should be amended so that all books are deposited to the NL and digital 
publications are also received in NL. He pointed out that the main function of NL is to have 
publications for the posterity but that there is no preservation system in the NL for the books and 
the manuscripts. He informed the Committee that the post of Director in the Central Secretariat 
Library (CSL) has be en lying vacant for the last ten years which, in turn, impacts all other 
Government of India Libraries since the CSL is the nodal library and advises all other 
Government libraries. 
4.         Dr. R.K. Chadha further informed the Committee that the Nationa l Library Policy had 
originally been published around the same time as the National Education Policy which came out 
in 1985 -86 and while the National Education Policy has been revised, the National Policy on 
Library and Information Science has not been rev ised ever since. He highlighted the need to 
make State Governments accountable for the funds given to them for the development of State 
Libraries. He was of the view that the Central Government should frame guidelines for libraries 
to follow in light of th e ongoing transition to online learning. He suggested that a National 
Commission on Libraries should be set up which will formulate the standards and policies for 
libraries and conduct research and development in the field of libraries. He further suggeste d that 
26

 
 
the Ministry should develop five to ten model libraries across the country which can be emulated 
by the State Governments. He informed the Committee that none of the libraries applied for the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation scheme wherein the Founda tion was providing free computers 
and free connectivity to any institution that wanted to give digital teaching to the students. He 
opined that the Central Libraries should conduct membership drives to make more people aware 
about the library services. He suggested that financing of libraries through PPP model and 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds should be looked into. 
  
 Witnesses: - 
Ministry of Culture 
1. Shri Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. R. K. Sharma 
(in the capacity of domain expert) 
Director General, Delhi Public Library 
5.         The Chairman welcomed Shri Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma, Additional Secretary, Ministry 
of Culture and Dr. R.K. Sharma, Director General, Delhi Public Library (DPL) to the meeting 
and sought their views on the subject 'Functioning of Central Libraries in the country'. He stated 
that the sharing of ancient Indian knowledge, teaching -learning systems and digitization of 
various such valued resources to broadbase our education system and making s uch initiative 
available to the citizens of the country will help realize the concept of ‘One Nation - One 
Comprehensive learning platform’. He sought to know about the various issues and challenges 
being faced by the Central Libraries in the implementatio n of National Mission on Libraries 
scheme and the possible solutions thereto. He enquired about the possible ways through which 
technical expertise and reading resources available with the Central Libraries can be shared with 
the State Libraries. He stressed upon the need to digitize books and creation of software to access 
such digitized books at the libraries as well as on the internet. 
6.         Director General, Delhi Public Library informed the Committee that the total 
membership of DPL is about 1.5 l akhs, down from about 1.85 lakhs before the Coronavirus 
27

 
 
pandemic. He informed the Committee that DPL is a network of 33 libraries, comprising 1 
Central Library, 4 zonal libraries, 18 branch libraries and about 9 libraries in resettlement 
colonies. He furth er apprised that DPL also runs mobile libraries, wherein 9 mobile vans cover 
about 160 points across Delhi. He briefed the Committee about the initiation of digital payment 
at the DPL, installation of GPS system in its mobile vans, addition of e -resources on website, 
redesign of online public access catalogue to link with the databases of other libraries, linkage 
with National Digital Library, conduction of online webinars, special conferences and quizzes as 
part of the ‘Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav’ celebration, and upgradation of children library. 
7.         A Member suggested that Central Libraries should extend their membership to school 
kids. He sought to know about the mechanism in place in order to maintain and preserve 
manuscripts and books present at the National Library. Another Member was of the view that the 
Ministry should consider making a provision for submission of digital copy alongwith any book 
submitted to the National Library. One Member of the Committee enquired about the utilization 
of Rs. 60 crores fund that was allocated to IIT Bombay to create a virtual library. In this regard, 
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that IIT Bombay was given 
the funds to develop the National Virtual Library of India, which has been  developed and is 
presently online in the form of the Indian Culture Portal, which has 27 sections and has 
thousands of rare books and manuscripts. He further stated that work is going on to digitize more 
content for uploading on the said Portal. He apprised the Committee that the Ministry has written 
to all the Secretaries, Government of India; Chief Secretaries and Missions abroad to popularize 
the Indian Culture Portal. He informed the Committee that the National Mission on Libraries has 
been extended ti ll 2026 and that one district library model library is to be developed in each 
State. 
8.         The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Culture and DG, DPL responded to some of the 
queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman th en directed the 
Additional Secretary to furnish written replies to other queries/points/issues raised by him and 
28

 
 
the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting, to the 
Secretariat.   
  
Witnesses: - 
Archaeological Survey of India, Ministry of Culture 
1. Prof. Alok Tripathi 
(in the capacity of domain expert) 
Additional Director General 
2. Shri T.J. Alone 
(in the capacity of domain expert) 
Joint Director General 
  
Domain Experts 
1. Adv. A.D.N. Rao Senior Advocate on panel of Supreme Court 
2. Adv. Jayant Tripathi President Legal Advisor to ASI 
9.         The meeting resumed at 4:00 P.M. to hear the views of Prof. Alok Tripathi, Additional 
Director General, ASI; Shri T.J. Alone, Joint Director General, ASI; Adv. A.D.N. Rao, Senior 
Advocate on panel of Supreme Court of India; and Adv. Jayant Tripathi, President Legal Advisor 
to ASI, on the subject ‘Creation of Regulatory Framework for protection of Historical Sites and 
Monuments’. 
10.       Adv. A.D.N. Rao briefed the Committe e about the difficulties faced by the people living 
around the protected monuments leading to issues of encroachment. He stressed upon the need 
for public participation for protection of historical monuments and sites and educating the people 
living nearby protected monuments regarding the importance of the monuments. He felt that the 
powers available with ASI to deal with encroachment are not sufficient as they are dependent on 
local police, which sometimes works in connivance with the encroachers. He sugg ested that ASI 
officers should have powers like those given to District Forest Officers (DFOs) under The 
Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and that granting power to ASI to seal the site of illegal 
construction by the time the demolition can be done, would b e effective in curbing the issue of 
29

 
 
encroachment of monuments. He was of the view that local industries should be approached for 
safeguarding of local monuments through CSR funds. 
11.       The Chairman recommended that the Forest Act should be studied and  important points 
should be taken and implemented in the legislation for protection of historical monuments and 
sites. He suggested that local Panchayats and Municipalities should be roped in to ensure the 
security of historical monuments. He was of the vi ew that outsourcing should be done to appoint 
staff for security of the monuments and that guides should be trained and they should also be 
made responsible for taking care of the property. 
12.       With regard to outsourcing, Adv. A.D.N. Rao highlighted the issue of contract workers 
asking for regularization after completion of their contract. He raised the issue of infrastructure 
projects facing problems in implementation because of protected monuments in the vicinity and 
suggested that the authorities should hold consultations with the ASI at the planning stage. 
13.       Adv. Jayant Tripathi informed the Committee that the role of ASI in respect of 
monuments need to be ascertained and that after 1992, ASI is supposed to look at 300 meters 
beyond the mon ument and see if any construction, repair or renovation is going on in the area. 
He opined that ASI does not have the expertise and the manpower for this purpose, and that the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 should be revis ited in this 
regard. On the issue of monuments which are not under any sort of protection, be it Central 
Government or State Government, he opined that protection of such non -protected monuments 
can be enabled by incorporation of heritage-specific bye-laws in the municipal building bye-laws 
of the concerned municipal corporation. The other alternative that he suggested for the protection 
of non-protected monuments was to set up a Heritage Commission to look after them but that 
would require a minor Constitu tional amendment wherein the words ‘historical buildings and 
sites’ would need to be added to Entry 40 of List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. 
Briefing the Committee about the rule regarding restrictions on construction in prohibited and 
30

 
 
regulated area of a monument, he informed the Committee that the said rule is turning the 
citizens against our heritage by restricting their rights to construct on their own land. He 
suggested that the lengths of regulated and prohibited areas of each monument should be decided 
on a case-to-case basis, which would require a new survey of all the monuments by ASI. 
14.       Additional Director General, ASI informed the Committee about the issue of lack of 
manpower faced by the ASI in the protection of historical monuments across the country. He was 
of the view that having regular staff at all Centrally Protected Monuments can allow ASI to stop 
encroachments at the early stage before any illegal construction has taken place. He further 
opined that having monume nt-specific bye -laws, depending on their nature, date and kind of 
structure etc. will help ASI in protecting the monuments more effectively. 
15.       Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
witnesses. The Chai rman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
16.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
17.         The meeting adjourned at 5:05 PM. 
 
31

 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Monday, the 6 th January, 2022 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh           -               Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
3. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
5. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
6. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses: - 
  
*   *    *    * 
  
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and   
 *   *   *   * 
2. *   *1   *i   * 
3. *   *   *   * 
4. *   *   *   * 
5. *   *   *   * 
6. *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1 * Relates to other matters 
32

 
7. *   *   *   * 
8. *   *   *   * 
9. *   *   *   * 
10. *   *   *   * 
11. *   *2   *   * 
12. *   *   *   * 
Witnesses: - 
Ministry of Culture 
1. Shri Govind Mohan Secretary 
 
Archaeological Survey of India 
2. Ms. V. Vidyavathi Director General 
3. Shri Alok Tripathi Additional Director General 
4. Shri Janhwij Sharma Additional Director General 
5. Shri T.J. Alone Joint Director General 
6. Dr. M. Nambirajan Joint Director General 
 
13.         The Chairman welcomed Shri Govind Mohan, Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Ms. 
Vidyavathi, Director General, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) and other senior officers 
from the Ministry and ASI to the meeting of the Committee. He raised the issue of senior 
positions lying vacant for several years at various Central Libraries in the c ountry and sought to 
know the reasons for the same and the steps being taken by the Ministry to fill the positions. He 
enquired about the progress made under the National Mission on Libraries so far. He highlighted 
the issue of non -availability of preserva tion facilities for books and manuscripts at the National 
Library, Kolkata and desired to know the action being taken in this regard.   
 *    *   *   * 
14.         Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that the Ministry has sought 
information from the State Government regarding the utilization of funds granted to them for the 
purpose of development of Libraries. On the issue of senior posi tions in Central Libraries lying 
vacant, he informed the Committee about the procedure for filling up such positions and stated 
that the Ministry is trying its level best to ensure that all these posts are filled up at the earliest. 
Regarding the progress on the National Mission on Libraries, he apprised the Committee that the 
                                                           
2 * Relates to other matters 
33

 
Ministry has created an Indian Culture Portal which has a total of 2.5 lakh digital artefacts and 
more than 9 lakh bibliographic entries.  *  *  *  * 
15.        *   *   *   * 
16.         Secretary, Ministry of Culture and DG, ASI responded to the queries raised by the 
Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman then directed the Secretary to furnish 
written replies to other queries/points/issues raised by him and the Members of  the Committee, 
which could not be replied during the meeting, to the Secretariat.   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
17.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
18.       The meeting adjourned at 2:43 PM. 
                                                           
i * Relates to other matters 
34

 
  
 
 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st January, 2022 in Committee Room 
- '4', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Dr. Sonal Man Singh 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
10. Shri Margani Bharat 
11. Shri Tapir Gao 
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Shri Prince Raj 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider  and adopt 
the following Reports:- 
 
35

 
A.        Draft Action Taken Report on - 
(i) *   *   *   * 
(ii) *   *   *   * 
(iii) *   *   *   * 
(iv) *   *   *   * 
(v) *   *   *   * 
(vi) *   *   *   * 
B.        Draft subject Report on - 
 (i)         Functioning of Central Libraries in the country; 
(ii)        *   *   *   * 
(iii)       *   *   *   * 
(iv)       *   *   *   * 
 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
  
 
 
i 
                                                           
i* Relates to other matters 
36

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 

 
37 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
1st November, 2021 
2:00 P.M. 
Ministry of Culture 
S.No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Govind Mohan Secretary 
2.  Shri Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma Additional Secretary 
3.  Ms. V. Vidyavathi Director General, ASI 
4.  Shri Alok Tripathi Additional Director General, ASI 
5.  Shri Ajay Yadav Director, ASI 
6.  Sh. T.J. Alone Joint Director General, ASI 
 
9th December, 2021 
3:00 P.M. 
Ministry of Culture 
1 Shri Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma Additional Secretary 
 
Domain Experts 
1 Dr. R. K. Sharma Director General, Delhi Public Library 
2 Dr. R. K. Chadha Former Additional Secretary, Parliament 
Library 

 
38 
 
9th December, 2021 
4:00 P.M. 
Ministry of Culture 
1 Prof Alok Tripathi ADG, ASI 
2 Shri T. J. Alone Joint Director General, ASI 
 
Domain Experts 
1 Adv A.D.N. Rao Senior Advocate on panel of Supreme 
Court of India 
2 Adv Jayant Tripathi  President Legal Advisor to ASI 
 
6th January, 2022 
2:00 P.M. 
Ministry of Culture 
S. No. Name Designation 
7.  Shri Govind Mohan Secretary 
8.  Ms. V. Vidyavathi Director General, ASI 
9.  Shri Alok Tripathi ADG, ASI 
10.  Shri Janhwij Sharma ADG, ASI 
11.  Shri T. J. Alone Joint DG, ASI 
12.  Dr. M. Nambirajan Joint DG, ASI 
 
 
 