PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                                                       
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,
 TOURISM & CULTURE
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY THIRD REPORT
 
ON
 
THE AIRPORTS ECONOMIC REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF
 INDIA BILL, 2007
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17.04.08)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 17.04.08)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
APRIL, 2008/CHAITRA, 1930 (SAKA)
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
PAGES

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                            
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                             
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE              
                              
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                                      
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury              - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.   Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary*
3.   Shri Naresh Gujral
4.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal^
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya*
6.       Shri Janardhan Poojary *
       

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
7. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8.       Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9.       Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10.   Shri Shatrughan Sinha *
LOK SABHA
11.   Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.   Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.   Shri Joachim Baxla
14.   Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.   Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.   Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.   Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.   Smt. Priya Dutt
19.   Shri Dip Gogoi
20.   Shri P. Karunakaran
21.   Dr. P.P. Koya
22.   Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal#
23.   Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24.   Shri Samik Lahiri 
25.   Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.   Shri Hemlal Murmu
27.   Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28.   Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29.   Shri Dushyant Singh
30.   Shri Suraj Singh
31.   Shri Prahlad Joshi
32.   Shri Rakesh Singh**
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
 
^  Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f .2.4.2008
*  Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f  9th  April, 2008
#  Expired on 13.11.2007
** Nominated on 1.12.2007. 
           
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and
 Thirty Third  Report of the Committee on the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2007 *.
2.         The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 5
th  September, 2007.  In pursuance of rules relating to the
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Bill to the
 Committee on 28th September, 2007 for examination and report within three months. On the request being made by the
 Chairman of the Committee, Hon’ble Chairman had granted extension of time till the first day of last week of the
 Budget Session (second part) of the Parliament for the presentation of the report of the Committee on the aforesaid Bill.
3.          The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation at its
 meeting held on the 23rd October, 2007.
4.          The Committee heard the views of the representatives of Federation of Indian Airlines (FIA), Airports Authority
th

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 Employees Union and Air Cargo Agents Association of India at its meeting held on the 7  February, 2008.  The
 Committee also heard the views of the Chairman, Airports Authority of India at its meeting held on the 14 th February,
 2008.  Under the mandate, the Committee has examined the Bill and finalized the Report.
5.         The Committee also considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same on  15th April,  2008.
6.          The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 and Ministry of Law and Justice for the assistance and inputs provided during deliberations on the provisions of the
 Bill. The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of representatives of Federation of Indian Airlines (FIA),
 Airports Authority Employees Union, Airports Authority of India and Air Cargo Agents Association of India who
 submitted their valuable suggestions on the provisions of the Bill.
 
NEW DELHI;                                                              SITARAM YECHURY
April 15, 2008
                                                                                Chairman
            Chaitra 26, 1930 (Saka)                           Department-related Parliamentary Standing
     Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
  
*   Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 5.9.2007
 **   Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.44503 dated 1.10.2007.
(ii)
 
Report
The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2007 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 5 th
 September, 2007.  The Bill was referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
 Tourism and Culture for examination and report.  Under the mandate, the Committee has examined the Bill and
 finalised the Report after hearing the views of various stakeholders and the nodal Department i.e. Ministry of Civil
 Aviation.    The Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of an Airports Economic Regulatory Authority to regulate
 tariff and other charges for the aeronautical services rendered at airports and to monitor performance standards of
 airports and also to establish Appellate Tribunal to adjudicate disputes and dispose of appeals and for matters connected
 therewith or incidental thereto.
2.         The salient features given in the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Airports Economic
 Regulatory Authority of India, 2007 (Annexure) are as follows:-
2.1       Most of the civil airports, including civil enclaves at Defence Airports, are presently controlled by the
 Airports Authority of India (the Airports Authority) in the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Airports
 Authority, with the approval of the Central Government, fixes the aeronautical charges for the airports
 under its control and prescribes the performance standards to all airports and monitor  the same. Airport
 infrastructure Policy formulated in1997 provides for the private sector participation for improving
 quality, efficiency and increasing competition. As a result of this initiative, Greenfield airports are now
 coming up at Bangalore  and Hyderabad in Public-Private-Partnership. A private airport is already fully
 operational at Cochin. Delhi and Mumbai Airports have also been restructured through the Joint Venture
 route for modernization and development. The trends indicate growing competition and a requirement of
 level playing field amongst different categories of airports in future.
2.2       At present, the Airports Authority performs the role of airport operator as well as the regulator, which
 results in conflict of interest. This situation has often led to complaints of a mis-match between the
 aeronautical charges levied by the Airports Authority and the quality of services rendered at airports
 which are controlled by the Airports Authority. The Naresh Chandra Committee set up by the Central
 Government to prepare the road map for civil aviation sector has recommended for setting up of an
 independent regulatory authority.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
2.3       In the above background, it is felt that an independent economic regulator, namely, the Airports
 Economic Regulatory Authority (the Regulatory Authority), may be established so as to create a level
 playing field and foster healthy competition amongst all major airports to encourage investment in
 airport facilities to regulate tariffs for aeronautical services, etc. It is, therefore, considered necessary to
 enact a law for the establishment of the Regulatory Authority to regulate tariff and other charges for the
 aeronautical services rendered at airports and to monitor performance standards of airports and also to
 establish Appellate Tribunal to adjudicate disputes and dispose of appeals.
2.4       The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2007, inter alia, seeks to provide for (i)
 establishment of Regulatory Authority which shall consist of a Chairperson and two Members to be
 appointed by the Central Government; (ii) laying down the powers and functions of the Regulatory
 Authority to determine the tariff structure for aeronautical services; to determine the amount of
 development fees in respect of major airports; to determine the amount of passenger service fee; to
 monitor the performance standards relating to quality, continuity and reliability of service; (iii)
 establishment of an Appellate Tribunal consisting of a Chairperson and not more than two Members to
 be appointed by the Central Government; (iv) laying down the functions of the Appellate Tribunal to
 adjudicate disputes between two or more service providers or between a service provider and a group of
 consumers, and to hear and dispose of appeals against any direction, decision or order of the Regulatory
 Authority under this Act; (v) imposing penalties in cases of willful non-compliance of the orders or
 directions given under the Act; and  (vi) the powers of the Central Government to issue directions in the
 matter of policy involving public interest.
3.         The Ministry of Civil Aviation further informed the Committee the reasons for the introduction of the Bill,
 which have been enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs:-
3.1       In India, civilian airports, including civil enclave at Defence Airports, have traditionally been managed
 by Airports Authority of India (AAI) and its predecessor entities.   Airport Infrastructure Policy
 formulated in 1997 recognised the need for private sector participation in this sector for improving
 quality, efficiency and increasing competition.   The Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 and the
 Aircraft Rules, 1937 were amended in 2004 to enable the participation of private sector.  As a result of
 this initiative, Greenfield airports are now coming up in Bangalore  and Hyderabad in Public-Private-
Partnership (PPP) mode.  A similar airport is already fully operational at Cochin.  Delhi and Mumbai
 Airports are also being restructured through Joint Venture route for modernization and upgradation.   In
 this scenario, there is a need to ensure a level playing field amongst different categories of airports. 
 Further, airports are natural monopolies.  It is, therefore, necessary to ensure that the tariffs are
 commensurate with the services.  Besides, prospective investors are seeking certainty about regulatory
 and commercial regime over the concession period and have urged the Government to set up an
 independent regulatory authority to fix aeronautical charges etc.
3.2       The Committee was informed that at present, fixation of aeronautical charges is done by the Central
 Government for Airports Authority of India airports.  However, the monitoring of commensurate
 performance standards is left to Airports Authority of India only.  Such performance standards have not
 been fixed for  Airports Authority of India's airports.  In a way, Airports Authority of India assumes the
 role of airport operator and at the same time regulator, which results in conflict of interest.   This may
 have led to a mis-match between the aeronautical charges levied by Airports Authority of India and the
 quality of services rendered at airports.  Further, private airports, after amendment of the  Airports
 Authority of India Act of 1994, are not covered by  Airports Authority of India Act 1994 and are
 subjected to the provisions of Aircraft Act, 1934 and Rules made there under.  These Private Airports
 will also have to approach Central Government for tariff fixation.
3.3       The Ministry has also stated that various Committees and Studies have recommended setting up of an
 independent regulator in the civil aviation sector.  The Planning Commission, in a study conducted for a
 regulatory mechanism in Civil  aviation sector, has recommended setting up of an Aviation Economic
 Regulatory and Development Authority.  The Competition Commission of India (CCI), as a general
 body, may not be able to handle the special problems of the Civil Aviation Sector in the most effective
 manner.  The Naresh Chandra Committee set up by Ministry of Civil Aviation to prepare the road map

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 for Civil Aviation sector, realizing the potential for likely abuse of monopoly power in airport activities,
 have also recommended the setting up of an Independent Economic Regulator.   The Committee on
 Infrastructure under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister and 'Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM)'
 constituted to oversee restructuring process of Delhi and Mumbai airports have also suggested the
 setting up of an Economic Regulatory Authority for airport sector.
3.4       With the prime objective to create a level playing field, to foster healthy competition amongst all
 airports, encourage investment in airport facilities, regulation of tariffs of aeronautical services,
 protection of reasonable interest of users, operation of efficient, economic and viable airports, etc., the
 setting up of an Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) has, therefore, become imperative.
3.5       The Committee was further informed that the civil aviation sector on the transport side, already has
 market based competition where fares, entry and exit of firms are market determined.   The anti-
competitive practices amongst airlines can be checked through existing competition laws.   Hence, only
 airports sector are proposed to be brought within the ambit of the economic regulation.  Even in airport
 sector, the economic regulation regime can be extended to cover all airport related functions, ranging
 from tariff to slot allocation.   However, on careful consideration and considering the level of private
 sector participation, it has been felt that to begin with, tariff regulation and monitoring of pre-set
 performance standards at major airports only should be covered by The Airports Economic Regulatory
 Authority of India Bill, 2007.  In future, depending upon further developments in the sector, other
 functions could be considered for being assigned to the regulator.
3.6       Further to ensure that the Authority works in accordance with the broad policy guidelines, the Bill
 provides that the Central Government can issue directions on policy issues to the Authority. There is
 also an emergency provision by which the authority can be suspended.  Clause 49 of the Bill provides
 that the authority can be superseded if it is not following the directions issued; and the authority can be
 reconstituted.
4.         The Committee in its meeting held on the 23
rd October, 2007 heard the views of the Secretary and other
 Officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Law and Justice on the Bill and sought replies to the queries
 on the subject.  The Committee heard the views of Associations/stakeholders in its meeting held on the 7 th February,
 2008 and also the Chairman, Airports Authority of India on the 14th February, 2008.  The Committee in its meeting
 held on the 15th April, 2008 considered the Bill and recommends for amendments as under: 
4.1       Clause 2 reads  - "In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aeronautical service” means any service provided–
       (i) for navigation, surveillance and supportive communication thereto for air                                     traffic
 management;
      (ii) for the landing, housing or parking of an aircraft or any other ground                               facility offered in
 connection with aircraft operations at an airport;
     (iii) for providing ground safety services at an airport;
(b) “airport ” means a landing and taking off area for aircrafts, usually with          runways and aircraft
 maintenance and passenger facilities and includes an aerodrome as defined in clause (2) of section 2 of the Aircraft Act,
 1934;
            (c) "airport user" means any person availing of passenger facilities at an airport;
            (d) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority
            Appellate Tribunal established under section 17;
            (e) “Authority” means the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority established
            under sub-section (1) of section 3;
            (f) “civil enclave” means an area, if any, allotted at an airport belonging to any

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
            armed force of the Union, for use by persons availing of any air transport services          from such airport or for
 the handling of baggage or cargo by such service, and         includes land comprising of any building and structure on
 such area;
            (g) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under
            sub-section (2) of section 4;
            (h) “leased airport” means an airport in respect of which a lease has been made
            under section 12A of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994;
            (i) “major airport” means any airport which has, or is designated to have, annual
            passenger throughout in excess of one and a half million or any other airport as   the Central Government may,
 by notification, specify as such;
            (j) “Member” means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson;
            (k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
            (l) “private airport” has the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (nn) of
            section 2 of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994;
            (m) “regulations” means regulations made by the Authority under this Act;
            (n) “service provider” means any person who provides aeronautical services
            and is eligible to levy and charge user development fees from the embarking       passengers at any airport and
 includes the authority which manages the airport;
            (o) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
            Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 shall have the same meanings respectively
            assigned to them in that Act."
5.         This clause defines certain expressions used in the proposed legislation. Jet Airways Limited in their written
 submission stated that at several places throughout the Bill and in important clauses there is a reference to
 “stakeholders”.  However, at no place in the Bill is the word itself defined.   The Ministry in their reply submitted that
 AERA is proposed to be a high level regulatory body for economic regulation of major airports.  It will consult all
 stakeholders and not merely principal stakeholders, in discharging its functions.  The provisions of Sub clause 4 of
 clause 13, while ensuring that AERA will discharge its functions in consultation with the stakeholders, also provide
 sufficient flexibility to the Authority to choose the stakeholders to be consulted based upon the matter, under
 consideration, on case to case basis.
6.         The Committee notes that it will be critical in defining to what extent or what role a “stakeholder” such as an
 airline has in the key decision making processes of the regulatory framework.  The Committee feel that it is not clear
 from  the provisions of the Bill that whether the passengers using the airports would presumably be classified as one of
 the stakeholders so that they have the opportunity to make submission for determination of the quantum of the airport
 tariffs.   The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Bill should clearly define as to who are the principal
 stakeholders and establish unambiguously their role in the functioning of AERA and the consultative process for
 decision making by AERA. 
7.         The proposed legislation does not address the cargo activity involved in the airports.  The Cargo Agents
 Association while submitting their views before the Committee requested that the definition of airport user should be
 expanded to include persons availing of cargo/freight transportation and operation facilities at the airports.  The Cargo
 Agents Association submitted before the Committee that as far as India is concerned, 30% of the international trade is
 carried by air, i.e., in value terms.  It will come around 40-50 billion dollars of our trade.  They further stated that the
 most glaring omission in the draft Bill is the absence of the any mention of cargo in the definition in Section 2(c).   In
 Section 2(c)  it is mentioned : “user means any person availing of passenger services at airport” but cargo has not been
 mentioned as part of airport user. The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and they submitted vide
 their letter NoAV.20036/32/2005-AAI dated the 7
th February, 2008 that since cargo operators also use airports and pay

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 charges for aeronautical services the suggestion is acceptable. 
8.         The Committee notes that cargo is one of the major components of the civil aviation sector and the omission of
 cargo from the definition of the Bill need to be rectified.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definition
 ‘airport user’ in Section 2(c) should read "as any person availing of passenger and/or cargo facilities". 
9.         The Committee also received a representation stating that various surcharges imposed on the cargo added to
 more than what is the freight charges.  The Committee feels that this also needs to be looked into. 
10.       The Committee recommends that the Ministry may suitably amend the Bill to include the cargo operators in the
 ambit of the Bill. 
11.       Clause 4 reads - "(1) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and two other         Members to be appointed
 by the Central Government:
Provided that whenever the Authority is deciding a matter involving a civil          enclave in a defence airfield,
 there shall be an additional Member, not below the    rank of Additional Secretary on the Authority, to be nominated by
 the Ministry of        Defence.
(2) The Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the    Central Government from
 amongst persons of ability and integrity having     adequate knowledge of, and professional experience in, aviation,
 economics, law,             commerce or consumer affairs:
Provided that a person who is or has been in the service of Government shall not           be appointed as a
 Member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or      Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any
 equivalent post in the         Central or State Government for a total period of not less than three years.
(3) The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole time members.
            (4) The Chairperson or other Members shall not hold any other office.
            (5) The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive of the Authority.
            (6) The Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall be appointed by             the Central Government
 on the recommendation of Selection Committee referred    to in section 5".
12.       This clause relates to composition of Authority. This clause, inter alia, provides that the Authority shall consist
 of a Chairperson and two other Members to be appointed, on the recommendation of Selection Committee referred to in
 clause 5 by the Central Government from amongst persons of ability and integrity having adequate knowledge of, and
 professional experience in, aviation, economics, law, commerce or consumer affairs. However, whenever the Authority
 is deciding a matter involving a civil enclave in a defence airfield, there shall be an additional Member, not below the
 rank of Additional Secretary on the Authority, to be nominated by the Ministry of Defence. It further provides that a
 person who is or has been in the service of Government shall not be appointed as a Member unless such person has held
 the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central or State
 Government for a total period of not less than three years. The Chairperson and other Members shall be whole-time
 Members. It also provides that the Chairperson or whole-time Members, if any, shall not hold any other office.
13.       One of the stakeholders submitted to the Committee that AERA should be an autonomous entity and the
 Members selected for appointment should not have been employees of any stakeholder for the previous three to four
 years at the time of appointment.   In response thereto the Ministry submitted that sufficient safeguards for autonomous
 exercise of powers and independence of the Chairpersons and Members of the authority have been built into the AERA
 Bill. In order to ensure that AERA works independently and in unbiased manner, a person who had served any of
 stakeholder organization should have some minimum cooling period before he is appointed as Chairperson/Members.
 The Committee recommends that the provision may be modified accordingly.
14.       Clause 4(2) of the Bill states that the Chairperson and the Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the
 Central government from amongst persons of ability and integrity having adequate knowledge of, and professional
 experience in, aviation, economics, law, commerce and consumer affairs.  The Committee is of the opinion that the
 Members should also have the expertise on competition law and policy as the AERA is created to promote fair
 competition in the field of aviation.   Therefore, the Clause 4(2) may be amended accordingly.
15.       Various representationists stated that this clause effectively debars senior serving or retired officer from the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 Defence Forces who might otherwise have vast experience in the field of aviation.   In reply to the representation, the
 Ministry clarified that the proviso to the Sub-Clause 2 of Clause 4 of the Bill simply specifies that the persons who
 have held any equivalent posts to the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary to the Government of India should also
 be appointed as Member/Chairperson of the Authority. The Committee wonders whether in the Defence Forces there is
 any equal post to the Secretary.  The literal meaning of the clause does not bar personnel of the Defence Forces being
 appointed to the Authority.  However, in practice, the clause may effectively prevent the entry of experienced and
 meritorious people of the Defence Forces to the Authority.  Moreover, the reply of the Government gives an impression
 that the Authority can be filled up only by Members of bureaucracy.   In fact, in the era of economic liberalization and
 globalization a lot of talent and expertise is available outside the Government set up.  The Committee, therefore, feels
 that the law should be flexible not only to accommodate the personnel of the Defence Forces but also to accommodate
 the experts from the private sector.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 4(2) may be suitably modified. 
16.       Clause 6 reads -  "(1) The Chairperson and other Members, shall hold office, as         such, for a term of five
 years from the date on which he enters upon his office, but      shall not be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold office, as such, after he
            attains —
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of sixty-five years; and
            (b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-two years.
            (2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of             service of, the
 Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and          other Members shall not
 be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Chairperson or any          Member may,—
(a) relinquish his office by giving, in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less than three months;
 or
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 8.
            (5) The Chairperson or any Member ceasing to hold office, as such, shall–
(a) be ineligible for further employment under the Central Government or any     State Government for a period
 of two years from the date he ceases to hold such office;
            (b) not accept any commercial employment including private for a period of two            years from the date he
 ceases to hold such office; or
            (c) not represent any person before the Authority in any other manner.
            Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
            (a) “employment  under the Central Government or State Government” includes              employment under any
 local or other authority within the territory of India or             under the control of the Central Government or State
 Government or under any     corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government.
            (b) “commercial employment” means employment in any capacity under, or       agency of, a person engaged in
 trading, commercial, industrial or financial          business in any field and includes also a director of a company or
 partner of a firm    and it also includes setting up practice either independently or as partner of a firm           or as an
 adviser or a consultant."
17.       This clause relates to the terms of office and other conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members.
18.       This clause, inter alia, provides that the Chairperson and other Members, shall hold office, as such, for a term of
 five years from the date on which he enters upon his office, but shall not be eligible for re-appointment. The
 Chairperson shall not hold office, as such, after he attains the age of sixty-five years and other Members shall not hold
 office, as such, after he attains the age of sixty-two years. The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms
 and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed. The Chairperson
 or any Member ceasing to hold office, as such, shall (a) not be eligible for further employment under the Central

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 Government or any State Government for a period of two years from the date he ceases to hold such office; (b) not
 accept any commercial employment including private for a period of two years from the date he ceases to hold such
 office; or (c) represent any person before the Authority in any other manner. This clause also defines the expressions (a)
 “employment under the Central Government or State Government”; and (b) “commercial employment”. The
 Chairperson or any Member can, relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government notice of not less
 than three months; or be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of Clause 6.
19.       When the Committee specifically asked about the curtailment of the tenure of the Chairperson and other
 Members of the Authority from five years to three years, the Ministry has replied that the term of office of five years
 for Chairperson and members of the Authority is reasonable.   This is also in line with the provisions in respect of
 similar regulatory bodies already established such as Central Electricity Regulatory Commission, Petroleum and
 Natural Gas Regulatory Board, etc.
20.       This clause inter alia provides that the Chairpersons and other Members shall hold Office for a term of five
 years from the date on which he enters upon his Office but shall not be eligible for reappointment.   One of the
 stakeholders in a written submission submitted to the Committee stated that it is not clear whether a past Member be
 appointed as a Chairperson and vice versa because Section 2(j) includes Chairperson also to be a Member.  In a
 clarification to the question raised, the Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted that Sub-Clause (1) of Clause 6 of the
 AERA Bill provides that the Chairperson other Members shall not be eligible for reappointment.   As such, it is clear
 that the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall not be eligible for reappointment as Chairperson or
 Member, respectively.  There is no bar for a Member being appointed as the Chairperson.  The Committee notes the
 clarification furnished by the Ministry. The Committee, however, feels that to avoid ambiguity and multiplicity of
 interpretation it is better to define the aspects of reappointment in the clause itself.   While drafting the clause the
 legislative intent should be made amply clear.  Theoretically, it is possible that a Chairperson could be appointed as a
 Member, though normally it is not done.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the clause should be modified in
 such a way making it clear that a Member cannot be appointed as Chairperson but a Chairperson can be appointed as a
 Member. 
21.       Clause 13 reads - " (1) The Authority shall perform the following functions in respect of major airports,
 namely:—
(a) to determine the tariff for the aeronautical services taking into consideration—
(i) the capital expenditure incurred and timely investment in improvement            of airport facilities;
                        (ii) the service provided, its quality and other relevant factors;
(iii) the cost for improving efficiency;
(iv) economic and viable operation of major airports;
(v) the concession offered by the Central Government in any agreement or         memorandum of
 understanding or otherwise;
(vi) any other factor which may be relevant for the purposes of this Act:
            Provided that different tariff structures may be determined for different   airports having regard to all or
 any of the above considerations specified at Sub-    Clauses (i) to (vi);
            (b) to determine the amount of the development fees in respect of major airports;
            (c) to determine the amount of the passengers service fee levied under rule 88 of            the Aircraft Rules, 1937
 made under the Aircraft Act, 1934;
            (d) to monitor the set performance standards relating to quality, continuity and    reliability of service as may be
 specified by the Central Government or any       authority authorised by it in this behalf;
            (e) to call for such information as may be necessary to determine the tariff under             clause (a);
            (f) to perform such other functions relating to tariff, as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government or as
 may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
            (2) The Authority shall determine the tariff once in five years and may if so         considered appropriate and in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 public interest, amend, from time to time during the      said period of five years, the tariff so determined.
            (3) While discharging its functions under sub-section (1) the Authority shall not   act against the interest of the
 sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the       State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
 decency or morality.
            (4) The Authority shall ensure transparency while exercising its powers and        discharging its functions, inter
 alia,—
            (a) by holding due consultations with all stake-holders with the airport;
            (b) by allowing all stake-holders to make their submissions to the authority; and
            (c) by making all decisions of the authority fully documented and explained".
22.       This clause relates to the functions of the Authority. This clause specifies the functions to be performed in
 respect of the major airports, by the Authority. The functions to be performed by the Authority shall be (a) to determine
 the tariff for the aeronautical services taking into certain considerations specified in items (a)(i) to (a)(vi) of Sub-Clause
 (1) of this Clause. The Authority can determine different tariff structures for different airports having regard to all or
 any of the above considerations specified in said sub-clauses (i) to (vi); (b) to determine the amount of the development
 fees in respect of major airports; (c) to determine the amount of the passengers service fee levied under rule 88 of the
 Aircraft Rules, 1937 made under the Aircraft Act, 1934; (d) to monitor set performance standards relating to quality,
 continuity and reliability of service as may be specified by the Central Government or any authority authorised by it in
 this behalf; (e) to call for such information as may be necessary to determine the tariff under clause (a); (f) to perform
 such other functions relating to tariff as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government or as may be necessary to
 carry out the provisions of this proposed legislation. This clause further provides that the Authority shall determine the
 tariff once in five years and may if so considered appropriate and in public interest, amend, from time to time during
 the said period of five years, the tariff so fixed. It also provides that while discharging its functions, the Authority shall
 not act against the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
 foreign States, public order, decency or morality and it shall ensure transparency in the manner specified in sub-clause
 (4) of this clause while exercising its power and discharging its functions.
23.       The proposed legislation will determine the charges for the aeronautical services provided by the operator and
 the “aeronautical service” has been defined in this Act as any service provided (i) for navigation, surveillance and
 supportive communication thereto for air traffic management; (ii) for the landing, housing or parking of an aircraft or
 any other ground facility offered in connection with air craft operations at an airport; and (iii) for providing ground
 safety services at an airport.
24.
      One of the important functions of the Authority will be determination of tariff for the aeronautical services.  To a
 specific query about the methodology for determination of tariff, the Ministry of Civil Aviation replied that
 internationally there are various approaches to economic regulation of airports viz., regulation on rate of return basis,
 direct price control, revenue cap basis, light handed approval system and deregulated approach with monitoring of price
 only.  The Ministry further stated that the approach to be adopted by AERA would be finalized, keeping in background
 the international best practices and the requirement of the civil aviation sector in India in specific.
25.       Another important aspect of the proposed legislation is the determination of tariff in respect of major airports
 under the AERA vide Clause 13 (1) (a).  Major airports which are defined as airports which have, or are designated to
 have, annual passenger throughput in excess of one and a half million or any other airports as the Central Government
 may, by notification, specify as such.   This gives impression that all airports in the country other than major airports,
 will continue to be governed by the already existing tariff structure set by the Airports Authority of India.
26.       While deposing before the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted that the jurisdiction
 of the regulatory authority has been confined to the airport sector.  As it is felt that the Civil Aviation Sector and the
 Transport side already has a market based competition where fares, entry and exit of firms are marketed determined. 
 On the other hand, airports could be susceptible to their abuse of monopoly power.  However, Jet Airways in their
 representation submitted that the role of AERA should not be restricted to the determination of tariffs and airport
 sectors but it should include non-aeronautical services also.  The Authority’s coverage should be expanded to include
 provision of terminal facilities to airlines such as office premises, checking counters, passenger amenities such as
 restaurants, food stalls, etc., allotment of land for construction of hangers, maintenance facilities etc.  AERA should

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 have the responsibility of ensuring that the charges levied by the service providers in these areas are reasonable and do
 not take advantage of their monopolitic position while determining the charges.   Air India also submitted to the
 Committee that the ambit of AERA should be broadened to include regulation of both aeronautical as well as non
 aeronautical revenues.  As per the current proposal only aeronautical revenues are sought to be regulated through
 AERA.  If non-aeronautical revenues are exempted from the purview of AERA Act, the user charges for aeronautical
 services may increase in an unwarranted fashion imposing severe financial constraints to the airlines as well as
 passengers.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their comments submitted that the airport operators, mostly through
 concessionaire, were selected based on a process of open bidding /in line with the market practices.   On the other hand,
 aeronautical services are the monopoly of the airport operator.  Therefore, it is felt that the jurisdiction of AERA
 should, presently, be limited to regulate the aeronautical services only.  The Committee observes that though the basic
 infrastructure of airport is geared towards providing landing, housing, parking of an aircraft along with supporting
 ground handling, navigation, surveillance and communication facilities, the airports also provide banks and other office
 spaces etc.   The economies of airport operation depends on both revenue streams i.e. aeronautical revenue and non-
aeronautical revenue.  Even though the bulk of revenue for Indian airports come from aeronautical services, world over
 the successful airports get majority of their revenue from non-aeronautical services. 
27.       The Committee further observes that the points raised by the stakeholders need serious consideration in view of
 the financial implication involved in it and the Government may amend the Bill in order to include non-aeronautical
 service also in the ambit of the Bill. 
28.       The representative of the Federation of Indian Airlines submitted before the Committee that the Civil Aviation
 Sector is intensely competitive on the demand side with the fares being market determined.  On the supply side Airlines
 deal only with monopoly players, be it airports, the fuel suppliers or the aircraft and equipment manufacturers.  The
 cost of the Airlines have been spiraling out of control, most notably on the fuel front.  So there are rising costs, lower
 revenues and excess capacity in the airline industry in India.  Indian carriers simply have no room to absorb any new
 charges and through surcharges imposed on the airlines we are seeing pass through of cost and a rise in the total cost of
 travel for passengers.  The airports are increasing the surcharges manifold on various heads, whether it is vehicle entry
 permits, introducing new surcharges for non-motorised vehicles or increasing the royalty charge for ground handling
 services at the airport.   All these are exercises for revenue maximization on the airport front which are pushing the
 airlines deeper into the red.  The Federation of Indian Airlines also submitted that there appears to be a gap between the
 definition of aeronautical services as defined in the AERA Bill and the coverage of aeronautical services under the
 consensus agreements for airports signed by the Government of India, or the Operations Management Development
 Agreement (OMDA) signed in the case of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The ODMA agreements lists around 52
 different heads with the provisions to enlarge its scope.  However, on a perusal of the provisions of the AERA Bill it is
 apparent that the Bill did not capture all the 52 heads in its entirety.  Therefore, they requested that adequate provision
 may be made in the Bill to ensure that all the aeronautical and non-aeronautical services listed in various OMDA
 agreements are covered under the ambit of the AERA Bill. 
29.       The Committee feels that there appears to be a gap between the definitions of aeronautical services as defined in
 the AERA Bill and the coverage of aeronautical services under the concession agreement for airports signed by the
 Government of India or even the Operations Management Development Agreement, the OMDA signed in the case of
 Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The Committee is of the opinion that while the AERA Bill limits itself to the navigation,
 surveillance and supportive communication for Air Traffic Management and for landing, housing or parking of aircraft,
 the OMDA has a broader scope for aeronautical services and it includes baggage systems, check-in concourses and
 hydrant infrastructure for aircraft fuelling services among many others.  The Committee recommends that AERA
 oversight for aeronautical services and their charges should not be restrictive in scope, but should be extended to all
 other major aeronautical service heads laid out in concession and OMDA agreements as AERA has to ensure a
 balanced outcome between airports, airlines and also the passengers as many services which have been left out of
 AERA coverage are essential to passengers and need monitoring by a regulator.    The Committee welcomes the
 regulation of aeronautical services by the new regulator even though this will be only a small part of the revenue
 earning however, the non-aeronautical services, which are the large chunk of the earnings will go as un-regulated.   The
 ambit of AERA should be broadened to include regulation of both aeronautical, as well as, non-aeronautical revenue. 
 As per the current proposal, only aeronautical revenues are sought to be regulated through AERA.  The Committee
 recommends that this lacuna should be addressed by the Government and the non-aeronautical services also be brought
 under the ambit of proposed regulator.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
30.       Another point brought before the Committee by the Federation of Indian Airlines is that the exorbitant cost of
 the ATF.  The Indian carriers are subject to surcharges, states sales taxation, airport throughput charges etc.   All these
 various different elements add up to the differential of 70 to 90%in excess of what fuel costs elsewhere.   Airports have
 a considerable scope to exercise market power in negotiating terms and conditions for the provisions of refueling
 services by the Oil Companies and the scope for airlines to use alternative suppliers or refuel offside is not available.  
 Therefore, they propose that fuel supply infrastructure at airports should come under the purview of AERA.  This is in
 line with the recommendations of the Naresh Chandra Committee. 
31.       In view of the submissions made by the FIA, the Committee strongly recommends that the fuel supply
 infrastructure should be brought under the purview of AERA Bill and this should be added in the powers and functions
 of the authority in Chapter 3 of the Bill.
32.       To a specific query regarding the expansion of AERA’s role and functions to cover all airports used for the
 operation of commercial flights irrespective of size of the airport or ownership, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has
 replied that 11 major airports generate/handle almost 85% of the revenue and passenger traffic.  Therefore, the scope of
 AERA is sufficiently wide.  Further the Ministry has stated that economic regulation of smaller airports would be
 cumbersome without commensurate benefits.  In any case depending on the need, the Central Government can notify
 other airports also, i.e. even those airports which have throughput less than 1.5 million passengers per annum as major
 airports.
33.       The Bill limits the powers of the authority only to major airports which are having a throughput of 1.5 million
 passengers per annum.  Jet Airways submitted that all airports are inevitable monopolies irrespective of ownership and
 the passenger throughput.  Therefore, it is necessary that the charges levied at all the airports should be subject to the
 regulation of AERA.  This will ensure that the tariffs payable at these airports are determined on the basis of some
 principles as are being laid down under the Bill and they also bear some relationship to the charges levied at major
 airports as defined in the Bill. 
34.       The Committee observes that the Airports Authority of India, did not have any fixed performance standards to
 serve the passengers or to that matter for the efficiency of the airports.  The Bill presently covers only major airports
 handling 1.5 million or more passengers per annum.  The Committee does not find any reason to exclude about 116 odd
 other airports from the purview of the present Bill.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the role of AERA and
 its functions should be expanded to cover all the airports used for the operation of commercial flights irrespective of the
 size of the airport or ownership or throughput of passengers. 
35.       The Authority will also determine the amount of development fees in respect of major airports as per Clause 13
 (1) (b).   Development fees are a new syndrome which is being introduced in the Indian aviation sector. 
 Commissioning of new Greenfield private airports at Hyderabad and Bangalore has paved the way for introduction of
 user development fees on the passengers for using the airports.   Pending the AERA set-up, both the operators at these
 Greenfield airports have already fixed different rate of development fees for the passengers.
36.       The main question before the regulator will be quantum of development fees which will be charged on the
 passengers.  Since this will be a new phenomenon in the Indian aviation sector, response from the passengers will be a
 varied one.  Any amount of development fees will definitely increase the cost of air travel which will finally have an
 impact on the viability of the airlines.
37.       The Committee hopes that any amount of development fee which will be fixed by the AERA should not dampen
 the passenger demand.  The Committee is of the opinion that making air travel expensive by such development fees
 will have a significant impact on the overall economy, especially, on the tourism, commerce and hospitality sectors. 
 The Committee hopes that the proposed regulator will definitely play a positive and critical role in determining
 development fees.            
38.       It further provides that the selection of Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be made by the
 Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee.
Clause 20 reads - " A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the       Chairperson or a Member of the
 Appellate Tribunal unless he—
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or            the Chief Justice of a High
 Court;

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
(b) in the case of a Member, has held the post of Secretary to the Government of          India or any equivalent
 post in the Central Government or the State Government       for a total period of not less than two years in the
 Ministries or Departments     dealing with aviation or economics or law or a person who is well-versed in the field of
 aviation or economics or law".
39.       This Clause relates to the qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members. This clause provides that
 (a) a person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal unless he, is, or has
 been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court; and (b) a person shall not be qualified for
 appointment as the Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he has held the post of Secretary to the Government of
 India or any equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government for a total period of not less than two
 years in the Ministries or Departments dealing with aviation, economics or law, or a person who is well-versed in the
 field of aviation or economic or law.
40.       This Clause prescribes the qualification for appointment of chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal. 
 The Clause inter alia specifies conditions as to who could be appointed for such posts.  The Orient Flying School raised
 the point that if an ex-Chairperson or ex-Member of the AERA is appointed to the Appellate Board of the Tribunal and
 any matter on appeal relating to their period of incumbency in AERA is to
be examined, it may create embarrassing situation.   While clarifying this point the Ministry of Civil Aviation given an
 example of the Members of lower Authority/Courts who progress to become Members of the Appellate
 Authority/Courts in normal course.  In such cases, as per judicial discipline/propriety the appeals arising from the
 judgements/orders based in lower capacity are not listed before/heard by the same persons while acting in higher
 capacity.  The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Ministry mainly because the Appellate Tribunal Acts as a
 single entity where all the appeals are invariably heard by all the Members sitting together irrespective of the fact that
 whether any one of them was part of the deciding authority at the lower levels or not. 
 
41.       The Committee observes that while doing so there are chances that the Members may be biased in taking a
 decision. The Committee also observes that India does not have dearth of any qualified and experienced people to mann
 the Authority or the Tribunal.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that Section 20 may be suitably modified to
 ensure that those who were Members of AERA , are not appointed to the Appellate Tribunal. 
.           Clause 22 reads - " The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and      conditions of service of
 the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate          Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson
 or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal         shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment"
42.       This Clause relates to the terms and conditions of service. This Clause provides that the salary and allowances
 payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate
 Tribunal shall be such as may be specified by rules made by the Central Government. However, neither the salary and
 allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal
 shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.
43.       The Committee is of the view that on the lines of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Bill a Clause on
 ‘Funds’ may be inserted as follows:
(1)
               There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Airport  Regulatory Authority of India General fund and
 there shall be credited thereto- (a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and
 (b) all sums received by the Authority from such other services as may be decided upon by the Central
 Government.
(2)               The Fund shall be applied for meeting-(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and
 members and the administrative expenses including the salaries, allowances and pension payable to or in
 respect of officers and other employees of the Authority; and (b) the expenses on objects and for purposes
 authorized by this Act.
44.       Clause 42 reads - "(1) The Central Government may, from to time to time, issue          to the Authority such
 directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the             sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the
 State, friendly relations with    foreign States, public order, decency or morality.
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall, in exercise            of its powers or the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 performance of its functions, be bound by such directions on      questions of policy as the Central Government may
 give in writing to it from time    to time:
            Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an         opportunity to express its views
 before any direction is given under this sub-       section.
(3) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or         not shall be final".
45.       This Clause relates to the directions by the Central Government. This Clause confers power upon the Central
 Government may, issue from to time to time, such directions to the Authority, as it may think necessary in the interest
 of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
 decency or morality. It further provides that the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its
 functions, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from
 time to time. It also provides that the decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
 shall be final.
46.       Clause 43 reads - "The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of          the Authority shall be
 deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of          any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants
 within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code".
47.       This Clause relates to the Members, Officers and employees of the Authority to be public servants. This Clause
 provides that the Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting or
 purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section
 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
48.       Clause 44 reads - "No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter           which the Authority is
 empowered by or under this Act to determine".
49.       This Clause relates to the bar of jurisdiction. This Clause provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction in
 respect of any matter which the Authority is empowered by or under this proposed legislation to determine.
50.       Clause 45 reads - "No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie       against the Central Government
 or the Authority or any Member, officer or other    employees thereof for anything which is in good faith done or
 intended to be done     under this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder".
51.       This Clause relates to the protection to the Members/Officers of the Authority for action taken in good faith.
 This Clause provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or the
 Authority or, any Member, officer or other employees thereof for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
 done under this proposed legislation or the rules and regulations made thereunder.
52.       Clause 46 reads - "Notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth-tax Act,             1957, the Income-tax
 Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time being in         force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or gains, the
 Authority shall not be       liable to pay wealth-tax, income-tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth,   income,
 profits or gains derived".
53.       This Clause relates to the exemption of the Authority from tax on wealth and income. This Clause provides that
 the Authority shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the Income-tax Act, 1961, or any
 other law for the time being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or gains, be liable to pay wealth-tax,
 income-tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, income, profits or gains derived.
54.       Clause 47 reads - "No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under        this Act, except upon a
 complaint in writing made by the Authority or by any     officer of the Authority duly authorised by the Authority for
 this purpose".
55.       The Clause 47 provides that no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this proposed
 legislation, except upon a complaint in writing made by the Authority or by any officer of the Authority duly authorised
 by the Authority for this purpose.
56.       Clause 48 reads - "The Authority may, by general or special order in writing,   delegate to the Chairperson or
 any Member or officer of the Authority, subject to   such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the
 order, such of         its powers and functions under this Act (except the power to settle disputes and             the power to

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 make regulations), as it may deem necessary".
57.       This Clause relates to the delegation of powers. This Clause confers power upon the Authority, delegate, by
 general or special order in writing to the Chairperson or any Member or officer of the Authority, subject to such
 conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this proposed
 legislation (except the power to settle disputes and the power to make regulations), as it may deem necessary.
58.       Clause 49 reads - " (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion—
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Authority is unable to discharge the          functions and duties
 imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying with any           direction issued by the Central
 Government under this Act or in the discharge of           the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the
 provisions of this Act and      as a result of which default, the financial position of the Authority or the administration of
 any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical     communication station has deteriorated; or
            (c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to             do, the Central
 Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,         supersede the Authority for such period, not exceeding
 six months, as may be        specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section for the reasons mentioned in Clause (b), the
 Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause as to why it should not
 be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the Authority,—
                        (a) all  the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their                                     offices as
 such;
                        (b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the                                provisions of    
 this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the                           Authority, shall until       the Authority is re-
constituted under sub-section (3),                      be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central  
                         Government may direct;
            (c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the        Authority is re-constituted under
 sub-section (3), vest in the Central        Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified the notification issued under sub-section (1), the
 Central Government may,—
            (a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding           six months, as it may
 consider necessary; or
            (b) re-constitute  the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the            Members who vacated
 their offices under Clause (a) of sub-section (2)        shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:
            Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the         expiration of the period of
 supersession, whether as originally specified under         sub-section (1) or as extended under this sub-section, take
 Action under Clause (b)           of this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section (1)         and a full report of any
 action taken under this section and the circumstances     leading to such action to be laid before both Houses of
 Parliament at the earliest        opportunity".
59.       This Clause relates to the power of the Central Government to supersede Authority. This Clause confers power
 upon the Central Government to supersede, by notification in the Official Gazette, the Authority for such period, not
 exceeding six months. The grounds on which the Authority can be superseded on the grounds mentioned in this sub-
Clause. This Clause further provides that upon the publication of a notification under Sub-Clause (1) superseding the
 Authority, (a) all the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate  their offices as such; (b) all the powers,
 functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this proposed legislation, be exercised or discharged by
 or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the Authority is re-constituted under Sub-Clause (3), be exercised and
 discharged by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct; (c) all property owned or controlled by the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 Authority shall, until the Authority is re-constituted under Sub-Clause (3), vest in the Central Government. On the
 expiration of the period of supersession specified the notification issued under Sub-Clause (1), the Central Government
 may, (a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding six months, as it may consider
 necessary; or (b) re-constitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the Members who vacated their
 offices under item (a) of Sub-Clause (2) of this Clause shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment. This Clause
 also provides that the Central Government shall cause a notification issued under Sub-Clause (1) and a full report of
 any action taken under this Clause and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before both Houses of
 Parliament at the earliest opportunity.
60.       Clause 50 reads - " The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in            derogation of, the
 provisions of any other law for the time being in force".
61.       The Clause 50 provides that the provisions of this proposed legislation shall be in addition to, and not in
 derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
62.       Clause 51 reads - " (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official            Gazette, make rules for
 carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,             such rules may provide
 for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
            (a) the salary and allowances payable to, and the other conditions of                              service of, the
 Chairperson and other Members under sub-section (2) of                                  section 6;
(b) the form and manner in which and the Authority before whom the oath of office and secrecy shall be
 made and subscribed under sub-section (4) of section 6;
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised or discharged by the Chairperson under section 7;
(d) the procedure for conducting any inquiry made under sub-section (2) of section 8;
(e) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the Secretary,
 officers and other employees of the Authority under subsection (3) of section 9;
(f) the performance standards relating to the quality, continuity and reliability of service to be monitored
 under Clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 13;
(g) the books of account or other documents which are required to be maintained by the service provider
 under sub-section (3) of section 14;
(h) the form and manner in which the form shall be verified and fee to be accompanied by the form under
 sub-section (3) of section 18;
(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson
 and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal under section 22;
(j) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of such officers and employees of the
 Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 25;
(k) the matters in respect of which the Authority will have the powers of a civil court under Clause (a) of
 sub-section (2) of section 29;
(l) the form in which the Authority shall prepare, and at such time in each financial year, its budget and
 the time at which such budget shall be prepared under section 33;
(m) the form in which proper accounts and other relevant records shall be maintained and the annual
 statement of accounts shall be prepared by the Authority under sub-section (1) of section 35;
(n) the form, manner and the time in which the returns and statements shall be furnished by the Authority
 under sub-section (1) of section 36;
(o) the form and time at which the annual report, shall be prepared by the Authority under sub-section (2)
 of section 36;
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 by rules".
63.       This Clause relates to the power of the Central Government to make rules. This Clause confers power upon the
 Central Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of this proposed legislation. The matters in respect of
 which rules may be made are specified in Sub-Clause (2) of this Clause.
64.       Clause 52 reads - " (1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette,         and with the previous
 approval of the Central Government, make regulations, not        inconsistent with this Act, and the rules made
 thereunder, to carry out the     purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
            such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
            (a) the procedure in accordance with which the experts and professionals                                  may be
 engaged under sub-section (4) of section 9;
            (b) the places and time of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to                                   be
 followed at such meetings, (including the quorum at its meetings) under                 sub-section (1) of section 10;
            (c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by                              regulations".
65.       This Clause relates to the power of the Central Government to make regulations.   This Clause confers power
 upon the Authority to make, with the previous approval of the Central Government, regulations, not inconsistent with
 this proposed legislation, and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of this proposed legislation. The
 matters in respect of which regulations may be made are specified in Sub-Clause (2) of this Clause.
66.       Clause 53 reads - " Every rule made by the Central Government, and every     regulation made by the Authority,
 under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be   after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
 for a total      period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more             successive
 sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following    the session or the successive sessions
 aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any    modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule
 or          regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect   only in such modified form or
 be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,     hat any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
 to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation".
67.       This Clause relates to the rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. This Clause requires that every rule
 made by the Central Government, and every regulation made by the Authority, under this proposed legislation shall be
 laid before each House of Parliament.
68.       Clause 54 reads - " The enactments specified in the Schedule to this Act shall be          amended in the manner
 specified therein and such amendments shall take effect on the date of establishment of the Authority".
69.       This Clause relates to the amendment of the Aircraft Act, 1934 and the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994.
 The proposed amendments are of consequential nature and amendments shall take effect on the date of establishment of
 the Authority.
70.       Clause 55 reads - "  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
 Government may, by order published in the Official   Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
 provisions of this Act, as             may appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of          two years from the date of
 commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is          made, before each House
 of Parliament".
71.       This Clause relates to the power of the Central Government to remove difficulties. This Clause confers power
 upon the Central Government to make, by order, published in the Official Gazette, such provisions, not inconsistent
 with the provisions of this proposed legislation, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty, if any,
 which arises in giving effect to the provisions of this proposed legislation. However, no such order shall be made under
 this Clause after the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this proposed legislation. This Clause
 further requires that every order made under this Clause shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
72.       When the Committee raised some queries over the sweeping powers of the Authority vide Clauses 43-48 like no
 suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or the Authority or any member,
 officer or other employees thereof for anything which is done in good faith and also the non-taxation of profits of the
 Authority, the Secretary responded that the Central Government can supersede the Authority as mentioned in the
 Clause 49 of the Bill.
73.       The Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice while responding to the abovementioned queries has
 stated that the provisions of Clause 43 has incorporated this policy to strengthen the legal status of the Chairperson,
 Members and the officials or the Authority so that they may effectively discharge their duties envisaged under the law. 
 As for as Clause 44 is concerned, they have stated that whenever an Authority is created under the law to determine the
 tariff in respect of a service, no other forum should determine the same matter for the purpose of certainty and
 avoidance of multiplicity of conflict on jurisdiction on the issues involved.   This Clause is also necessary for the
 purpose to avoid parallel proceedings at two places in respect of the same matter.
74.       The Legislative Department has also stated that the provisions of Clause 45 aim to provide protection in respect
 of action taken in good faith.  It has been the policy of law not to protect the actions which are in bad faith, actuated by
 malice, ill-will or deliberate misuse of powers, as it has been the golden thread of the rule of law.  However, the honest
 and bonafide actions must be protected by the law for the efficient discharge of duties by the officials.  The provisions
 of Clause 45 are necessary in a legislation creating an authority for the purpose of effective functioning of the Members
 and Officials of the Authority.  The Indian Penal Code has also provided general exception to the offence in respect of
 actions and omissions done in good faith.  Therefore, it has been consistent legal policy to uphold protection in law for
 the acts and omissions done in good faith.
75.       Regarding Clause 47 the Department has further stated the Chapter VI of the proposed legislation contains
 offences and penalties under sections 37 to 41.  Sections 37 to 39 provide for the punishment of non-compliance of the
 orders of the Authority and the Appellate Authority and of the orders and directions given under this Act.  Sections 40
 and 41 provide for the punishment of the officers in case the offences committed by the companies and the Government
 Departments.  Hence, it is necessary that no prosecution may be initiated in respect of the offences under this Act
 except on an authorization by the Authority so that the Authority may effectively monitor the performance standard at
 the airports.
76.       When the Committee enquired about  the delegation of powers of the Authority as mentioned in Clause 48 of the
 Bill, the Legislative Department replied that there is a Chairperson and Members in the Authority and decision of the
 Authority is arrived by the collective participation and discussion of views of all the Members and the chairperson in
 the Authority.  It may not be always convenient to call for the meeting of the Authority where all the Members and the
 Chairperson would resolve certain matters which may better be delegated and, therefore, the arrangement for delegation
 is necessary to be made in law.  What matters may suitable be delegated and to whom, have been left for the decision of
 the Authority with in the scope and ambit of the legislation.   There is also an inbuilt safeguard under the provision of
 Clause 48 of the Bill that suitable conditions and limitations may be imposed by the Authority while delegating its
 powers.  A provision for delegation is necessary for efficient and convenient performance by the Authority consisting
 of number of persons for resolving the issues falling within their purview.    There is need to clearly demarcate policy
 and regulatory matters.
77.      The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after taking into account its recommendations as enumerated
 in the preceding paragraphs.
78.      The Committee recommends that the Bill’s title should be changed from Airports Economic Regulatory
 Authority of India Bill, 2007 to Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2008 as the year has changed
 from 2007 to 2008. 
79.      In the enacting formula the words ‘Fifty Eighth’ be substituted by ‘Fifty Ninth’.
*****
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
Clause 2
The Committee notes that it will be critical in defining to what extent or what role a “stakeholder” such as
 an airline has in the key decision making processes of the regulatory framework.  The Committee feel that it is
 not clear from  the provisions of the Bill that whether the passengers using the airports would presumably be
 classified as one of the stakeholders so that they have the opportunity to make submission for determination of
 the quantum of the airport tariffs.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill should clearly define as
 to who are the principal stakeholders and establish unambiguously their role in the functioning of AERA and
 the consultative process for decision making by AERA.                                                              
                                                  (Para : 6)        
           
The Committee notes that cargo is one of the major components of the civil aviation sector and the omission of
 cargo from the definition of the Bill need to be rectified.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
 definition ‘airport user’ in Section 2(c) should read "as any person availing of passenger and/or cargo
 facilities".                                                                                                          
(Para :8)
            The Committee also received a representation stating that various surcharges imposed on the cargo added
 to more than what is the freight charges.  The Committee feels that this also needs to be looked
 into.                                                             
(Para : 9)
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry may suitably amend the Bill to include the cargo operators
 in the ambit of the Bill.                                             
(Para : 10)
            The Committee is of the opinion that the Members should also have the expertise on competition law and
 policy as the AERA is created to promote fair competition in the field of aviation.   Therefore, the Clause 4(2)
 may be amended accordingly.                                                                                                         (Para: 14)
            The Committee wonders whether in the Defence Forces there is any equal post to the Secretary.   The
 literal meaning of the clause does not bar personnel of the Defence Forces being appointed to the Authority. 
 However, in practice, the clause may effectively prevent the entry of experienced and meritorious people of the
 Defence Forces to the Authority.  Moreover, the reply of the Government gives an impression that the Authority
 can be filled up only by Members of bureaucracy.  In fact, in the era of economic liberalization and globalization
 a lot of talent and expertise is available outside the Government set up.  The Committee, therefore, feels that the
 law should be flexible not only to accommodate the personnel of the Defence Forces but also to accommodate the
 experts from the private sector.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 4(2) may be suitably
 modified.              
(Para :15)
 
Clause 6
            The Committee notes the clarification furnished by the Ministry. The Committee, however, feels that to
 avoid ambiguity and multiplicity of interpretation it is better to define the aspects of reappointment in the clause
 itself.  While drafting the clause the legislative intent should be made amply clear.   Theoretically, it is possible
 that a Chairperson could be appointed as a Member, though normally it is not done.  Therefore, the Committee
 recommends that the clause should be modified in such a way making it clear that a Member cannot be
 appointed as Chairperson but a Chairperson can be appointed as a Member.                  
                                                                   (Para : 20)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 
Clause 13
The Committee observes that though the basic infrastructure of airport is geared towards providing
 landing, housing, parking of an aircraft along with supporting ground handling, navigation, surveillance and
 communication facilities, the airports also provide banks and other office spaces etc.  The economies of airport
 operation depends on both revenue streams i.e. aeronautical revenue and non-aeronautical revenue.  Even
 though the bulk of revenue for Indian airports come from aeronautical services, world over the successful
 airports get majority of their revenue from non-aeronautical services.                                                    
                                                                                                              (Para : 26)    
            The Committee further observes that the points raised by the stakeholders need serious consideration in
 view of the financial implication involved in it and the Government may amend the Bill in order to include non-
aeronautical service also in the ambit of the Bill.                                                                                                   
(Para : 27)
            The Committee feels that there appears to be a gap between the definitions of aeronautical services as
 defined in the AERA Bill and the coverage of aeronautical services under the concession agreement for airports
 signed by the Government of India or even the Operations Management Development Agreement, the OMDA
 signed in the case of Delhi and Mumbai airports.  The Committee is of the opinion that while the AERA Bill
 limits itself to the navigation, surveillance and supportive communication for Air Traffic Management and for
 landing, housing or parking of aircraft, the OMDA has a broader scope for aeronautical services and it includes
 baggage systems, check-in concourses and hydrant infrastructure for aircraft fuelling services among many
 others.  The Committee recommends that AERA oversight for aeronautical services and their charges should
 not be restrictive in scope, but should be extended to all other major aeronautical service heads laid out in
 concession and OMDA agreements as AERA has to ensure a balanced outcome between airports, airlines and
 also the passengers as many services which have been left out of AERA coverage are essential to passengers and
 need monitoring by a regulator.    The Committee welcomes the regulation of aeronautical services by the new
 regulator even though this will be only a small part of the revenue earning however, the non-aeronautical
 services, which are the large chunk of the earnings will go as un-regulated.   The ambit of AERA should be
 broadened to include regulation of both aeronautical, as well as, non-aeronautical revenue.  As per the current
 proposal, only aeronautical revenues are sought to be regulated through AERA.  The Committee recommends
 that this lacuna should be addressed by the Government and the non-aeronautical services also be brought
 under the ambit of proposed regulator.                                                                                    
                                                                                                                              (Para :29)
            The Committee strongly recommends that the fuel supply infrastructure should be brought under the
 purview of AERA Bill and this should be added in the powers and functions of the authority in Chapter 3 of the
 Bill.                                                
(Para : 31)
            The Committee observes that the Airports Authority of India, did not have any fixed performance
 standards to serve the passengers or to that matter for the efficiency of the airports.  The Bill presently covers
 only major airports handling 1.5 million or more passengers per annum.  The Committee does not find any
 reason to exclude about 116 odd other airports from the purview of the present Bill.   The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that the role of AERA and its functions should be expanded to cover all the airports used for the
 operation of commercial flights irrespective of the size of the airport or ownership or throughput of
 passengers.                                                         
(Para : 34)
            The Committee hopes that any amount of development fee which will be fixed by the AERA should not
 dampen the passenger demand.  The Committee is of the opinion that making air travel expensive by such
 development fees will have a significant impact on the overall economy, especially, on the tourism, commerce
 and hospitality sectors.  The Committee hopes that the proposed regulator will definitely play a positive and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
 critical role in determining development fees.                                                   
       (Para : 37)                       
Clause 20
            The Committee observes that while doing so there are chances that the Members may be biased in taking
 a decision. The Committee also observes that India does not have dearth of any qualified and experienced people
 to mann the Authority or the Tribunal.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Section 20 may be suitably
 modified to ensure that those who were Members of AERA , are not appointed to the Appellate
 Tribunal.                                                                                                            
(Para : 41)
             The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after taking into account its recommendations as
 enumerated in the preceding paragraphs.                         
(Para : 77)
           The Committee recommends that the Bill’s title should be changed from Airports Economic Regulatory
 Authority of India Bill, 2007 to Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2008 as the year has
 changed from 2007 to 2008.          (Para : 78)
           In the enacting formula the words ‘Fifty Eighth’ be substituted by ‘Fifty Ninth’.             
                                                                                                                             (Para : 79)
*****
 
 
FOURTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 23rd October 2007 in Committee Room 'A',  Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
4. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
5. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
6. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
8. Shri Joachim Baxla
9. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
11. Shri P. Karunakaran
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
15. Shri Prahlad Joshi

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
 DEPARTMENT):
 
Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Shrimati Veena Kothavale, Assistant Legislative Counsel
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING:
Shri A.K. Mohapatra, Secretary
Shri Rajeev Gupta, Joint Secretary (S&IWT)
            Shri Rajneesh Kumar, Director (IWT)
            Shri S.B. Mathur, Chairman, IWAI
            Shri Susheel Kumar, Vice-Chairman, IWAI
            Shri R.P. Khare, Director
            Shri S.S. Pandian, Chief Engineer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
 DEPARTMENT):
 
Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Dr. G.N. Raju, Additional Legislative Counsel
Shri K. Biswal, Deputy Legislative Counsel
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION:
 
Shri Ashok Chawla, Secretary
Shri K.N. Shrivastava, Joint Secretary
Shri Sandeep Prakash, Director
Dr. K. Ramalingam, Chairman, Airport Authority of India
Shri S.C. Chhatwal, Member (Finance), Airport Authority of India
2.         At the outset, the Chairman briefed the Members about the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of the
 Barak River) Bill, 2007 and the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2007 which have been referred
 to the Committee for examination and report.  Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department
 of Shipping on the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007 followed by a power
 point presentation on the subject by the Vice-Chairman, Inland Water Authority of India (IWAI).   The Secretary
 replied to various queries raised by the Members during the meeting.    To several other queries raised by the Members,
 the Ministry representatives were requested to give written replies within a week. The Chairman of the Committee also
 informed the Secretary, Department of Shipping that the Department has not furnished the comments on the
 Memoranda received from various individuals/stakeholders on the Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007 forwarded to
 the Department and directed to furnish the same immediately. The representatives of the Department of Shipping then
 withdrew.
3.         Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Airports
 Economic Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2007.   The Secretary explained to the Committee on various provisions
 of the Bill.  The Secretary and other representatives replied to various points raised by the Members.   To several other
 queries raised by the Members, the Ministry representatives were requested to give written replies within a week. 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
4.         *                      *                      *                      *                      *.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.45 p.m. to meet again on the 2nd November, 2007.
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 7 th February, 2008 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Janardhana Poojary
5. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
6. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
8. Shri Joachim Baxla
9. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
11. Shri P. Karunakaran
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
15. Shri Pralhad Joshi
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
 DEPARTMENT):
 
Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Dr. G.N. Raju, Additional Legislative Counsel
Shri K. Biswal, Assistant Legislative Counsel
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE 
FEDERATION OF INDIAN AIRLINES (FIA):
Shri Amitabh Khosla, Executive Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY EMPLOYEE’S UNION:
Shri P.K. Tyagi, All India Vice-President,
Shri Jai Pal Singh, Asstt. General Secretary,
Shri Pramod Kumar Sharma, Branch Secretary
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE AIR CARGO AGENTS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA
Shri Depak Dadlani, Former President & Advisor
 
           
2.         The Committee heard the views of the above-mentioned witnesses on the Airports Economic Regulatory
 Authority of India Bill, 2007.   The Members raised queries on various provisions of the Bill and the stakeholders
 explained their position thereon.
3.                     *                      *                      *                      *                      *
4.         The Committee also decided to hear the views of the Chairman, Airports Authority of India on the Airport
 Economic Regulatory Authority of India Bill 2007 in its next meeting on the 14
th February, 2008.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.30 p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 14
th February, 2008 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.                                                                              Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.                                                                              Shri Naresh Gujral
3.                                                                              Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
4.                                                                              Shri Shahid Siddiqui
5.                                                                              Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
6.                                                                              Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
7.                                                                              Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
8.                                                                              Dr. P.P. Koya
9.                                                                              Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
10.                                                                          Shri Samik Lahiri

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
11.                                                                          Shri Madan Lal Sharma
12.                                                                          Shri Dushyant Singh
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA :
Dr. K. Ramalingam, Chairman (AAI)
Shri H.S. Bains, Member (P&A)
Shri V.P. Agarwal, Member (Planning)
Shri M.C. Kishore, Company Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
 DEPARTMENT):
 
Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Dr. G.N. Raju, Additional Legislative Counsel
 
            2.         The Committee heard the views of the Chairman, Airport Authority of India on the Airports Economic
 Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2007.  The Committee also sought clarifications from the Chairman, Airports
 Authority of India on the closure of Begumpet  Hyderabad Airport. The Members raised queries on the subject and the
 Chairman, AAI explained their position thereon. To some queries raised by the Members, the Chairman, AAI was
 requested to give written replies within a week.
3.         *                      *                      *                      *                      *.
4.         The Committee also decided to hear the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the proposed
 closure of Begumpet Airport in Hyderabad and matters related thereto in its next meeting on the 22
nd February, 2008.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 15th April 2008 in Room No. '63', First Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
4. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
6. Shri N.S. V. Chitthan

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/133.htm[28-08-2018 13:33:23]
7. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
8. Dr. P.P. Koya
9. Shri Samik Lahiri
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Dushyant Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
                                     
2.         The Committee considered the following draft Reports :
 
(i)         The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007;
(ii)                The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority Bill, 2007; and
(iii)               Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Department of Shipping.
 
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the three Reports with minor modifications. The Committee also
 authorized the Chairman and Shri Naresh Gujral to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. P.P. Koya and Shri
 Anandrao Vithoba Adsul to lay the Reports in Lok Sabha on the 17 th April, 2008.    The Committee also decided to
 hold a Press Conference after the presentation of the Reports.
3.         *                      *                      *                      *                      *
 
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m. to meet again on the 24
th April, 2008.
 
 
 