PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT
Issues related to improving consumers'
satisfaction of airlines
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
256
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT
Issues related to improving consumers'
satisfaction of airlines
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-11
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — AT A G LANCE .................................................... 12-17
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 19-31
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................ 33-37

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri Derek O' Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri La. Ganesan
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Praful Patel
6. Kumari Selja
7. Shri Rajeev Shukla
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
18. Shri P . Kumar
19. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
20. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
23. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
25. Shri Prathap Simha
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh

(ii)
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two
Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report on "Issues related to improving consumers' satisfaction of airlines".
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Director-General,
DGCA; Director-General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS); Chairman, Airports Authority of
India and CMDs/CEOs of Air Asia, IndiGo and Go Air on the subject in its meeting held on 20th
November, 2017. The Committee heard the CMDs/CEOs of Spicejet, Jet Airways, Air India Ltd. and
Vistara in its meeting held on 27th November, 2017. The Committee again heard the Secretary, Ministry
of Civil Aviation; Director-General, DGCA; Director-General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS);
Chairman, Airports Authority of India in its meeting held on 4th December, 2017.
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil Aviation; DGCA;
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS); Airports Authority of India; CMDs/CEOs of Air Asia, IndiGo,
Go Air, Spicejet, Jet Airways, Air India Ltd. and Vistara for placing before the Committee, the material
and information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the
Members.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 2nd January, 2018.
N
EW D ELHI; DEREK O' BRIEN
2 January,  2018 Chairman,
Pausa 14, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
AAI : Airports Authority of India
ADF : Airport Development Fee
A TC : Air Traffic Control
A TF : Aviation Turbine Fuel
BCAS : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
CEO : Chief Executive Officer
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force
CMD : Chairman and Managing Director
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
CUSS : Common Use Self Service
DGCA : Directorate General of Civil Aviation
IT : Information Technology
NGOs : Non-Government Organizations
PSF : Passenger Service Fee
SMS : Short Messaging Service
UDF : User Development Fee
(iv)

REPORT
Even though the aviation industry in India has witnessed a growth, a boom in flying has led to a
surge in consumer complaints. From 606 complaints lodged against airlines in September this year, the
number shot up to 656 in October. While 30.5% of the flyers blamed customer service, 16% pointed
fingers at flight problems like sudden cancellation and delay, 22% had issues with their baggage and 7.5%
did not like staff behavior. For an industry that is projected to have ushered in a new era of expansion
given its application of new technological inventions and growing emphasis on higher connectivity, the
civil aviation sector is fraught with unprofessional behaviour at all levels of customer interaction and
management. This has thrown up various challenges with regard to keeping up with the increasing
growth in the number of passengers. One of the greatest challenges the aviation sector is presently facing
is to maintain a healthy interface between the passengers and the airlines staff. A part of that challenge
is also enhanced by the lack of Ministry mandated guidelines in a number of areas of customer protection
as well as lack of speedy redressal mechanisms for customer complaints. It is in this backdrop that the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take
up the subject “Issues related to improving consumers' satisfaction of airlines” for examination and report
thereon.
2. In this connection, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation;
Director-General, BCAS; Director-General, DGCA; and Chairman, Airports Authority of India on 20th
November and 4th December, 2017. The Committee also heard the CEOs/CMDs of IndiGo, Go Air and
Air Asia on 20th November, 2017 and the CEOs/CMDs of Air India, Jet Airways, Spicejet and Vistara
on 27th November, 2017. A Questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to all the seven airlines and
written replies were obtained on various aspects of the functioning of the airlines.
3. Some of the major points discussed during the deliberations of the Committee are:
(i) Pricing of Air tickets;
(ii) Behaviour of Airlines staff;
(iii) Trai ning of Airlines staff;
(iv) Problems at check-in counters;
(v) Quality of food served;
(vi) Seating space in the aircraft;
(vii) Unserviceable seats;
(viii) Cancellation charges;
(ix) Facilities for persons with disability;
(x) Frisking of passengers;

2
(xi) E-boarding facility;
(xii) Clean toilets at the airports;
(xiii) Complaints redressal mechanism;
(xiv) Immigration counters;
(xv) Airport infrastructure;
(xvi) Erroneous practice of "non-uniform block time";
(xvii) A vailability of slots / bilaterals; and
(xviii) Corporate social responsibility.
Pricing of Air Tickets
4. The issue of exorbitant airfares charged during the festival seasons, holiday seasons, natural disasters
and political/social unrest was at the centre stage of the deliberations of the Committee. The Members
of the Committee also raised the issue of charging high airfares by airlines to the Gulf countries during
festival seasons and on the eve of new year.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation while deposing before the Committee, submitted to the
Committee that airfares are not controlled by the Government, but varies with the market forces of
demand and supply and that this is a global practice in the aviation industry.
6. The Committee was informed that the domestic airline pricing runs in multiple levels (bucket or
RBD) which is in line with the practice followed globally. The lower fare in the fare bucket is available
for advance booking much earlier. As time lapses and date of journey approaches closer, the fare in
higher side of fare bucket is made available as per the respective airline policy. Advance Purchase Scheme
offers low fares when tickets are booked 90 days, 60 days, 30 days, 15 days &7 days prior to departure.
Under the immediate purchase, fares are offered in multiple levels or buckets (up to about 14 levels) and
the fares move to higher buckets as the lower ones get filled. One of the CEOs informed the Committee
that as regards pricing of air tickets, it is a deregulatory environment and the airlines are free to price
anything. Theoretically, there is no cut off price. The tickets are priced at cost plus basis.
7. The Committee is of the view that the pricing mechanisms applicable in the developed
countries may not be suitable for India. The Committee also notes that even after a 50%
reduction of the ATF prices, the airlines have not passed on the benefit of reduction in ATF prices
to the consumers.
8. The Committee notes that around festivals and for bookings made closer to the date of
travel, some airlines are charging more than ten times of the advance booking fare. The
Committee observes that this is arbitrary. A deregulatory environment does not mean unlimited
freedom of exploitation. Windfall profits cannot be taken from the hapless passengers especially
from those working class passengers who are travelling in the Gulf sector. The Committee
believes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has a social responsibility towards its citizens. Economic

3
viability cannot be the only criteria for decision making. The Ministry of Civil Aviation, though
aware of the rampant exploitation, is not showing any proactive role in regulating the airfares.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation to consider fixing an upper
limit of the air tickets for every sector.
Behaviour of airlines staff
9. The Committee noted that recently there were many incidents of manhandling, discourteous
and rude behavior by airlines staff, both ground staff and cabin crew. Some of them were
reported in the media and a large number of them went unreported. While narrating some of
the incidents of misbehaviour in airlines, especially in IndiGo, majority of the Members opined
that the attitude of airlines staff is very condescending, often unco-operative and on many
occasions, downright rude.
10. As one Member of the Committee pointed out "the attitude of airlines staff is as if they are on
some high ground and the passengers are like herds, as if passengers are uneducated and illiterate ones
who do not know anything, who have not flown before. Occasionally, the airlines staff murmur “please”
and “thank you” but beyond that, their attitude is rude. The ground staff is worse than the cabin crew
of the airlines".
11. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation assured the Committee that any employee of an airline who
is found to be indulging in some kind of unnecessary and violent behavior may be debarred from entering
into any of the civil aviation airports as an employee. The Committee opined that merely taking
strictest action against the employees does not absolve the airline of its guilt of the incident.
12. The Committee observes that the problems affecting the airlines are not personal; it is
institutional. An institution like IndiGo has to develop a consumer friendly approach in dealing
with their passengers. The Committee believes that being a leader in market share, IndiGo
needs to look inward and find out the reasons for the discourteous attitude and rude and
indifferent behavior of their employees, whether it is their cabin crew or the ground staff. The
Committee emphasizes that the arrogant behavior of airlines employees should stop.
Training of Airlines staff
13. The Committee had detailed interaction with the CEOs of various airlines on various trainings
imparted to different categories of officials and employees. The Members of the Committee unanimously
emphasized upon the need for providing proper training to the airlines staff especially on soft skills and
passenger handling. As regards the budget for training, airlines have indicated budget allocation ranging
from a few lakhs to Rs.10 crores. However, IndiGo, Jet Airways and Go Air have not given the details
regarding their budget for training.
14. The President and whole time Director, IndiGo, while deposing before the Committee, informed the
Committee thus :-
“We have a challenge of getting talented people in consumer facing industry. For a country of 130
crore people, one shortage we have is talent. We have to just hold up the mirror to ourselves. We

4
have lot of young people with so many degrees but the talent we require is not there. IndiGo is
hiring people from Tier-II and Tier III cities and creating jobs there. Those who studied in Government
schools or mohalla / village areas cannot be trained to speak fluent English within a span of four
to five weeks. IndiGo is investing more and more on training”.
15. The Committee totally disagrees with the proposition that the students coming out of
Government Schools and colleges cannot be trained. Our Government schools and colleges
produce the best students of the country and we have a duty to nurture and promote such
students to achieve their full potential. If a particular airlines has grown exponentially, they
should deploy a proportionate amount to the training of their staff instead of misbehaving and
manhandling the passengers or blaming the youngsters from Tier II and III cities and Government
schools.
16. The Committee, keeping in view the recent incidents of misbehavior of airlines staff including
the manhandling of a passenger by staff of IndiGo Airlines, emphasizes on the need for soft
skills training and functionality training for all employees across airlines.
17. The Committee desires that the employees be provided training in order to effectively
manage crisis situations such as delay in flight take-off, delay in landing, diversion of flights etc.
Further, training should also be given to the airlines staff to sensitize them to meet the needs
of persons with disability. Intensive training should be given to the crew and staff to extend
courteous and decent behaviour to the passengers. The crew should be trained to be more polite
than saying 'please' or 'thank you'. The passengers expect a civilized behaviour from the cabin
crew and the ground staff as the salaries to the cabin crew and ground staff are paid from the
income earned from the passengers.
18. The Committee notes that the training modules, training schedules, content of training,
duration of training, budget allocation for training etc. varies from airline to airline. In some of
the cases, the training programmes are non-existent or just for namesake. The Government
should come up with a training programme suitable to Indian conditions emphasizing on courteous
behavior to the passengers. The Committee underlines the need to standardize the training
programmes of all the airlines. The Committee recommends that the Government should formulate
the guidelines for such training programmes applicable to all the airlines, at the earliest.
Check-in Counters
19. During the deliberations of the Committee, some Members drew attention to the problem of
unmanned check-in counters and the long queues at the check-in counters. The airlines have informed
the Committee that in addition to the normal check-in at the airport counters, there are facilities like Web
check-in, mobile check-in, Tele check-in and kiosk check-in etc. for the passengers. Some of the airlines
have also submitted that their check-in time to issue a boarding pass is less than 10 minutes.
20. The Committee notes that the check-in process and collection of luggage are cumbersome
and time consuming. What the passenger wants is a quick check-in, without long queues and a
smooth process of security check. Despite the huge claims of airlines regarding the check-in

5
process, the Committee is compelled to observe that the check-in counters are in a mess,
especially those of the low cost airlines such as IndiGo.
21. The Committee has noticed reports of some private airlines creating long queues at the
check-in counters to delay the process of check-in so that passengers miss their scheduled
flights. This compels them to buy tickets at exorbitant prices to travel in the next available
flight. The Committee also notes that airlines are overbooking flights and creating later, artificial
situations to deny boarding to the confirmed ticket holders. Many a times it has been noticed
that adequate number of personnel are not posted to man the check-in counters.
22. The Committee recommends that arrangements be made to ensure that the passenger does
not spend more than 10 minutes in a queue at the check-in counter to get a boarding pass.
Whenever there is a rush of passengers, additional staff should be deputed at the check-in
counters. AAI and other airport operators may provide adequate number of check-in counters
and self checking kiosks at the airports. The Government should also ensure that if a passenger
is denied boarding due to rush at the counter or due to overbooking, the passenger may be
compensated adequately and he/she may be sent in an alternative flight.
E-boarding facility
23. As per the background note furnished by the Ministry, E-boarding facility has been approved at
Hyderabad Airport to reduce the delays and inconvenience to the passengers. Other airports are also
conducting similar trials for implementation of E-boarding. Hyderabad airport has also started express
security screening for passengers with only hand baggage. BCAS has also given in-principle clearance
for biometric based entry and passage through security check points and boarding at Bengaluru Airport.
24. Also, instructions have been issued regarding access of passengers on the basis of e-ticket/web/
kiosk check-in boarding passes. E-tickets include soft copy/image of such tickets in smart phones,
tablets PCs or laptops for gaining access into the terminal buildings through departure entry gates. The
image of the e-ticket thus produced by the passenger on electronic device should be the same as issued
by the aircraft operators. SMS or partial information pertaining to the ticket shall not entitle the passenger
to gain access to terminal.
25. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Airport operators to provide e-boarding
facility at certain airports to reduce waiting time for baggage check-in and security clearance.
The Committee desires that e-boarding facility should be made available to passengers at all
airports.
Quality of food served
26. Many Members of the Committee pointed out the need to ensure better quality of food served in
the airlines. They also opined that the menu offered should be changed periodically. In some cases, the
food offered is awful. The CEO of Jet Airways admitted to the Committee that in recent times, the quality
of food served in Jet Airways has deteriorated and assured that it will be improved in a few weeks. There
were less complaints about food served by Spice Jet, Air Asia and Air India. Everyone liked the food
served by Vistara.

6
27. The Committee was informed that there are great difficulties in getting water and food in
low cost airlines especially in IndiGo. In IndiGo, the food has to be pre-booked and on board,
if someone demands food, they refuse to provide the food even to those who are diabetic or
suffering from other medical conditions. A passenger has to report to the airport counter 2 hours
before the departure time and one has to spend a few more hours in the flight without food and
water and it is a horrible thing to face. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IndiGo and
other low cost airlines should take adequate steps to ensure that food is available to the passengers
on demand, especially to those who are having some medical conditions.
28. The Committee notes that the main difference between a low cost carrier and the full cost
carrier is the serving of food. It is unacceptable for airlines to serve unsatisfactory food after
having charged customers for it. Every airline should maintain the highest quality of food and
they should also change the menu occasionally instead of keeping a cold sandwich in their menu
throughout the year. The Committee recommends that random audits of the catering kitchens
should be held to ensure quality, quantity and hygiene and that feedback from customers may
also be taken into account. The cost of food may be separately printed on the ticket.
Seating space in the aircraft
29.  The Committee raised the issue of inadequate seating space and inadequate leg room in the
aircrafts. Air India informed the Committee that their seats are wider and have enough leg space.
However, many of the other airlines, including the full service carriers, are having smaller cramped seats.
Due to their profit motive, the airlines are not providing adequate leg space to the passengers.
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may prepare a guideline laying down
a minimum space standard in respect of seats and leg room.
Unserviceable seats
30. The Chairman and the Members of the Committee has pointed out that unserviceable seats are found
in many aircrafts including those in business classes, flying in International sectors. If unserviceable seats
are offered to passengers, especially in long journeys, it detrimentally affects the comfort of the passengers.
31. The Committee has been informed by all airlines that no unserviceable seats are being
offered to passengers. However, the Committee has noted that unserviceable seats are in fact
offered to passengers and complaints made to the cabin crew in this regard have gone unheeded.
The Committee noticed that though all the airlines have a policy of not offering unserviceable
seats, the practice is that these are silently offered to the unsuspecting passengers. It is a cruel
joke to offer unserviceable seats even to Business Class passengers. Due to their busy schedule,
the passengers are compelled to travel by availing the unserviceable seats. The Committee
observes that it is a deficiency of service by service airlines. The airlines should take an initiative
to ensure that unserviceable seats are either replaced or repaired at the earliest. Monetary
compensation may be given to the affected passengers who are offered the unserviceable seats.
The Government should formulate a policy to restrict the use of unserviceable seats.

7
Cancellation Charges
32. Many Members of the Committee raised the issue of high cancellation charges and rescheduling
fees levied by the airlines.
33. The Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee as follows:-
(i) Refund provisions:
• 07 days to the account of credit card holder in case of credit card payments.
• Immediate in case of cash transactions.
• 30 working days in case ticket is purchased through travel agent/portal.
• Option of holding refund amount in credit shell by the airlines to be the prerogative of
the passenger and not a default practice of the airline.
(ii) Airlines to refund all statutory taxes and User Development Fee (UDF)/Airport Development
Fee (ADF)/Passenger Service Fee (PSF) in case of cancellation/ non-utilisation of tickets/no
show. This provision shall also be applicable for all types of fares offered including promos/
special fares and where the basic fare is non-refundable.
(iii) Airlines shall not levy cancellation charge more than basic fare plus fuel surcharge.
(iv) Airlines shall not levy any additional charge to process the refund.
(v) Airline shall not levy any additional charge for correction in name of the same person, when
error in name spelling is pointed out by the passenger after booking of ticket.
34. As per Air Asia's written reply, cancellation fee is charged at Rs.2200/- which is one of the lowest
in the industry keeping in line with their tagline “Everyone Can Fly”.
35. Air India has informed the Committee that they have different charges for changes, cancellation and
no-show for different class and category of tickets. In some cases, the tickets are non-refundable and
in other cases, they may charge up to Rs. 2500/-.
36. Go Air, in its written reply, has stated that they have a flat cancellation fee. However, if cancellation
is less than 2 hours before departure, full fare is forfeited.
37. In its written reply, IndiGo has stated that they charge a minimum of Rs.3000/- upwards in domestic
sector and Rs.3500/- upwards in international sector. The cancellation may be allowed only upto 2 hours
prior to the scheduled departure for the domestic sector and 4 hours prior to the departure for the
international sector.
38. Jet Airways, in its written reply, has not given much details about the cancellation charges.
39. In the written reply submitted by Spicejet and Vistara, they have informed the Committee that they
are charging Rs.2000/- upwards for change, cancellation and no-show.

8
40. The Committee notes that cancellation charges levied by private airlines are arbitrarily set.
There is no uniformity or minimum standards to impose charges for rescheduling, cancellation
and no-show. Attractive offers by private airlines veil the fact that passengers are charged the
entire ticket amount if they want to cancel the tickets. The airlines must be restricted to
charging not more than 50% of the base fare as cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge
collected should be refunded to the passengers on cancellation of tickets. The Committee desires
that DGCA may conduct periodic checks to ensure that the cancellation charges are not a burden
on consumers.
41. The cancellation charges may be printed prominently in the ticket itself and not as a fine
print. Norms for cancellation should be given more publicity through posters and websites.
Persons with disability
42. The Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that adequate instructions have been given
to the Airlines and the Airport operators to facilitate the travel requirements of persons with disability.
However, the Committee has noted that the airlines are not giving adequate support and priority to the
differently abled persons. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to reissue guidelines
reiterating already existing guidelines, hence ensuring strict compliance by all the airlines. If
needed, the schemes and guidelines may be strengthened for the smooth travel of differently
abled persons.
Frisking of passengers
43. Some Members of the Committee pointed out that the CISF personnel deployed at the airports
should be more passenger friendly. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed the Committee that BCAS
has issued instructions for guidance to CISF / State Police to facilitate proper and courteous screening
of passengers. Guidelines have been issued for touch free frisking with hand gloves and private screening
area for passengers. Publicity in BCAS website for smart travel tips to passengers has been circulated.
CISF has been requested for imparting proper training in soft skills to their screeners for dealing with
such delicate issues as the motto is to carry out the security check process efficiently keeping the dignity
and privacy of the passenger in mind. Specific instructions have been issued to CISF to ensure that due
courtesy is extended to Hon'ble Judges in High Court of India and Hon'ble Members of Parliament.
44. The Committee notes that even after the existence of guidelines of BCAS, there are
instances of misbehaviour by CISF and other security personnel. The Committee observes that
the Government needs to be proactive to face the emerging challenges of the growth of Civil
Aviation Sector. The recent incidents of misbehaviour definitely show CISF in poor light and
prove that the training programmes are insufficient and more needs to be done. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government should reevaluate the soft skill training programmes
of CISF and security personnel and motivate them to be passenger friendly.
Clean Toilets at the airports
45. Many Members of the Committee pointed out that the condition of toilets at various airports is
appalling and in an abysmal state.

9
46. Poor experiences in the toilets are often very strongly linked to passengers' overall
satisfaction. Having enough washrooms in the right places and keeping the washrooms clean
should be the priority of the AAI and Airport operators. The toilets should be the statement of
quality. The Committee recommends that cleanliness should be given utmost importance by AAI
and various other airport operators and they should take effective steps to ensure that toilets
at the airports should be maintained in a clean and tidy manner. The Government of India should
also monitor the quality of the toilets of all the airports.
Complaints Redressal Mechanism
47. Regarding complaints redressal mechanism, the airlines are using websites, mobiles, emails and
feedback forms etc. to address the complaints of passengers. Many of them are just to comply with the
requirements / guidelines of the regulatory authorities. It is good that they are using various IT platforms
to address the grievances. However, some of the airlines are taking more than 3 days just to acknowledge
the complaints even in an IT equipped environment.
48. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has developed an Air Sewa Application which can be availed
through Web portals and mobile phones, with an aim to help the air travellers. It contains a
module for receiving, tracking and monitoring of grievances with the stakeholders. Around
20,000 people downloaded this application and the Ministry has received 6,000 complaints from
passengers during the last year. The Committee is surprised to note that in a country where
there are more than 16 crores passengers using air services, just 20,000 people are using the
application developed by the Civil Aviation Ministry. It should be improved and the App may be
advertised to ensure that every passenger is aware of the existence of the App. Every grievance
redressal mechanism of the Airlines may be integrated with the Air Sewa App of the Government
so that better monitoring can be done.
49. During the deliberations of the Committee, the CEO, Jet Airways was requested to address
the issue of customer complaints. The Committee also notes, through personal anecdotes of
Committee Members, the deliberate reluctance of Jet Airways to note customer complaints. The
Committee is of the view that a proper complaints redressal mechanism should be in place with
all airlines. The complaints received from the customers should be redressed in a time bound
manner. It should be ensured that the complaints have been redressed to the satisfaction of the
customers. The details of the complaint redressal mechanism should be adequately advertised
and printed bold in the tickets of the airlines.
Immigration Counters
50. The Committee could understand that the behaviour of persons deployed at the immigration counters
in the airports is far from cordial.
51. The Committee notes that the officials at the immigration counters have no right to be rude
and discourteous. They are just Government servants regulated by the set of rules and regulations.
Their main role is to facilitate the passenger's journey and not to misbehave. The Committee
recommends that soft skills training be imparted to the persons at immigration counters given
their direct dealings with foreign tourists.

10
Airport infrastructure
52. The Committee understands that the exponential growth in passenger traffic has led to saturation
of airports. With the unveiling of the National Civil Aviation Policy and Regional Connectivity Scheme,
the airlines industry has got a fillip which resulted in increased air traffic volumes.
53. The Committee was informed by all the private airlines that urgent capacity enhancement is needed
at all key airports. It is getting next to impossible to add any flights due to lack of slots and parking
slots. The number of Immigration / Emigration counters, check-in counters and CUSS kiosks etc. need
to be increased. Upgradation of airport infrastructure and adoption of technology on various activities
of the airport operation may be given top priority.
54. The Committee is aware that airport infrastructure has a major role to play in extending
amenities and conveniences to the passengers. The Committee is of the view that there is a need
for adequate technology driven infrastructure in our country to enable airlines to improve their
on-time performance.
55. The Committee realizes that so far, the growth of airport infrastructure has not been
commensurate with the growth in the number of passengers. Keeping in view the pace at which
Indian aviation is growing, the Committee recommends that AAI and other Airport Operators
should bolster their efforts to build new infrastructure and to expand existing airports to enhance
the facilities available at airports. Decongesting the airports, decongesting the runway and the
airspace should be the top priority of the Government. Airport facilities need to be upgraded on
an urgent basis.
Erroneous Practice of “non-uniform block time”
56. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the flying time of IndiGo from Indore to Delhi
is two hours whereas in other airlines it is only one hour thirty five minutes flying time. IndiGo is
adopting a longer flying time in various sectors of their flights just to bolster their ontime performance.
When a flight arrives at the landing station the captain announces “we are very happy to announce that
we have arrived earlier than schedule but no landing permission from the ATC due to congestion”. The
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that 'block time' is the time usually the
aircrafts take to fly a particular sector, but many airlines are not following it. But the aircrafts are
permitted to use the “non-uniform block time” i.e. long duration flying time (more time in air) to cover
a particular sector due to lack of slots at the airports. They may hover around the destination stations
for some time. The non-uniform block time i.e. longer duration travel time may be shown in the flight
schedules but the passengers may not be aware of the nitty-gritties involved and they are made to believe
that the flight is arriving before time. The Government has informed the Committee that they are aware
of the wrong practice and that they are instructing all the airlines to follow uniform block time.
57. The Committee notes that due to 'non-uniform block time', the passengers often have to
spend more time on board the aircraft. The practice of 'non-uniform block time' is obviously not
desirable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the airlines may follow uniform block
time. The Committee also recommends that a co-ordinated effort should be made by Air Traffic

11
Control, Airports Authority of India, Airport operators and Airlines for maintaining punctuality
in air services.
Availability of slots/ Bilaterals
58. The representatives of all the airlines who deposed before the Committee highlighted the lack of
availability of adequate landing slots. They stated that while they are not given adequate landing slots at
Dubai, foreign airlines are given landing slots in India.
59. Traffic rights for operation in international airlines are determined through bilateral air services
agreements concluded with foreign countries on reciprocal basis in which the balance of opportunities
and benefits are the key determinants. The Government decides the quantum of seats to be allocated to
various foreign as well as domestic players.
60. The Committee notes that in granting traffic rights, home carriers' interests, whether
Government owned or private, are always considered. The incremental capacity generated by the
bilateral could not be used by the home carriers due to the limitation of non-availability of
landing slots and parking slots in foreign destinations. The Government which is aware of the
limitations, knowingly and willingly, allowed incremental capacity to foreign airlines whereas the
home carriers are left in a lurch. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all bilateral rights
may be directly linked with the slots being given to the Indian carriers in foreign destinations.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should thoroughly examine this issue of making
slots available to the Indian airlines and ensure that airlines of India get fair allocations.
Corporate Social responsibility
61. The Committee was informed that protection of environment, promotion of clean energy, Green
initiatives, collaborating with NGOs to facilitate community intervention, promotion of sports, helping the
underprivileged sections of the society etc. are some of the CSR initiatives undertaken by various private
airlines. The Committee is of the view that the airlines should strike the right balance between
profit making and social responsibility. The Committee, therefore, appreciates the various CSR
initiatives undertaken by airlines and expects that they should do more.
General Observation
62. The Committee notes with dismay that the Government has adopted the open sky policy
without laying down the necessary guidelines, rules and regulations to control the activities of
the airlines. The consumers are at the receiving end and at the mercy of the private airlines for
any kind of services. The Committee is not clear who fixes the standards and what are the
standards, be it training, quality of food, amenities to passengers, behaviour of airlines staff,
quality of seats, cancellation charges, pricing of air tickets etc. The Committee desires that the
Government should wake up from its slumber and perform their duties to save the airline
passengers from the vices and to make the air travel an enjoyable experience for them. Civil
Aviation and Airlines industry is service industry and any service industry has to be user friendly
and customer friendly.

12
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee is of the view that the pricing mechanisms applicable in the developed
countries may not be suitable for India. The Committee also notes that even after a 50%
reduction of the ATF prices, the airlines have not passed on the benefit of reduction in ATF prices
to the consumers. (Para 7)
The Committee notes that around festivals and for bookings made closer to the date of
travel, some airlines are charging more than ten times of the advance booking fare. The
Committee observes that this is arbitrary. A deregulatory environment does not mean unlimited
freedom of exploitation. Windfall profits cannot be taken from the hapless passengers especially
from those working class passengers who are travelling in the Gulf sector. The Committee
believes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has a social responsibility towards its citizens. Economic
viability cannot be the only criteria for decision making. The Ministry of Civil Aviation, though
aware of the rampant exploitation, is not showing any proactive role in regulating the airfares.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation to consider fixing an upper
limit of the air tickets for every sector. (Para 8)
The Committee noted that recently there were many incidents of manhandling, discourteous
and rude behaviour by airlines staff, both ground staff and cabin crew. Some of them were
reported in the media and a large number of them went unreported. While narrating some of
the incidents of misbehaviour in airlines, especially in IndiGo, majority of the Members opined
that the attitude of airlines staff is very condescending, often unco-operative and on many
occasions, downright rude. (Para 9)
The Committee opined that merely taking strictest action against the employees does not
absolve the airline of its guilt of the incident. (Para 11)
The Committee observes that the problems affecting the airlines are not personal; it is
institutional. An institution like IndiGo has to develop a consumer friendly approach in dealing
with their passengers. The Committee believes that being a leader in market share, IndiGo
needs to look inward and find out the reasons for the discourteous attitude and rude and
indifferent behaviour of their employees, whether it is their cabin crew or the ground staff. The
Committee emphasizes that the arrogant behaviour of airlines employees should stop.  (Para 12)
The Committee totally disagrees with the proposition that the students coming out of
Government Schools and colleges cannot be trained. Our Government schools and colleges
produce the best students of the country and we have a duty to nurture and promote such
students to achieve their full potential. If a particular airlines has grown exponentially, they
should deploy a proportionate amount to the training of their staff instead of misbehaving and
manhandling the passengers or blaming the youngsters from Tier II and III cities and Government
schools. (Para 15)
The Committee, keeping in view the recent incidents of misbehaviour of airlines staff
including the manhandling of a passenger by staff of IndiGo Airlines, emphasizes on the need
for soft skills training and functionality training for all employees across airlines. (Para 16)
12

13
The Committee desires that the employees be provided training in order to effectively
manage crisis situations such as delay in flight take-off, delay in landing, diversion of flights etc.
Further, training should also be given to the airlines staff to sensitize them to meet the needs
of persons with disability. Intensive training should be given to the crew and staff to extend
courteous and decent behaviour to the passengers. The crew should be trained to be more polite
than saying 'please' or 'thank you'. The passengers expect a civilized behaviour from the cabin
crew and the ground staff as the salaries to the cabin crew and ground staff are paid from the
income earned from the passengers. (Para 17)
The Committee notes that the training modules, training schedules, content of training,
duration of training, budget allocation for training etc. varies from airline to airline. In some of
the cases, the training programmes are non-existent or just for namesake. The Government
should come up with a training programme suitable to Indian conditions emphasizing on courteous
behaviour to the passengers. The Committee underlines the need to standardise the training
programmes of all the airlines. The Committee recommends that the Government should formulate
the guidelines for such training programmes applicable to all the airlines, at the earliest.
(Para 18)
The Committee notes that the check-in process and collection of luggage are cumbersome
and time consuming. What the passenger wants is a quick check-in, without long queues and a
smooth process of security check. Despite the huge claims of airlines regarding the check-in
process, the Committee is compelled to observe that the check-in counters are in a mess,
especially those of the low cost airlines such as IndiGo. (Para 20)
The Committee has noticed reports of some private airlines creating long queues at the
check-in counters to delay the process of check-in so that passengers miss their scheduled
flights. This compels them to buy tickets at exorbitant prices to travel in the next available
flight. The Committee also notes that airlines are overbooking flights and creating later, artificial
situations to deny boarding to the confirmed ticket holders. Many a times it has been noticed
that adequate number of personnel are not posted to man the check-in counters. (Para 21)
The Committee recommends that arrangements be made to ensure that the passenger does
not spend more than 10 minutes in a queue at the check-in counter to get a boarding pass.
Whenever there is a rush of passengers, additional staff should be deputed at the check-in
counters. AAI and other airport operators may provide adequate number of check-in counters
and self checking kiosks at the airports. The Government should also ensure that if a passenger
is denied boarding due to rush at the counter or due to overbooking, the passenger may be
compensated adequately and he/she may be sent in an alternative flight. (Para 22)
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Airport operators to provide e-boarding
facility at certain airports to reduce waiting time for baggage check-in and security clearance.
The Committee desires that e-boarding facility should be made available to passengers at all
airports. (Para 25)

14
The Committee was informed that there are great difficulties in getting water and food in
low cost airlines especially in IndiGo. In IndiGo, the food has to be pre-booked and on board,
if someone demands food, they refuse to provide the food even to those who are diabetic or
suffering from other medical conditions. A passenger has to report to the airport counter 2 hours
before the departure time and one has to spend a few more hours in the flight without food and
water and it is a horrible thing to face. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IndiGo and
other low cost airlines should take adequate steps to ensure that food is available to the passengers
on demand, especially to those who are having some medical conditions. (Para 27)
The Committee notes that the main difference between a low cost carrier and the full cost
carrier is the serving of food. It is unacceptable for airlines to serve unsatisfactory food after
having charged customers for it. Every airline should maintain the highest quality of food and
they should also change the menu occasionally instead of keeping a cold sandwich in their menu
throughout the year. The Committee recommends that random audits of the catering kitchens
should be held to ensure quality, quantity and hygiene and that feedback from customers may
also be taken into account. The cost of food may be separately printed on the ticket.
(Para 28)
 Due to their profit motive, the airlines are not providing adequate leg space to the passengers.
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may prepare a guideline laying down
a minimum space standard in respect of seats and leg room. (Para 29)
The Committee has been informed by all airlines that no unserviceable seats are being
offered to passengers. However, the Committee has noted that unserviceable seats are in fact
offered to passengers and complaints made to the cabin crew in this regard have gone unheeded.
The Committee noticed that though all the airlines have a policy of not offering unserviceable
seats, the practice is that these are silently offered to the unsuspecting passengers. It is a cruel
joke to offer unserviceable seats even to Business Class passengers. Due to their busy schedule,
the passengers are compelled to travel by availing the unserviceable seats. The Committee
observes that it is a deficiency of service by service airlines. The airlines should take an initiative
to ensure that unserviceable seats are either replaced or repaired at the earliest. Monetary
compensation may be given to the affected passengers who are offered the unserviceable seats.
The Government should formulate a policy to restrict the use of unserviceable seats.
(Para 31)
The Committee notes that cancellation charges levied by private airlines are arbitrarily set.
There is no uniformity or minimum standards to impose charges for rescheduling, cancellation
and no-show. Attractive offers by private airlines veil the fact that passengers are charged the
entire ticket amount if they want to cancel the tickets. The airlines must be restricted to
charging not more than 50% of the base fare as cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge
collected should be refunded to the passengers on cancellation of tickets. The Committee desires
that DGCA may conduct periodic checks to ensure that the cancellation charges are not a burden
on consumers. (Para 40)

15
The cancellation charges may be printed prominently in the ticket itself and not as a fine
print. Norms for cancellation should be given more publicity through posters and websites.
(Para 41)
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to reissue guidelines reiterating already
existing guidelines, hence ensuring strict compliance by all the airlines. If needed, the schemes
and guidelines may be strengthened for the smooth travel of differentlyabled persons.
(Para 42)
The Committee notes that even after the existence of guidelines of BCAS, there are
instances of misbehaviour by CISF and other security personnel. The Committee observes that
the Government needs to be proactive to face the emerging challenges of the growth of Civil
Aviation Sector. The recent incidents of misbehaviour definitely show CISF in poor light and
prove that the training programmes are insufficient and more needs to be done. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government should reevaluate the soft skill training programmes
of CISF and security personnel and motivate them to be passenger friendly. (Para 44)
Poor experiences in the toilets are often very strongly linked to passengers' overall
satisfaction. Having enough washrooms in the right places and keeping the washrooms clean
should be the priority of the AAI and Airport operators. The toilets should be the statement of
quality. The Committee recommends that cleanliness should be given utmost importance by AAI
and various other airport operators and they should take effective steps to ensure that toilets
at the airports should be maintained in a clean and tidy manner. The Government of India should
also monitor the quality of the toilets of all the airports. (Para 46)
The Ministry of Civil Aviation has developed an Air Sewa Application which can be availed
through Web portals and mobile phones, with an aim to help the air travellers. It contains a
module for receiving, tracking and monitoring of grievances with the stakeholders. Around
20,000 people downloaded this application and the Ministry has received 6,000 complaints from
passengers during the last year. The Committee is surprised to note that in a country where
there are more than 16 crores passengers using air services, just 20,000 people are using the
application developed by the Civil Aviation Ministry. It should be improved and the App may be
advertised to ensure that every passenger is aware of the existence of the App. Every grievance
redressal mechanism of the Airlines may be integrated with the Air Sewa App of the Government
so that better monitoring can be done. (Para 48)
During the deliberations of the Committee, the CEO, Jet Airways was requested to address
the issue of customer complaints. The Committee also notes, through personal anecdotes of
Committee Members, the deliberate reluctance of Jet Airways to note customer complaints. The
Committee is of the view that a proper complaints redressal mechanism should be in place with
all airlines. The complaints received from the customers should be redressed in a time bound
manner. It should be ensured that the complaints have been redressed to the satisfaction of the
customers. The details of the complaint redressal mechanism should be adequately advertised
and printed bold in the tickets of the airlines. (Para 49)

16
The Committee notes that the officials at the immigration counters have no right to be rude
and discourteous. They are just Government servants regulated by the set of rules and regulations.
Their main role is to facilitate the passenger's journey and not to misbehave. The Committee
recommends that soft skills training be imparted to the persons at immigration counters given
their direct dealings with foreign tourists. (Para 51)
The Committee is aware that airport infrastructure has a major role to play in extending
amenities and conveniences to the passengers. The Committee is of the view that there is a need
for adequate technology driven infrastructure in our country to enable airlines to improve their
on-time performance. (Para 54)
The Committee realizes that so far, the growth of airport infrastructure has not been
commensurate with the growth in the number of passengers. Keeping in view the pace at which
Indian aviation is growing, the Committee recommends that AAI and other Airport Operators
should bolster their efforts to build new infrastructure and to expand existing airports to enhance
the facilities available at airports. Decongesting the airports, decongesting the runway and the
airspace should be the top priority of the Government. Airport facilities need to be upgraded on
an urgent basis. (Para 55)
The Committee notes that due to 'non-uniform block time', the passengers often have to
spend more time on board the aircraft. The practice of 'non-uniform block time' is obviously not
desirable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the airlines may follow uniform block
time. The Committee also recommends that a co-ordinated effort should be made by Air Traffic
Control, Airports Authority of India, Airport operators and Airlines for maintaining punctuality
in air services. (Para 57)
The Committee notes that in granting traffic rights, home carriers' interests, whether
Government owned or private, are always considered. The incremental capacity generated by the
bilateral could not be used by the home carriers due to the limitation of non-availability of
landing slots and parking slots in foreign destinations. The Government which is aware of the
limitations, knowingly and willingly, allowed incremental capacity to foreign airlines whereas the
home carriers are left in a lurch. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all bilateral rights
may be directly linked with the slots being given to the Indian carriers in foreign destinations.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should thoroughly examine this issue of making
slots available to the Indian airlines and ensure that airlines of India get fair allocations.
(Para 60)
The Committee is of the view that the airlines should strike the right balance between profit
making and social responsibility. The Committee, therefore, appreciates the various CSR initiatives
undertaken by airlines and expects that they should do more. (Para 61)
The Committee notes with dismay that the Government has adopted the open sky policy
without laying down the necessary guidelines, rules and regulations to control the activities of
the airlines. The consumers are at the receiving end and at the mercy of the private airlines for

17
any kind of services. The Committee is not clear who fixes the standards and what are the
standards, be it training, quality of food, amenities to passengers, behaviour of airlines staff,
quality of seats, cancellation charges, pricing of air tickets etc. The Committee desires that the
Government should wake up from its slumber and perform their duties to save the airline
passengers from the vices and to make the air travel an enjoyable experience for them. Civil
Aviation and Airlines industry is service industry and any service industry has to be user friendly
and customer friendly. (Para 62)

MINUTES

IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 20 th November, 2017 in Committee Room No.3,
First Floor, Block-A, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Kumari Selja
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
7. Km. Arpita Ghosh
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan
9. Shri P . Kumar
10. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
11. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
12. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
13. Shri Rajesh Pandey
14. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
15. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
17. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. G. Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer
21

22
WITNESSES
Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri Rajiv Nayan Choubey, Secretary
2. Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra, Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Usha Padhee, Joint Secretary
Director General of Civil Aviation
1. Shri B.S. Bhullar, Director General
2. Shri Lalit Gupta Joint, Director General
Bureau of Civil Aviation
Shri Kumar Rajesh Chandra, Director General
Airports Authority of India
1. Shri Guruprasad Mohapatra, Chairman
2. Shri I.N. Murthy, Member (Operations)
3. Shri J.P. Alex, Executive Director (Operations)
IndiGo (InterGIobe Aviation Limited)
1. Shri Aditya Ghosh, President and Whole Time Director
2. Shri Vikram Chona, Vice President-Corporate Affairs
3. Shri Sajeev Ramdas , Executive Vice President
4. Ms. Priyaah Sundaram, Associate Vice President
Go Air Airlines
Shri Wolfgang Prock-Schauer, Chairman and Managing Director
Air Asia
1. Shri Abrol, Chairman and Managing Director
2. Shri Satish Kumar, Delhi Station Manager
2. * * *
3. The Chairman of the Committee extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He
then informed the Committee that the Committee will hear the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation;
Director-General, DGCA; Chairman, Airports Authority of India; Director-General of Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security and private airline operators on the subject 'Passenger amenities and behaviour of airline
personnel towards passengers'.
***Relate to other matters.

23
4. The Director-General, DGCA while making a power point presentation before the Committee, stated
that passenger centric regulations are issued by DGCA, steps are taken for passenger facilitation by
BCAS and that passenger amenities are provided by AAI. He narrated the steps taken in case of refund
of airline tickets to passengers and compensation in case of denied boarding. He enumerated the passengers
amenities provided by AAI and facilities for comfort of Divyang passengers. He also gave an overview
on Air Seva application which was launched by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to enhance the travelling
experience of air travellers.
5. The Chairman, Airports Authority of India apprised the Committee about the mandate of AAI and
stated that the major challenge is to upgrade the airport facilities, both in terms of runway capacity and
terminal capacity. He pointed out the lack of availability of necessary land for expansion of airports and
for the construction of airports.
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation apprised the Committee that the growth rate in terms of
domestic passengers was 20% in the last three years and in this year, it is 17%. He highlighted the main
features of the National Civil Aviation Policy 2016 and stated that keeping in view the growth in the
number of passengers, the capacity of the airports have to be increased. He pointed out the need for
payment to CISF for providing security at airports to be made from the Budget and not from the
passengers. Regarding the issue of manhandling of a passenger by the Indigo staff, he informed the
Committee that the airport entry passes of the staff have been cancelled.
7. The Members of the Committee gave a graphic detail of their experiences as air passengers.
Thereafter, the Committee heard the CEOs of IndiGo, GoAir and Air Asia. While welcoming the CEOs,
the Chairman stated that the Committee was looking at the bigger issues of airline safety vis-a-vis safety
measures put in place, procedures followed to avoid accidents, social responsibilities and training of air
line personnel while dealing with passengers.
8. The representative of IndiGo apprised the Committee about the process of pricing of air tickets.
He pointed out the need for better airport infrastructure and the lack of availability of landing slots. He
stated that training is given to the IndiGo staff to deal with passengers.
9. The representatives of Air Asia elaborated upon the facilities extended to their passengers. He stated
that on an average, the aircrew is trained for about four months and the ground staff is trained for about
21 days. He highlighted the constraints regarding landing slots and parking of aircrafts.
10. The representatives of Go Air drew the attention of the Committee to the existing poor infrastructure
environment in the aviation arena. He informed the Committee that the staff at Go Air are given three
to four months training. As regards social responsibility, he stated that Go Air caters to Jammu and
Kashmir and Port Blair and that even where there was a crisis, their services continued.
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
14. The meeting adjourned at 5.58 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

24
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 27 th November, 2017 in Committee Room No. 3,
First Floor, Block-A, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri La. Ganesan
3. Kumari Selja
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
7. Km. Arpita Ghosh
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan
9. Shri P. Kumar
10. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
11. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
12. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
13. Shri Rakesh Singh
14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
15. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. G. Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer
24

25
WITNESSES
Vistara (TATA SIA Airlines Ltd.)
1. Shri Leslie Thng, CEO
2. Shri Gurjot Malhi, Advisor to CEO
3. Shri Pankaj Handa, Head, Airports
4. Shri Moinuddin Wasil, Dy. GM, Regulatory Affairs
Jet Airways (India) Limited
1. Shri Vinay Dube, CEO
2. Shri Jayaraj Shanmugam, Executive Vice President, Product & Services
3. Shri A.K. Sivanandan, Vice President Public Relations
4. Shri Narendra Mansukhani, Head of Guest Experience
5. Shri Sumit Kapoor, Executive Public Relations
Spicejet
1. Shri Ajay Singh, CMD
2. Shri G.P . Gupta, CAO
3. Shri Kamal Hingorani, Sr. VP
4. Shri Sumant Rautela, HOD Ground Services
5. Shri CS Palani, HOD Liaison
Air India
1. Shri Rajiv Bansal, CMD
2. Shri Pankaj Srivastava, Director (Commercial)
3. Ms. Aruna Gopalakrishnan, ED(CA)
4. Shri Rohit Dubey, AM(CA) for Liaison and Protocol
2. The Chairman of the Committee extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He
then informed the Committee that the Committee will hear the CEOs/CMDs of Vistara, Jet Airways and
Spicejet on the subject 'Passenger amenities and behaviour of airline personnel towards passengers' and
CMD, Air India on 'Passenger amenities and behaviour of airline personnel towards passengers' and
'Proposed disinvestment of Air India'.
3. The representative of Jet Airways explained the various factors involved in pricing of air tickets and
stated that air fares are determined by the forces of demand and supply. When asked about the training
given to the staff, he stated that the cabin crew of Jet Airways are given twelve weeks of training.

26
4. The representative of Spicejet informed the Committee that the cost of aviation turbine fuel is the
highest in India. He stated that since it is a very competitive market, when one airline reduces the ticket
price, the other airlines also follow suit. He stated that there is no cut off price for air tickets. He pointed
out the lack of sufficient landing slots. He stated that abinitio training for two months is given in Spicejet
and that recurrent training is also given.
5. The representative of Vistara apprised the Committee that cabin crew of Vistara undergo a training
of four months, especially in terms of soft skills and that refresher training courses are also held.
Regarding the long queues at checking counters, he stated that it can be improved.
6. The representative of Air India apprised the Committee that Air India is a full service carrier and
that they operate on a hub-and-spoke model. He stated that they were in the process of buying new seats
so that there are no unserviceable seats. Regarding the 'Proposed disinvestment of Air India', he stated
that a directive has been received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation to create an Air India asset holding
company into which four subsidiaries are to be hived off. He further stated that the non-core assets are
to be hived off into the asset holding company and divested individually. He pointed out the shortage of
pilots to fly ATR-72 aircrafts.
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 5.44 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

27
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Monday, the 4 th December, 2017 in Committee Room No. 4,
First Floor, Block-A, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Kumari Selja
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
6. Km. Arpita Ghosh
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan
8. Shri P . Kumar
9. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
10. Shri Rajesh Pandey
11. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
12. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari
15. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. G. Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer
27

28
WITNESSES
Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri Rajiv Nayan Choubey, Secretary
2. Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra, Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Usha Padhee, Joint Secretary
Director General of Civil Aviation
1. Shri B.S. Bhullar, Director General
2. Shri Lalit Gupta, Joint Director General
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
Shri Kumar Rajesh Chandra, Director General
Airports Authority of India
1. Shri Guruprasad Mohapatra, Chairman
2. Shri I.N. Murthy, Member (Operations)
3. Shri J.P. Alex, Executive Director (Operations)
4. Shri G. K. Chaukiyal, ED (RCS)
Air India
1. Shri Rajiv Bansal, CMD
2. Ms. Aruna Gopalakrishnan, ED(CA)
Department of Investment and Public Asset Management
1. Shri Neeraj Kumar Gupta, Secretary
2. Shrimati Anuradha Thakur, Joint Secretary
3. Shri G.U. Ahmed, Director
2. The Chairman of the Committee extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He
then informed that the Committee is going to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; CMD, Air
India and Secretary, Department of Investment and Public Asset Management on 'Proposed disinvestment
of Air India'; and Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Director General, DGCA; Director General, BCAS;
and Chairman, AAI on the subject 'Passenger amenities and behaviour of airline personnel towards
passengers'.
3. *  * *
4. *  * *
***Relate to other matters.

29
5. On the issue of charging high air fares during the festival seasons, the Secretary stated that it was
not a good idea to regulate the ticket prices since the moment market forces are interfered with which
has its own spin off. He apprised the Committee that only 2% to 3% of the air passengers fly in the
highest fare bucket.
6. The Chairman, AAI while dwelling upon the training given to Air India staff, stated that 6 months
training is given for Air Traffic Control and Communication Navigation Surveillance (CNS) staff and that
one month's induction training is given to appointees who are in operations, engineering, finance and HR.
7. *  * *
8. *  * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The meeting adjourned at 5.25 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

30
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 2 nd January, 2018 in Room No. 63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri D erek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri La. Ganesan
4. Shri Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Praful Patel
6. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
7. Shri Rajeev Shukla
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
10. Shri Vinod Chavda
11. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
12. Shri Rahul Kaswan
13. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
14. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
15. Shri Rajesh Pandey
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
17. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy
18. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
19. Shri Pratap Simha
20. Shri Dushyant Singh
21. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
22. Shri Rakesh Singh
23. Shri Manoj Tiwari
24. Shri K.C. Venugopal
30

31
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended very warm New Year wishes to the Members of the Committee
and welcomed them to the meeting. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider
the draft report of the Committee on 'Issues related to improving consumers' satisfaction of airlines' and
adopt the same thereafter.
3. *  * *
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on 'Issues related to improving
consumers' satisfaction of airlines' with a modification to 'Erroneous Practice of non-uniform block
time'.
5. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament on 4th January,
2018. The Committee, accordingly, authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar,
M.P . and in his absence, Shri Ritabrata Banerjee, M.P . to present the Report in Rajya Sabha. Shri K.C
Venugopal, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Rahul Kaswan, M.P. was authorized to lay the above mentioned
Report on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018.
6. *  * *
7. The meeting adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE
List of Witnesses who appeared before the Department- Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
20.11.2017
Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri Rajiv Nayan Choubey Secretary
2. Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Usha Padhee Joint Secretary
Director General of Civil Aviation
1. Shri B.S. Bhullar Director General
2. Shri Lalit Gupta Joint Director Genral
Bureau of Civil Aviation
Shri Kumar Rajesh Chandra Director General
Airports Authority of India
1. Shri Guruprasad Mohapatra Chairman
2. Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Operations)
3. Shri J.P. Alex Executive Director (Operations)
IndiGo (InterGlobe Aviaton Limited)
1. Shri Aditya Ghosh President and Whole Time Director
2. Shri Vikram Chona Vice President-Corporate Affairs
3. Shri Sajeev Ramdas Executive Vice President
4. Ms. Priyaah Sundaram Associate Vice President
Go Air Airlines
Shri Wolfgang Prock-Schauer Chairman and Managing Director
Air Asia
1. Shri Abrol Chairman and Managing Director
2. Shri Satish Kumar Delhi Station Manager
35

36
27.11.2017
Vistara (TATA SIA Airlines Ltd.)
1. Shri Leslie Thng CEO
2. Shri Gurjot Malhi Advisor to CEO
3. Shri Pankaj Handa Head, Airports
4. Shri Moinuddin Wasil Dy. GM, Regulatory Affairs
Jet Airways (India) Limited
1. Shri Vinay Dube CEO
2. Shri Jayaraj Shanmugam Executive Vice President, Product & Services
3. Shri A.K. Sivanandan Vice President Public Relations
4. Shri Narendra Mansukhani Head of Guest Experience
5. Shri Sumit Kapoor Executive Public Relations
Spice Jet
1. Shri Ajay Singh CMD
2. Shri G P Gupta CAO
3. Shri Kamal Hingorani Sr. VP
4. Shri Sumant Rautela HOD Gorund Services
5. Shri CS Palani HOD Liaison
Air India
1. Shri Rajiv Bansal CMD
2. Shri Pankaj Srivastava Director (Commercial)
3. Ms. Aruna Gopalakrishnan ED (CA)
4. Shri Rohit Dubey AM (CA) for Liaison and Protocol
4.12.2017
Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Shri Rajiv Nayan Choubey Secretary
2. Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Usha Padhee Joint Secretary
Director General of Civil Aviation
1. Shri B.S. Bhullar Director General
2. Shri Lalit Gupta Joint Director General

37
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
Shri Kumar Rajesh Chandra Director Genaral
Airports Authority of India
1. Shri Guruprasad Mohapatra Chairman
2. Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Operations)
3. Shri J.P. Alex Executive Director (Operations)
4. Shri G.K. Chaukiyal ED (RCS)
Air India
1. Shri Rajiv Bansal CMD
2. Ms. Aruna Gopalakrishnan ED(CA)
Department of Investment and Public Asset Management
1. Shri Neeraj Kumar Gupta Secretary
2. Shrimati Anuradha Thakur Joint Secretary
3. Shri G.U. Ahmed Director