  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2017/ Magha, 1938 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
243 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY THIRD REPORT 
 The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th  February, 2017) 
 (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th  February, 2017) 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY THIRD REPORT 
 The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th  February, 2017) 
 (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2017) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2017/ Magha, 1938 (Saka) 
 


C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS         (iii) 
4. REPORT                                1- 97           
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE  98-120 
  
       
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________  
*To be appended at printing stage. 
 
 
6. MINUTES                                                                                                                121-141
7.            ANNEXURE                                                                                                                  142-147

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2016) 
 
1. Shri Mukul Roy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi  
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore  
6. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  
8. Kumari Selja  
9. Shri Rajeev Shukla  
 9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
 10. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi 
12. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
13. Shri Vinod Chavda 
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama  
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
17. Shri P. Kumar  
18. Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
19. Yogi Aditya Nath 
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala  
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey  
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan   
23. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy  
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
28. Shri Rakesh Singh 
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
(i) 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Thirty Ninth  Report of the 
Committee on the  Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016*. 
2.         The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 9th August, 2016.  In pursuance 
of rules relating to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the 
Hon‟ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Bill to the Committee on the 17 th 
August, 2016 for examination and report within two months. On the request being 
made by the Chairman of the Committee, Hon‟ble Chairman had granted extension of 
time for a period of two months i.e. upto 16th December, 2016.  But the deliberations 
could not be concluded within the stipulated period and the Committee again requested 
extension.  The Hon‟ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha acceded to the request for the 
presentation of the Report to both the Houses of the Parliament upto 16 th February, 
2017. 
3.          The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers of the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Ministry of Law and Justice at its 
meeting held on the 29 th September and 14 th October, 2016.  The Committee heard the 
views of Secretaries, Ministries  of Road Transport and Transport Commissioner s  of 
various States and Union Territories  on 25 th October, 2016 and 4 th November, 2016. 
The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of various stakeholders and 
individuals at its meeting held on the 4th November, 2016. 
4. The Committee considered the draft Report on the Bill in its meetings held on 
9th December and 27th December, 2016 and adopted the same on  24th January, 2017. 
5.          The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers 
of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Ministry of Law and Justice for 
the assistance and inputs provided during delibe rations on the provisions of the Bill. 
The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of Secretaries, Road Transport of 
various States and representatives of various NGOs, stakeholders and individuals who 
submitted their valuable suggestions on the provisions of the Bill. 
  
  
MUKUL ROY 
New Delhi;                           Chairman, 
January 24, 2017                        Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
4 Magha, 1938 (Saka)             Committee on  Transport, Tourism and Culture.  
 
 
 
 
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 9th August, 2016. 
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No 55911, dated 26th  October, 2016. 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
GoM - Group of Ministers 
GDP - Gross Domestic Product 
RTA - Road Transport Authority 
RTO - Road Transport Officers 
CUTS - Consumer Unity & Trust Society 
HMV - Heavy Motor Vehicle 
MVA - Motor Vehicle Act 
NHAI - National Highways Authority of India 
MACT - Motor Accident Claims Tribunal 
LMV - Light Motor Vehicle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

REPORT 
  The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 
9th August, 2016 and Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Hon'ble 
Speaker, Lok Sabha referred this Bill on 17 th August, 2016 to the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture for 
consideration, examination and report within 2 months.  Since it is an exhaustive Bill 
and it required time for examination of stakeholders on th e subject, the Committee 
sought extension of time for two months upto 16 th December, 2016 from Hon'ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha.  But the deliberations could not be concluded within the 
stipulated period and the Committee again sought extension of period upto  16th 
February, 2017 to present its Report to the Parliament and request of the Committee 
was acceded to by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha.  
2. The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is the principal Act for regulating all the 
activities related to Motor Vehicles  in the country.  It has been amended four times i.e. 
in the year 1994,2000, 2001 and 2015 to adapt it to the technological upgradation 
emerging in road transport, passenger, freight movement and in motor vehicle 
management.  Many provisions of the Act eit her have lost its sheen in present context 
or there is a need to add more teeth to it especially vis -à-vis provisions pertaining to 
increasing penalty to enforce road safety and also provisions for incorporating modern 
technology.  There is a need for amen ding the existing provisions to suit the present 
requirement.  
3. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways constituted a Group of Ministers 
GoM) under the Chairmanship of Shri Yoonus Khan, Minister for PWD and Transport, 
State Government of Rajasthan to del iberate on the issues facing the transport sector in 
the country.  GoM gave its interim reports and suggested a series of recommendations. 
4. The Ministry has claimed that there is a need for bringing out changes in the 
Principal Act.  The Bill has given emphasis on road safety, computerization, enhanced 
penalty for traffic offences. 
5. In the year 2015,  as per Ministry's information 1,46,000 p eople died in road 
accidents and around 3 lakh people got injured.  Road transport plays a vital role in the 
economy of the country and Road Transport constitutes 4.5 percent of the GDP of the 
country.  
6. To address the issues faced by the transport sector, the Ministry had initiated the 
Road Transport and Safety Bill.  But, several States have expressed apprehensions with 
regard to provisions relating to opening up of public transport as well as issues relating 
to the control and regulations of permits an d taxation.  Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways has framed following guidelines which have to be given importance while 
making the amendments in the Principal Act:- 
(i) Good Samaritan law- It has been incorporated in the Bill with a view to 
1

help those peo ple who come forward after the accident and rescue and 
help the victim should not be harassed. 
(ii) Issue of learning License online 
(iii) Registration of vehicles at dealer's point. 
(iv) Accidental Insurance cover for the drivers of vehicles. 
(v) Review of periodicity for renewal of driving licenses. 
(vi) Liberalizing intra -city taxi permit system and other automobile 
aggregation policy. 
(vii) Steps for promoting low cost last mile connectivity. 
(viii) Strengthening rural transport. 
(ix) Strengthening public transport system. 
 
7. During the deliber ations of the meeting, the Committee also came across some 
suggestions which are worth consideration and may be included in the Bill, which will 
strengthen the Act further.  Some of those points are as follows: 
(i) Wearing of headgear/helmet may be made mandatory for a two -wheeler 
rider, whether it is a 50 c.c. or 100 c.c. vehicle, if it is motorized then it 
should be compulsory for the riders (both major & minor). 
(ii) Mandatory test of competence must be fixed for driver. 
(iii) States may be delegated some powers to punish dealers, if they indulge 
in malpractices. (Section -56) 
(iv) Government vehicles may be exempted from getting insurance cover 
and the money saved from non -coverage should be spent on giving 
claims to accident victims through making a road safety fund. 
(v) Government may incorporate the provision for the manufacturers that 
the strength of axle of goods vehicle may be kept at par with the load to 
be carried by the vehicle. 
(vi) Indian roads are currently not suitable for vehicles which can run on 200 
km or 250 km /hour speed and hence vehicles may be made which can 
better suit Indian road conditions. The provision in this regard may be 
added in the Bill. 
8. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2016. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
different States and any reference in this Act to the commencement of this Act shall, in 
relation to a State, be construed  as a reference to the coming into force of this Act in 
that State. 
2

Clause 1 provides for the short title of the Bill as “the Motor  Vehicles 
(Amendment) Act, 2016”, and seeks to provide for the commencement of the 
provisions of the Bill from such date as may be notified by the Central Government 
and different dates may be appointed for different States for different provisions of 
the Bill. 
Clause 2 reads 
9. In the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in 
section 2, 
(i) for clause (1), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
'(1) "adapted vehicle" means a motor vehicle either 
specially designed and constructed, or to which alterations 
have been made under sub -section (2) of section 52, for 
the use of a person suffering from any physical defect or 
disability, and used solely by or for such person; 
(1A) "aggregator" means a digital intermediary or market place for a 
passenger to connect with a driver for the purpose of transportation; 
(1B) "area" in relation to any provision of this Act, means such area as 
the State Government may, having regard to the requirements of that 
provision, specify by notification in the Official Gazette;‟;  
(ii) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
'(4A) "community service" means an unpaid work which a person is 
required to perform as a punishment for an offence committed under this 
Act;' ; 
(iii) after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
'(9A) "driver refresher training course" means the course referred   to in
   
sub-section (2A) of section 19;' 
(iv) after clause (12), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
'(12A) "golden hour" means the time period lasting one hour following a 
traumatic injury during which there is highest likelihood of preventing death 
by providing prompt medical care;   
(v) clause (18) shall be omitted; 
(vi) in clause (24), for the words "invalid carriage", the words "adapted 
vehicle" shall be substituted; 
(vii) in clause (26), for the words "invalid carriage", the words "adapted vehicle" 
shall be substituted;   
(viii) after clause (38), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: 
3

— '(38A) "scheme" means a scheme framed under this Act;' 
(ix) after clause (42), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
„(43A) "testing agency" means any entity designated as a testing agency 
under section 110B;'   
(x) in clause (49), after the word 'rests', the words 'or moves' shall be inserted. 
Clause 2 seeks to amend section 2 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988(Act) relating to 
definitions of certain expressions used in the Act such as, „medium passenger motor 
vehicle‟, „motor car‟ and „weight‟ and to insert some new definitions in section 2, such 
as, „adapted vehicle‟,  „aggregator‟, „community service‟, „driver refresher training 
course‟, „golden hour‟, „scheme‟ and „testing agency‟. 
Clause 3 reads 
10. After section 2A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"2B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and  subject  to  such 
conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government, in order to promote 
innovation and research and development in the fields of vehicular engineering,
  mechanically propelled vehicles and transportation in general, the Central 
Government may exempt certain types of mechanically propelled vehicles from the 
application of the provisions of this Act." . 
Clause 3 seeks to insert a new section 2B in the Act to provide flexibility to the Central 
Government to exempt new technologies, inventions or innovations from the provisions 
of the principal Act so as to give such technologies and innovations. 
11 The Committee observes that the insertion of Clause 2B to include new 
technologies, inventions and innovations in the Motor Vehicle Sector to develop 
and update itself with the modern technologies is a welcome step.  Modern 
vehicular engineering will help in checking harmful emissions from the vehicles 
and save the ecosystem.  
12. Clause 4 reads in section 8 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "the licensing authority having jurisdiction
   
in the area", the words "any of the licensing authority in the State" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "and with such fee", the words "with 
such fee and submit in such manner, including by electronic means" 
shall be substituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (3),— 
(a) after the word "application", the words "to drive a  transport 
vehicle  made" shall be inserted; 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted; 
(iv)  in sub-section (4), in the proviso, for the words "invalid 
4

carriage", the words "adapted vehicle" shall be  substituted; 
(v) in sub-section (5), for the words "passes to the satisfaction of 
the licensing authority such test" the words "satisfies such 
conditions" shall be   substituted; 
(vi) in sub-section (6), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
"Provided further that a licencing authority may issue a learner's licence 
in electronic form and such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government." 
Clause 4 seeks to amend section 8 of the Act to simplify the procedure for obtaining a 
learner‟s licence. It seeks to enable an applicant to apply to any licensing authority in 
the State, to use online means to submit the application, fee and other documents, and 
allow the government flexibility in determining the eligibility to obtain a learner‟s licence. 
It also seeks to provide for the issue of a learner‟s licence in electronic form. 
13. The State of Karnataka raised the issue about amendment of Section 8 by 
Clause 4 which provides the procedure for obtaining learner's license.  It seeks to 
enable an applicant to apply to any licensing authority in the State to use online means 
to submit the application, the fee and other documents and allow the Government the  
flexibility in determining the eligibility to obtain a learner's license.  The State is 
concerned that the issuance of learners license in electronic form without testing his 
knowledge about driving license is not in favour of public interest.  This facil ity will be 
misused. 
14. The Ministry has informed that this issue of learners' license online is to 
enable the citizens of the country to get license in an easier way and also to avoid 
rush at the RTOs. 
15. The Committee was informed by  many States‟ repr esentatives that filling 
up of online application and uploading of document need to be followed up by the 
appropriate written test prescribed by the individual concerned at the identified 
office premises.  But the Committee feels that this amendment is a w elcome step 
which will enable speedy submission of application form and documents.  
Learners license is not an address proof, the driving license is issued only after  
proper verification. The Committee is afraid that online procedure of obtaining 
learning license will be misused and people may get learner's driving license filling 
up the wrong information online.  The Committee recommends that this section 
may be modifi ed further to get rid off such possibilities if any, of misusing this 
facility by the miscreants.  
16. Clause 5 reads in section 9 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "the licensing authority having 
jurisdiction in the area", the words "any of the licensing authority in the State" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub -section ( 3), for the second proviso, the following proviso 
5

shall be substituted, namely:— 
 "Provided further that a driving licence for driving an adapted vehicle 
may be issued to the applicant, if the licensing authority is satisfied 
that he is fit to drive such motor vehicle."; 
(iii) in sub -section ( 4), the words "such minimum educational 
qualification as may be prescribed by the Central Government and" shall be 
omitted; 
  (iv) in sub-section (5), in the proviso, after the words "last such test", the 
words and figures "and such applicant shall be required to complete a remedial 
driver training course from any school or establishment under section 12" 
shall be inserted. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 9 of the Act to simplify the procedure for the grant of a 
driving licence. It seeks to enable an applicant to apply to any licensing authority in the 
State, removes the requirement for minimum educational qualification as long as the 
applicant holds a certificate from a driver training school or establishment. It also seeks 
to provide that an applicant who fails the test of competence repeatedly shall be 
required to undergo a remedial  driver training course before such applicant can apply 
again. 
17. The State of Kerala has submitted before the Committee that in Clause 5 
amending S.9 (4) -  in the original Act, there is a provision for minimum educational 
qualification for grant of driving license and it can be retained in the Bill. 
18. One stakeholder put some important points regarding strengthening the 
licensing system and suggested that Central Government should prescribe minimum 
period for basic training.  Along with driving certificate issued by a school or 
establishment, applicant shall undergo mandatory test of competence at the licensing 
centre.  Bill should empower Central Government to formulate guidelines for 
accreditation, monitoring and moderation of schools and establishments.  State 
Governments should formulate guidelines  for regulation of training fees and license 
fees. 
19. In response, the Ministry has replied that the training imparted by a school or 
establishment referred to in S.12 shall ensure that the driver can read signs and perform  
logistical duty such as mainte nance of driver logs, inspection of trucks and trailers, 
submission of pre -trip and post -trip records, determination of discrepancies in 
paperwork, effective communication to report safety hazards.   
20. Moreover, under sub -Section (4) of S.9  schools and establishments which are 
providing vocational training and skilling facilities are subject to regulatory oversight.  
Hence, the training imparted will be of high quality covering all aspects of driving a 
particular type of motor vehicle. The focus is not m erely on the educational 
qualifications but on better driving skills. 
21. The Ministry has in their written submission said that under Section 9, Central 
Government has the power to prescribe test of competence. 
6

22 The Committee notes that the Govt. want t o do away with minimum 
educational qualifications prescribed for issuing a driving license.  
23. The Committee feels that the person should be literate enough to read, 
write and understand the road signage.  The Committee is of the view that Central 
Govt. should prescribe a mandatory test of competence for a new license holder 
under Section 9 of the Motor Vehicle Act.  The competency test prescribed should 
be uniform throughout India and the State Governments should not be allowed to  
further dilute the prescribed competency test criteria.  
24. Clause 6 reads  in section 10 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), in 
clause (c), for the words "invalid carriage", the words "adapted vehicle" shall 
be substituted. 
Clause 6 seeks to amend section 10 of the Act to replace the term „invalid 
carriage‟ with the term „adapted vehicle‟. 
25. The Committee agrees with the provision of this Clause to replace the 
words 'invalid carriage' with adapted vehicle".  Because people who are suffering 
from physical disabilities may  like to have  their vehicle modified which may suit 
to their requirements. 
26. Clause 7 reads  in section 11 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), for 
the words  "the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area", the words 
"any licensing authority in the State" shall be substituted. 
Clause 7 seeks to amend section 11 of the Act so as to allow a licence 
holder to apply to any licensing authority in the State for the addition of 
other classes or descriptions of motor  vehicles to his or her driving 
licence. 
27. The State of Karnataka has expressed its reservation  against clause 7 which 
seeks to amend Section 11 of the Act so as to allow a license holder to apply to any 
licensing authority in the State for the addition of other classes or desc riptions of motor 
vehicles to his/her driving license and have also stated that if amendment to Section 11 
is promulgated section 28 (2) (a) and s. 65 (2) (b) are required to be amended after the 
implementation of Saarthi-IV and Vahan-IV for central repository. 
28. The Committee notes that India is a fast moving country towards 
digitization and information technology revolutions. Internet has removed all sorts 
of geographical boundaries and enables the citizens to operate the network from 
anywhere in the co untry. The Government should adopt their own mechanism to 
check the identity proof and veracity of other documents physically before issuing 
the driving license. 
29. The Committee agrees with the substitution of words "the licensing 
authority having jurisdiction in area" with the words  "any licensing authority in 
the State". Every person has a residence/identity proof where he stays and he may 
get the driving license from any licensing authority in the State at this age of 
Internet.  The Committee strongly  feels that giving a license  to a person after 
7

ascertaining his identity from anywhere in the State will not only save his time and 
money but also remove the existing bottleneck.  The Committee, therefore,  
recommends that the existing words “the licensing authority having jurisdiction in 
the area” must be substituted with the word “any licensing authority in the State”. 
30. Clause 8 reads in section 12 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
  "(5) Notwithstanding  anything contained in any other provision,   
where any school or establishment has been accredited by a body notified 
by the Central Government under any other law for the time being in force, 
any person who has successfully completed a training module at such school 
or establishment covering a particular type of motor vehicle shall be eligible 
to obtain a driving licence for such type of motor vehicle. 
(6) The curriculum of the training module referred to sub -section (5) 
shall be such a s may be prescribed by the Central Government and the 
Central Government may make rules for the regulation of such schools or 
establishments.". 
Clause 8 seeks to amend section 12 of the Act to allow applicants who 
have obtained specialized training that has been devised by the Central 
Government, from accredited schools or establishments, to drive without 
being required to meet other requirements e.g. driving with  light motor 
vehicle for at least one year before being granted a learner‟s licence to 
drive a transport vehicle. 
31. Institute of Public Health submitted that there is a need for improvement in the 
current driving license system.  Another stakeholder  suggested to omit sub section 5 of 
Section 12 which allows applicants to obtain licence of a cert ain category of vehicles 
based on a certificate from an established school -such provision can lead to issuance of 
an HMV licence to a fresh applicant, without any test of competence, who is 
theoretically trained but lacks practical experience of driving an y kind of motor vehicle 
on the road prior to obtaining the HMV licence.  There is room for establishment, not 
adequately regulated, to issue certificates of training. 
32. State of West Bengal raised the query that proposed S.12 (5) envisages 
important role for driver training schools accredited by a body notified by the Central 
Government.  It is not clear why accreditation by a body notified by the State 
Government will not receive equal and concurrent authority.  Formation of training 
modules, notification and accreditation of driver training  schools should remain under 
the jurisdiction of State. 
33. The Ministry responded that under Section 12 as amended, the Central 
Government may prescribe the curriculum for training of drivers.  Such curriculum will 
improve driver training and thus strengthen road safety.  The Ministry further submitted 
that under sub-section (5) the applicant would be required to undertake training from an 
accredited establishment.  If an establishment is found to issue certificate of  training 
8

without providing the training as mandated in the curriculum prescribed by the Central 
Government or violates rules and regulations made by the Central Government under 
sub-section (6), then such establishment shall lose its accreditation.  
34. The curriculum prescribed by the Central Government shall provide adequate 
training, including practical training as may be prescribed, to ensure that applicants are 
able to drive HMVs on roads in a safe manner. 
35. The provision is expected to address the severe national shortage of competent 
long haul HMV drivers and thus improve logistics efficiency in the country. 
36. In response, the Ministry has submitted that the amendment Bill does not dilute 
the authority of the State Government to license and regulate driver training school 
under S.12.  This is to cover the institutions created under skill Development 
Programme using approved qualification curriculum.  
37. The Committee observes that if a person has already undergone a 
specialized training prescribed by the Central Government then he may be given 
exemption from meeting other requirements viz. condition of driving o f light 
motor vehicle for one year before granting a license to drive transport vehicle. 
38. The Committee notes the  assurance given by the Central Government that 
the Clause does not dilute the authority of the State Governments to issue license 
and regulate driving schools.  The Committee also notes that India is a big country 
with varying geographical conditions necessitating rules and regulations required 
to suit the local conditions which can be better addressed by the concerned State 
Governments.  Therefore, Committee recommends that every step should be made 
to strengthen the State Governments in regulating driving schools.  
39. Clause 9 reads n section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
 (i) in clause (a),— 
(A) for the words "three years", the words "five years" shall be 
substituted; 
(B) in the proviso, for the portion beginning with the words "one year" and 
ending with the word "and" the words "three years and renewal thereof shall be 
subject to such conditions as the Central Government may  prescribe; and", shall be  
substituted; 
(ii)  for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(b) in the case of any other licence, subject to such conditions as the 
Central Government may prescribe, if the person obtaining the licence, 
either originally or on renewal thereof,— 
(i) has not attained the age of thirty years on the date of   issue or,  
renewal thereof, be effective until the date on which such person 
attains the age of forty years; or 
(ii) has attained the age of thirty years but has not attained the 
9

age of fifty years on the date of issue or, renewal thereof, be effective 
for  a 
period of ten years from the date of such issue or renewal; or   
(iii) has attained the age of fifty years but has not attained the age 
of fifty-five years on the date of issue or, renewal thereof, be effective 
until the date on which such person attains the age of sixty years; or 
(iv) has attained the age of fifty-five years on the date of issue or as 
the case may be, renewal thereof, be effective for a period of  five years 
from the date of such issue or renewal."; 
(iii) the proviso shall be omitted. 
Clause 9 seeks to amend section 14 of the Act to increase the length of 
time for which a driving licence shall remain valid. 
40. The State of Kerala in their submission before the Committee stated that 
amending Section 14(2) under Clause 9 will create confusion regarding the period of 
validity of license. 
41. The Ministry has replied that this provision exten ds the validity of licenses and 
will reduce the office work and is citizen friendly. 
42. The Committee is happy to note that the Bill seeks to amend section 14(2) 
of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 which will increase the period from 3 years to 5 
years and it has further categorized for the renewal of the driving license in the 
age group of 30s, 40s and 50s.  The Committee feels it's a welcome step. 
43. Clause 10 reads in section 15 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), in the first proviso, for the words "more than thirty days", 
the words "either six months prior to date of its expiry or within six months" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words "thirty days", the words "six months" 
shall be  substituted; and 
(iii) in sub-section (4),— 
(a) for the words "thirty days", the words "six months" shall be substituted; and 
(b) in the second proviso for the words "five years after the driving licence has 
ceased to be effective, the licensing authority may", the words "six months 
after the driving licence has ceased to be effective, the licence authority  
shall" shall be substituted. 
Clause 10 seeks to amend section 15 of the Act to allow a licence holder to apply for 
renewal of licence any time in a window of six months before expiry of licence and six 
months after. It also seeks to provide that any applicant who attempt to renew his or 
her driving licence  more than six months after expiry shall have to undergo a test of 
competence. 
10

44. The State of Kerala in their submission added that in  Clause 10 amending 
Section 15(4), the proposed period of 'six months' may be enhanced to at least 2 years.  
Since the situation in Kerala is different from other States, a large number of people are 
working abroad and they visit the State once in 2 or 3 years only.  At present they get 5 
years to renew their license but in the proposed amendment,  they will get only 6 
months. 
45. The Ministry has replied that this provision extends the renewal to be perm itted 
to six months as against present provision of one month before or after the expiry. 
Hence, it is beneficial provision to citizens of India. 
46. The Committee appreciates the move taken by the Ministry to increase the 
time period of renewal of driving  license before and after its expiry date.  The 
Committee feels that this change will help those people who go abroad and return 
after a gap of substantial period.  The Committee further recommends that 
provision for renewal of license for those people who  go abroad for longer period 
may get some extra relief i.e. time-period of one year before and after the expiry of 
the license for getting their license renewed. 
47. Clause 11 read in section 19 of the principal Act,— 
(iv) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:—  
  "(1A) Where a licence has been forwarded to the licensing authority under 
sub-section (4) of section 206, the licensing authority, if satisfied, after giving 
the holder of the driving licence an opportunity of being heard, either discharge 
the holder of a driving licence or, it may for detailed reasons recorded in writing, 
make an order disqualifying such person from holding or obtaining any licence to 
drive all or any class or description of vehicles specified in the licence— 
(a) for a first offence, for a period of three months; 
(b) for a second or subsequent offence, with revocation of the driving   
licence of such person: 
 Provided that where a driving licence is revoked under this section, the name of 
the holder of such driving licence may be placed in the public domain in such  
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government."; 
(v) in sub-section (2),—   
 
(a) after the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (1)", the words, 
brackets, figure and letter "or sub-section (1A)" shall be inserted; 
(b) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, 
namely:—  
 "Provided that the driving licence shall be returned to the holder at   
the  end of the period of disqualification only if he successfully 
completes the driver refresher training course."; 
(vi) after sub-section (2) the following such sections shall be inserted, 
11

namely:—  
 "(2A) The licence holder whose licence has been suspended shall 
undergo the  driver refresher training course from a school or 
establishment licenced and  regulated under section 12 or such other 
agency, as may be notified by the Central Government. 
(2B) The nature, syllabus and duration of the driver refresher 
training course shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.”; 
(vii) in sub-section (3) after the word, brackets and figure "sub-section 
(1)", the 
 words, brackets, figure and letter "or sub-section (1A)" shall be inserted. 
Clause 11 seeks to amend section 19 of the Act to provide for disqualification from 
holding driving licence and revocation of driving licence of drivers found to commit 
certain offence, such as, jumping red lights, driving under the influence of alcohol and 
drugs, driving licence using a mobile phone, driving in the wrong way etc. It also seeks 
to provide that  such licence holders shall be required to complete a driver refresher 
training course, as prescribed by the Central Government. 
 
48. Regarding amendment of Section 19 the Ministry  has replied that the licensing 
authority shall have the power to disqualify a person from driving, if he or she has 
committed certain offences.  For repeat offences, the driving license can be revoked.  
The section also provides for driver refresher training courses to enable drivers to 
unlearn bad driving habits.  T he Ministry further says that Bill under Section 19 
provides for driver refresher training courses for drivers found to indulge in bad driving 
behavior such as jumping red lights, using mobile phones while driving, dangerous 
driving etc.  This will ensure good driving behavior from drivers of transport vehicles. 
49. The Committee is of the view that wrong driving of motor vehicles is  
dangerous not only for the occupants of the vehicle but it may also affect adversely 
the safety of other persons or vehicles  on the road and brings others‟ lives under 
peril.  The Committee feels that strong penal deterrence is necessary to ward off 
wrong doers from creating havoc on the road. 
50. Clause 12 reads After section 25 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"25A. (1) The Central Government shall maintain a National Register of 
Driving Licences in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
  (2) All State Registers of Driving Licences shall be subsumed under the 
National Register of Driving Licences by a date to be notified by the Central 
Government. 
(3) No driving licence issued, or renewed, under this Act shall be valid 
unless it has been issued a unique driving licence number under the National 
Register of Driving Licences. 
12

  (4) All State Governments and licensing authorities under this Act shall 
transmit all information including contained data in the State Register of 
Driving Licences  in such  form and manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
(5) The State Governments shall be entitled to access the National 
Register and update their records in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.”. 
 Clause 12 seeks to insert a new section 25A in the Act to establish a 
National Register of Driving Licences containing data on all driving 
licences issued throughout India and facilitate  the grant of licences in a 
transparent and efficient manner. It also seeks to enable the State 
Governments to transmit all information contained in the State Register 
of Driving Licences  to the Central Government and to update the 
National Register in a manner to be prescribed  by the Central 
Government. It also seeks to subsume all State Registers into the National 
Register by a date to be notified by the Central Government. 
 
51. A stakeholder suggested that the National register of driving licenses should 
provide for mandatory use of biometric information to reduce the likelihood of a driver 
obtaining multiple licenses with false information.  The use of biometric  information 
can keep a check on the duplicity of licenses.  
52. On this, the Ministry has replied that Sub -section (1) of the proposed section 
25A states that the Central Government shall maintain the National Register of Driving 
Licenses in a form and manner that it may prescribe. 
53. The Central Government may provide for the use of biometric information 
through rules made under this provision, if States request for such a provision. 
54. The Ministry has further added that licensing system all over the c ountry is 
becoming online and the data is directly getting recorded into the National Register.  
States have already adopted the VAHAN and SARATHI applications.  So data is being 
shared and if, there is change, it gets reflected. 
55. The Committee is not a ware of the factual provision so far about the 
National Register of Driving Licenses.  The Committee feels that before 
implementing the proposed changes at national level, every State has to be 
electronically equipped with the software of required informat ion.  The 
Committee, while discussing with various States on the matter, found that many 
States are asking for more time i.e., 2-3 years for making their offices 
electronically equipped.  The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the 
Ministry to incorpo rate the instant section.  But, at the same time recommends 
that the Ministry should extend help viz.  financial, logistics and trained 
manpower to various States (when States ask for)  to implement this section 
effectively.   
13

56. The Committee hope that t he modalities to be prescribed by the Central 
Government to update the National Register would be worked out by the  Central 
Government in consultation with the States. 
57.  In section 26 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "the following particulars, namely", 
the words "particulars, including" shall be substituted; 
(ii) sub-section (2), shall be omitted. 
Clause 13 seeks to amend section 26 of the Act to omit the requirement on the part of the 
State Government to supply the Central Government with a copy of the State Register of 
Driving Licences. 
58. Clause 14 says in section 27 of the principal Act,— 
 (i) after clause (d) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(da) the form and manner in which a licensing authority may 
issue a learner's licence under sub-section (6) of section 8;" 
(ii) after clause (j) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ja) the curriculum of training modules and the regulation of 
schools and 
 establishments under sub-section (6) of section 12; 
(jb) the conditions for the renewal of licence to drive transport 
vehicles carrying goods of dangerous or hazardous nature and other 
motor vehicles under clause ( a) and clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 14;"; 
(iii) after clause (n) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 "(na) the manner of placing in the public domain of the name of the licence holder 
as referred to in sub-section (1A) of section 19; 
(nb) providing for the nature, syllabus and duration of the driver 
refresher training course as referred to in sub-section (2B) of section 19; 
(iv) after clause (o), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—  
"(oa) all or any of the matters referred to in section 25A;”; 
(v) in clause (p), after the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (1)", 
the words brackets and figure "and sub-section (2)" shall be inserted. 
Clause 14 seeks to amend section 27 of the Act in consequence of the 
amendments proposed in Chapter II of the Act. 
59. The Committee hopes that the curriculum of training modules, regulation 
of schools and establishments to be set up in the States and the training modules 
itself should be formulated in consultation with the State Governments.  The 
14

Committee recommends that  appropriate guidelines may be formulated to 
transport the goods of hazardous and  dangerous nature and also for specialized 
training programme for those drivers who are involved in driving of heavy 
oversized vehicles. 
60. The Committee recommends that the re should be a proper training by the 
Government for those drivers who are involved in driving heavy vehicles (Mega 
Vehicles) and also carrying goods of hazardous and dangerous nature. 
61. Clause 15 says In  section 40 of the principal Act, for the words "a registering 
authority", the words "any registering authority in the State" shall be substituted.  
 Clause 15 seeks to amend section 40 of the Act to allow an owner to register his 
motor vehicle by making an application to any registering authority in the State. 
62. The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Ministry and hope 
that in a digitized world the geographical limits should not be imposed on citizens. 
63. Clause 16 says in section 41 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 "Provided further that in the case of a new motor vehicle, the application for  
registration in the State shall be made by the dealer of such motor vehicle, if the new 
motor vehicle is being registered in the same State in which the dealer is situated.";  
(ii) in sub-section (3),— 
(a)   for the words "to the owner of  a  motor  vehicle  
registered  by  it  a certificate  of registration", the words "a 
certificate of registration in the name of the owner" shall be  
substituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (6), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— "Provided that in case of a 
new motor vehicle, the application for the 
registration of which was made under the second proviso to sub-
section    (1), 
such motor vehicle shall not be delivered to the owner until  
such registration   
mark is displayed on the motor vehicle in such form and 
manner as may prescribed by the Central Government."; 
(iv) in sub-section (7),— 
(a) the words "other than a transport vehicle" shall be 
omitted; and 
(b) after the words " date of issue of such certificate", the 
words "or for   
15

such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government" 
shall be inserted; 
(v) in sub-section (8), the words "other than a transport vehicle", 
shall be omitted; 
(vi) in sub-section (10),— 
(a) for the words "for a period of five years", the words " for 
such period, 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government" shall be 
substituted;   
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Provided that the Central Government may 
prescribe different period of renewal for different 
types of motor vehicles."; 
(vii) in sub-section (11),— 
(a) for the words and figures " section 177, such amount  
not exceeding   
one hundred", the words, brackets, figures and letter " sub-
section (1) of section 192B, such amount not exceeding 
five thousand" shall be substituted; and 
(b) in the proviso, for the word and figures "section 
177", the words brackets, figures and letter "sub-section 
(1) of section 192B" shall be substituted; 
(viii)   after sub-section (11), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"(11A) If a dealer fails to make an application under the second 
proviso to sub-section (1), the registering authority may, having regard to 
the circumstances of the case, require the dealer to pay, in lieu of any 
action that may be taken 
 against him under sub-section (2) of section 192B, such amount not 
exceeding fifteen thousand rupees as may be prescribed under sub -
section (13): 
Provided that an action under sub-section (2) of section 192B shall be 
taken against the dealer where the dealer fails to pay the said amount."; 
(ix) for sub-section (12), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
  "(12) Where the owner or the dealer has paid the amount under 
sub- section (11) or sub-section (11A), as the case may be, no action 
16

shall be taken against  him under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of 
section 192B, as the case may be."; 
(x) for sub-section (13), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
  "(13) For the purposes of sub -section (11)  and sub -section    
(11A), the State  Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of  delay on the part of such owner or dealer in 
making an application under sub- section (1) or sub-section (8), as the 
case may be.". 
Clause 16 seeks to amend section 41 of the Act to provide for the 
registration of new motor vehicles by dealers and provide for penalties 
for dealers who fail to register a new motor vehicle. It also seeks to 
provide that new motor vehicles shall be delivered to the customers only 
after the affixation of the registration mark. It also seeks to empower the 
Central Government to prescribe the validity of a registration certificate 
for different classes of motor vehicles. 
 
64. The State of Karnataka submitted before the Committee that the Registering 
Authorities of the Transport Department in the State who are public servants, whose 
orders are challengeable under section 57 dealing with appeals of the Act, and 
therefore, these o fficers are Authorities within the meaning of the Act and also under 
Article 12 of the Constitution, and they are accountable to the accuracies of the 
registered documents.  Government authorities, that is, RTOs are accountable for any 
malfunctioning; empo wering vehicle dealers who have a profit motive of promoting 
their sales, they may cheat the Government or customers by violating the rules and 
regulations.  As per section 66 of the proposed Act, every transport vehicle needs 
permit for its operation in a ny public place.  Further, for the purpose of levy of tax in 
respect of transport vehicle, inspection by the Registering Authority is mandatory since 
taxation is different for different classes of transport vehicles.  For example, tax on 
floor area, tax on  sitting capacity, tax on gross combination weight, gross vehicle 
weight etc.  Hence, empowering the dealer as Registering Authorities may lead to 
misuse of power and fraudulent issue of RCs which is not in public interest. 
65. The Committee notes that a n umber of State Governments are unhappy 
with the functioning of vehicle dealers as they are under -invoicing, overcharging 
customers on logistics/handling charges, taking extra insurance premiums and 
indulging in other malpractices.  The Committee also notes  that the vehicle dealer 
is an agent of the manufacturer and shall not be made an instrumentality of the 
Government to perform statutory functions and quasi judicial powers of 
registering authority.  At the same time the Committee notes that RTOs 
throughout the country are overburdened and understaffed.  Moreover, they are a 
den of corruption.  The Committee, therefore, appreciates that the delegation of 
powers to dealers for registration of vehicles may alleviate a lot many problems of 
17

the vehicle owners.  However, the Committee recommends that strict guidelines 
may be prescribed for the functioning of the vehicle dealers.  The Committee also 
recommends that the registration of vehicle by dealers may be made optional to 
the States depending on the State‟s specific requirements.  
66. Clause 17 says -17.For section 43 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“43. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 40, the owner of a 
motor vehicle  may apply to any registering authority or other authority as 
may be prescribed by the State Government to have the motor vehicle 
temporarily registered and such authority  shall issue a temporary certificate 
of registration and temporary registration mark in accordance with such rules 
as may be made by the Central Government”. 
 
Clause 17 seeks to amend section 43 of the Act to enable the Central Government 
to make  rules for the issue of temporary certificates of registration and temporary 
registration marks  and it provides for an application for temporary registration to be 
made to a registering authority or any other authority as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 
67. West Bengal deposed before the Committee that proposed amendment to S.43 
authorising Central Government to  frame rules for temporary registration is also 
lopsided. State Government should also have power to frame such rules and enforce 
them. 
68. The Ministry has replied that temporarily registered motor vehicles may be 
transported across State boundaries.  Hen ce uniform rules for the entire country are 
required to be framed by the Central Government. 
69. The Committee notes the comments of the Government. The Committee 
also recommends that the State governments should be permitted to issue 
temporary registration certificate which can be applicable within the State.  The 
Committee is of the view that there should be a time limit of just one month for 
validity of a temporary registration certificate and it should be uniform 
throughout India. 
70. Clause 18 says For  section 44 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
"44.(1) Subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in this behalf, a motor vehicle sold by an authorised 
dealer shall not 
 require production before a registering authority for the purposes of 
registration for the first time. 
(2) Subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the State 
Government, a person in whose name a certificate of registration has been issued 
18

shall not be required to produce  the vehicle registered or transferred before a 
register authority.". 
 Clause 18 seeks to amend section 44 of the Act to remove the requirement of the 
production of a motor vehicle before the registering authority at the tim e of 
registration. 
Clause 18 
71. One stakeholder suggested that amendment in section 44 is inappropriate. 
Provision should be made for appearance of buyer and seller before the registering 
authority. 
72. The Ministry has replied that this has been included as per the recommendations 
of the GoM, which were made after great deliberation on their part.  Some States like 
Delhi have successfully implemented similar process. 
73. This would reduce corruption and provide a much -needed relief to the 
customers.  This  also streamlines the process of registration and clamps down on the 
practice of using new vehicles in their unregistered state. 
74. The requirement of production of a new vehicle does not add any value to the 
entire process.  Rather this acts as a tool for harassment.  
75. The Committee notes that Delhi which is having the largest vehicular 
population is implementing the same scheme effectively.  However, the Committee 
was informed that Delhi has implemented the scheme because it has inadequate 
officers to manage the vehicle registration whereas in many other States they have 
required infrastructure to deal with the vehicle registration.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that this proposal in Clause 18 shall be made optional for 
the States to decide on the basis of the infrastructure and manpower available and 
the Committee further recommends  that it should not be made as mandatory to 
be followed by all the States. The Committee also recommends that it may be 
implemented in such a way that the regional and local needs are effectively 
addressed and the dealers may not be able to manipulate the system or vehicle 
configurations to suit their needs. 
76. Clause 19 says. in section 49 of the principal Act,— 
(i) sub-section (1), for the words "registering authority, to that other 
registering authority" the words "State, to any registering authority in that 
State" shall be substituted;  
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
  "(1A) The intimation under sub-section (1) may be sent to the 
appropriate registering authority in electronic form along with the 
electronic form of such documents, including proof of authentication 
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government."; 
(iii) in sub-section (2), for the words "one hundred rupees", the words 
"five 
19

 hundred rupees" shall be  substituted. 
Clause 19 seeks to amend section 49 of the Act to simplify the process for 
recording change of residence on registration certificate by means of online application 
process. It also seeks to enhance the penalty for failure to provide the new information in 
a timely manner. 
 
77. Some States and other private stakeholders strongly objected about the 
amendment to section 49 of the Act saying that it takes away the powers of officers  to 
receive fees via electronic mode unless so authorized by the State Government. 
78. The Ministry has replied that the amendment to section 49 merely enables 
payments to be made through the electronic mode. 
79. The Committee observes that the change in a ddress of vehicle owners is 
very common and it is the responsibility of the owner to intimate the authority in 
time.  But, in the new amendment States are not involved in substitution of the 
existing addresses.  The Committee recommends that the State Gove rnment may 
also be made part of the decision making body while making the final form of 
proof of authentication.  The Committee recommends that the Authority which 
originally registered the vehicle should be involved while making the correction 
also. 
80. Clause 20 says in section 52 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the second proviso, the following proviso 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“Provided further that the Central Government may prescribe 
specifications, conditions for approval, retrofitment and other related  
matters 
for the alteration of motor vehicles and in such cases, the warranty 
granted by  the 
manufacturer shall not be considered as void for  the  purposes  of  such 
alteration or retrofitment.”; 
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:—  
"(1A) A manufacturer of a motor vehicle shall on the direction 
issued by 
the Central Government, alter or retrofit safety equipment, or any other 
equipment   
in accordance with such standards and specifications as may be 
specified by the Central Government."; 
(iii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:—  
20

"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any 
person 
may, with the subsequent approval of the registering authority, alter or cause 
to   
be altered any vehicle owned by him to be converted into an adapted 
vehicle: 
Provided that such alteration complies with such conditions as 
may be imposed by the Central Government."; 
(iv) in sub-section (3), the words, brackets and figure "or by reason of 
replacement 
of its engine without such approval under sub-section (2)" shall be omitted. 
Clause 20 seeks to amend section 52 of the principal Act to allow owners to alter 
or retrofit equipment to their motor vehi cle and provides that the warranty granted by 
the manufacturer shall not be declared void when such alteration or retrofitment is 
done in accordance  with specifications laid down by the Central Government. It also 
empowers the Central Government to require  manufacturers to retrofit safety and 
emissions control equipment on motor vehicles. It also seeks to enable the conversion of 
a motor vehicle into an adapted vehicle for use by persons with disabilities. 
 
81. States and other stakeholders submitted before  the Committee that S.T.U.s will 
face problems since the amendment of section 52 has removed the exception for 
persons owning more than 10 transport vehicles under which they were allowed to 
exchange engines between such vehicles in the fleet. 
82. The Comm ittee feels that under Clause 20, to make alteration or retro 
fitment  in a vehicle should commensurate not only with the need of the owner but 
the attention may also be drawn to the effect of such changes on environment as 
well as traffic.  A vehicle owne r can change the fittings of his vehicle to suit his 
commercial need but at the same time changes carried out by the Vehicle owner 
should not play havoc on the road.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may give due care while formulating the rules for change or retrofitment in the 
vehicle.  The Committee welcomes if the Ministry allows the person to get his 
vehicle converted into adapted vehicle as per his requirement on medical ground.  
83. Clause 21 in section 55 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(5A) If any registering authority or other prescribed authority has reasons to 
believe that any motor vehicle within its jurisdiction has been used in the 
commission of an offence punishable under section 199A, the authority may, after 
giving the owner an  opportunity of making a representation in writing, cancel the 
certificate of registration of the vehicle for a period of one year: 
21

Provided that the owner of the motor vehicle may apply for fresh 
registration in accordance with the provisions of section 40 and section 
41." 
Clause 21 seeks to amend section 55 of the Act to provide for the cancellation of 
the registration of a motor vehicle which has been used by a juvenile in contravention 
of the provisions of the principal Act. 
84. The Committee observes that the proposed amendment is a step in  right 
direction.  It discourages the owner to hand over  their vehicle to an unauthorized 
person who is not supposed to drive the vehicle.  Such person may cause accident 
harming others‟ life and property besides committing an offence which is 
punishable under S.199-A. 
85. Clause 22 says in section 56 of the principal Act,—   
(i) in sub-section (1), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 "Provided further that no certificate of fitness shall be granted to a vehicle, after 
the 1st day of October, 2018, unless such vehicle has been tested at an automated 
testing station.";  
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:—  
"(2) The "authorised testing station" referred to in sub-section (1) means 
any facility, including automated testing facilities, authorised by the State 
Government, where fitness testing may be conducted in accordance with   the 
rules made by the Central Government for recognition, regulation and control of 
such  stations."; 
(iii) in sub-section (4), for the proviso, the following provisos 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
"Provided that no such cancellation  shall  be  made  by  the  
prescribed authority unless,—   
(a) such prescribed authority holds such technical 
qualification as may be prescribed by the Central Government 
and where the  prescribed authority does not hold the technical 
qualification, such cancellation is made  on the basis of the report 
of an officer having such qualification, and 
(b) the reasons recorded in writing cancelling a 
certificate of fitness are confirmed by an authorised testing 
station chosen by the owner of the vehicle whose certificate of 
fitness is sought to be cancelled: 
Provided further that if the cancellation is confirmed by the 
authorised testing station, the cost of undertaking the test shall be 
borne by the owner of the vehicle being tested and in the alternative by 
the prescribed authority."; 
22

(iv) after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
  "(6) All transport vehicles with a valid certificate of fitness issued 
under this section shall carry, on their bodies, in a clear and visible 
manner such distinguishing  mark as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
(7) Subject to such conditions as the Central Government may 
prescribe, the provisions of  this section may be extended to non -
transport vehicles.". 
 Clause 22 seeks to amend section 56 of the Act to provide for automated testing 
facilities at authorized testing stations for grant of certificates of fitness to motor 
vehicles and to ensure that no certificate of fitness shall be granted after October 1 
2018 unless the motor vehicle is tested at such automated testing facilities. It also 
empowers the Central Government to direct other motor vehicles, in addition to transport 
vehicles, to carry certificates of fitness. It also seeks to provide that transport vehicles 
with valid certificates of fitness shall  carry clear visible distinguishable marks on their 
bodies. 
 
86. It was submitted before the Committee that the move to amend section 56 of the 
Act to require all vehicles, transport and non -transport, to carry certificates of fitness is 
unwarranted since non -transport vehicles are engaged in public service.  Moreover, 
sub-section (2) of the amended provision allows the owner of a vehicle to choos e the 
testing station of his choice when his vehicle is found to be non -compliant with fitness 
standards.  This defeats the purpose of inspecting the vehicle for reasons of road safety. 
87. The Ministry has replied that the requirement of testing at automa ted testing 
stations is to ensure objectivity in the fitness certification and to reduce corruption. 
88. These testing stations have to be authorized by the State Government. 
89. Non-transport vehicles are not mandated to undergo fitness testing.  Only an 
enabling provision has been provided and early implementation would help the cause of 
road safety. 
90. The Committee after hearing various States and other stake holders on the 
subject came to the conclusion that cut off date for implementing the testing f or 
vehicles from authorized testing stations w.e.f. 1 st October, 2018 is not acceptable 
to many States.  The States have requested the Committee to pursue their request 
to the Ministry to extend the date for a further period.  Many of the States have 
submitted to the Committee that they may not be ready with the testing stations 
by October, 2018.  The representative of the State of Uttar Pradesh submitted to 
the Committee that entire State has just one automated testing station. The 
Committee understands th at every State has its own problems to deal with and it 
will certainly take time to switch over to automated testing stations.  The 
Committee recommends that Ministry may take States into confidence to 
implement this procedure when they get automated stati ons installed in sufficient 
23

number in each of the RTOs in their respective States in a fixed time -frame.  The 
Committee notes that the idea is good but its implementation should be deferred 
till such time all the States are ready with adequate numbers of t esting stations.  
The Central Govt. may, therefore, notify a suitable date (which may even be 
different for different States) by Executive Orders by which a State may enforce  
these provisions. 
91. The Committee is surprised to see Clause 7 of the proposed  amendment in 
Section 56 as it is saying that provision of this Section may be extended to non -
transport vehicles also. Use of non -transport vehicles is quite different from the 
use of transport vehicles.  The same Rule may not be applied to non -transport 
vehicle also.  The Committee thinks that it will create problems for public.  The 
Committee accordingly recommends the deletion of Sub Clause 7. 
92. Clause 23 says that in section 59 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(4) The Central Government may, having regard to the public safety, 
convenience, protection of the environment and the objects of this Act, 
make rules prescribing the manner of recycling of motor vehicles and parts 
thereof which have 
 exceeded their life.". 
Clause 23 seeks to amend section 59 of the Act to enable the Central Government 
to make rules for the recycling of motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts at the end of 
their life. 
93. The Committee feels that recycling of outdated and obsolete vehicle 
material by scientific method is the need of the hour.   The Committee 
recommends that the Central Government may formulate a comprehensive policy 
for recycling of outdated Motor Vehicles keeping in mind the protection of 
environment and public safety. 
94. Clause 24 says that after section 62 in the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"62A. (1) No registering authority shall register any motor vehicle that 
contravenes any rule made under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
110. 
  (2) No prescribed authority or authorised testing station shall issue a 
certificate of fitness under section 56 to any motor vehicle that contravenes 
any rule made under section 110. 
62B. (1) The Central Government shall maintain a National Register 
of Motor Vehicles in such form and manner as may be prescribed by it: 
  Provided that all State Registers of Motor Vehicles shall be subsumed 
under the National Register of Motor Vehicles by such date as may be 
notified in the Official Gazette by the Central Government. 
24

(2) No certificate of registration issued, or renewed, under this Act shall 
be valid unless  it has been issued a unique registration number under the 
National Register of 
 Motor Vehicles. 
(3) In order to maintain the National Register of Motor Vehicles, all 
State Governments and registering authorities under this Act shall transmit 
all information and data in the State Register of Motor Vehicles to the 
Central Government in such form  and manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
  (4) State Governments shall be able to access the National Register  of 
Motor Vehicles and update records in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made by the Central Government thereunder." 
Clause 24 seeks to insert new provisions, viz., sections 62A and 62B in the Act. 
Section 62A seeks to prohibit the registration of oversized vehicles and issuance of 
certificates of fitness to such vehicles. Section 62B seeks to establish the National 
Register of Motor Vehicles that shall contain data on all motor vehicles registered 
throughout India. It also provides that no certificate of registration shall be issued or 
renewed u nless it has been issued a unique registration number under the National 
Register. It also enable the State Governments to transmit information and data 
contained in the State Registers of Motor Vehicles to the National Register and update 
the National Register in accordance with rules as  may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
95. The State of Maharashtra raised the issue of  Unique Registration Number under 
the National Register and hoped that this should not be another additional number 
because the present system of giving registration numbers, which is in the case of 
Maharashtra is MH-04 and like that.  So the same number may also be considered and 
States should not have too many numbers for the same vehicle which will unnecessarily 
increase the  complication. Committee hopes that the Government will consider the 
concern of the States to protect their identity while formulating new scheme of 
numbers. 
96. The Committee hopes that the Government will consider the concern of the 
States and protect th eir identity while formulating new scheme of number for 
vehicles.  
 97. The Committee welcomes the step of maintaining a National Register of 
Motor Vehicles.  
98. Clause 25 says in section 63 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "the following particulars, 
namely", the words "particulars, including" shall be substituted; 
(ii)     for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
25

"(2) Each State Government shall supply the updated details of the State 
Register of Motor Vehicles to the Central Government in such form as the Central 
Government may prescribe."; 
(iii) after sub-section (3) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
 
"(4) All State Registers of Motor Vehicles shall be subsumed under the 
National Register of Motor Vehicles by such date as may be notified by the 
Central Government." 
Clause 25 seeks to amend section 63 of the Act to enable the Central Government 
to prescribe the form in which a State Government shall supply the updated details of the 
State Register of Motor Vehicles to the Central Government. 
99. The Committee notes the proposed amendment. 
100. Clause 26 says in section 64 of the principal Act,— 
(iv) after clause (d) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—   
"(da) providing for the period of validity of a certificate of registration 
under sub-section (7) of section 41;"; 
(v) after clause (e) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ea) the period of renewal of certificate of registration of different types 
of motor vehicles under sub-section (10) of section 41;";   
(vi) after clause (f) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(fa) the issue of temporary certificate of registration and temporary 
registration mark under section 43; 
(fb) the terms and conditions under which a motor vehicle sold by an 
authorized dealer shall not require production before a   registering authority
   
under sub-section (1) of section 44;"; 
(vii) after clause (j) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(ja) the form and manner for the electronic submission of the 
intimation of change of address, documents to be submitted along with 
such   intimation 
including proof of authentication under sub-section (1A) of section 49;";   
(viii) after clause (l) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(la) specifications, conditions for approval, retrofitment and other 
related matters for the alteration of motor vehicles under sub-section (1) of 
section 52; 
(lb) the conditions for the alteration of any motor vehicle into an adapted 
vehicle under sub-section (2) of section 52;";   
26

(ix) after clause (n) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(na) the distinguishing mark to be carried on the body of transport 
vehicles under sub-section (6) of section 56; 
(nb) the conditions under which the application of section 56 may be 
extended to non-transport vehicles under sub-section (7) of section 56;   
(nc) the recycling of motor vehicles and parts thereof which have 
exceeded their life under sub-section (4) of section 59;"; 
(x) after clause (o), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— (oa) all or any of the matters under in section 62B; 
"(ob) all or any of the matters under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of 
section 63;" 
Clause 26 seeks to amend section 64 of the Act in consequence of the 
amendments proposed in Chapter IV of the Act. 
101. The Committee has noted the insertions to be made under this Clause. 
102. Clause 27 says In section 66 of the principal Act,— 
(xi) in sub -section (1), after the third proviso, the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Provided also that where a transport vehicle has been issued any permit
  or permits, as well as a licence under this Act, such vehicle may be used 
either under the permit, or permits, so issued to it, or under such licence, at the 
discretion of the vehicle owner."; 
(xii) in sub-section (3), after clause ( p) the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
  "(q) to any transport vehicle having been issued a licence under a 
scheme under sub-section (3) of section 67 or sub-section (1) of section 
88A, or plying under  such orders as may be issued by the Central 
Government or by the State Government." 
Clause 27 seeks to amend section 66 of the Act to exempt transport vehicles, 
operating with a licence under a scheme for the transportation of goods and passengers 
made under the provisions of chapter V of the Act from acquiring a permit. It also 
allows a transport vehicle  which has been issued a permit or a licence under a scheme 
for the transportation of goods and passengers made under the provisions of chapter V 
of the Act to ply either under such permit or such licence at the discretion of the owner 
of the transport vehicle. 
 
103. Stakeholders have submitted that the amendment to section 66 of the Act which 
now exempts transport vehicles from the provisions of Chapter V with regard to 
permits seems to undermine the legitimacy and monopoly of State Transport 
27

Undertakings by allowing private sector players to start passenger transport services 
and thus this is against the public interest. 
104. The Ministry has replied that the amendment in section 66 has been made to 
augment the existing transport capacities in States without undermini ng the 
infrastructure already in place.  The powers are vested with the States to decide in the 
best interest of the citizens. 
105. The Committee notes the provision of this Clause. The Committee hopes 
that the Commercial vehicles may be exempted from taking permit if it is involved 
in promotion and development of last mile connectivity, rural transport, reducing 
traffic congestion, improving economy etc.  The Committee recommends that it 
should be specified in the Act itself that the vehicle involved in ca rrying out a 
special job may be exempted from taking permits.  The representatives of the 
State of Haryana informed the Committee that the present definition of the 
vehicles which can be utilized for last mile connectively is not including a large 
variety of vehicles used in Haryana. The Committee, therefore recommends that 
the definition may be widened to include the concerns of the State Governments. 
106. Clause 28 says after  section 66 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"66A. (1) The Central Government may develop a National 
Transportation Policy consistent with the objects of this Act in consultation 
with State Governments and other agencies with a view to— 
(i) establish a planning framework for passenger and goods transportation 
 within which transport bodies are to operate; 
(ii) establish a medium and long term planning framework for all 
forms of road transport, identify areas for the development of transport 
improvement infrastructure across India in consultation with the 
authorities and agencies related to ports, railways and aviation as well as 
with local and State level planning, 
 land holding and regulatory authorities for the delivery of an integrated 
multi- modal transport system; 
(iii) establish the framework of grant of permits and schemes; 
(iv) establish strategic policy for transport by road and its role as a 
link to other means of transport; 
  (v) identify strategic policies and specify priorities for the transport 
system that address current and future challenges; 
(vi) provide medium to long term strategic directions, priorities and 
actions; 
(vii) promote competition, innovation, increase in capacity, 
seamless mobility  and greater efficiency in transport of goods or 
livestock or passengers, 
 and economical use of resources; 
28

(viii) safeguard the interest of the public and promote equity, while 
seeking to enhance private participation and public -private partnership 
in the transport sector; 
(ix) demonstrate  an integrated  approach  to transport  and land 
use 
 planning; 
(x) identify the challenges that the National Transportation Policy 
seeks to address; 
(xi) address any other matter deemed relevant by the Central 
Government.  
66B. No person who holds the permit issued under this Act 
shall— 
  (a) be disqualified from applying for a licence under the   scheme 
made under sub-section (3) of section 67 or sub-section (1) of section 
88A by reason of holding such permit; and 
(b) be required to get such permit cancelled on being issued a 
licence under any scheme made under this Act.". 
 Clause 28 seeks to insert new provisions, viz., sections 66A and 66B in the 
Act. Section 66A seeks to empower the Central Government to develop and implement 
a National Transportation Policy. Section 66B seeks to provide that permit holders shall 
not be disqualified from applying for a licence under a scheme for the transportation 
of goods and  passengers made under the provisions of chapter V of the Act nor shall 
such permit holder be required to surrender the permit on being issued such a licence. 
107. The Committee appreciates the proposed addition of section 66A & 66B of 
National Transportation Policy.  The Committee feels that it will ease the 
transport, both the public and commercial, between the States.  The Committee 
recommends that whatever policy Centre propose to formulate, all the States may 
be taken into confidence and the Government sector  i.e., public transport and 
public carriage may take priority over private contenders. 
108. Clause 29 says in section 67 of the principal Act,— 
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:— "(1) A State Government, 
having regard to — 
(a) the advantages offered to the public, trade and 
industry by the 
development of motor transport; 
(b) the desirability of co-ordinating road and rail 
transport;  
(c) the desirability of preventing the deterioration of the 
road system; 
29

and 
(d) promoting effective competition among the 
transport  service 
providers, 
may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette 
issue directions     
both to the State Transport Authority and Regional 
Transport Authority regarding the passengers' 
convenience, economically competitive fares, prevention 
of overcrowding and road safety."; 
(ii) in sub-section (2) the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"Provided that the State Government may subject to such 
conditions as it   
may deem fit, and with a view to achieving the objectives 
specified in clause (d) of sub-section (1), relax all or any 
of the provisions made under this Chapter."; 
(iii) after sub-section (2) the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— "(3) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette modify any permit 
issued under this    
Act or make schemes for the transportation of goods and 
passengers and issue licences under such scheme for the 
promotion of development and efficiency in 
transportation— 
(a) last mile connectivity; 
(b) rural transport;   
(c) reducing traffic congestion; 
(d) improving urban transport; 
(e) safety of road users; 
(f) better utilisation of transportation assets; 
(g) the  enhancement of  economic vitality of  the  
area, though   
competitiveness, productivity, and efficiency; 
(h) the increase in the accessibility and mobility of 
people; 
(i) the protection and enhancement of the environment; 
30

(j) the promotion of energy conservation; 
(k) improvement of the quality of life;   
(l) enhance integration and connectivity of the 
transportation system, across and between modes 
of transport; and 
(m) such other matters as the Central Government may 
be deemed fit. 
(4) The scheme framed under sub-section (3), shall specify the fees 
to be  charged, form of application and grant of a  licence  including  
the  renewal, suspension cancellation or modification of such licence." 
Clause 29 seeks to amend section 67 of the Act to empower the State Government to 
issue directions to the State Transport Authority and the Regional Transport Authorities 
to safeguard the convenience of passengers, prevent overcrowding, promote road 
safety and provide  economically competitive fares. It also empowers the State 
Government to relax any of the provisions made under Chapter V and modify permits 
and make schemes for the transportation  of goods and passengers to enhance last mile 
connectivity and rural transport, reduce traffic congestion, improve urban transport, 
promote safety of road users, better utilization  of transport assets, enhance regional 
economic vitality, increase accessibility and mobility, protect the environment, promote 
energy conservation, improve the quality of life and enhance multimodal integration 
among other purposes. 
 
109. The stakeholders have given suggestions that the introduction of licenses under 
sub-section (3) of section 67 may lead to a situation where licenses are issued liberally 
without any conditions imposed thereon and thus, it would be against public interest. It 
provides the State Governments the power to promote effective competition as opposed 
to curbing of uneconomic competition under the original provision.  This can be made 
possible only through deregulation.  But deregulation will adversely affect availab ility 
and consequently will be disadvantageous to public interest.  
110. The Ministry has replied in response that these powers are proposed to be given 
to States to act in the interest of the public. 
111. Clause 29 of the Bill is supposed to empower the S tate Governments to 
protect the convenience of passengers, promoting road safety etc.  The Committee 
feels that this provision will go a long way in helping the public to travel by public 
transport. 
112. Section 30 says in  section 72 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Provided that the Regional Transport Authority may waive any such condition   
for a Stage carriage permit operating in a rural area, as it deems fit." 
31

Clause 30 seeks to amend section 72 of the Act to empower the 
Regional Transport Authority to waive any permit condition for a stage 
carriage operating in a rural area. 
 
113. The Save Life Foundation and some States suggested proviso to sub -section (2) 
of Section 72 allowing the RTA to wa ive any permit conditions for a stage carriage 
operating in rural areas.  This is detrimental to the safety of road users as RTAs will be 
empowered to allow a stage carriage to carry more than prescribed number of 
passengers or weight of goods.   
114. The State of Telangana has given a written representation saying that waiving 
condition of operation will lead to deregulation in stage carriage operation.  The public 
in poor sector with less population will be affected severely.  
115. The Ministry has replied that waiver is only in respect of the permit conditions.  
The RTAs cannot over-ride the legal stipulations regarding capacity of vehicles etc. 
116. The Committee is of the view  that waiving the provision of permit for a 
stage carriage in a rural area ma y prove beneficial for the people belonging to 
rural areas of India. The Committee hopes that RTA will perform their duty of 
waiving the permit condition for stage carriage to be operated in a rural area with 
due diligence and care and road safety may be accorded top priority. 
 
117. Clause 31 says in section 74 of the principal Act,— 
 
(i) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:—  
"Provided that the Regional Transport Authority may in the interests  
of last  mile connectivity waive any such condition in respect of any 
such types of vehicles as may be specified by the Central 
Government." 
  (ii) in sub-section (3), in the proviso to clause (b), after sub-clause 
(vi), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(vii) self-help groups." 
Clause 31 seeks to amend section 74 of the Act in order to empower the Regional 
Transport Authority to waive any permit condition for a contract carriage to promote 
low cost  last mile connectivity solutions. It also seeks to facilitate empowerment of 
marginalised and vulnerable groups through preference in issuance of permits. 
 
118. The State of Telangana has submitted that waiving the condition of operation 
will lead to deregulation in contract carriage operation and will create unhealthy and 
uneconomic competition among the passenger transport operators (STU and private 
stage carriage operators).  The power of State Government in regard of Section 67 (d) 
32

will be diluted.  The STU will get crushed and wiped out by the way of inability to 
compete with this tourist bus permit. 
119. The Committee feels that the instant proviso may help the people in 
overcoming the trauma of last mile connectivity if it is implemented efficiently.  
The Committee also hopes that as the Ministry has expressed their intent ion that 
this amendment will help in empowerment of marginalized and vulnerable groups 
through preference in issuance of permits, the States need not have to be worried 
about it. 
120. Clause 32 says after section 88 of the principal Act, the following sect ion shall 
be inserted, namely:— 
  "88A. (1) Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in this Act, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, modify 
any permit issued under  this Act or make schemes for national, multimodal 
and inter-State transportation of goods or passengers, and issue or modify 
licenses under, such scheme for the following purposes namely:— 
 (a) last mile connectivity; 
(b) rural transport; 
(c) improving the movement of freight, and logistics; 
(d) better utilisation of transportation assets; 
(e) the enhancement to the economic vitality of the area, 
especially   by 
 enabling competitiveness, productivity and efficiency; 
(f) the increase in the accessibility and mobility of people; 
(g) the protection and enhancement of the environment; 
(h) the promotion of energy conservation; 
(i) improvement of the quality of life; 
  (j) enhancement of the integration and connectivity of the 
transportation system, across and between modes of transport; 
(k) such other matters as the Central Government may deem fit: 
Provided that the Central Government may, before taking any action 
under this sub-section consult the State Governments. 
  (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), two or more 
States may make schemes for the operation within such States for the inter-
State transportation of goods or passengers: 
Provided that in the event of any repugnancy between the schemes 
made by  the Central Government under sub-section (1) and schemes 
made by two or more States under this sub -section, the schemes made 
under    sub-section (1) shall prevail. 
33

Clause 32 seeks to insert a new section 88A in the Act to empower the Central 
Government to modify permits and make schemes for inter -state transport of goods 
and passengers. 
121. The State of Telangana has submitted that it is a herculean task for the National 
Transport Authority to look after the preparation of Schemes for all the 29 States and 7 
Union territories.  It may not reflect the needs of the adjoinin g States.  Further, the 
traffic demand between two States is better assessed by Transport Authorities of two 
States when compared with National Transport Authority. 
122. The preparation of schemes for inter -State services shall be entrusted to the 
concerned State Governments as per the existing provisions of Section 88(5) & 88(6) of 
M.V. Act 1988. 
123. The Ministry has replied that S.88 A does not contravene the right of any person 
to carry on their trade or business, the right to which is the substance of Article 19 (i) 
(g) of the Constitution of India. 
124. The Committee agrees that  the insertion of new Section 88 A would 
empower the Central Government to make schemes for national, multimodal and 
inter-state transport of passengers and goods but the Committee suggests that the 
views of State Governments may be solicited before making  any type of 
improvements in this direction. 
125. Clause 33 says in  section 92 of the principal Act, for the words "stage carriage or 
contract carriage, in respect of which a permit", the words "transport vehicle, in respect 
of which a permit or licence" shall be substituted. 
Clause 33 seeks to amend section 92 of the Act in order to void any contract for 
conveyance of a passenger in a transport vehicle licenced under a scheme made under 
Chapter V that seeks to negative or restrict liability on imposes condition for the 
enforcement of liability for the death or bodily injury suffered by such passenger arising 
out of the use of such transport vehicle. 
 
126. Amendment in Clause 33 has been objected by many States and they have 
demanded that the term "license" is added along with the term "permit".  
127. The Ministry in their response has informed that the rules for issue of licenses 
under all such schemes unde r sub-section (3) of s.67 will have to be made by the State 
Government with regard to the conditions specified in sub-section (4). 
128. The Committee thinks that the words to be substituted carry wider 
meaning and suggests that while applying the provision s it should be interpreted 
in letter and spirit.  
129. Clause 34 says  in section 93 of the principal Act,— 
(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
   "Agent or canvasser or aggregator to obtain licence."; 
(ii) in sub-section (1),— 
34

 (a) after clause (ii), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
  "(iii) as an aggregator;"; 
(b) the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Provided that while issuing the licence to an aggregator the State 
Government shall follow such guidelines as may be issued by the Central 
Government: 
Provided further that every aggregator shall comply with the  
provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder." 
Clause 34 seeks to amend section 93 of the Act in order to provide 
statutory recognition to transport aggregators. 
 
130. Some States have shown their apprehension that this proposal is intended to 
encourage entry of aggregators who operate from other countries but aggregate taxi 
owner cum drivers into an organized cluster for providing taxi services.  This will be 
detrimental to the city operation and increase personalized transport for affluent class 
and cause congestion on roads which is detrimental to public transport and also causes 
increase of pollution due to addition of small cars in the cities.  
131. The Ministry has commented that all modes of public transport should be 
promoted so as to reduce dependence on personalized transport which will reduce 
congestion and pollution. 
132. Further, Section 193, as amended in this Bill, clearly lays down penalties for 
aggregators for actions in contravention of the provisions of this Act. 
133. Clause 34 of the Bill proposes certain amendments in Section 93 of the 
Principal Act which inter alia prescribes the issuance of licenses to aggregators.  
The Committee notes that it has bee n prescribed that while issuing the license to 
aggregators, the State Government shall follow such guidelines as may be issued 
by the Central Government.  The proviso makes it amply clear that the State 
Governments should follow the guidelines issued by th e Central Government for 
issuance of licenses to aggregators.  The Committee feels that the control of 
transport vehicles are the exclusive domain of the State Governments.  Through 
this amendment, the balance of power between the Centre and the State has been 
tilted and the Central Government will get a preponderance of power to control 
the aggregators throughout India.  The Committee believes that there is no need to 
take away the rights of the State Governments with regard to control of transport 
vehicles.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that every State Government 
should have its own powers and guidelines to control the operations of aggregators 
within the State.  The Committee further recommends that in Clause 34, Section 
93, sub -section (iii) (b)  proviso, in place of the " State Government shall follow " 
with words "State Government may follow " be substituted.  The Committee 
recommends that while encouraging aggregators certain effective protective 
35

mechanism should be evolved for small operators and  local taxi drivers to ensure 
that their livelihood is not jeopardized.  
134. Clause 35 says in section 94 of the principal Act, after the words "permit" 
occurring at both the places the words "or licence issued under any scheme" shall be 
inserted. 
Clause 35 seeks to amend section 94 of the Act in order to Act to oust the jurisdiction of 
civil courts to entertain any question or issue injunction relating to the issue of licences 
under a scheme made under Chapter V. 
135. There is objection to the inclusion of the term licence in section 94 by some of 
the stakeholders.  
136. The Ministry has stated that the rules for issue of licenses under all such 
schemes under sub -section (3) of section 67 will have to be made by the Sta te 
Government with regard to the conditions specified in sub -section (4).  All licenses 
issued must adhere to the said rules and hence there is very little scope for abuse in case 
of issue of licenses.  
137. The Committee notes the amendment. 
138. Clause 36 says in section 96 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause 
(xxxii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(xxxiia) framing of schemes under sub-section (3) of section 67; 
(xxxiib) the promotion of effective competition, passenger convenience and safety, 
competitive fares and prevention of overcrowding," 
Clause 36 seeks to amend section 96 of the Act consequence of the amendment 
proposed in Chapter V. 
 
139. There is strong objection by the public that section 96 has been amende d to 
include rules for framing of schemes under rule making powers of the State 
Government.  And hence, this is not in public interest. 
140. The Ministry in response has submitted that this amendment has been inserted 
in order to harmonise the provisions of the Amendment Bill. 
141. Some of the States have shown their apprehension regarding amendment of 
S.110 B which says 'the Central Government shall make rules for the accreditation, 
registration and regulation of testing agencies" and urged that the concur rence of State 
Government may be sought before issuing the rules. 
142. The Ministry has said that this is a pro -citizen provision and would ensure 
quality.  The implication would be national and not confined to any particular State. 
143. The Committee feels that incorporation of Clause 36 will help in promoting 
effective competition among the transport providers while keeping in mind the 
safety and security of passengers besides other conveniences.  The Committee 
recommends that the States  may accord to p priority in ensuring conveniences to 
commuters. 
36

144. Clause 37 says in section 110 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause ( k), after the words "standards of the 
components", the words ", including software," shall be inserted'; 
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), after the words "in particular circumstances", the  
words "and such rules may lay down the procedure for investigation, the officers 
empowered to conduct such investigations, the procedure for hearing of such 
matters and the penalties to be levied thereunder" shall be inserted; 
(iii) after sub-section (2) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(2A) Persons empowered under sub-section (2) to conduct investigations 
referred to in sub-section (2) shall have all the powers of a civil court, while 
trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the 
following matters, namely :— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; and 
(d) any other matter as may be prescribed." 
Clause 37 seeks to amend section 110 of the Act for the enforcement of standards for 
construction, equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles. 
145. The Committee notes the provision to be incorporated. 
146. Clause 38 says after section 110 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
"110A. (1) The Central Government may, by order, direct a manufacturer to 
recall motor vehicles of a particular type or its variants, if— 
(a) a defect in that particular type of motor vehicle may cause harm to the 
environment or to the driver or occupants of such motor vehicle or other road 
users; and  
(b) a defect in that particular type of motor vehicle has been reported to 
the   
Central Government by— 
(i) such percentage of owners, as the Central Government, may by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify; or 
(ii) a testing agency; or 
(iii) any other source. 
(2) Where the defect referred to in sub -section ( 1) lies in a motor vehicle 
component, the Central Government may, by order, direct a manufacturer to recall all 
37

motor vehicles which contain such component, regardless of the type or its variants of 
such motor vehicle. 
(3) A manufacturer whose vehicles are recalled under sub -section ( 1) or sub - 
section (2), shall— 
(a) reimburse the buyers for the full cost of the motor vehicle, subject to any 
hire-purchase or lease-hypothecation agreement; or 
(b) replace the defective motor vehicle with another motor vehicle of similar or 
better specifications which complies with the standards specified under  this Act 
or repair it; and 
(c) pay such fines and other dues in accordance with sub-section (6). 
(4) Where a manufacturer notices a defect in a motor vehicle manufactured by 
him, he shall inform the Central Government of the defect and initiate recall proceedings 
and in such case the manufacturer shall not be liable to pay fine under sub-section (3). 
(5) The Central Government may authorise any officer to conduct investigation 
under this section who shall have all the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him 
on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; and 
(d) any other matter as may be prescribed. 
(6) The Central Government may make rules for regulating the recall of motor 
vehicles, of a particular type or its variants, for any defect which in the opinion of the 
Central Government, may cause harm to the environment or to the driver or occupants of 
such motor vehicle or to other road users. 
110B. (1) No motor vehicle, including a trailer or semi-trailer or modular hydraulic 
trailer or side car shall be sold or delivered or offered for sale or delivery or used in a 
public place in India unless a type approval certificate referred to in sub -section (2) 
has been issued in respect of such vehicle: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
extend the requirement of type approval certificate to other vehicles drawn or intended to 
be drawn by a motor vehicle: 
Provided further that such certificate shall not be required for vehicles  which 
are— 
(a) intended for export or display or demonstration or exhibition; or 
(b) used by a manufacturer of motor vehicles or motor vehicle components or a 
research and development centre or a test by agency for testing and validation or for 
data collection, inside factory premises or in a non-public place; or 
38

(c) exempted by the Central Government. 
(2) The manufacturer or importer of motor vehicles including trailers, semi-
trailers, modular hydraulic trailers and side cars shall submit the prototype of the vehicle 
to be manufactured or imported  for test to a testing agency for obtaining a type -
approval certificate by such agency. 
(3) The Central Government shall make rules for the accreditation, 
registration and regulation of testing agencies. 
(4) The testing agencies shall conduct tests on vehicles drawn from the 
production line of the manufacturer or obtained otherwise to verify the conformity of 
such vehicles to the provisions of this Chapter and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder. 
(5) Where the motor vehicle having a type-approval certificate is recalled 
under section 110A, the testing agency which granted the certificate to such motor 
vehicle shall be liable for its accreditation and registration to be cancelled." 
Clause 38 seeks to insert new provisions, viz., sections 110A and 110B in the 
Act. Section 110A seeks to empower the Central Government to recall vehicles which do 
not meet standards and for making rules in this behalf. Section 110B seeks to provide for 
issue of type- approval certificates and the establishment and regulation of testing 
agencies for testing of motor vehicles and issue of type approval certificates, and for 
the making of rules in this behalf by the Central Government. 
147. The Committee finds that the Clause 38 is one of the most important 
amendments as it speaks about recalling the vehicles which may cause harm to 
environment and may be risky for its occupants including driver and other road 
users.  The Committee thinks that the owner of vehicles may also be compensated 
suitably and the manufacturer may reimburse the total cost of vehicle to its owner, 
if the vehicle is found to be faulty.  The Committee hopes that inclusion of this 
section will go a long way in curbing the malpractices by the manufacturers.  The 
Committee recommends that this Section may be implemented/invoked whenever 
it is required without favouring anyone and provision of penalty on 
manufacturers may be imposed if running of defective vehicles have caused harm 
to the environment. 
148. Clause 39 says in  section 114 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
words "authorised in this behalf by the State Government", the words "or any other 
person authorised in this behalf by the State Government" shall be substituted. 
Clause 39 seeks to amend section 114 of the Act in order to enable State 
governments to designate any agency as the enforcement agency for this  
section. 
149. The stakeholders submitted before the Committee that under the amended 
section 114, power should be delegated only to such agency on condition that their 
equipment is foolproof and transparent and is accessible to the Transport Department.  
Weighing process should be recorded and fines collected electronically.  Weighbridges 
39

should be tamper proof and there must be audits carried out by independent parties 
every three months.  Agencies who misuse their power under this section should be 
punished harshly with fine of Rs.25 lakhs or more and imprisonment of three years or 
more. 
150. The Ministry has replied that law relating to the accuracy of the equipment is 
implemented by Weights and Measures department. 
151. The Ministry has further added that the power to delegate is being vested with 
the States.  The States will act in public interest. 
152. The Committee notes the reply and feels that the measures to be taken  
under section 114 are the responsibility vested with the States and they have to 
implement and ensure the honesty of the agency to be employed for the job.  The 
work is linked not only with the road safety but also with the revenue generation 
for the States. 
153. Clause 40 says in section 116 of the principal Act,— 
(i) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the National 
Highways Authority of India constituted under the National Highways 
Authority of India Act, 1988 or any other agency authorised by the Central 
Government, may  cause or permit traffic signs, as provided in the First 
Schedule, to be placed or  erected or removed on national highways for the 
purpose of regulating motor vehicle traffic and may order the removal of any 
sign or advertisement which in its opinion is so placed as to obscure any traffic 
sign from view or is so similar in appearance to a traffic sign as to mislead or 
is likely to distract the attention or concentration of the driver."; 
(ii)   in sub-section (3), after the words, brackets and figures "provided by sub- 
section (1)", the words, brackets, figures and letter "or sub-section (1A)" shall 
be inserted; and 
Clause 40 seeks to amend section 116 of the Act in order to enable the NHAI to 
construct traffic signs for highways and for roads immediately leading up to 
highways. 
 
154. The stakeholders said that section 116 has been amended to enable NHAI to 
erect traffic signs for highways and  for roads leading immediately up to highways.  
This is against public interest because NHAI lacks the expertise to determine place of 
erection of such signs, or the need and demand for such signs. 
155. The Ministry has replied that the purpose of the said  amendment is to utilize 
fully the capacities of NHAI with regard to creation of safe road infrastructure. 
156. The Committee feels that it is the duty of the organization which constructs 
it to maintain the same in all respects.  NHAI plays the biggest role in constructing 
a highway and it is their responsibility to maintain it and guide the road user in a 
proper way.  The Committee appreciates the move of Ministry to enable NHAI to 
40

do the needful for smooth running of traffic.  As far as expertise of NHAI  
regarding erection of traffic signs is concerned, it is the responsibility of NHAI to 
get suggestions and expertise of those  who are having practical knowledge of the 
subject. 
157. Clause 41 says in section 117 of the principal Act, the following provisos shall 
be inserted, namely:— 
"Provided that the State Government or the authorised authority shall, give 
primacy to the safety of road users and the free flow of traffic in determining such 
places: 
Provided further that for the purpose of this section the  National Highways 
Authority of India, constituted under the National Highways Authority of India  
Act, 1988 or any other agency authorised by the Central Government, may also 
specify such places." 
Clause 41 seeks to amend section 117 of the Act for the 
establishment of parking facilities for motor vehicles. 
158. The Committee notes that many of the major accidents are caused and 
many lives are lost due to the wrong parking of vehicles in Highways.  Parking 
spaces should be an integral part of all the roa d construction projects. A clear and 
effective policy in this regard is essential to curb the menace.  The Committee feels 
that parking space is a very important aspect of the road safety and there is 
requirement of space for parking the vehicles by the ro ad users to allow smooth 
traffic flow.  The Committee recommends that NHAI may create parking for the 
public's vehicle along the highways at regular intervals.  At the same time States 
should also construct and maintain parking spaces along State Highways.   
159.  Clause 42 says for section 129 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
"129. Every person, above four years of age, driving or riding or being carried 
on a  motor cycle of any class or description shall, while in a public place, wear 
protective headgear conforming to such standards as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government: 
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a person who is 
a Sikh,  if, while driving or riding on the motor cycle, in a public place, he is 
wearing a turban: 
Provided further that the Central Government may by rules provide for 
measures for the safety of children below four years of age riding or being carried on 
a motorcycle. 
Explanation.—"Protective headgear" means a helmet which,— 
(a) by virtue of its shape, material and construction, could reasonably be 
expected to afford to the person driving or riding on a motor cycle a degree 
or protection from injury in the event of an accident; and 
41

(b) is securely fastened to the head of the wearer by means of straps or 
other fastenings provided on the headgear." 
Clause 42 seeks to substitute section 129 of the Act. The new section  
129 exempts children below four years of age from the ambit of this 
provision and empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
additional measures for the safety of children below four years. 
 
160 There should be special rules and regulations to ensure safety of children, 
require child restraints, not allow children between ages of 0 -4 years to ride on  two-
wheelers. 
161. The Ministry has submitted that new Section 194B has been added to impose a 
penalty if child restraints system is not used. Section 129 empowers the Central 
Government to make rules to provide for measures for the safety of children bel ow four 
years of age being carried on two wheelers. 
161. The Committee observes that two wheeler riders carry more risk during 
driving compared to four -wheelers and it is an essential requirement that riders 
could wear protective headgears during driving.  Riders who are above 4 years 
certainly need protective headgears for their safety.  The Committee thinks that 
amendment in Section 129 will strengthen the authority to enforce the safety 
measures in the public interest.  The Committee also recommends that  the 
Government should make an appropriate rule on allowing children below four 
years in two wheelers.  While formulating the rule, safety aspect of the below 4 
year old child should be given the uppermost consideration regardless of any 
socio-economic situation prevailing in our country. 
162. Clause 43 says after section 134 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:— 
  "134A. (1) A Good Samaritan shall not be liable for any civil or criminal 
action for any injury to or death of  the victim of an accident involving a 
motor vehicle, where such injury or death resulted from the Good Samaritan's 
negligence in acting or failing to act while rendering emergency medical or 
non-medical care or assistance. 
(2) The  Central Government may  by  rules provide for  the  
procedure  for 
 questioning or examination of the Good Samaritan, disclosure of personal 
information of the Good Samaritan and such other related matters. 
'Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, "Good Samaritan" 
means a person, who in good faith, voluntarily and without expectation of 
any reward or compensation renders emergency medical or non -medical 
care or assistance at   the scene of an accident to the victim or transporting 
such victim to the hospital‟. 
42

Clause 43 seeks to insert a new section 134A in the Act to protect Good 
Samaritans. 
163. The Committee finds that the insertion of new Section i.e. 134 A which 
encourages in motivating the general public to come forward and help the 
accident victims at the time  of need is a welcome step.  It has been observed that 
many a times people instead of helping the accident victims, wait for police to 
arrive on the accident sites, so that the police could help the victims in reaching 
the nearby hospitals.  Sometimes, in this process a substantial period of time is lost 
and victims succumb to injury.   The Committee feels that people don't come 
forward to help the accident victims as they have  doubt in their minds that the 
police will harass them.  The Committee recommend s that it is the responsibility 
of the local administration and police to make the people trust them that they will 
not be harassed in any manner if they extend their voluntary help to victims.  At 
the same time, the Committee recommends that the police at  the lower level who 
comes to the accident sites first, may be sensitized on this issue as they have to deal 
with the public directly and elicit people‟s support. 
164. The Committee notes that the doctors and nurses who are attending the 
accident victims a re often harassed by the police authorities.  The Committee 
observes that to give effect to the concept of „Good Samaritan‟ the doctors and 
nurses who are treating the accident victims should also get adequate legal 
protection.  The Committee, therefore re commends that the doctors and nurses 
who are treating the accident victims  should be included in the definition of 
“Good Samaritans”. 
165. Clause 44 says in section 135 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1),— 
(a)  in clause (c), the word "and" shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (d), for the word "highways", the word 
"highways and" shall 
 be  substituted; and 
(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(e) any other amenities in the interests of the safety and the 
convenience of the public."; 
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
  "(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make one or more schemes to conduct in -depth studies on the 
causes and analysis of road accidents." 
Clause 44 seeks to amend section 135 of the Act to empower the State 
government to make schemes for any amenities that they deem fit in the 
43

interests of the public. It also empowers the Central Government to make 
schemes for in-depth studies and analysis of causes of road accidents. 
166. A number of stakeholders put queries before the Committee that there is no 
scientific investigation of road crashes - it is important to improve data collection to 
account for driver fault, road conditions and other external causes in order to improve 
road safety.  Further,  Bill does not address efforts for creating awareness, education, 
and involving stakeholders for maximum reach.  It does not address streamlining of the 
procedures and processes for road safe ty audit.  There are lack of basic amenities, rest 
areas, secure parking zones and harassment by law enforcement and toll officials. 
167. The Ministry has replied that Section 135 empowers the Central and State 
Governments to make schemes to conduct in -depth studies on the causes and analysis 
of road accidents.  The Ministry further added that the road safety advocacy is the 
responsibility of the executive and need not be included in the Act. 
168. Section 135 empowers the State Government to provide for way side amenities 
on highways and provide truck parking complexes on highways and other amenities in 
the interests of the safety and convenience of the public. 
169. Power to conduct road safety audits is proposed to be granted to the State 
Government under Se ction 135, wherein it may make schemes for in -depth studies on 
causes and analysis of road accidents. Safety audits of roads are important to determine 
causes and analyse road accidents.  Hence State Governments are empowered to 
conduct safety audits. 
170. The Committee is alarmed at the large number of  road accidents 
occurring in the country. After hearing the stakeholders from various fields, the 
Committee came to the conclusion that there are many factors which cause 
accidents on road.  Road designing/e ngineering, potholes, wrong signage, high 
speed and inferior driving skills are some of the reasons to quote.  To reduce the 
accidents there is a need to take many measures by the State Governments.  
Secondly, causes of accidents are not the same at every place but it varies.  The 
Committee recommends that some strategy may be formulated at the State level to 
address the causes of accident at a particular accident prone stretch and also  to 
find its remedy to correct the problems.  
171.  In India, we lack a robust, scientific and standardized accident investigation 
and data collection system.  The Committee notes that reasons for the large 
number of accidents are never studied or investigated to incorporate remedial 
measures.  Simply by providing a framework to conduct road safety audit is not a 
sufficient mechanism for scientific investigation to understand  the causes of road 
accidents.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new Section 213 A may 
be inserted to authorise Central Government to prescribe  the form and manner of 
scientific investigation on the causes of road accidents.  It should also give powers 
to the State Governments to carry out road safety audits.  
172. The Committee also notes that the present Bill failed to address the issue of 
accidents caused by faulty road designs and non -maintenance of roads and the 
accountability of the same.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a penalty  
44

provision (Section 198A) may be inserted in the Bill to hold road contractors and 
concessionaires acc ountable for faulty design, construction and maintenance of 
roads.  
173. As per available data, during the year 2015, approximately 1.5 lakh people 
died in the road accidents all over the country and around 5 lakh people got 
injured or disabled.  The Commi ttee notes that it is an alarming situation and a 
huge loss to the nation.  The Stakeholders such as the Governments of the Centre 
and the State, road users, various governmental agencies etc. have to play their 
role in a positive way to minimize the road accidents. 
174. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and respective States to provide in their respective field, certain 
amenities viz. washrooms, medical stores, restaurants, petrol pumps etc. since 
people travel for hours together on the road and such type of amenities are needed 
and it should be made available to the public by the authorities. 
175. The Committee further recommends that every road construction 
project/contract should invariably include the provisions such as washrooms, 
medical facilities,  trauma centres,  petrol pumps, parking spaces etc. In this 
direction the committee also recommends that availability of ambulance on the 
highways on every 30 km may be ensured by the operator of the Highways so that 
in  case of any accident the injured may get the necessary medical treatment. 
176. Clause 45 says after section 136 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:— 
 "136A.  ( 1)  The  State  Government  shall  ensure electronic  monitoring 
and enforcement of road safety in the manner provided under sub-section (2) 
on National highways, State highways, roads or in any urban city within a 
State which has a population  upto such limits as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall make rules for the electronic 
monitoring and 
 enforcement of road safety including speed cameras, closed-circuit television 
cameras, speed guns, body wearable cameras and such other  technology. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this  section the expression "body 
wearable camera" means a mobile audio and video capture device worn on 
the body or uniform of a person authorised by the State Government." 
Clause 45 seeks to insert a new section 136A in the Act in order to 
allow electronic monitoring and enforcement. 
177. State of West Bengal submitted before the Committee that the Bill has imposed 
significant financial responsibility on States.  E.g. S.136 A mandates States to 
implement electronic enforcement of road safety even on National  Highways.  Income 
from National Highways goes to Central Funds and previously safety has been the 
45

responsibility of the Central Government.  However, no fund provision has been made 
to the States for such additional responsibility.   
178. The Ministry has  reacted in response saying that this is only an enabling 
provision for electronic enforcement giving it a legal cover. Central Government has 
committed substantial resources for road safety. 
179. The Committee appreciates the insertion of Clause 136A for enforcement 
of  safety on roads.  It is a known fact that today road traffic is very high and to 
control them manually is an uphill task for any agency.  It is high time for the 
State to go for electronic monitoring to enforce the road Rules and the Commit tee 
recommends that the Ministry should help all the States in acquiring expertise and 
other logistic supports to make roads more safe. 
180.  Clause 46 says - in section 137 of the principal Act, — 
(i) after clause (a) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(aa) providing for the standards of protective headgear and 
measures for the safety of children below the age of four years riding 
under section 129;" 
(ii) after clause (b) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
  "(c) providing for criteria for the selection of cities by the State 
Governments where the electronic monitoring and enforcement under 
in sub-section (1) of section 136A is to implemented; and 
 (d) providing for electronic monitoring and enforcement under sub -
section (2) of section 136A.". 
Clause 46 seeks to amend section 137 of the Act in consequence of 
the amendments proposed in Chapter VIII. 
 
181. The Committee agrees with the proposed amendment to be brought under 
S.137 regarding protective headgear and measures for the safety of children below 
the age of four years riding under section 129.  The Committee is of the view that 
every individual's life is valuable and it must be protected at any cost.  It has been 
seen that many people buy helmets/headgear of inferior quality which i s from the 
safety point of view is a costly compromise. The Committee recommends that the 
Government should ensure quality and standard of children's headgear by the 
manufacturer and this section may be implemented forcefully. The Committee 
further recomme nds that the Centre should allocate resources to the States to 
implement various new schemes and programmes envisaged in this Amendment 
Bill. 
182. Clause 47 says In  section 138 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the 
following sub-section shall be iinserted, namely:— 
"(1A) The State Government may make rules for the purpose of regulating  
the activities in a public place of pedestrians and such means of transport as are 
propelled or powered by muscular power of either human beings or animals. 
46

Clause 47 seeks to amend section 138 of the Act in order to empower 
States to regulate pedestrians and non-motorised transport. 
183. The Committee observes that the insertion of new sub -section 1(A) under 
Section 138 is very important step towards streamlining the uncontrolled non -
motorized vehicles and pedestrians.  It is a fact that pedestrians are the most 
vulnerable section among the road users and more often the victims do not have 
any insurance cover for him/her.  The Committee also stresses that the non -
motorized vehicles do not follow road rules and create a lot of nuisance.  They are 
traffic hazard for others also.  The Committee recommends that for smooth 
traffic, there is a need of streamlining non -motorized vehicles by introducing 
minor penalty/punishment.  Here the punishment may be prescribed as corrective 
measures like giving training on traffic rules and not as penalty in monetary term. 
The Committee recommends that the non -motorized vehicles should not be 
allowed on National Highways and main roads of metro cities. 
184.  Chapter X in the principal Act, shall be omitted. 
Clause 48 seeks to omit Chapter X of the Act because no fault liability has been 
provided for under section 164 of the new Chapter XI. 
185. Clause 48 says that Chapter X in the Principal  Act  shall be omitted.  It is 
mentioned here that Chapter -X speaks about the liability without fault in certain cases 
and this chapter consists of 5 Sections i.e. from 140 to 144.  Section 140 deals with 
liability to pay compensation in certain cases on the principle of no fault i.e. the liability 
of the owner of the vehicle to pay compensation in certain cases on the principle of no 
fault; where death or permanent disablement of a person has resulted from an accident 
arising out of a motor vehicle.  In S. 141 contains provisions on right to Claim 
compensation for death or permanent disablement. 
186. The Committee notes the omission of Chapter X of the Act. 
187. Clause 49 says for Chapter XI of the principal Act, the following chapter shall 
be substituted, namely:— 
Clause 49 seeks to substitute Chapter XI of the principal Act with a new 
Chapter XI. This Chapter aims to simplify the third party insurance for motor 
vehicles. It empowers the Central Government to prescribe the premium and the 
corresponding liability of the insurer for  such a policy. It also provides for 
compensation on the basis of no-fault liability, scheme for  the treatment of 
accident victims during the Golden hour and provides for increase in the 
compensation to accident victims up to a limit of ten lakh rupees in the case of 
death and five lakh rupees in the case of grievous hurt. It also provides a 
scheme for interim relief to be given to claimants. 
For Chapter XI of the principal Act, the following chapter shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
"CHAPTER XI 
47

INSURANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES AGAINST 
THIRD PARTY  RISKS 
145. In this Chapter,— 
(a) "authorised insurer" means an insurer for the time being carrying on 
general insurance business in India and granted a certificate of registration 
by the  Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority established under 
section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 
and any Government  insurance fund authorised to do general insurance 
business under the General Insurance Business (Nationalization) Act, 1972; 
(b) "certificate of insurance" means a certificate issued by an authorised 
insurer in pursuance of section 147 and includes a cover note complying 
with such requirements as may be prescribed, and where more than one 
certificate has been issued in connection with a policy, or where a copy of a 
certificate has been issued, all those certificates or that copy, as the case may 
be; 
(c) "grievous hurt" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 
320 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860; 
(d) "hit and run motor accident" means an accident arising out of the use 
of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles the identity whereof cannot be 
ascertained in spite of reasonable efforts for the purpose; 
(e) "Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority" means the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority established under section 
3 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999; 
(f) "policy of insurance" includes certificate of insurance; 
(g) "property" includes roads, bridges, culverts, causeways, trees, posts, 
milestones and baggage of passengers and goods carried in any motor 
vehicle; 
(h) "reciprocating country" means any such country as may on the basis 
of reciprocity be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette to 
be a reciprocating country for the purposes of this Act; 
(i) "third party" includes the Government. 
146. (1) No person shall use, except as a passenger, or cause or allow any other 
person to use, a motor vehicle in a public place, unless there is in force, in relation to 
the use of the vehicle by that person or that other person, as the case may be, a policy 
of insurance complying with the requirements of this Chapter: 
Provided that in the case of a vehicle carrying, or meant to carry, dangerous or 
hazardous goods, there shall also be a policy of insurance under the Public Liability 
Insurance     Act, 1991. 
 
48

 Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub -section, a person driving a motor 
vehicle merely as a paid employee, while there is in relation to the use of the vehicle no 
such policy in force as is required by this sub -section, shall not be deemed to act in 
contravention of the sub -section unless he knows or has reason to believe that  there is 
no such policy in force. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to any motor 
vehicle owned by the Central Government and used for the purposes relating 
to the defence of the  country which is unconnected with any commercial 
objective, subject to an order made in writing in this regard by the Central 
Government. 
   (3) No order under sub-section (2) shall be made unless there has been 
established and maintained a fund in accordance with the rules made under 
this Act for meeting any liability to third parties arising out of the use of 
motor vehicles specified in that sub-section. 
147. (1) In order to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, a 
policy of 
  insurance must be a policy which— 
(a) is issued by a person who is an authorised insurer; and 
(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in the policy 
to the extent specified in sub-section (2)— 
(i)  against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of 
 the death of or bodily injury to any person including owner of  the 
goods or his authorised representative carried in the motor vehicle or 
damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of 
the use of the motor vehicle in a public place; 
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger 
of a   transport vehicle, except gratuitous passengers of a goods 
vehicle, caused by or arising out of the use of the motor vehicle in a 
public place. 
Explanation— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 
death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third 
party shall be deemed to have been caused by or to have arisen out of, the use 
of a vehicle in a public 
  place, notwithstanding that the person who is dead or injured or the property 
which is damaged was not in a public place at the time of the accident, if the 
act or omission which led to the accident occurred in a public place. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained under any other law for the 
time being in force, for the purposes of third party insurance related to either 
death of a person or grievous hurt to a person, the Central Government shall 
prescribe a base premium and the liability of an insurer in relation to such 
premium for an insurance policy under sub- section (1) in consultation with 
49

the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority: 
Provided that the payment to a person by an insurer, under the third 
party insurance  policy, shall be a sum of not exceeding ten lakh rupees in 
case of death and not exceeding ten five lakh rupees in case of grievous 
hurt, as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to time. 
(3) A policy shall be of no effect for the purposes of this Chapter 
unless and until there is issued by the insurer in favour of the person by 
whom the policy is effected  a certificate of insurance in the prescribed form 
and containing the prescribed   particulars of any condition subject to 
which the policy is issued and of any other prescribed matters; and 
different forms, particulars and matters may be prescribed in different cases. 
(4) Where a policy of insurance issued before the commencement of 
the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2016 does not conform to the 
provisions of this Act, it shall   be so  amended as to conform to the 
provisions of this Act, within a period of three months from the date of 
commencement of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2016. 
 
(5) Where a cover note issued by the insurer under the provisions of 
this Chapter or the rules or regulations made thereunder is not followed by a 
policy of insurance  within the specified time, the insurer shall, within seven 
days of the expiry of the period of the validity of the cover note, notify the 
fact to the registering authority or to such othe r authority as the State 
Government may prescribe.   
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, an insurer issuing a policy of insurance under this section 
shall be liable to indemnify the person or classes of persons specified in the 
policy in respect of any liability  which the policy purports to cover in the 
case of that person or those classes of persons.   
148. Where, in pursuance of an arrangement between India and any reciprocating 
country, the motor vehicle registered in the reciprocating country operates on any route 
or within any area common to the two countries and there is in force in relation to the use 
of the vehicle in the reciprocating country, a policy of insurance  complying with the 
requirements of the law of  insurance for the time being in force in that country, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in section 147 but subject to any rules which may 
be made under section 164B such policy of insurance shall be effective throughout  the 
route or area in respect of which the arrangement has been made, as if the  policy of 
insurance had complied with the requirements of this Chapter. 
149. (1) The insurance company shall, upon receiving information of the 
accident,either through accident information report or otherwise, designate an officer to 
settle the claims relating to such accident. 
(2) An officer designated by the insurance company for processing the 
50

settlement of  claim of compensation may make an offer to the claimant for 
settlement before the 
Claims Tribunal giving such details, within such time and after following such procedure        
as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) If, the claimant to whom the offer is made under sub-section (2),— 
(a) accepts such offer,— 
(i) the Claims Tribunal shall make a record of such settlement, and such 
claim shall be deemed to be settled by consent; and    
(ii) the payment shall be made by the insurance company within a maximum 
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such record of settlement; 
(b) rejects such offer, a date of hearing shall be fixed by the Claims Tribunal to 
adjudicate such claim on merits. 
150. (1) If, after a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub-section (3)  of section 
147 in favour of the person by whom a policy has been effected, judgment or award in 
respect of any such liability as is required to be covered by a policy under clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of section 147 (being a liability covered by the terms of the policy) or 
under the provisions of section 164 is obtained against any person insured by the 
policy, then, notwithstanding that the insurer may be entitled to avoid or cancel  or 
may have avoided or cancelled the policy, the insurer shall, subject to the provisions of 
this section, pay to the person entitled to the benefit of the award any sum not 
exceeding the sum assured payable thereunder, as if that person were the judgment 
debtor, in respect of the liability, together with any amount payable in respect of costs 
and any sum payable in respect of interest on that sum by virtue of any enactment 
relating to interest on judgments. 
(2) No sum shall be payable by an insurer under sub -section (1) in respect of any  
judgment or award unless, before the commencement of the proceedings in which the 
judgment or award is given the insurer had notice through the court or, as the case may 
be, the Claims Tribunal of the bringing of the proceedings, or in respect of such 
judgment or award so long as its execution is stayed pending an appeal; and an insurer to 
whom notice of the bringing of any such proceedings is so given shall be entitled to be 
made a party thereto, and to defend the action on any of the following grounds, 
namely:— 
(a) that there has been a breach of a specified condition of the policy, being 
one of the following conditions, namely:— 
(i) a condition excluding the use of the vehicle— 
(A) for hire or reward, where the vehicle is on the date of the contract of 
insurance a vehicle not covered by a permit to ply for hire or reward; or 
(B) for organised racing and speed testing; or 
(C) for a purpose not allowed by the permit under which the vehicle is 
51

used, where the vehicle is a transport vehicle; or 
(D) without side-car being attached where the vehicle is a two- wheeled 
vehicle; or 
(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named person or by any person who is 
not duly licensed or by any person who has been disqualified for holding or  
obtaining a driving licence during the period of disqualification; or 
(iii) a condition excluding liability for injury caused or contributed to by 
conditions of war, civil war, riot or civil commotion; or 
(b) that the policy is void on the ground that it was obtained by non - 
disclosure of any material fact or by representation of any fact which was false in 
some material particular; or 
(c) that there is non-receipt of premium as required under section 64VB of the 
Insurance Act, 1938. 
(3) Where any such judgment or award as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) is 
obtained from a court in a reciprocating country and in the case of a foreign judgment is, 
by virtue of the provisions of section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
conclusive as to any matter adjudicated upon by it, the insurer (being an insurer 
registered under the Insurance Act, 1938 and whether or not that person is registered 
under the corresponding law of the reciprocating country) shall be liable to the person 
entitled to the benefit of the decree in the manner and to the extend specified in sub- 
section (1), as if the judgment or award were given by a court in India: 
Provided that no sum shall be payable by the insurer in respect of any such 
judgment or award unless, before the commencement of the proceedings in which the 
judgment or award is given, the insurer had notice through the court concerned of the 
bringing of the proceedings and the insurer to whom notice is so given is entitled 
under the corresponding law of the reciprocating country, to be made a party to the 
proceedings and to defend the action on grounds similar to those specified in sub - 
section (2). 
(4) Where a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 147 to the person by whom a policy has been effected, so much of the policy as 
purports to restrict the insurance of the persons insured thereby, by reference to any 
condition other than those in sub -section (2) shall, as respects such liabilities as are 
required to be covered by a policy under clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of section 147,  
be of no effect: 
Provided that any sum paid by the insurer in or towards the  discharge of any 
liability of any person which is covered by the policy by virtue of this sub -section 
shall be recoverable by the insurer from that person. 
 
(5) If the amount which an insurer becomes liable under this section to 
pay in respect of a liability incurred by a person insured by a policy exceeds the 
52

amount for which the insurer would apart from the provisions of this section be 
liable under the policy i n respect of that liability, the insurer shall be entitled to 
recover the excess amount from that person.  
(6) No insurer to whom the notice referred to in sub -section (2) or sub-
section has been given shall be entitled to avoid his liability to any person ent itled 
to the benefit of any such judgment or award as is referred to in sub -section (1) or 
in such judgment  as is referred to in sub-section (3) otherwise than in the manner 
provided for in  sub-section (2) or in the corresponding law of the reciprocating 
country, as the case may be. 
(7) If on the date of filing of any claim, the claimant is not aware of the 
insurance company with which the vehicle had been insured, it shall be the duty 
of the owner of the vehicle to furnish to the tribunal or court the information as to 
whether the vehicle had been insured on the date of the accident, and if so, the 
name of the insurance company with which it is insured. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) "award" means an award made by the Claims Tribunal under section 
168; 
 (b)"Claims Tribunal" means a Claims Tribunal constituted under section 165;
   
(c) "liability covered by the terms of the policy" means the liability which is covered 
by the policy or which would be so covered but for the fact that the insurer is entitled 
to avoid or cancel or has avoided or cancelled the policy; and 
(d) "material fact" and "material particular" means, respectively, a fact or
 25 particular of such a nature as to influence the judgment of a prudent 
insurer in determining whether he shall take the risk and, if so, at what 
premium and on what conditions. 
151. (1) Where under any contract of insurance affected in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter, a person is insured against liabilities which he may incur to
 30 third parties, then— 
(a) in the event of the person becoming insolvent or making a 
composition or arrangement with his creditors; or 
(b) where the insured person is a company, in the event of a winding -up 
order being made or a resolution for a voluntary winding-up being passed with 
respect to the company or of a receiver or manager of the company's business or 
undertaking being duly appointed, or of possession being taken by or on behalf of the 
holders of any debentures secured by a floating charge of any property comprised in 
or subject to the charge,  
if, either before or after that event, any such liability is incurred by the insured per his 
rights against the insurer under the contract in respect of the liability shall, 
53

notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any provision of law, be transferred   to 
and vest in the third party to whom the liability was so incurred. 
(2) Where an order for the administration of the estate of a deceased debtor is  
made according to the law of insolvency, then, if any debt provable in  insolvency is  
owing by the deceased in respect of a liability to a third party against which he was 
insured under a contract of insurance in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, 
the deceased debtor's  rights against the insurer in respect of that liability shall, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any provision of law, be transferred   to 
and vest in the person to whom the debt is owing.   
 
(3) Any condition in a policy issued for the purposes of this Chapter 
purporting, either directly or indirectly, to avoid the policy or to alter the rights of the 
parties thereunder  upon the happening to the insured person of any of the events 
specified in clause  (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) or upon the making of an 
order for the administration of the estate of a deceased debtor according to the law  of 
insolvency, shall be of no effect. 
(4) Upon a transfer under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the insurer shall 
be under the same liability to the third party as he would have been to the insured person, 
but— 
 (a)  if the liability of the insurer to the insured person exceeds the liability 
of the insured person to the third party, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights of 
the insured person against the insurer in respect of the excess amount; and 
 (b) if the liability of the insurer to the insured person is less than the liability 
of the insured person to the third party, nothing in this   Chapter shall affect the rights 
of the third party against the insured person in respect of the balance amount. 
152. (1) No person against whom a claim is made in respect of any liability 
referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section (1) of section 147 shall, on demand by or  on 
behalf of the person making the claim, refuse to state whether or not he was insured in 
respect of that liability by any policy issued under the provisions of this Chapter, or 
would have been so insured if the insurer had not avoided or cancelled the policy, nor 
shall he refuse, if he was or would have been so insured, to give such particulars with 
respect to that policy as were specified in the certificate of insurance issued in respect 
thereof. 
(2) In the event of any person becoming insolvent or making an arrangement with  
his creditors or in the event of an order being made for the administration of the estate 
of a deceased person according to the law of insolvency, or in the event of a winding -
up order being made or a resolution for a voluntary winding-up being passed with 
respect to any company or of a receiver or manager of the company's business or 
undertaking being duly appointed or of possession being taken by or on behalf of the 
holders of any debentures secured by a floating charge on any property comprised in or 
subject to the charge, it shall be the duty of the insolvent debtor, personal 
representative of the deceased debtor or company, as the case may be, or the  official  
54

assignee or receiver in insolvency, trustee, liquidator, receiver or manager, or person in 
possession of the property to give, on the request of any person claiming that the 
insolvent debtor, deceased debtor or company is under such liability to him as is 
covered by the provision of this Chapter, such information as may reasonably be 
required by him for the purpose of ascertaining whether any rights have been transferred  
 to and vested in him by section 151, and for the purpose of enforcing such  
rights, if any, and any such contract of insurance as purports whether directly or 
indirectly to avoid the contract or to alter the rights of the parties thereunder upon the 
giving of such information in the events aforesaid, or otherwise to prohibit or prevent the 
giving thereof in the said events, shall be of no effect. 
  (3) If, from the information given to any person in pursuance of sub-section (2) or 
otherwise, he has reasonable ground for supporting that there have or may have been 
transferred to him under this Chapter rights against any particular insurer, that insurer  
shall be subject to the same duty as is imposed by the said sub-section on the persons 
therein mentioned. 
  (4) The duty to give the information imposed by this section shall include a duty 
to allow all contracts of insurance, receipts for premiums, and other relevant documents in 
the possession or power of the person on whom the duty is so imposed to be inspected 
and copies thereof to be taken. 
153. (1) No settlement made by an insurer in respect of any claim which might 
be made by a third party in respect of any liability of the nature referred to in clause (b) 
of sub-section (1) of section 147 shall be valid unless such third party is a party to the 
settlement. 
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall ensure that the settlement is bona fide and was not 
made under undue influence and the compensation is made in accordance with the 
payment schedule referred to in sub-section (1) of section 164. 
(3) Where a person who is insured under a policy issued for the purpose of this 
Chapter has become insolvent, or where, if such insured person is a company, a 
winding-up order has been made or a resolution for a voluntary winding-up has been 
passed with respect to the company, no agreement made between the insurer and the 
insured person after the liability has been incurred to a third party and after the 
commencement of the insolvency or winding-up, as the case may be, nor any waiver, 
assignment or other disposition made by or payment made to the insured person after 
the commencement aforesaid, shall be effective to defeat the rights transferred to the 
third party under this Chapter; but those rights shall be the same as if no such agreement, 
waiver, assignment or disposition or payment has been made. 
154. (1) For the purposes of sections 151, 152 and 153, a reference to "liabilities to 
third parties" in relation to a person insured under any policy of insurance shall not 
include a reference to any liability of that person in the capacity of insurer under some 
other policy of insurance. 
55

(2) The provisions of sections 151, 152 and 153 shall not apply where a company is 
wound-up voluntarily merely for the purposes of reconstruction or of an amalgamation 
with another company. 
155. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 306 of the Indian Succession 
Act, 1925, the death of a person in whose favour a certificate of insurance had been 
issued, if it occurs after the happening of an event which has given rise to a claim 
under the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be a bar to the survival of any cause of 
action arising out of such event against his estate or against the insurer. 
156. When an insurer has issued a certificate of insurance in respect of a contract of 
insurance between the insurer and the insured person, then— 
(a) if and so long as the policy described in the certificate has not been 
issued by the insurer to the insured, the insurer shall, as between himself and any 
other person except the insured, be deemed to have issued to the insured person  a 
policy of insurance conforming in all respects with the description and particulars 
stated in such certificate; and 
(b) if the insurer has issued to the insured the policy described in the 
certificate, but the actual terms of the policy are less favourable to persons 
claiming under or by virtue of the policy against the insurer either directly or 
through the insured then the particulars of the policy as stated in the certificate, the 
policy shall, as between the insurer and any other person except the insured, be  
deemed to be in terms conforming in all respects with the particulars stated in the 
said certificate. 
157. (1) Where a person, in whose favour the certificate of insurance has  been 
issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, transfers to another person 
the ownership of the motor vehicle in respect of which such insurance was taken 
together with the policy of insurance relating thereto, the certificate of insurance and 
the policy described in the certificate shall be deemed to have been transferred in 
favour of the person to whom the motor vehicle is transferred with effect from the date of 
its transfer. 
 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is herby clarified that such deemed 
transfer shall include transfer of rights and liabilities of the said certificate of insurance 
and policy of insurance. 
(2) The transferee shall apply within fourteen days from the date of 
transfer in 
 the prescribed form to the insurer for making necessary changes in regard to 
the fact of transfer in the certificate of insurance and the policy described in 
the certificate in his favour, and the insurer shall make the necessary 
changes in the certificate and the policy of insurance in regard to the 
transfer of insurance. 
56

158. (1) Any person driving a motor vehicle in any public place shall, on 
being 
 so required by a police officer in uniform authorised in this behalf by 
the State Government, produce— 
(a) the certificate of insurance; 
(b) the certificate of registration; 
(c) the pollution under control certificate; 
 (d) the driving licence; 
(e) in the case of a transport vehicle, also the certificate of fitness 
referred to in section 56, and the permit; and 
(f) any certificate or authorisation of exemption that has been 
granted under this Act, 
   relating to the use of the vehicle. 
(2) Where, owing to the presence of a motor vehicle in a public place, an 
accident occurs  involving death or bodily injury to another person, if the 
driver of the vehicle does not at that time produce the required certificate, 
driving licence and permit referred to in sub-section (1) to a police officer, he or 
the owner shall produce the said certificates, 
 licence and permit at the police station at which the driver makes the report 
required by section 134. 
(3) No person shall be liable to conviction for offences under sub-section 
(1) or sub -section ( 2) by reason of the failure to produce the required 
certificate if, within seven  days from the date on which its production was 
required under sub-section (1), 
 or as the case may be, from the date of occurrence of the accident, he  
produces the certificate at such police station as may have been specified by 
him to the police officer who required its production or, as the case may be, to 
the police officer at the site of the accident or to the officer -in-charge of the 
police station at which he reported the accident: 
  Provided that except to such extent and with such modifications as 
may be prescribed, the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to the 
driver of a transport vehicle. 
(4) The owner of a motor vehicle shall give such information as he may 
be required by or on behalf of a police officer empowered in this behalf 
by the State 
 Government for the purpose of determining whether the vehicle was or was 
not being driven in contravention of section 146 and on any occasion when 
the driver was required under this section to produce the certificate of  
insurance. 
(5) In this section, the expression "produce the certificate of insurance"  
57

means produce for examination the relevant certificate of insurance or such 
other evidence as may be prescribed that the vehicle was not being driven in 
contravention of section 
 146. 
159. The police officer shall, during the investigation, prepare an 
accident information report to facilitate the settlement of claim in such form 
and manner, within such time and containing such particulars and submit the 
same to the Claims Tribunal and such other agency as may be prescribed. 
160.  A registering authority or the officer-in-charge of a police station shall, if so 
required by a person who alleges that he is entitled to claim compensation in respect of 
an accident arising  out of the use of a motor vehicle, or if so required by an insurer 
against whom a claim has been made in respect of any motor vehicle, furnish to that 
person or to that insurer, as the case may be, on payment of the prescribed fee, any 
information at the disposal of the said authority or the said police officer relating to the 
identification marks and other particulars of the vehicle and the name and address of 
the person who was using the vehicle at the time of the accident or was injured by it 
and the property, if any, damaged in such form and within such time as the Central 
Government may prescribe. 
161. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force or any instrument having the force of law, the General Insurance Council of 
India formed under section 9 of the said Act and the insurance companies for the time 
being carrying on general insurance business in India shall provide for paying in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the scheme made under sub-section (3), 
compensation in respect of the death of, or grievous hurt to, persons resulting from  hit 
and run motor accidents. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the scheme made under sub-
section (3), there shall be paid as compensation,— 
(a) in respect of the death of any person resulting from a hit and run motor 
accident, a fixed sum of two lakh rupees or such higher amount as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government; 
(b) in respect of grievous hurt to any person resulting from a hit and run 
motor accident, a fixed sum of fifty thousand rupees or such higher amount  as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make a 
scheme specifying the manner in which the scheme shall be  administered by the 
Central Government or General Insurance Council, the form, manner and the time 
within which applications for compensation may be made, the officers or authorities to 
whom such applications may be made, the procedure to be followed by such officers or 
authorities for considering and passing orders on such applications, and all other 
matters connected with, or incidental to, the administration of the scheme and the 
payment of compensation under this section. 
58

(4) A scheme made under sub-section (3) may provide that,— 
(a) a payment of such sum as may be prescribed by the Central Government as 
interim relief to any claimant under such scheme; 
(b) a contravention of any provision thereof shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with fine which shall not be less 
than twenty -five thousand rupees but may extend to five lakh rupees or with 
both; 
(c) the powers, functions or duties conferred or imposed on any officer or 
authority by such scheme may be delegated with the prior approval in writing of 
Central Government, by such officer or authority to any other officer or authority; 
(d) any provision of such scheme may operate with retrospective effect from  
a date not earlier than the date of establishment of the Solatium Fund under the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 as it stood immediately before the commencement of this 
Act: 
Provided that no such retrospective effect shall be given so as to prejudicially 
affect the interests of any person who may be governed by such provision. 
162. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the General Insurance Companies 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972 or any other law for the time being in force or any instrument 
having the force of law, the insurance companies for the time being carrying on general 
insurance business in India shall provide in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and the scheme made under sub -section ( 2), for treatment of road accident victims 
during the golden hour. 
(2) The Central Government shall make a scheme for the cashless treatment of 
victims of the accident during the golden hour and such scheme may contain provisions 
for creation of a fund for such treatment. 
163. (1) The payment of compensation in respect of the death of, or grievous hurt 
to, any person under section  161 shall be subject to the condition that if any 
compensation (hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the other compensation) or 
other amount in lieu of or by way of satisfaction of a claim for compensation is awarded 
or paid in respect of such death or grievous hurt under any other provision of this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force or otherwise, so much of the other 
compensation or other amount aforesaid as is equal to the compensation paid under 
section 161, shall be refunded to the insurer. 
(2) Before awarding compensation in respect of an accident involving the death of, 
or bodily injury to, any person arising out of the use of a motor vehicle under any 
provision of this Act other than section 161 or any other law for the time being in force, 
the Claims Tribunal, court or other authority awarding such compensation shall verify as 
to whether in respect of such death or bodily injury compensation has already been paid 
under section 161 or an application for payment of compensation is pending under that 
section, and such Tribunal, court or other authority shall— 
59

(a) if compensation has already been paid under section 161, direct the 
person liable to pay the compensation awarded by it to refund to the insurer, so 
much thereof as is required to be refunded in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (1); 
(b) if an application for payment of compensation is pending under section 161 
forward the particulars as to the compensation awarded by it to the insurer. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of  this sub -section, an application for 
compensation under section 161 shall be deemed to be pending— 
(i) if such application has been rejected, till the date of the rejection of the 
application; and 
(ii) in any other case, till the date of payment of compensation in pursuance of 
the application. 
164. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the 
time being in force or instrument having the force of law, the owner of the motor 
vehicle or the authorised insurer shall be liable to pay in the case of death or grievous 
hurt due to any accident arising out of the use of motor vehicle, a compensation, in 
accordance with such payment schedule as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, to the legal heirs or the victim, as the case may be: 
Provided that the minimum compensation to a person shall be a sum as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government from time to time not exceeding ten lakh rupees in 
case of death or not exceeding five lakh rupees in case of grievous hurt. 
(2) In any claim for compensation under sub-section (1), the claimant shall not be 
required to plead or establish that the death or grievous hurt in respect of which the 
claim has been made was due to any wrongful act or neglect or default of the owner of 
the vehicle or of the vehicle concerned or of any other person. 
(3) Where, in respect of death or grievous hurt due to an accident arising out of the 
use of motor vehicle, compensation has been paid under any other law for the time being 
in force, such amount of compensation shall  be reduced from the amount of 
compensation payable under this section. 
164A. (1) The Central Government, may make schemes for the provision 
of interim relief to claimants praying for compensation under this Chapter. 
(2) A scheme made under sub -section ( 1) shall also provide for   procedure  to
  recover funds disbursed under such scheme from the owner of the motor 
vehicle,  where the claim arises out of the use of such motor vehicle or other sources 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) A scheme made under sub-section (1) may provide that— 
(a) any contravention of any provision thereof shall be punishable with   
imprisonment for such term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but may extend to five lakh 
rupees or with both; and 
60

(b) the powers, functions or duties conferred or imposed on any officer or 
authority by such scheme may be delegated with the prior approval, in writing,
  of Central Government, by such officer or authority to any other officer or 
authority. 
164B. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the 
Motor Vehicle Accident Fund and thereto shall be credited— 
(a) a cess or tax or payment of a nature notified and approved by the    
Central Government;   
(b) any grant or loan made to the Fund by the Central Government; 
(c) any other source of income as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
(2) The Fund shall be constituted for the purpose  of  providing  compulsory 
insurance cover to all road users in the territory of India.   
(3) The Fund shall be utilised for the following, namely:— 
(a) treatment of a person who has been grievously hurt in an accident 
till such time he may be stabilised; 
(b) compensation to representatives of a person who died in hit and run  
motor accident, not caused by the deceased on whose behalf the claim is being 
made, and for which accident no person may be held liable; 
(c) compensation to a person grievously hurt in an accident where no fault can 
be fixed upon either that person or on any other person involved in the accident;  
and 
(d) compensation to such persons as may be prescribed by   the Central 
Government. 
(4) The maximum liability amount that shall be paid in each case shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(5) In all cases specified in clause (a) of sub-section (3), when the claim of 
such person becomes payable, where amount has been paid out of this fund to 
any person, the same amount shall be deductible from the claim received by 
such person from the insurance company. 
(6) The Fund shall be managed by such authority or agency as the Central 
Government may specify having regard to the following:— 
(a) knowledge of insurance business of the agency;   
(b) capability of the agency to manage funds; and 
(c) any other criteria as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(7) The Central Government shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as 
may be prescribed by  the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
61

   (8) The accounts of the fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor- General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him. 
(9) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any person 
appointed by him  in connection with the audit of the accounts of the fund 
under this Act shall have the  same rights, privileges and  authority in  
connection with such audit     of  the 
  Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents 
and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority. 
(10) The accounts of the fund, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor- General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annual to the 
Central Government   and the Central Government shall cause the same to be 
laid before each House of the Parliament. 
164C. (1) The Central Government may make rules for the purposes of 
carrying into effect, the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules 
may   provide for— 
(a) the forms to be used for the purposes of this Chapter 
including,— 
(i) the form of the insurance policy and the particulars it shall 
contain as referred to in sub-section (3) of section 147; 
(ii) the form for making changes in regard to the fact of 
transfer in 
  the certificate of insurance under sub-section (2) of section 157; 
(iii) the form in which the accident information report may 
be prepared, the particulars it shall contain, the manner and the 
time for submitting the report to the Claims Tribunal and the 
other agency under sub-section (1) of section 159; 
  (iv) the form for furnishing information under section 160; 
and 
(v) the form of the annual statement of accounts for the 
Motor Vehicle Crash Fund as referred to in sub -section ( 7) of 
section 164B; 
(b) the making of applications for and the issue of certificates of 
insurance; 
(c) the issue of duplicates to replace certificates of insurance lost, 
destroyed 
  or mutilated; 
62

(d) the custody, production, cancellation and surrender of 
certificates of insurance; 
(e) the records to be maintained by insurers of policies of insurance 
issued under this Chapter; 
   (f) the identification by certificates or otherwise of persons   or 
vehicles exempted from the provisions of this Chapter; 
(g) the furnishing of information respecting policies of insurance 
by insurers; 
(h) adopting the provisions of this Chapter to vehicles brought into 
India 
  by persons making only a temporary stay therein or to vehicles 
registered in a reciprocating  country and operating on any route or 
within any area in India by applying those provisions with prescribed  
modifications; 
(i) the requirements which a certificate of insurance is required to 
comply with as referred to in clause (b) of section 145; 
(j) the minimum premium and the maximum liability of an 
insurer under sub-section (2) of section 147; 
(k) such other amount to be paid to a person by an insurer 
under the   
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 147; 
(l) the conditions subject to which an insurance policy shall be 
issued and other matters related thereto as referred to in sub-section 
(3) of section 147; 
(m) the details of settlement, the time limit for such settlement and 
the procedure thereof under sub-section (2) of section 149;   
(n) the extent of exemptions and the modifications under the 
proviso to sub-section (3) of section 158; 
(o) the other evidence under sub-section (5) of section 158; 
(p) such other agency to which the accident information report as referred 
to in section 159 may be submitted;   
(q) the time limit and fee for furnishing information under section 160; 
(r) the higher amount of compensation in respect of death under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 161; 
(s) the fixed sum to be paid as compensation in respect of grievous 
hurt under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 161;    
(t) a sum to be paid as interim relief as referred to in clause (a) 
of sub-section (4) of section 161; 
63

(u) the payment schedule under sub-section (1) of section 164; 
(v) the minimum compensation in case of death under the proviso to 
sub-section (1) of section 164;   
(w) such other sources from which funds may be recovered for the 
scheme as referred to in section 164A; 
(x) any other source of income that may be credited into the Motor 
Vehicle Crash Fund under sub-section (1) of section 164B; 
(y) the persons to whom compensation may be paid under clause  (d) of
    
sub-section (3) of section 164B; 
(z) the maximum liability amount under sub-section (4) of section 
164B;  
(za) the other criteria under clause (c) of sub-section (6) of section 164B;  
(zb) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by rules.   
164D. (1) The State Government may make rules for the purposes of 
carrying into effect, the provisions of this Chapter other than the matters 
specified in section 164C. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules 
may provide for—   
(a) the other authority under sub-section (5) of section 147.". 
188. The Ministry has submitted to the Committee that Motor Vehicle third 
Party Insurance Liability cover is a statutory requirement under the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988.  The Policy does not provide any direct benefit to the insured 
but covers the liabilities of  the insured against damages arising from 
death/disability of third party loss or damage to third party property. As per the 
Insurance Information Bureau (IIB) data, approximately 94% of the claims are up 
to Rs.7.5 lakhs and that 96.13% are for less than R s.10 lakhs.  A perusal of the 
number of claims paid by the private sector as well as Government sector 
insurance companies shows that during the last 4 years (2011 -12 to 2014 -15), 
claims in 93% to 97% of the death and grievous hurt cases were below Rs.10 
lakhs (Source IIB).  In the case of grievously hurt during the last five years, 
almost 90% of the numbers of claims were up to Rs.5 lakhs. (as per IIB).   
189. The Ministry further added that the  Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 
2016 aims to reform the third party motor vehicle insurance by providing for- 
1. Fixing the limits of minimum compensation so as to ensure a fair and 
reasonable compensation to accident victims from present limit of 
Rs.50000/- to the revised limit of upto Rs.10 lacs in cases of no -fault 
liability. 
2. Providing for payment of part of compensation as interim relief 
64

3. Increased compensation in hit & run cases of Rs.2 lacs as against the 
present provision of Rs.25000/ - in case of death and Rs.50000/ - as 
against Rs.12500/- in case of grievous hurt. 
4. Treatment to the accident victims during golden hour. 
5. Inclusion of hired drivers for compensation payment. 
6. Specifying the upper limit for which the insurance company would be 
liable for. 
190. The Committee was informed that under section 147(2) of th e Bill it 
is proposes to cap the liability of general insurance companies to Rs.5 lakh to 
10 lakh in compensating the third party claims in case of road accident.  It 
was submitted to the Committee that the proposal would expose millions of 
Third Party Veh icle insurance policy holders to unlimited risk.  If a 
Tribunal or court awards compensation above 5 lakhs in case of injury and 
Rs.10 lakhs in case of death, the owner of the vehicle has to bear the burden 
of paying over and above to the third party.  The  Committee is of the view 
that the basic aim of insurance is to defray individual risk collectively over a 
vast group of premium contributors especially when the risk apprehended is 
likely to be beyond all the means of the individual.  If this main purpose  to 
save the individual is defeated there seems to be no necessity for insurance 
policy to mitigate the risk which an individual could not meet by himself.  
There is no mens rea  in accidents and very purpose of insurance is to 
underwrite the cost of unfore seen contingencies.  FDI was liberalized in 
insurance to strengthen the concept of insurance in a country in  which life 
essentially is exposed to all sorts of unforeseen contingencies and calamities.  
Insurance Companies cannot run away from their basic responsibilities after 
collecting hefty amount of no claim insurance premium.   
191. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the capping of liability 
of the insurance companies under third party insurance policy is patently 
incorrect and against the intere st of the millions of road users.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that proviso to section 147 (2) as 
included in Clause 49 may be omitted. 
192. The Committee was informed by various stakeholders that under 
Section 147 of the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 a  statutory cover has been given 
to safeguard the interest of the driver, cleaner and employees engaged in the 
working of the Motor Vehicles.  However, in the proposed amendment the 
statutory coverage of the driver, cleaner and employee engaged in the 
vehicle are omitted from the liability of the Insurance Company.   
193. The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and they have informed the Committee that the amendment 
provides coverage to any person who dies or gets injured by a motor vehicle 
in a public place and therefore, shall include driver, cleaner and employee 
engaged in running the vehicle. 
65

194. In fact, the amendment increases the ambit to cover employees who 
are otherwise not covered under the Workmen's Compensation Act.  
195. The Committee notes the assurance of the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways and recommends that the Government should 
ensure that the driver, cleaner and employees engaged in a vehicle are fully 
protected under the insurance coverage.  The Co mmittee therefore 
recommends that the “Driver, cleaner and employees engaged in the 
working of the Motor Vehicles” be specifically mentioned in the clause. 
196. The Committee is concerned over the apprehension expressed by the 
States about getting all Stat e Government's vehicles insured.  The States 
have submitted they are already in resource crunch and if the State will have 
to spend a big amount for making premium payment, it would adversely 
affect their exchequer.  The Committee further recommends that t he State 
Governments may be exempted from paying premium for the Government 
vehicles for two reasons, first these vehicles are in public service and second, 
the amount saved from premium payment may be spent on giving 
compensation to road accident victims. 
197. Clause  50 says i n section 165 of the principal Act, in the Explanation, for the 
words, figures and letter "section 140 and section 163A", the word and figures "section 
164" shall be substituted. 
Clause 50 seeks to amend section 165 of the Act in consequence of the 
amendments proposed in Chapters X and XI. 
198. Committee notes the changes. 
Clause 51 says in section 166 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted;   
 
(ii) in sub-section (4), for the words, brackets and figures  "sub-section (6) of 
section 158", the word and figures "section 159" shall be substituted; 
(iii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
"(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force, the right of a person to claim compensation for injury in an 
accident shall, upon the death of the person injured, survive to his legal 
representatives, irrespective of whether the cause of death is relatable to or 
had any nexus with the injury or not.". 
Clause 51 seeks to amend section 166 of the Act to ensure that a claim 
for compensation does not abate on the death of the claimant and may be 
continued by his legal representatives. 
 
66

199. The Committee feels that the proposed sub -section (5) is a favourable step 
towards the family of the injured who succumbed to injuries and it will help the 
family financially. 
196. Clause 52 says in section 168 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(iv) for the word and figures "section 162", the word and figure "section 
163" shall be substituted; 
(v) the proviso shall be omitted. 
Clause 52 seeks to amend section 168 of the Act in consequence of the 
amendment proposed in Chapters X and XI. 
200. The Committee notes the changes. 
Clause 53 says In section 169 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 
section shall be inserted, namely,— 
"(4) For the purpose of enforcement of its award, the Claims Tribunal shall 
also have all the powers of a Civil Court in the execution of a decree under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, as if the award were a decree for the payment of money 
passed by such court in a civil suit." 
Clause 53 seeks to amend section 169 of the Act in order to confer 
powers of the Civil Court  upon the Claims tribunals with regard to 
execution of a decree passed by itself. 
201. The Committee feels that giving the power of civil court to the tribunal will 
not only expedite the disposal of cases but also help to th e family of the victim of 
road accident to overcome the mental trauma and also for settlement of the 
financial claims. The Committee appreciates this move. 
202. Clause 54 says in section 170 of the principal Act, for the word and figures 
"section 149" the word and figures "section 150" shall be substituted. 
Clause 54 seeks to amend section 170 of the Act in consequence of the 
amendment proposed in Chapters X and XI. 
203. The Committee notes the changes. 
204. Clause 55 says -In section 173 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
words "ten thousand", the words "one lakh" shall be substituted; 
Clause 55 seeks to amend section 173 of the Act in order to increase the 
amount in controversy  required for an appeal from the decision of the Claims 
Tribunal to be heard by the High Court. 
 
205. Regarding Amendment of Section -173 to increase the minimum claim amount 
for which a person may appeal against an order of the claims Tribunal at the High 
Court. 
67

206. On this, the Ministry has said that the increased a mount in the Amendment Bill 
is to bring the minimum amount in line with present relation and also to prevent 
frivolous litigation from reaching the High Court. 
207. The Committee feels that the proposal to increase the amount from ten 
thousand to one lakh required for an appeal from the decision of the claims 
tribunal to be heard by the High Court is on correct lines. 
208. The Committee was informed that at present more than 10 lakh Third Party 
claims are pending before MACT and various judicial fora.  With a view to address this 
malady it was suggested that the law provides for all claimants of road accidents to first 
approach insurance companies and file their claim details and documents.  If they are 
dissatisfied with the compensation they may take recour se to approach MACT/judicial 
for a redressal. 
209. This Committee was further informed that there is no hard coding of time limit 
for filing of claims before MACT consequent to the 1994 amendment to MV Act.  
Insurance companies receive intimation of claims filed before MACT after a lapse of 3-
4 years.  Further, the court proceedings take another 4 -5 years leading to inordinate 
delay in settlement of compensation to victims of road accidents. 
210. The Committee also noted that Delhi High Court had laid down an agreed 
procedure for investigation and reporting of road accidents to the court and to the 
insurer.  Supreme Court has advised all the High Courts in the country to adopt similar 
procedure.  This procedure has strict time lines for both intimation as we ll as settlement 
of Motor Accident Claims.   
211. The Committee was informed that the delayed filing of claims and the courts 
condemning such delays without exception has led to several false and fraudulent 
claims -such as cooked up accidents, claims by wr ong persons, multiple claims for the 
same accident, over compensation etc. 
212. The Committee notes that above suggestions are full of merits and need to 
be codified in the legislation.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that all 
claimants of road accid ents should first approach the insurance companies for 
settlement of the claims and if they are dissatisfied they can approach the MACT 
and judicial fora.   
213. The Committee further recommends that every claim of settlement should 
be filed before the MACT or with the insurer within a period of six months so that 
it acts as a catalyst for quick settlement and, at the same time, acts as a deterrent 
against deliberate delay in filing of claims as well as fraudulent/fictitious claims 
being preferred.  The Com mittee also recommends that necessary legislative 
backing may be provided so as to ensure detailed accident report by police as 
prescribed by the Supreme Court and which is followed in Delhi. 
214. Clause 56 says in  section 177 of the principal Act, for the words "one hundred 
rupees" and "three hundred rupees", the words "five hundred rupees" and "one thousand 
and five hundred rupees" shall respectively be substituted. 
Clause 56 seeks to amend section 177 of the Act in order to enhance the 
general penalties. 
68

215. The Committee finds the increase in penalty as appropriate. 
216. Clause 57 says after section 177 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
"177A. Whoever contravenes the regulations made under section 118, shall 
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees, but may 
extend to one thousand  rupees.". 
Clause 57 seeks to insert a new section 177A in the Act in order to provide for 
penalties for violation of the Rules of the Road Regulations and other regulations 
made under section 118 of the Act. 
217. The Committee appreciates the proposal. 
Clause 58 says in section 178 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 
" two hundred rupees", the words "five hundred rupees" shall be  substituted. 
Clause 58 seeks to amend section 178 of the Act in order to enhance penalties 
for travelling without pass or ticket. 
218. The Committee finds the increase in penalty from Rs. two hundred to five 
hundred as appropriate. 
219. Clause 59 says in section 179 of the principal Act,— 
(vi) in sub-section (1), for the words " five hundred rupees", the words "two 
thousand rupees"  shall  be substituted; 
(vii) in sub-section (2), for the words " five hundred rupees", the words "two 
thousand rupees" shall be  substituted. 
Clause 59 seeks to amend section 179 of the Act in order to enhance penalties 
for disobedience of orders, obstruction, etc. 
Clause 59 
220. The Committee finds that the penalty for disobedience of order, 
obstruction and refusal of information t o be given by a person to public servant 
while discharging his duties under this Act to be increased from five hundred to 
two thousand rupees under Section 179 (1) & (2) as appropriate. 
221. Clause 60 says in section 180 of the principal Act, for the words "which may 
extend to one thousand rupees", the words " of five thousand rupees" shall be   
substituted. 
Clause 60 seeks to amend section 180 of the Act in order to enhance penalty 
for allowing unauthorised persons to drive vehicles. 
222. Section 180 deals with the owner of a motor vehicle who gives his vehicle to 
such a person who is not authorized to drive a vehicle under this Act is liable to 
pay fine of one thousand rupees. The Committee finds that the fine of five 
thousand rupees would be appropriate a s a deterrent because a person who is not 
authorized to drive is a safety hazard.  
69

223. Clause 61 says in section 181 of the principal Act, for the words "which may 
extend to five hundred rupees", the words " of five thousand rupees" shall be  
substituted. 
Clause 61 seeks to amend section 181 of the principal Act. It enhances penalty for 
driving vehicles in contravention of section 3 and section 4 of the Act. 
224. Clause 61  Under Section 181 the punishment/penalty (imprisonment 3 
months/Rs.five hundred rupees) has been prescribed for driving vehicles in 
contravention of section 3 or section 4.  The Committee thinks that to increase the 
penalty to five thousand rupees is appropriate. 
225. Clause 62 says in section 182 of the principal Act,— 
(i)  in sub-section (1), for the words "which may extend to five 
hundred rupees", the words " of ten thousand rupees" shall be  
substituted; 
(ii) in sub -section ( 2), for the words " one hundred rupees", the 
words "ten thousand rupees" shall be  substituted. 
Clause 62 seeks to amend section 182 of the Act, in order to enhance the 
penalties for offences relating to licences. 
226. Section 182 deals with the offence of a person who has been disqualified 
from having a driving license drives a vehicle in a public place or any place o r 
applies for a license without disclosing the endorsement to his earlier license.  The 
Committee notes that the fine to be imposed on such an offender is appropriate. 
227. Clause 63 says for section 182A of the principal Act, the following 
sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
"182A. (1) Whoever, being a manufacturer, importer or dealer of motor 
vehicles,  sells or delivers or alters or offers to sell or deliver or alters, a motor 
vehicle that is in contravention of the provisions of Chapter VII or the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend t o one year, or with fine of one lakh rupees per such motor 
vehicle or with both: 
Provided that no person shall be convicted under this section if he proves 
that, at  the time of sale or delivery or alteration or offer of sale or delivery or 
alteration of such motor vehicle, he had disclosed to the other party of the 
manner in which such motor  vehicle was in contravention of the provisions of 
Chapter VII or the rules and regulations made thereunder. 
(2) Whoever, being a manufacturer of motor vehicles, fails to comply with 
the  provisions of Chapter VII or the rules and regulations made 
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year or with fine which  may extend one hundred crore rupees or 
with both. 
(3) Whoever, sells or offers to sell, or permits the sale of any component 
70

of a  motor vehicle which has been notified as a critical safety component by  
the Central Government and which does not comply with Chapter VII or the 
rules and regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to one year or with fine of one lakh rupees per such 
component or with both. 
(4) Whoever, being the owner of a motor vehicle, alters a motor vehicle, 
including by way of retrofitting of motor vehicle parts, in a manner not permitted 
under the Act   or the rules and regulations made thereunder shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine of 
five thousand rupees per such alteration or with both. 
182B. Whoever contravenes the provisions of the section  62A,  shall  
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees, but 
may extend to ten thousand  rupees.". 
Clause 63 seeks to amend section 182A of the Act, in order to 
enhance penalties for contravention of provisions of Chapter VII by 
manufacturers, importers, dealers and owners of motor vehicles. It is also 
proposed to insert a new section 182B in the Act in  order to provide for 
penalty for registration and issuance of certificate of fitness to oversized 
vehicles. 
228. Clause 63  speaks about the punishment prescribed for offences related to 
construction, manufacture, sale and alteration of motor vehicles and its 
components.  The Committee finds that proposed substitution is good for checking 
unscrupulous elements in the Motor Vehicle industry both the dealer as well as the 
manufacturer and of course buyer upto some extent.   
229. As it is a fact that any alteration  or retrofitting which is not permissible 
under this Ac t is detrimental to the environment as well as for pedestrians and 
commuters.  The Committee thinks that fine of Rupees hundred crore prescribed  
in Section 182 A (2) to be awarded to such manufacturer who fails to comply with 
the provisions of chapter VII of the Act will act as a deterrent. 
230. Clause 64 says in section 183 of the principal Act,— 
(viii) in sub-section (1),— 
(a) after the words "Whoever drives", the words "or causes any  person 
who is employed by him or subjects someone under his control to drive" shall 
be   
inserted; 
(b) for the words "with fine which extend to four hundred 
rupees, or, if having  been previously convicted of an offence under 
this sub-section is again convicted of an offence under this sub -
section, with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees", the following shall be substituted, namely:—   
"in the following manner, namely:— 
71

(i) where such motor vehicle is a light motor vehicle 
with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees 
but may extend to two  thousand rupees; 
(ii) where such motor vehicle is a medium goods vehicle or a
  
medium passenger vehicle or a heavy goods vehicle or a 
heavy passenger vehicle with fine which shall not be less 
than two thousand rupees, but may extend to four thousand 
rupees;  and 
(iii) for the second or any subsequent offence under this sub- 
section the driving licence of such driver shall be impounded as per 
the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 206.". 
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
   (iii) in sub-section (3), after the word "mechanical", the words "or 
electronic" shall be inserted. 
(iv) in sub-section (4), for the words, brackets and figure "sub-section 
(2)", the words, brackets and figure "sub-section (1)" shall be substituted. 
Clause 64 seeks to amend section 183 of the Act in order to enhance 
the penalties for driving  at excessive speed and to provide for different 
penalties for different classes of motor vehicles. 
 
231. The Committee feels that the proposed enhancement of penalties in 
respective categories is appropriate.  
232. Clause 65says  in section 184 of the principal Act,— 
   (i) after the words "dangerous to the public", the words " or which 
causes a sense of alarm or distress to the occupants of the vehicle, other 
road users, and persons near roads," shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words "which may extend to six months or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees", the words "which may extend to one year 
but shall not  be 
  less than six months or with fine which shall not be less than one thousand 
rupees but may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both" shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) for the words "which may extend to two thousand rupees", the 
words " of ten thousand rupees" shall be  substituted; 
(iv) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 
  "Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,— 
(a) jumping a red light; 
72

(b) violating a stop sign; 
(c) use of handheld communications devices while driving; 
(d) passing or overtaking other vehicles in a manner contrary to 
law; 
  (e) driving against the authorised flow of traffic; or 
(f) driving in any manner that falls far below what would be 
expected of a competent and careful driver and where it would be 
obvious to a competent and careful driver that driving in that 
manner would be dangerous.".  
  shall amount to driving in such manner which is dangerous to public. 
Clause 65 seeks to amend section 184 of the Act in order to enhance 
penalties for driving dangerously. It also seeks to insert an explanation 
giving examples of acts that are considered driving in a manner dangerous 
to the public, such as jumping a red light, violating a stop sign, use of 
handheld communication devices while driving, passing or overtaking 
any motor vehicle in violation of law, etc. 
233. Amendment in Clause 65 has given some explanation under sub section 
(iv). It was submitted before the Committee   that these explanations may be 
misinterpreted and misread by the law enforcement agencies such as police.  
Jumping a red light means a vehicle has crossed the stop line when the light was 
not green but sometimes dura tion of amber light is too short and a vehicle cannot 
pass from one side to another side and the driver just reaches other side when the 
light is already red and he comes under the ambit of red light jumping. Under 184 
(iv) (d) explanation is passing or overtaking other vehicles in a manner contrary to 
law. One of the  stakeholders submitted that many times heavy vehicle is moving 
slowly in right lane and a car wants to overtake but overtaking is not allowed from 
left and if he does he will commit the offence of wrong side overtaking. 
234. This Clause seeks to amend Section 184 in order to enhance penalties for 
driving dangerously indulging in such activities during driving which may 
endanger others‟ lives. The Committee feels that sometimes a person who has  not 
committed mistake as such but was caught on wrong foot because of others‟ fault, 
then he should not be penalized heavily.  The Committee recommends that before 
applying law, technical things like signals, signages, stop -signs, divider etc. may be 
placed correctly.  Proper training to police officials is also essential.  
235. At present the police agencies are implementing the provisions as per their 
whims and fancies.  There is no standardization of technical aspect which can be 
followed by the public.   
236. The Committee recommends that the Government should come out with 
appropriate rules and regulations to decide and define what constitute lane 
driving, red light jumping, violation of signals etc. 
73

237. The Committee also recommends that signage shou ld be uniform based on 
certain technical parameters and standards and the signage should be exclusively 
erected only by authorized authorities such as NHAI on National highways and 
State PWD Departments for State highways. 
238. The Committee was informed that draft Road Traffic Regulations are 
pending with the Government.  The Committee recommends that the proposed 
Road Traffic Regulation by virtue of powers conferred by the Section 118 of the 
Motor Vehicle Act 1988 should be notified along with the present Amendment Bill. 
239. The Committee further recommends that parts A &B of the first schedule 
of the Act needs revision as the same is not updated and should also comply with 
the UN Convention of road signs and signals of 1969 to which India is a signatory .  
Road marking, signals and miscellaneous devices should also be included in the 
schedule. 
240. Clause 66 says in section 185 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in clause (a), after the words "breath analyser,", the words "or in any 
another test including a laboratory test," shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words "which may extend to two thousand rupees", the 
words " of 
  ten thousand rupees" shall be  substituted; 
(iii)     the words " if committed within three years of the commission of the 
previous similar offence," shall be omitted; 
(iv)  for the words "which may extend to three thousand rupees", the words "of 
fifteen thousand rupees" shall be  substituted; 
  (v) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:— 
"Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression 
"drug" means any intoxicant other than alcohol, natural or synthetic, or 
any natural material or any salt, or preparation of such substance or 
material as may be notified  by the Central Government under this Act 
and includes a narcotic drug and psychotropic substance as defined in 
clause (xiv) and clause (xxiii) of section 2  of the Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.". 
Clause 66 seeks to amend section 185 of the Act in order to enhance 
the penalties for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
 
241. A stakeholder submitted before the Committee that one who has in his 
blood more than 30 MG per 100 ML of blood portion of alcohol to be tested by a 
“breath alcohol analyzer",  comes under the category of person who is drunk.  
There are two tests when a per son takes a breath, the breath alcohol tester 
converts it by a formula into blood alcohol ratio.  Now, the Government of India 
has not decided the formula if it is 1:2100; 1:2300.  There are three conversion 
ratio equally used in the entire world based upo n the type of a body we have and 
74

the type of food we eat.  So, when we talk about drunken driving with breath 
alcohol analyzer, we still don't have a formula (breath to blood alcohol ratio to 
change), but when we talk about going to the laboratory or a bre ath alcohol 
analyzer, we have to write the conversion between breath and blood.  Otherwise, 
we will again run into a huge problem.  Secondly, there is the issue of apparatus.  
Regarding breath alcohol analyzers, there is no stipulation of type approval 
standards what should be a breath alcohol analyzer. 
242. The Committee heard the views of States, private stakeholders and the 
Ministry also on the menace of drunken driving and also driving after taking 
drugs.  The Committee after hearing the views came to t he conclusion that to find 
out the alcohol in the blood of driver is easier but the modalities to trace the drugs 
is not available at present.  It is a fact that the drunk driving is a big menace on 
the road and many accidents take place due to the fact th at the driver of the 
vehicle was under the influence of alcohol or drugs while driving.   
243. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should impose stringent 
penalty on such driver who was caught driving after drinking.  Such driver 
endangers the lives  of his own , other occupants of the vehicle and other persons 
on the road.   
244. After hearing the witnesses, the Committee notes that method of testing the 
alcohol in the blood of offender is not foolproof and the standard of "breath 
analyzer"  is also not good enough which could give the authentic report.  The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should go for testing machines of 
international standard that should prescribe standards for breath analyzer 
machines and various parameters to decide drunkenness.  
245. The Committee notes that drunken driving is a major cause of road 
accidents.  This  malady needs to be dealt with a firm hand.  The Committee got 
suggestions to the effect that if a drunken driver commit an accident which results 
in the death of persons the former should be dealt under the provisions of culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder under the relevant Sections of IPC.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may amend the 
necessary legislations to include the deaths  due to drunken driving as culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder. 
246. The Committee also recommends that if the drunken driver  commits an 
accident, his action should not be construed as mere 'negligence' rather it should 
be treated as a premeditated commitment of a crime and the drunken driver 
should be made punishable under relevant provisions of IPC depending on the 
consequences of the accident. 
247. Clause 67 says in section 186 of the principal Act, for the words "two hundred 
rupees" and "five hundred rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" and "two 
thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted. 
Clause 67 seeks to amend section 186 of the Act in order to enhance the 
penalties for driving when mentally or physically unfit to drive. 
75

248. The Committee notes the increase in the penalty to be increased for driving 
when mentally or physically unfit to drive.  The Committee finds the increased 
penalty is appropriate. 
249. Clause 68 says in section 187 of the principal Act,— 
(i) for the brackets and letter "(c)" the brackets and letter "(a)" shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) for the words "three months", the words "six months" shall be substituted; 
(iii) for the words "which may extend to five hundred rupees", the words " of 
five thousand rupees" shall be  substituted; 
(iv) for the words "six months", the words "one year" shall be substituted; 
and 
(v) for the words "which may extend to one thousand rupees", the words " of 
ten thousand rupees" shall be  substituted. 
Clause 68 seeks to amend section 187 of the Act in order to enhance the 
penalties for offences relating to accident. 
250. The Committee notes the change in penalty to be incorporated in Section 
187 of the principal Act, which is for the offences committed relating to an 
accident. 
Clause 69 in section 189 of the principal Act,— 
(vi) for the words "one month", the words "three months" shall be 
substituted; 
(vii) for the words "which may extend to five hundred rupees", the 
words "of five thousand rupees"  shall  be substituted; 
(viii) after the words "with both", the words ", and for a subsequent 
offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine of ten thousand rupees; or with both." shall be inserted. 
Clause 69 seeks to amend section 189 of the Act in order to enhance the 
penalties for racing and trials of speed. 
 
251. The Committee notes and finds it appropriate to increase the penalties for 
the offence of racing and trials of speed.  The Committee feels that the fast driving 
vehicle is a big nuisance on road and it endangers lives of p edestrians as well as 
commuters.  It is further added here that on most of the roads in a place like 
Delhi, speed limit is same what was written some 20 -30 years back.  The 
Committee recommends that speed limit on different roads may be reconsidered 
in view of increasing number of vehicles. 
252. The Committee notes that speed limit in Indian roads are up to 80 Km in 
most of the National Highways.  In certain cases the roads were designed for a 
speed up 120 km, but the maximum speed limit permitted is 100 km .  The 
76

Committee notes that most of the accidents happen due to over speeding of 
vehicles.  The Committee also notes that most of the vehicles manufactured in 
India are with a capability of driving more than 180 -Km/hr.  In some cases the 
vehicles are manufactured for more than 240 Km/hr. capability. These vehicles act 
like a missile or rocket if involved in an accident. During the deliberations of the 
Committee, one stakeholder was asked to respond on the futility of high speed 
vehicles when the speed limit s are upto a maximum of 100 km/hr.  They informed 
the Committee that for acceleration purposes high end speed engines are required.  
They could not give any other explanation.  The Committee feels that these 
manufactures are following standards of European  and American countries and 
the same standards and technologies are being implemented in India. 
253. The Committee recommends that the Government should formulate the 
necessary legislation to limit the acceleration capability of vehicles manufactured 
for use in India to speed limit as per the infrastructure availability of the country.   
254.  The Committee also notes that slow moving vehicles are a hazard in 
National Highways.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that minimum speed 
limit should be prescri bed for National Highways according to place and amount 
of traffic.   
255. Clause 70 says in section 190 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1),— 
(a) for the words "which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees" 
the words " of one thousand five hundred rupees" shall be  
substituted; 
(b) for the words "which may extend to one thousand rupees" 
the words "of five thousand rupees" shall be substituted;  and 
(c) after the words "with both", the words, and for a subsequent 
offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with a fine of ten thousand rupees for 
bodily injury or damage to property" shall be inserted. 
(ii) in sub-section (2),— 
(d) for the words "a fine of one thousand rupees", the words 
"imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine 
which may extend to ten  thousand rupees or with both and he shall be 
disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months" shall be 
substituted; and 
(e) for the words "a fine of two thousand rupees", the words 
"imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both" shall be substituted;  and 
(iii) in sub-section (3),— 
(f) for the words "which may extend to three thousand rupees", the words 
"of ten thousand rupees and he shall be disqualified for holding licence for a 
period of three months" shall be substituted; and 
77

(g) for the words "which may extend to five thousand rupees", the 
words "of twenty thousand rupees" shall be  substituted; 
Clause 70 seeks to amend section 190 of the Act in order to enhance the 
penalties for using vehicle in unsafe condition. 
256. Section 190 of the Principal Act speaks about using a vehicle by a person in 
an unsafe condition.  Such vehicle may endanger other‟s lives in a public place; 
can cause bodily injury or damage to property.  Clause (3) speaks about such 
carriage which are dangerous or hazardous nature to hu man life.  The Committee 
finds that the consequences of  a vehicle which is not fit to run on the road and 
may cause harms to people, environment or damages to other‟s property fall 
under serious category hence increase in penalty is appropriate. 
257. Clause 71 says Section 191 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
Clause 71 seeks to omit section 191 of the Act, which deals with sale of 
vehicle in or alteration of vehicle to condition contravening the Act. 
258. The Ministry has proposed to omit the Section  191 of the Principal Act 
which deals with the sale of vehicle in or alteration of vehicle to condition 
contravening the Act.  The Committee is unable to understand why this Section 
has to be omitted.  The Committee recommends that the  Ministry should 
prescribe provisions to the effect that  importer or seller of motor vehicle will not 
sell any vehicle which contravenes this Act. 
259. Clause 72 says in section 192 of the principal Act, the following Explanation 
shall be inserted, namely: 
"Explanation.— Use of a motor vehicle in contravention of the 
provisions  of 
 section 56 shall be deemed to be a contravention of the provisions of 
section 39 and shall be punishable in the same manner as provided in sub -
section (1).". 
Clause 72 seeks to amend section 192 of the Act in order to provide that use of a 
motor vehicle in contravention of provisions regarding certificate of fitness shall 
be deemed as use of a motor vehicle not registered under the Act and shall be 
punishable in the same manner. 
260. The Committee notes the proposed amendment. 
Clause 73 in section 192A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(i) after the words "for the first offence with", the words 
"imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and" shall 
be inserted; 
   (ii) for the words "which may extend to five thousand rupees but shall  
not be less than two thousand rupees", the words " of ten thousand 
rupees" shall be substituted;  
(iii) for the words "one year", the words "two years" shall be 
78

substituted; 
(iv) for the words "three months", the words "six months" shall be 
substituted; 
(v) for the words "which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall 
not be less than five thousand rupees", the words "of twenty thousand 
rupees" shall be substituted. 
Clause 73 seeks to amend section 192A of the Act in order to enhance the penalties 
for using a transport vehicle in contravention of section 66. 
261. The Committee feels that the penalty prescribed for different offences 
under this Clause is little bit on higher side.  The Committee recom mends that in 
Section 192 A (1) (i) imprisonment for a term may be kept as 6 months instead of 
one year.  In 192 A 1 (iii) maximum one year should remain there and in 192 A 
1(v) ten thousand rupees is sufficient. 
262. Clause 74 says after section 192A in the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
"192B. (1) Whoever, being the owner of a motor vehicle, fails to make 
an 
  application for registration of such motor vehicle under sub-section (1) of 
section 41 shall be punishable with fine of five times the annual road tax or 
one-third of the lifetime tax of the motor vehicle whichever is higher. 
(2) Whoever, being a dealer, fails to make an application for the 
registration of a new motor vehicle under the second proviso to sub-section 
(1) of section 41 shall be 
  punishable with fine of fifteen times the annual road tax or the lifetime tax of 
the motor vehicle whichever is higher. 
(3) Whoever, being the owner of a motor vehicle, obtains a certificate 
of registration for such vehicle on the basis of documents which were, or by 
representation of  facts which was, false in any material particular, or the 
engine number or the chassis 
  number embossed thereon are different from such number entered in the 
certificate of registration shall be punishable with fine of ten times the annual 
road tax or two-third of  the lifetime tax of the motor vehicle whichever is 
higher. 
(4) Whoever, being a dealer, obtains a certificate of registration for such 
vehicle on the basis of documents which were, or by representation of facts 
which was, false 
  in any material particular, or the engine number or the chassis number 
embossed thereon are different from such number entered in the certificate of 
79

registration shall be punishable with fine of thirty times the annual road tax or 
twice the lifetime tax of the motor vehicle whichever is higher. 
Clause 74 seeks to insert a new section 192B in the Act to provide for 
imposition of penalty on an owner or dealer, as the case may be, for 
failure to make an application f or registration and for false representation 
of facts or documents. 
263. The Committee finds that the insertion of new section 192 B is a welcome 
step towards allowing only authorized/registered vehicle to run on the road and 
penalty for violation of the rules proposed in 192 B (1) and (2) are justified but the 
Committee feels that in obtaining a certificate based on false representation of 
facts by a person or dealer is a serious offence and may be given harsher 
punishment than that proposed.  In 192 B (3)  & (4) the Committee recommends 
that such offender may be given imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
minimum 6 months and maximum upto one year.  This may be added in the Bill. 
264. Clause 75 In the principal Act,— 
   (A) in section 193, in the marginal heading, for the words "agents and 
canvassers", the words "agents, canvassers and aggregators" shall be   
substituted; 
(B) section 193 shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and— 
(i) in sub-section (1) as so numbered,— 
(a) for the words "which may extend to one thousand 
rupees", the 
  words "of one thousand rupees" shall be   substituted; 
(b) for the words "which may extend to two thousand 
rupees", the words "of two thousand rupees" shall be  substituted; 
(ii) after sub-section (1) as so numbered, the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
"(2) Whoever engages himself as an aggregator in 
contravention of the provisions of section 93 or of any rules 
made thereunder shall be 
punishable with fine up to one lakh rupees but shall not be less than
   
twenty-five thousand rupees. 
(3) Whoever, while operating as  an  aggregator  contravenes  a condition of the 
licence granted under sub-section (4) of section 93, not designated by the State 
Government as a material  condition,  shall  be punishable with fine of five 
thousand rupees.". 
Clause 75 seeks to amend section 193 of the Act in order to enhance the 
penalties for agents and canvassers and provide for penalties for 
80

aggregators for contravening the provisions of this Act and the conditions 
of licence. 
 
265. All India Federation of Motor Vehicle Department Technical Executive Officers 
Association has submitted before the Committee that there are no penalties on 
aggregators and consequently, it does not extend adequate protection to operators.  
Moreover, t he entry of aggregators would adversely affect the local taxi operators.  
Hence it is not in public interest.  
266. States of Tamilnadu , Karnataka, Odhisha have echoed the same conern. The 
Ministry has replied that section 193, as amended in this Bill, cl early lays down 
penalties for aggregators for actions in contravention of the provisions of this Act. 
267. Ministry is of the opinion that all modes of public transport should be promoted 
so as to reduce dependence on personalized transport which will redu ce congestion and 
pollution.  
 
268. The Committee is satisfied with the provision proposed in the Section 193 
of the Principal Act.  The Committee feels that in metros number of aggregators 
are increasing day by day and in the competitive situation aggrega tor and other 
like group/agent may resort to malpractices to get more profit hence to rein them 
the penalty in sub-section (2) is appropriate.  
269. Clause 76 says in section 194 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1),— 
(a) the word "minimum" shall be omitted; 
(b) for the words "of two thousand rupees and an additional amount  of 
one thousand rupees per tonne of excess load", the words "of twenty 
thousand   
rupees and an additional amount of two thousand rupees per tonne of 
excess load" shall be substituted; 
(c) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Provided that such motor vehicle shall not be allowed to move    
before such excess load is removed or is caused or allowed to be 
removed   
by the person in control of such motor vehicle.". 
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— "(1A) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or 
allows a motor vehicle 
to be driven when such motor vehicle is loaded in such a manner that the 
load or 
any part thereof or anything extends laterally beyond the side of the body or 
to   
81

the front or to the rear or in height beyond the permissible limit shall be 
punishable with a fine of twenty thousand rupees, together with the 
liability to pay charges for off-loading of such load: 
Provided that such motor vehicle shall not be allowed to move before 
such load is arranged in a manner such that there is no extension of    the 
load   
laterally beyond the side of the body or to the front or to the rear or in 
height beyond the permissible limit: 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply when 
such motor vehicle has been given an exemption by the competent 
authority authorized 
in this behalf, by the State Government or the Central Government, allowing 
the   
carriage of a particular load.". 
(iii) in sub-section (2), for the words, "which may 
extend to three thousand rupees" the words "of forty 
thousand rupees" shall be   substituted. 
Clause 76 seeks to amend section 194 of the Act in order to enhance the 
penalties for driving vehicle exceeding permissible weight. It also provides that 
a motor vehicle will not be allowed to move before excess load is removed. 
 
270. The stakeholders submitted before the Committee that for overloading of 
vehicles all people involved in  the allowing of overloaded vehicles in their jurisdiction 
should be penalized including truckers, transporter, consignor, consignee, law 
enforcement toll concessionaires, PDs, PIUs. 
271. The Ministry has replied that section 194 proposes penalty on the pe rson who 
drives or causes or allows to be driven an overloaded motor vehicles.  This is very wide 
language which covers trucker who drives an overloaded motor vehicle or transporter, 
consignor, consignee or others who cause such overloaded motor vehicle to be driven. 
272. The Committee observes that the penalty Clause given in Section 194 of the 
Principal Act is appropriate but at the same time the Committee is of the view that 
today Motor transport is the main source of transporting the goods from one place 
to another and to earn extra profit transporter carry extra loads on their vehicle. 
273. The Committee feels that extra load on a vehicle not only damages the road 
but it also makes driving the overloaded vehicle risky.  Overloaded vehicles are 
extremely dangerous for the travelling public.  They are the cause of large number 
of accidents. The Committee further adds that the proviso to be inserted under 
sub-section 1 'C' is a right measure towards curbing this problem.  The 
Committee recommends that the v ehicle in no condition should be allowed to 
move ahead unless and until the excess load has been removed from the vehicle 
82

besides imposing fines for each tone of load.  Harsh penalty may deter transporter 
to indulge in wrong practice of overloading.  At th e same time, the Committee 
suggests that at checking points, man power and machinery may be made 
available so that this rule can be implemented successfully.   
274. The Committee notes that a twenty tonne capacity vehicle often carry 30 to 
35 tonnes.  The Committee feels that the vehicle manufacturers have to redefine 
their technology to ensure that if a vehicle which is overloaded beyond its axle 
power is immobilized. 
275. The Committee notes that the linear dimensions of the vehicles which can 
ply on the roads may be prescribed by the Government. Many a times, vehicles 
which are carrying bulky oversized and protruding items like bagasse of 
sugarcane, sugarcanes, husk, cotton, hay chaff of paddy, wheat and cotton etc. are 
hindrances resulting in road accide nts and also hindrance to smooth flow of 
traffic.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the vehicles which are 
oversized in linear dimensions should not be allowed to ply on roads.  
276. Clause 77 says after section 194 in the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:—   
"194A. Whoever drives a transport vehicle or causes or allows a 
transport vehicle to be driven while carrying more passengers than is 
authorized in the registration certificate of such transport vehicle or the 
permit conditions applicable to such transport vehicle shall be punishable 
with a fine of one thousand rupees per excess passenger:    
Provided that such transport vehicle shall not be allowed to move 
before the excess passengers are off -loaded and an alternative transport is 
arranged for such passengers. 
 194B. (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle without wearing a safety belt or carries 
passengers not wearing seat belts shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand 
rupees: 
Provided that the State Government, may by notification in the Official 
Gazette, 
  exclude the application of this sub-section to transport vehicles allowed 
carrying standing passengers or other specified classes of transport  
vehicles. 
(2) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor 
vehicle to be driven  with a child who, not having attained the age of 
fourteen years, is not secured by a safety belt or a child restraint system 
shall be punishable with a fine of one 
  thousand rupees. 
194C. Whoever drives a motor cycle or causes or allows a motor cycle 
to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 128 or the rules or 
83

regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand 
rupees and he  shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three 
months. 
   194D. Whoever drives a motor cycle or causes or allows a motor cycle  
to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 129 or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand 
rupees and he  shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three 
months. 
194E. Whoever while driving a motor vehicle fails to draw to the side of 
the road, 
  on the approach of a fire service vehicle or of an ambulance or other 
emergency vehicle as may be specified by the State Government, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with a fine of ten thousand rupees or with both. 
194F. Whoever — 
  (a) while driving a motor vehicle — 
(i) sounds the horn needlessly or continuously or more 
than necessary to ensure safety, or 
(ii) sounds the horn in an area with a traffic sign prohibiting 
the use of a horn, or 
   (b) drives a motor vehicle which makes use of a cut-out by which 
exhaust gases are released other than through the silencer, shall be 
punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees and for a second or 
subsequent offence with a fine of two thousand rupees. 
Clause 77 seeks to insert new provisions, viz., section 194A, 194B, 194C, 194D, 
194E and 194F in the Act. Section 194A imposes a penalty for carriage of more 
passengers than authorised in the registration certificate. Section 194B imposes 
a penalty on persons for not wearing seat belts and for not seating children in a 
safe manner. Section 194C imposes a penalty  for carriage of more than two 
persons, including the driver, on a motor cycle. Section 194D imposes a penalty 
on persons for not wearing protective headgear while driving or riding a motor 
cycles. Section 194E imposes a penalty for failing to draw to the side of the 
road to provide passage for an emergency vehicle. Section 194F imposes a 
penalty for sounding the horn unnecessarily while driving a motor vehicle. 
 
277. Representative from Institute of Public Health submitted before the Committee 
that law passed should have stringent penalties because one of the main reasons behind 
high road crashes in India is the lighter penalties for violations.  A ll India Motor 
Transport Congress has submitted that penalties are exorbitant and will lead to 
harassment, corruption and extortion.  Penalties should be reasonable.  There should be 
84

scientific or photographic recording of fault and only on that basis, pen alty should be 
levied.  Higher penalties would also lead to higher insurance charges. 
278. The Ministry in reply to the above suggestions informed the Committee that the 
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill hikes penalties for violations significantly. The 
Ministry further added that the proposed penalties were suggested after deliberations by 
the Group of Transport Ministers (GoM) constituted by the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways vide notification dated March 2, 2016. 
279. The penalties have not be en changed since 1989, therefore, have not retained 
their deterrent effect. 
280. New Section 136A also mandates the State Governments to ensure electronic 
monitoring and enforcement and that the Central Government shall make rule for the 
electronic monitor ing and enforcement including speed cameras, CCTV, speed guns, 
body wearable cameras etc.  Hence in the future, electronic evidence of violations may 
also be used in levying penalties.  
281. Clause 77 of the proposed bill gives a new height to penalty to b e charged 
by the authority from vehicle owners/drivers etc. 
282. The Committee feels that under Section 194A penalty of Rs.1,000 per 
excess person is on higher side and Committee recommends that it should be 
brought down to Rs.200 per person.  Here, it wou ld be pertinent to mention that 
India is a developing country and in many parts of the country especially in rural 
areas, transportation is a problem.  People travel even on roof top of the bus.  At 
many places there is no government transport and people r ely on private 
buses/carriages.  To impose penalty is not the solution to the problem.   
283. Clause 78 says section 195 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
Clause 78 seeks to omit section 195 of the Act in order to eliminate discretion 
on the imposition of fine on offender. 
284. The Committee notes the proposed omission of the Section 195 from the 
Act. 
285. Clause 79 says  in section 196 of the principal Act,— 
(i) after the word "shall be punishable", the words "for the first 
offence" shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words "which may extend to one thousand rupees", the 
words "of two thousand rupees," shall be substituted;  and 
(iii) after the words "with both", the words ", and for a subsequent 
offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine of four thousand rupees, or with both." shall be 
inserted. 
Clause 79 seeks to amend section 196 of the Act in order to enhance 
the penalties for driving an uninsured motor vehicle. 
85

 
286.  A stakeholder submitted before the Committee that doubling of fine under Section 
196 for driving without mandatory  third party insurance is half hearted punishment to 
habitual offenders.  The penalty does not work because of limited enforcement and 
leniency of courts in not pres cribing imprisonment. Therefore there is need to ensure 
that uninsured motor vehicle is impounded and driving licence is suspended and for 
repeat offences permits and driving licenses  should be revoked. 
287. In response the Ministry has submitted that the  penalties provided in the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988 have not been revised since 1989.  Therefore, there is a need for 
upward revision for all the penalties provided under the Act. 
288. The implementation of provisions of the  MV Act 1988 is the responsibil ity of  
States.  Impounding of the vehicles is not practical solution for all types of violations. 
289. The Committee was informed that more than half of the vehicles on road 
are without a third party insurance.  The Committee notes that the registration 
tax is one time affair, likewise the third party insurance should also be made a one 
time affair.  The Committee recommends that every new vehicle purchased should 
be made to pay at the time of registration the third party insurance for life time of 
the vehicles. 
290. Clause 80 says in section 197 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "which may extend to five hundred 
rupees", 
  the words "of five thousand rupees" shall be  substituted; 
 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "which may extend to five 
hundred rupees" the words "of five thousand rupees" shall be  
substituted. 
Clause 80 seeks to amend section 197 of the Act in order to enhance the 
penalties for taking a motor vehicle without authority. 
291. The Committee notes the proposed amendment to Section  197. 
292. Clause 81 says in  section 198 of the principal Act, for the words "with 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees", the words "with fine of one 
thousand rupees" shall be  substituted. 
Clause 81 seeks to amend section 198 of the Act in order to enhance the 
penalties for unauthorized interference with a motor vehicle. 
293.  The Committee notes the proposed amendment  to section 198. 
Clause 82 says after section 199 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
86

"199A. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
juvenile, the guardian of such juvenile or the owner of the motor vehicle shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall render such guardian or 
owner liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence 
was committed  without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of such offence. 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the Court shall presume 
that the use of the motor vehicle by the juvenile was  with the consent of the 
guardian of such juvenile or the owner of the motor vehicle, as the case may be. 
(2) In addition to the penalty under sub -section (1), such guardian or owner 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years 
and with a fine of twenty-five thousand rupees. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall not apply to 
such guardian or owner if the juvenile committing the offence had been granted a 
learner's licence under section 8 or a driving licence and was operating a motor 
vehicle which such juvenile was licensed to operate. 
(4) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a juvenile, the 
registration of the motor vehicle used in the commission of the offence shall be 
cancelled for a period of twelve months. 
(5) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a juvenile, then 
notwithstanding section 4 or section 7, such juvenile shall not be eligible to be 
granted a driving licence under section 9 or a learner's licence under section  8 
until such juvenile has attained the age of twenty-five years. 
(6) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a juvenile, then 
such juvenile shall be eligible to be punished by fines as provided in the Act while 
any custodial sentence may be modified as per the provisions of the Juvenile 
Justice  Act, 2000.". 
Clause 82 seeks to insert a new section 199A in the Act to provide for 
liability of guardian  or owner of vehicle, as the case might be, for any 
offence under this Act committed by a juvenile. 
294. If a juvenile commits a crime after taking the control of the vehicle with or 
without the consent of his guardian then the guardian may be held responsible for 
Commission of  the criminal Act.  Then the punishment un der section 199A(2) 
may be evoked.  The Committee agrees with the proposed amendments in Section 
199 A (3), (4), (5) and (6). 
295. Clause 83 says in section 200 of the principal Act,— 
(iii) in sub-section (1),— 
(a) for the words, brackets and figures "punishable under section 177, 
87

section 178, section 179, section 180, section 181, section 182, sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2) of section 183, section 184, section 186, section 189, sub-
section 
(2) of section 190, section 191, section 192, section 194, section 196, or 
section 198,", the words, brackets, figures and letters "punishable under 
section 177, section  178, section 179, section 180, section 181, section 182, 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 182A, section 
182B, sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 183, section 184 only to the 
extent of use of handheld communication  devices, section 186, section 189, 
sub-section (2) of section 190, section 192, section 192A, section 194, section 
194A, section 194B, section 194C, section 194D, section 194E, section 194F, 
section 196, section 198, shall be inserted; 
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: 
Provided that the State Government may, in addition to such 
amount, require the offender to undertake a period of community 
service. 
(iv) after sub-section (2) the following provisos shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
   "Provided that, notwithstanding compounding under this  section, 
such offence shall be deemed to be a previous commission of the same 
offence for the purpose of determining whether a subsequent offence 
has been committed: 
Provided further that compounding of an offence will not 
discharge the offender from proceedings under sub-section (4) of section 
206 or the obligation 
  to complete a driver refresher training course, or the obligation to 
complete community service, if applicable.". 
Clause 83 seeks to amend section 200 of the Act to provide for the 
composition of certain  offences under the Act including provision of 
community service as a condition for composition of an offence. 
296. A stakeholder while giving his presentation before the Committee submitted 
that offenders should be made to spend time in Emergence Surgical OPDs to see the 
results of dangerous driving so as to learn the devastating consequences of their actions.  
This will have impact on reducing dangerous driving practices.  This measure may be 
provided for offences such as dangerous driving, using mobile ph ones while driving, 
speeding, DUI, jumping red lights, not wearing protective headgear. 
297. Another stakeholder submitted that community service is time consuming and 
may create feelings of stress and frustration.  It may be replaced with driver refresher  
training in order to develop road safety. 
88

298. The Ministry has replied that under Section 200 the State Government have 
been empowered to impose on the offender a requirement to undertake a period  of 
community service.  State may specify the particulars  of community service. 
Community service is a global best practice which is designed to make an offender 
understand the impact of his action on society by giving up his time and labour for the 
benefit of the society at large. 
299. Driver refresher training  course has also been provided for offences related 
directly to driving in an unsafe or illegal manner. 
300. The Committee agrees with the amendment proposed in this Clause for 
community service as a condition for composition of an offence.  But it is not 
known to the Committee what type of community service is supposed to be 
performed by the offender.  The Committee recommends that while giving 
community service the State should take care that the service to be performed by 
the offender may not be degradin g in any way.  The Committee notes that 
compelling the violators to spend time in emergency surgical OPDs of road 
accident victims is a good way of making them understand the consequences.  
301. Clause 84 in section 201 of the principal Act,— 
(i)  in sub-section (1),— 
(h)the word "disabled" shall be omitted; 
   (b) for the words "fifty rupees per hour", the words "five hundred 
rupees", shall be substituted; 
            (ii) in proviso to sub -section (1), for the words "Government Agency, 
towing charges", the words "an agency authorised by the Central Government 
or State Government, removal charges" shall be substituted. 
  (iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— "(3) Sub-section (1) shall not apply where the motor 
vehicle has suffered 
an unforeseen breakdown and is in the process of being removed. 
(iv) after sub-section (3) the following Explanation shall be inserted, 
namely:— "Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,  
"removal     charges" 
  includes any costs involved in the removal of the motor vehicle from one 
location 
to another, including by way of towing and also includes any costs 
related to storage of such motor vehicle." 
Clause 84 seeks to amend section 201 of the Act to enhance the 
penalties for causing obstruction to free flow of traffic. 
302. The Committee notes the amendment and finds that the penalty under 
Section 201 proposed to be imposed is appropriate. 
89

303. Clause 85 says In section 206 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3) the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
   "(4) A police officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the 
State Government shall, if he has reason to believe that the driver of a 
motor vehicle has committed an offence under any of sections 183, 184, 185, 
189, 190, 194C, 194D, or 194E, seize the driving licence held by such driver 
and forward it to the licensing authority for  disqualification or revocation 
proceedings under section 19: 
   Provided that the person seizing the licence shall give to the person 
surrendering the licence a temporary acknowledgement therefor but such 
acknowledgement shall not authorise the holder to drive until the licence 
has been returned to him.". 
Clause 85 seeks to amend section 206 of the Act to empower police 
officers to impound the driving licence of a person accused of certain 
offences such as driving dangerously (section  184), etc. and forwarding 
the same for disqualification proceedings under section 19 of the Act. 
 
304.  One stakeholder submitted before the Committee that under the provisions of 
Section 206, the provisions related to the enforcement action to be carried and the team 
of Enforcement Officers by which it is carried, provisions relating to the order of 
release and impounding of vehicles, all such provisions should be inserted in the Rules 
read along with Act. 
305. The Ministry has replied that the same may be prescribed through Rules made 
under this Act. 
306. The Committee observes that the proposed amendment under Section 206, 
sub-section (4) speaks about a police officer/authorized person of State may seize 
the driving license held by such driver who violates Section 183 -driving at 
excessive speed and Section 184 -driving dangerously. Section 185 Drunken 
driving, 189-Racing and trials o f speed; 190 -suing of vehicle in unsafe condition; 
194C-driving overloaded vehicle, 194 -D not wearing protective headgear and 194 
E- failure to allow free passage to emergency vehicles.  The Committee notes that 
the fines are revised after a period of almo st 30 years.  The Committee was 
informed that sanction of Parliament is required for increasing the fines.  That is 
why fine was stagnant in these years which resulted in its non-deterrence on traffic 
offenders.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a  Clause should be added 
in this Bill to give effect to increase of fine @10% every year through executive 
orders. 
307. Clause 86 says After section 210 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall inserted, namely:— 
 
   "210A. Subject to  conditions made by  the Central Government,     a 
State Government, shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify a 
90

multiplier, not less than one and not greater than ten, to be applied to each 
fine under this Act and such modified  fine, shall be in force in such State and 
different multipliers may be applied to different classes of motor vehicles as 
may be classified by the State Government for the purpose of this section. 
   
210B. Any authority that is empowered to enforce the provisions of 
this Act shall, if such authority commits an offence under this Act, shall be 
liable for twice the penalty corresponding to that offence under this Act.". 
Clause 86 seeks to insert new provision, viz., sections 210A and 210B in the 
Act. Section 210A empowers the State Governments to apply different 
multipliers to different fines and such multiplies may be different for different 
classes of motor vehicles. 
Section 210B provides for the imposition of twice the fine otherwise provided in 
the Act whenever an offence is committed by any person entrusted with the 
enforcement of the Act. 
308. A stakeholder also suggested points on rationalization of penalties for  life 
threatening offences. Other countries use a graduated penalty system with fines 
increased for repeat  offences.  Need to uphold stringent penalties proposed in the Bill.  
Fines should also be made part of guidelines and not the Act so as to provide flexibility 
of further amendment in due course of time and allow State Governments to increase 
penalties if required. 
309. The Ministry has replied that substantial increase in penalties has been 
proposed.  The Bill increase penalties for repeat offences also. 
304. New Section 210A allows State Governments to increase penalties by 
specifying, by notification, a multiplier to be applied to each fine under this Act.  Hence 
State Governments have been provided flexibility with respect to fines and increase 
penalties in due course of time. 
310. The Committee agrees with the proposed amendment under Section 210 A 
and B.  
311. Clause 87 says after section 211 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:—    
"211A. (1) Where any provision of this Act or the rules and regulations 
made thereunder provides for— 
(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document 
with any office, authority, body or agency owned or controlled by the 
Central Government 
or the State Government in a particular manner;   
(b) the issue or grant of any licence, permit, sanction, approval 
or endorsement, by whatever name called in a particular manner; 
91

(c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner, 
then notwithstanding anything contained in such provision, such requirement  
shall  
be deemed to have been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment, as 
the   
case may be, is effected by means of such electronic form as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be. 
(2) The Central Government or the State Government shall, for the 
purpose of sub-section (1), prescribe — 
(a) the manner and format in which such electronic forms and documents
   
shall be filed, created or issued; and 
(b) the manner or method of payment of any fee or charges for 
filing, creation or issue of any electronic document under clause (a).". 
Clause 87 seeks to insert a new section 211A in the Act to provide that all 
documents, forms  and applications under this Act may be filed in an 
electronic format to be prescribed by the Central or State Governments, as 
may be applicable. 
 
312. The stakeholders feel that insertion of Section 211 A which deals with 
electronic documents, etc. would lead to a situation where the power to deal with 
applications or any other form of transaction  would be taken away from officials of the 
State Government.  Such an insertion is unwarranted. 
313. The Ministry in its reply said that Section 211 A is merely the extension of the 
law codified in Section 41(6) of the IT Act 2000, according to which any d ocument 
which can be filed in a physical form may also be filed in an electronic form subject to 
any rules that may be made by the appropriate Government in that behalf.  It does not 
change the division of powers as envisaged in MV Act, in any form or manner. 
314. The Committee recommends that the digitalization and making the things 
electronically available should be done on priority but it should not be forced and 
it may be done in a phased manner because some states and some centres within 
the State may not be in a position to switch over to electronically equipped office 
in a short period due to financial shortage and lack of manpower. 
(C) In section 212 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in sub-section (4),—   
(a) after the words, brackets and figures "the proviso to 
sub-section (1) of section 112”, the words and figures 
"section 118" shall be inserted; 
(b) for the words, brackets, figures and letter "sub -
92

section ( 4) of section 163A",  the word, figures and letter 
"section 164, section 177A" shall be inserted; 
(ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:—   
"(5) Every notification issued by the State Government under 
section 210A shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, 
or where such Legislature consists  of one House, before that House, 
while it is in session for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive   
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the   session or the successive sessions aforesaid, the House agrees or both 
Houses agree, as the case may be, in making any modification in the 
notification or the House agrees or both Houses agree, as the case may be, 
that the notification   should not be issued, the notification shall thereafter 
have effect only  in such   
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that notification.". 
Clause 88 seeks to amend section 212 of the Act to provide for the 
placing in the State Legislature of notifications made under section 210A 
for legislative approval. 
315. Clause 88: The Committee notes the proposed amendment to be 
incorporate as sub-section (4) of Section 212. 
316. Clause 89 says after section 215 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:—   
215A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything else contained in this Act the 
Central Government shall have the power to delegate any power or 
functions that have  been conferred upon it by the Act to any person or 
groups of persons and authorise such person  or group of persons to 
discharge any of its powers, functions and duties under 
  this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything else contained in this Act the State 
Government shall have the power to delegate any power or functions that 
have been conferred upon it by the Act to any p erson or groups of persons 
and authorise such person or group  of persons to discharge any of its 
powers, functions and duties under this Act. 
   215B. (1) The Central Government may make rules for the purposes of 
carrying into effect, the provisions of this Chapter. 
93

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for— 
(a) the use of electronic forms and means for the filing of documents, 
issue 
  or grant of licence, permit, sanction, approval or endorsements and the 
receipt or payment of money as referred to in section 211A; and 
(b) the minimum qualifications which the Motor Vehicles 
Department officers or any class thereof shall be required to possess 
for appointment as such,  as referred to in sub-section (4) of section 
213. 
   215C. (1) The State Government may make rules for the purposes of 
carrying into effect, the provisions of this Chapter other than the matters 
specified in section 215F. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for— 
(a) the use of electronic forms and means for the filing of documents, 
issue 
  or grant of licence, permit, sanction, approval or endorsements and the 
receipt or payment of money as referred to in section 211A; 
(b) the duties and functions of the officers of the Motor Vehicle 
Department and the discharge thereof, the powers to be exercised by 
such officers (including the  powers exercisable by police officers 
under this Act) and the conditions 
  governing the exercise of such powers, the uniform to be worn by   
them, the authorities to which they shall be subordinate as referred to in 
sub-section (3) of section 213; and 
(c) such other powers as may be exercised by officers of the Motor 
Vehicles Department as referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (5) of 
section 213. 
Clause 89 seeks to insert new provisions, viz., sections 215A, 215B 
and 215C in the Act. Section 215A enables the Central and State 
Governments to delegate any power or function  to any person or group 
and authorise such person or group to discharge any of the powers, 
functions, or duties conferred under the Act. Section 215B enumerates the 
rule making powers granted to the Central Government under this 
Chapter. Section 215C enumerates the rule making powers granted to the 
State Government under this Chapter. 
317. A number of States has opposed the idea of inserting new section 215 A and 
said that this is a proposal to delegate power of enforcement to private agency.  It will 
create a menace and panic for vehicle operators.  Anti -social elements and cr iminals 
94

will loot operators openly.  Enforcement of Act and Rules and checking of vehicles 
should be entrusted with transport and traffic department only. 
318. The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
The Ministry has infor med the Committee that there is no intention to delegate these 
powers to private agency.  Ministry has assured the Committee that necessary changes 
would be made to permit such delegation only to a  public servant or a public 
authority. 
319. Insertion of Se ction 215B grants rule making powers to the Central 
Government. And insertion of section 215C grants rule making powers to State 
Governments.  
320. Section 215-A speaks about the delegation of any power to any person or 
group of persons to discharge any of  its powers, functions and duties under this 
Act by the Central and State Governments.  The Committee notes that Section 215 
A provides for delegation of powers, functions and duties conferred under the Act 
to any person or group of persons.  The Committee  observes that this is quite 
ambiguous and there are chances of misuse of powers.  The Government has 
already assured the Committee that any delegation of powers,  functions and 
duties under the Act will be made only to a public servant or a public authori ty.  
The Committee notes that the scope of public authority and public service is 
having wider connotations and it is a matter of interpretation.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that powers, duties and functions under the Section 215A 
may be delegated only to a Government servant or Government authority. 
 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
No guns be allowed in personal vehicles 
321.   The Committee notes that road rage is one of the daily phenomena 
happening in metropolitan cities and urban areas.  Many a time,  in road rage, 
licensed guns are used to kill persons.  This is happening mainly because licensed 
guns are carried by persons in the vehicles without any restriction.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that licenses to fire arms may be restricted in 
such a way that it should not be carried while traveling in personal Motor Vehicles 
in Metropolitan cities and urban areas where traffic jam is the order of the day.   
Inclusion of Traffic  and road safety education in school curricula 
322.   The committee no tes that there is a need to educate the students about the 
traffic laws, rules and regulations.  In many cases the drivers and vehicle owners 
are not aware of the extant rules and regulations related to lane driving, 
overtaking, speed limit, wearing of hel mets, seat belts, sounding of horn, free 
passages to ambulances and police vehicles, parking of vehicles, alighting of 
passengers, driving under influence of liquor and drugs, overloading, obeying 
signals and signage etc. The Committee, therefore, recommen ds that traffic and 
road safety education must be made a compulsory part of the school education 
upto the 12 th Standard throughout India.  The Curriculum may contain general 
awareness of traffic rules, existing motor vehicle laws, rules, regulations, messa ges 
95

of Govt authorities on road safety etc. Causes of accidents, impact of accidents on 
families and society, economic and social cost of accidents etc should also be made 
part of the curriculum. 
323.  The road safety education should impart knowledge, ski lls and 
understanding of road safety and road safety behavior.  The curriculum should 
also enable the students to better understand the risks associated with road use 
and to also develop an appreciation for the reasons for many of the laws and 
regulations in place to protect the drivers, passengers and commuters.  Student 
should learn and understand and practice road safety and safe road uses. 
Education needs to take centre -stage as technology and the challenges of driving 
evolve. The students should be evo lved as better driver when they get a driving 
license as future citizens.  We should evolve them as personally and socially 
responsible road users.  If we are educating the children we may be educating a 
generation of people. 
Restriction of Heavy vehicles during early morning 
324. The Committee is of the view that the commercial vehicles play a pivotal 
role in the field of commerce and trade and also is an integral part of the country‟s 
economy. The Committee feels that the drivers who are the backbone of r unning 
the transport system in the country is not a secured lot from any angle whether it 
is their salary, job condition, working hours, life insurance etc. They are directed 
to drive the vehicles for many days or weeks single handedly.  The Committee 
notes that driving the heavy vehicles for longer duration during the night causes 
fatigue to drivers and due to work pressure and lack of driver‟s concentration 
many a times causes accidents.  Moreover, heavy vehicles and trucks are causing 
major accidents dur ing wee hours.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the government should strictly implement the duty hours for the drivers of 
commercial vehicles and also prohibit the driving of commercial vehicles from 
3.00 AM to 5.00 AM in the morning.  The Commit tee also recommends that 
movement of heavy commercial vehicles may be regulated in the early morning in 
such a way that the commercial vehicles carrying/supplying movement of 
vegetables, milk and perishable food products are not affected.  The Committee 
further recommends that the Government should make it mandatory for the 
transporters to depute two drivers on a Heavy commercial vehicle having more 
than two axles to drive the vehicle alternately if the vehicle has to cover a distance 
of more than 500 kms.  The Government may take suitable action to amend the 
appropriate Law/Rules to implement the recommendations. 
Lane Segregation 
325. Another aspect noticed by the Committee is that there is no separate lane 
or segregation of vehicles on roads.  Every kind o f traffic from bicycle to two 
wheelers, three wheelers to LMVs, Tempos and Trucks to mega sized vehicles are 
using the same lanes of the roads at their whims and fancies and no one is 
following any lane driving or following any segregated way of traffic mo vement. 
96

The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should lay down 
clear cut policies for segregation of different type of vehicles on specific lanes on 
the roads. This is possible in majority of our National Highways as these are 
multilane r oads. Enforcement of lane driving should be given priority by the 
enforcement agencies. 
Insurance manual and a concise traffic rule book 
326. The vehicle manufacturers always supply a service manual with every new 
vehicle sold.  The Committee recommends th at an insurance manual which give 
details about available insurance products to enable the customers to compare 
different insurance products and choose the best, may be supplied along with the 
service manual.  A concise traffic rules manual may also be supplied alongwith the 
Service manual so that a driver can learn about the traffic rules and the fines and 
punishment associated with its violation.  
National Road Safety Board 
327. The broad aim of the Motor Vehicle Amendment Bill is to enhance road 
safety.  Road safety is a complex resultant of road construction technology, motor 
vehicle technology and the upgradation of skills of road users both vehicle drivers 
and pedestrians.  Mere enhancement of penalties will not solve the problem.  
There is a need to c onstitute a high powered road safety board and to ensure the 
availability of adequate funds for technologically upgrading and updating the 
standards.  National road safety fund can be constituted with an additional cess on 
first time sales of new motor veh icles which could fund all these activities.  The 
National Road Safety Board may contain representatives of both Central & State 
Governments. It should have adequate authority to guide the Government.  
328. The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a note for its consideration 
giving reason for not accepting/agreeing with any of its recommendations/observations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97

RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 
 
 The Committee observes that the insertion of Clause 2B to include new 
technologies, inventions and innovations in the Motor Vehicle Sector to develop 
and update itself with the modern technologies is a welcome step.  Modern 
vehicular engineering will help in checking harmful emissions from the vehicles 
and save the ecosystem.  
(Para 11) 
 The Ministry has informed that this issue of learners' license online is to 
enable the citizens of the country to get license in an easier way and also to avoid 
rush at the RTOs.  
(Para 14) 
 The Committee was informed by  many States‟ representatives that filling 
up of online application and uploading of document need to be followed up by the 
appropriate written test prescribed by the individual concerned at the identified 
office premises.  But the Committee feels that this amendment is a welcome step 
which will enable speedy submission of application form and documents.  
Learners license is not an address proof, the driving license is issued only after  
proper verification. T he Committee is afraid that online procedure of obtaining 
learning license will be misused and people may get learner's driving license filling 
up the wrong information online.  The Committee recommends that this section 
may be modified further to get rid off such possibilities if any, of misusing this 
facility by the miscreants.  
(Para 15) 
 The Committee notes that the Govt. want to do away with minimum 
educational qualifications prescribed for issuing a driving license.  
(Para 22) 
 The Committee feels tha t the person should be literate enough to read, 
write and understand the road signage.  The Committee is of the view that Central 
Govt. should prescribe a mandatory test of competence for a new license holder 
under Section 9 of the Motor Vehicle Act.  The competency test prescribed should 
be uniform throughout India and the State Governments should not be allowed to  
further dilute the prescribed competency test criteria.  
(Para 23) 
 The Committee agrees with the provision of this Clause to replace the 
words 'invalid carriage' with adapted vehicle".  Because people who are suffering 
from physical disabilities may like to have  their vehicle modified which may suit 
to their requirements.  
(Para 25) 
 The Committee notes that India is a fast moving country towar ds 
digitization and information technology revolutions. Internet has removed all sorts 
of geographical boundaries and enables the citizens to operate the network from 
anywhere in the country. The Government should adopt their own mechanism to 
98

check the identity proof and veracity of other documents physically before issuing 
the driving license.  
(Para 28) 
 The Committee agrees with the substitution of words "the licensing 
authority having jurisdiction in area" with the words  "any licensing authority in 
the State". Every person has a residence/identity proof where he stays and he may 
get the driving license from any licensing authority in the State at this age of 
Internet.  The Committee strongly feels that giving a license  to a person after 
ascertaining his identity from anywhere in the State will not only save his time and 
money but also remove the existing bottleneck.  The Committee, therefore,  
recommends that the existing words “the licensing authority having jurisdiction in 
the area” must be substituted with the word “any licensing authority in the State”.  
(Para 29) 
 The Committee observes that if a person has already undergone a 
specialized training prescribed by the Central Government then he may be given 
exemption from meeting other requirements viz . condition of driving of light 
motor vehicle for one year before granting a license to drive transport vehicle.  
(Para 37) 
 The Committee notes the  assurance given by the Central Government that 
the Clause does not dilute the authority of the State Gover nments to issue license 
and regulate driving schools.  The Committee also notes that India is a big country 
with varying geographical conditions necessitating rules and regulations required 
to suit the local conditions which can be better addressed by the concerned State 
Governments.  Therefore, Committee recommends that every step should be made 
to strengthen the State Governments in regulating driving schools.  
(Para 38) 
 The Committee is happy to note that the Bill seeks to amend section 14(2) 
of the Mot or Vehicle Act, 1988 which will increase the period from 3 years to 5 
years and it has further categorized for the renewal of the driving license in the 
age group of 30s, 40s and 50s.  The Committee feels it's a welcome step.  
(Para 42) 
 The Committee appreciates the move taken by the Ministry to increase the 
time period of renewal of driving license before and after its expiry date.  The 
Committee feels that this change will help those people who go abroad and return 
after a gap of substantial period.  The  Committee further recommends that 
provision for renewal of license for those people who go abroad for longer period 
may get some extra relief i.e. time-period of one year before and after the expiry of 
the license for getting their license renewed.  
(Para 46) 
 The Committee is of the view that wrong driving of motor vehicles is  
dangerous not only for the occupants of the vehicle but it may also affect adversely 
the safety of other persons or vehicles on the road and brings others‟ lives under 
peril.  The Committee feels that strong penal deterrence is necessary to ward off 
wrong doers from creating havoc on the road.  
99

(Para 49) 
 The Committee is not aware of the factual provision so far about the 
National Register of Driving Licenses.  The Committee feels that before 
implementing the proposed changes at national level, every State has to be 
electronically equipped with the software of required information.  The 
Committee, while discussing with various States on the matter, found that many 
States are asking for more time i.e., 2-3 years for making their offices 
electronically equipped.  The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the 
Ministry to incorporate the instant section.  But, at the same time recommends 
that the Ministry should extend help viz.  fina ncial, logistics and trained 
manpower to various States (when States ask for)  to implement this section 
effectively.   
(Para 55) 
 The Committee hope that the modalities to be prescribed by the Central 
Government to update the National Register would be wo rked out by the  Central 
Government in consultation with the States.  
(Para 56) 
 The Committee hopes that the curriculum of training modules, regulation 
of schools and establishments to be set up in the States and the training modules 
itself should be formulated in consultation with the State Governments.  The 
Committee recommends that appropriate guidelines may be formulated to 
transport the goods of hazardous and  dangerous nature and also for specialized 
training programme for those drivers who are i nvolved in driving of heavy 
oversized vehicles.  
(Para 59) 
 The Committee recommends that there should be a proper training by the 
Government for those drivers who are involved in driving heavy vehicles (Mega 
Vehicles) and also carrying goods of hazardous and dangerous nature.  
(Para 60) 
 The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Ministry and hope 
that in a digitized world the geographical limits should not be imposed on citizens.  
(Para 62) 
 The Committee notes that a number of State Government s are unhappy 
with the functioning of vehicle dealers as they are under -invoicing, overcharging 
customers on logistics/handling charges, taking extra insurance premiums and 
indulging in other malpractices.  The Committee also notes that the vehicle dealer 
is an agent of the manufacturer and shall not be made an instrumentality of the 
Government to perform statutory functions and quasi judicial powers of 
registering authority.  At the same time the Committee notes that RTOs 
throughout the country are overburdened and understaffed.  Moreover, they are a 
den of corruption.  The Committee, therefore, appreciates that the delegation of 
powers to dealers for registration of vehicles may alleviate a lot many problems of 
the vehicle owners.  However, the Committee r ecommends that strict guidelines 
may be prescribed for the functioning of the vehicle dealers.  The Committee also 
100

recommends that the registration of vehicle by dealers may be made optional to 
the States depending on the State‟s specific requirements.  
(Para 65) 
 The Committee notes the comments of the Government. The Committee 
also recommends that the State governments should be permitted to issue 
temporary registration certificate which can be applicable within the State.  The 
Committee is of the view that there should be a time limit of just one month for 
validity of a temporary registration certificate and it should be uniform 
throughout India.  
(Para 69) 
 The Committee notes that Delhi which is having the largest vehicular 
population is implementing the same scheme effectively.  However, the Committee 
was informed that Delhi has implemented the scheme because it has inadequate 
officers to manage the vehicle registration whereas in many other States they have 
required infrastructure to deal with the ve hicle registration.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that this proposal in Clause 18 shall be made optional for 
the States to decide on the basis of the infrastructure and manpower available and 
the Committee further recommends  that it should not be made as mandatory to 
be followed by all the States. The Committee also recommends that it may be 
implemented in such a way that the regional and local needs are effectively 
addressed and the dealers may not be able to manipulate the system or vehicle 
configurations to suit their needs.  
(Para 75) 
 The Committee observes that the change in address of vehicle owners is 
very common and it is the responsibility of the owner to intimate the authority in 
time.  But, in the new amendment States are not involved in  substitution of the 
existing addresses.  The Committee recommends that the State Government may 
also be made part of the decision making body while making the final form of 
proof of authentication.  The Committee recommends that the Authority which 
originally registered the vehicle should be involved while making the correction 
also.  
(Para 79) 
 The Committee feels that under Clause 20, to make alteration or retro 
fitment  in a vehicle should commensurate not only with the need of the owner but 
the attention may also be drawn to the effect of such changes on environment as 
well as traffic.  A vehicle owner can change the fittings of his vehicle to suit his 
commercial need but at the same time changes carried out by the Vehicle owner 
should not play havoc on the road.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may give due care while formulating the rules for change or retrofitment in the 
vehicle.  The Committee welcomes if the Ministry allows the person to get his 
vehicle converted into adapted vehicle as per his requirement on medical ground.  
(Para 82) 
 The Committee observes that the proposed amendment is a step in  right 
direction.  It discourages the owner to hand over  their vehicle to an unauthorized 
101

person who is not supposed to drive the vehicle.  S uch person may cause accident 
harming others‟ life and property besides committing an offence which is 
punishable under S.199-A. 
(Para 84) 
 The Committee after hearing various States and other stake holders on the 
subject came to the conclusion that cut off date for implementing the testing for 
vehicles from authorized testing stations w.e.f. 1 st October, 2018 is not acceptable 
to many States.  The States have requested the Committee to pursue their request 
to the Ministry to extend the date for a further  period.  Many of the States have 
submitted to the Committee that they may not be ready with the testing stations 
by October, 2018.  The representative of the State of Uttar Pradesh submitted to 
the Committee that entire State has just one automated testin g station. The 
Committee understands that every State has its own problems to deal with and it 
will certainly take time to switch over to automated testing stations.  The 
Committee recommends that Ministry may take States into confidence to 
implement this procedure when they get automated stations installed in sufficient 
number in each of the RTOs in their respective States in a fixed time -frame.  The 
Committee notes that the idea is good but its implementation should be deferred 
till such time all the Stat es are ready with adequate numbers of testing stations.  
The Central Govt. may, therefore, notify a suitable date (which may even be 
different for different States) by Executive Orders by which a State may enforce  
these provisions.  
(Para 90) 
 The Committee is surprised to see Clause 7 of the proposed amendment in 
Section 56 as it is saying that provision of this Section may be extended to non -
transport vehicles also. Use of non -transport vehicles is quite different from the 
use of transport vehicles.  The  same Rule may not be applied to non -transport 
vehicle also.  The Committee thinks that it will create problems for public.  The 
Committee accordingly recommends the deletion of Sub Clause 7.  
(Para 91) 
 The Committee feels that recycling of outdated and o bsolete vehicle 
material by scientific method is the need of the hour.   The Committee 
recommends that the Central Government may formulate a comprehensive policy 
for recycling of outdated Motor Vehicles keeping in mind the protection of 
environment and public safety.  
(Para 93) 
The Committee hopes that the Government will consider the concern of the 
States and protect their identity while formulating new scheme of number for 
vehicles.  
(Para 96) 
 The Committee welcomes the step of maintaining a National Re gister of 
Motor Vehicles.  
(Para 97) 
 The Committee notes the proposed amendment.  
102

(Para 99) 
 The Committee has noted the insertions to be made under this Clause.  
(Para 101) 
 The Committee notes the provision of this Clause. The Committee hopes 
that the Commercial vehicles may be exempted from taking permit if it is involved 
in promotion and development of last mile connectivity, rural transport, reducing 
traffic congestion, improving economy etc.  The Committee recommends that it 
should be specified in t he Act itself that the vehicle involved in carrying out a 
special job may be exempted from taking permits.  The representatives of the 
State of Haryana informed the Committee that the present definition of the 
vehicles which can be utilized for last mile c onnectively is not including a large 
variety of vehicles used in Haryana. The Committee, therefore recommends that 
the definition may be widened to include the concerns of the State Governments.  
(Para 105) 
 The Committee appreciates the proposed addition of section 66A & 66B of 
National Transportation Policy.  The Committee feels that it will ease the 
transport, both the public and commercial, between the States.  The Committee 
recommends that whatever policy Centre propose to formulate, all the States may  
be taken into confidence and the Government sector  i.e., public transport and 
public carriage may take priority over private contenders.  
(Para 107) 
 Clause 29 of the Bill is supposed to empower the State Governments to 
protect the convenience of passengers, promoting road safety etc.  The Committee 
feels that this provision will go a long way in helping the public to travel by public 
transport.  
(Para 111) 
 The Committee is of the view  that waiving the provision of permit for a 
stage carriage in a rural area may prove beneficial for the people belonging to 
rural areas of India. The Committee hopes that RTA will perform their duty of 
waiving the permit condition for stage carriage to be operated in a rural area with 
due diligence and care and road safety may be accorded top priority.  
(Para 116) 
 The Committee feels that the instant proviso may help the people in 
overcoming the trauma of last mile connectivity if it is implemented efficiently.  
The Committee also hopes that as the Ministry has expre ssed their intention that 
this amendment will help in empowerment of marginalized and vulnerable groups 
through preference in issuance of permits, the States need not have to be worried 
about it.  
(Para 119) 
 The Committee agrees that  the insertion of new Section 88 A would 
empower the Central Government to make schemes for national, multimodal and 
inter-state transport of passengers and goods but the Committee suggests that the 
views of State Governments may be solicited before making any type of 
improvements in this direction.  
103

(Para 124) 
 The Committee thinks that the words to be substituted carry wider 
meaning and suggests that while applying the provisions it should be interpreted 
in letter and spirit.  
(Para 128) 
 Clause 34 of the Bill proposes certain  amendments in Section 93 of the 
Principal Act which inter alia prescribes the issuance of licenses to aggregators.  
The Committee notes that it has been prescribed that while issuing the license to 
aggregators, the State Government shall follow such guide lines as may be issued 
by the Central Government.  The proviso makes it amply clear that the State 
Governments should follow the guidelines issued by the Central Government for 
issuance of licenses to aggregators.  The Committee feels that the control of 
transport vehicles are the exclusive domain of the State Governments.  Through 
this amendment, the balance of power between the Centre and the State has been 
tilted and the Central Government will get a preponderance of power to control 
the aggregators throughout India.  The Committee believes that there is no need to 
take away the rights of the State Governments with regard to control of transport 
vehicles.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that every State Government 
should have its own powers and guidelines to control the operations of aggregators 
within the State.  The Committee further recommends that in Clause 34, Section 
93, sub -section (iii) (b) proviso, in place of the " State Government shall follow " 
with words "State Government may follow " be su bstituted.  The Committee 
recommends that while encouraging aggregators certain effective protective 
mechanism should be evolved for small operators and local taxi drivers to ensure 
that their livelihood is not jeopardized.  
(Para 133) 
 The Committee notes the amendment.  
(Para 137) 
 The Committee feels that incorporation of Clause 36 will help in promoting 
effective competition among the transport providers while keeping in mind the 
safety and security of passengers besides other conveniences.  The Committ ee 
recommends that the States  may accord top priority in ensuring conveniences to 
commuters.  
(Para 143) 
 The Committee notes the provision to be incorporated.  
(Para 145) 
 The Committee finds that the Clause 38 is one of the most important 
amendments as it speaks about recalling the vehicles which may cause harm to 
environment and may be risky for its occupants including driver and other road 
users.  The Committee thinks tha t the owner of vehicles may also be compensated 
suitably and the manufacturer may reimburse the total cost of vehicle to its owner, 
if the vehicle is found to be faulty.  The Committee hopes that inclusion of this 
section will go a long way in curbing the malpractices by the manufacturers.  The 
Committee recommends that this Section may be implemented/invoked whenever 
104

it is required without favouring anyone and provision of penalty on 
manufacturers may be imposed if running of defective vehicles have caused  harm 
to the environment. 
(Para 147) 
 The Committee notes the reply and feels that the measures to be taken 
under section 114 are the responsibility vested with the States and they have to 
implement and ensure the honesty of the agency to be employed for the job.  The 
work is linked not only with the road safety but also with the revenue generation 
for the States.  
(Para 152) 
 The Committee feels that it is the duty of the organization which constructs 
it to maintain the same in all respects.  NHAI plays the biggest role in constructing 
a highway and it is their responsibility to maintain it and guide the road user in a 
proper way.  The Committee appreciates the move of Ministry to enable NHAI to 
do the needful for smooth running of traffic.  As far as expe rtise of NHAI 
regarding erection of traffic signs is concerned, it is the responsibility of NHAI to 
get suggestions and expertise of those  who are having practical knowledge of the 
subject.  
(Para 156) 
The Committee notes that many of the major accidents are caused and 
many lives are lost due to the wrong parking of vehicles in Highways.  Parking 
spaces should be an integral part of all the road construction projects. A clear and 
effective policy in this regard is essential to curb the menace.  The Committ ee feels 
that parking space is a very important aspect of the road safety and there is 
requirement of space for parking the vehicles by the road users to allow smooth 
traffic flow.  The Committee recommends that NHAI may create parking for the 
public's vehicle along the highways at regular intervals.  At the same time States 
should also construct and maintain parking spaces along State Highways.   
(Para 158) 
 The Committee observes that two wheeler riders carry more risk during 
driving compared to four -wheelers and it is an essential requirement that riders 
could wear protective headgears during driving.  Riders who are above 4 years 
certainly need protective headgears for their safety.  The Committee thinks that 
amendment in Section 129 will strengthen the authority to enforce the safety 
measures in the public interest.  The Committee also recommends that the 
Government should make an appropriate rule on allowing children below four 
years in two wheelers.  While formulating the rule, safety aspect of the bel ow 4 
year old child should be given the uppermost consideration regardless of any 
socio-economic situation prevailing in our country.  
(Para 161) 
 The Committee finds that the insertion of new Section i.e. 134 A which 
encourages in motivating the general p ublic to come forward and help the 
accident victims at the time of need is a welcome step.  It has been observed that 
many a times people instead of helping the accident victims, wait for police to 
105

arrive on the accident sites, so that the police could hel p the victims in reaching 
the nearby hospitals.  Sometimes, in this process a substantial period of time is lost 
and victims succumb to injury.   The Committee feels that people don't come 
forward to help the accident victims as they have  doubt in their m inds that the 
police will harass them.  The Committee recommends that it is the responsibility 
of the local administration and police to make the people trust them that they will 
not be harassed in any manner if they extend their voluntary help to victims.   At 
the same time, the Committee recommends that the police at the lower level who 
comes to the accident sites first, may be sensitized on this issue as they have to deal 
with the public directly and elicit people‟s support.  
(Para 163) 
 The Committee not es that the doctors and nurses who are attending the 
accident victims are often harassed by the police authorities.  The Committee 
observes that to give effect to the concept of „Good Samaritan‟ the doctors and 
nurses who are treating the accident victims should also get adequate legal 
protection.  The Committee, therefore recommends that the doctors and nurses 
who are treating the accident victims  should be included in the definition of 
“Good Samaritans”.  
(Para 164) 
 The Committee is alarmed at the large  number of  road accidents 
occurring in the country. After hearing the stakeholders from various fields, the 
Committee came to the conclusion that there are many factors which cause 
accidents on road.  Road designing/engineering, potholes, wrong signage, h igh 
speed and inferior driving skills are some of the reasons to quote.  To reduce the 
accidents there is a need to take many measures by the State Governments.  
Secondly, causes of accidents are not the same at every place but it varies.  The 
Committee recommends that some strategy may be formulated at the State level to 
address the causes of accident at a particular accident prone stretch and also  to 
find its remedy to correct the problems.  
(Para 170) 
In India, we lack a robust, scientific and standardiz ed accident 
investigation and data collection system.  The Committee notes that reasons for 
the large number of accidents are never studied or investigated to incorporate 
remedial measures.  Simply by providing a framework to conduct road safety 
audit is n ot a sufficient mechanism for scientific investigation to understand  the 
causes of road accidents.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a new 
Section 213 A may be inserted to authorise Central Government to prescribe the 
form and manner of scientifi c investigation on the causes of road accidents.  It 
should also give powers to the State Governments to carry out road safety audits.  
(Para 171) 
The Committee also notes that the present Bill failed to address the issue of 
accidents caused by faulty road  designs and non -maintenance of roads and the 
accountability of the same.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a penalty  
provision (Section 198A) may be inserted in the Bill to hold road contractors and 
106

concessionaires accountable for faulty design,  construction and maintenance of 
roads.  
(Para 172) 
 As per available data, during the year 2015, approximately 1.5 lakh people 
died in the road accidents all over the country and around 5 lakh people got 
injured or disabled.  The Committee notes that it i s an alarming situation and a 
huge loss to the nation.  The Stakeholders such as the Governments of the Centre 
and the State, road users, various governmental agencies etc. have to play their 
role in a positive way to minimize the road accidents.  
(Para 173) 
 The Committee recommends that Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and respective States to provide in their respective field, certain 
amenities viz. washrooms, medical stores, restaurants, petrol pumps etc. since 
people travel for hours together on the road and such type of amenities are needed 
and it should be made available to the public by the authorities.  
(Para 174) 
 The Committee further recommends that every road construction 
project/contract should invariably include the provisions such as w ashrooms, 
medical facilities,  trauma centres,  petrol pumps, parking spaces etc. In this 
direction the committee also recommends that availability of ambulance on the 
highways on every 30 km may be ensured by the operator of the Highways so that 
in  case of any accident the injured may get the necessary medical treatment.  
(Para 175) 
 The Committee appreciates the insertion of Clause 136A for enforcement 
of  safety on roads.  It is a known fact that today road traffic is very high and to 
control them manuall y is an uphill task for any agency.  It is high time for the 
State to go for electronic monitoring to enforce the road Rules and the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should help all the States in acquiring expertise and 
other logistic supports to make roads more safe.  
(Para 179) 
 The Committee agrees with the proposed amendment to be brought under 
S.137 regarding protective headgear and measures for the safety of children below 
the age of four years riding under section 129.  The Committee is of the view that 
every individual's life is valuable and it must be protected at any cost.  It has been 
seen that many people buy helmets/headgear of inferior quality which is from the 
safety point of view is a costly compromise. The Committee recommends that the  
Government should ensure quality and standard of children's headgear by the 
manufacturer and this section may be implemented forcefully. The Committee 
further recommends that the Centre should allocate resources to the States to 
implement various new sche mes and programmes envisaged in this Amendment 
Bill.  
(Para 181) 
 The Committee observes that the insertion of new sub -section 1(A) under 
Section 138 is very important step towards streamlining the uncontrolled non -
107

motorized vehicles and pedestrians.  It is a fact that pedestrians are the most 
vulnerable section among the road users and more often the victims do not have 
any insurance cover for him/her.  The Committee also stresses that the non -
motorized vehicles do not follow road rules and create a lot o f nuisance.  They are 
traffic hazard for others also.  The Committee recommends that for smooth 
traffic, there is a need of streamlining non -motorized vehicles by introducing 
minor penalty/punishment.  Here the punishment may be prescribed as corrective 
measures like giving training on traffic rules and not as penalty in monetary term. 
The Committee recommends that the non -motorized vehicles should not be 
allowed on National Highways and main roads of metro cities.  
(Para 183) 
 The Committee notes the omission of Chapter X of the Act. 
(Para 186) 
 The Committee was informed that under section 147(2) of the Bill it is 
proposes to cap the liability of general insurance companies to Rs.5 lakh to 10 lakh 
in compensating the third party claims in case of road acci dent.  It was submitted 
to the Committee that the proposal would expose millions of Third Party Vehicle 
insurance policy holders to unlimited risk.  If a Tribunal or court awards 
compensation above 5 lakhs in case of injury and Rs.10 lakhs in case of death , the 
owner of the vehicle has to bear the burden of paying over and above to the third 
party.  The Committee is of the view that the basic aim of insurance is to defray 
individual risk collectively over a vast group of premium contributors especially 
when the risk apprehended is likely to be beyond all the means of the individual.  
If this main purpose to save the individual is defeated there seems to be no 
necessity for insurance policy to mitigate the risk which an individual could not 
meet by himself.  There is no mens rea in accidents and very purpose of insurance 
is to underwrite the cost of unforeseen contingencies.  FDI was liberalized in 
insurance to strengthen the concept of insurance in a country in  which life 
essentially is exposed to all sorts o f unforeseen contingencies and calamities.  
Insurance Companies cannot run away from their basic responsibilities after 
collecting hefty amount of no claim insurance premium.   
(Para 190) 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the capping of liability of the 
insurance companies under third party insurance policy is patently incorrect and 
against the interest of the millions of road users.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that proviso to section 147 (2) as included in Clause 49 may be 
omitted.  
(Para 191) 
 The Committee was informed by various stakeholders that under Section 
147 of the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 a statutory cover has been given to safeguard 
the interest of the driver, cleaner and employees engaged in the working of the 
Motor Vehicles.  However, in the proposed amendment the statutory coverage of 
the driver, cleaner and employee engaged in the vehicle are omitted from the 
liability of the Insurance Company.   
108

(Para 192) 
 The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and they have informed the Committee that the amendment provides 
coverage to any person who dies or gets injured by a motor vehicle in a public 
place and therefore, shall include driver, cleaner and employee engaged in 
running the vehicle.  
(Para 193) 
 In fact, the amendment increases the ambit to cover employees who are 
otherwise not covered under the Workmen's Compensation Act.  
(Para 194) 
 The Committee notes the assurance of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and recommends that the Govern ment should ensure that the driver, 
cleaner and employees engaged in a vehicle are fully protected under the 
insurance coverage.  The Committee therefore recommends that the “Driver, 
cleaner and employees engaged in the working of the Motor Vehicles” be 
specifically mentioned in the clause.  
(Para 195) 
 The Committee is concerned over the apprehension expressed by the States 
about getting all State Government's vehicles insured.  The States have submitted 
they are already in resource crunch and if the State  will have to spend a big 
amount for making premium payment, it would adversely affect their exchequer.  
The Committee further recommends that the State Governments may be 
exempted from paying premium for the Government vehicles for two reasons, first 
these vehicles are in public service and second, the amount saved from premium 
payment may be spent on giving compensation to road accident victims.  
(Para 196) 
 Committee notes the changes.  
(Para 198) 
 The Committee feels that the proposed sub -section (5) is  a favourable step 
towards the family of the injured who succumbed to injuries and it will help the 
family financially.  
(Para 199) 
 The Committee notes the changes.  
(Para 200) 
 The Committee feels that giving the power of civil court to the tribunal will  
not only expedite the disposal of cases but also help to the family of the victim of 
road accident to overcome the mental trauma and also for settlement of the 
financial claims. The Committee appreciates this move.  
(Para 201) 
 The Committee notes the changes.  
(Para 203) 
 The Committee feels that the proposal to increase the amount from ten 
thousand to one lakh required for an appeal from the decision of the claims 
tribunal to be heard by the High Court is on correct lines.  
109

(Para 207) 
 The Committee notes that above suggestions are full of merits and need to 
be codified in the legislation.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that all 
claimants of road accidents should first approach the insurance companies for 
settlement of the claims and if they are di ssatisfied they can approach the MACT 
and judicial fora.   
(Para 212) 
 The Committee further recommends that every claim of settlement should 
be filed before the MACT or with the insurer within a period of six months so that 
it acts as a catalyst for quick  settlement and, at the same time, acts as a deterrent 
against deliberate delay in filing of claims as well as fraudulent/fictitious claims 
being preferred.  The Committee also recommends that necessary legislative 
backing may be provided so as to ensure d etailed accident report by police as 
prescribed by the Supreme Court and which is followed in Delhi.  
(Para 213) 
 The Committee finds the increase in penalty as appropriate.  
(Para 215) 
 The Committee appreciates the proposal.  
(Para 217) 
 The Committee finds the increase in penalty from Rs. two hundred to five 
hundred as appropriate.  
(Para 218) 
 The Committee finds that the penalty for disobedience of order, 
obstruction and refusal of information to be given by a person to public servant 
while discharging his duties under this Act to be increased from five hundred to 
two thousand rupees under Section 179 (1) & (2) as appropriate.  
(Para 220) 
 Section 180 deals with the owner of a motor vehicle who gives his vehicle to 
such a person who is not authorized to drive a vehicle under this Act is liable to 
pay fine of one thousand rupees. The Committee finds that the fine of five 
thousand rupees would be appropriate as a deterrent because a person who is not 
authorized to drive is a safety hazard.  
(Para 222) 
 Clause 61  Under Section 181 the punishment/penalty (imprisonment 3 
months/Rs.five hundred rupees) has been prescribed for driving vehicles in 
contravention of section 3 or section 4.  The Committee thinks that to increase the 
penalty to five thousand rupees is appropriate.  
(Para 224) 
 Section 182 deals with the offence of a person who has been disqualified 
from having a driving license drives a vehicle in a public place or any place or 
applies for a license without disclosing the endorsement to his earlier  license.  The 
Committee notes that the fine to be imposed on such an offender is appropriate.  
(Para 226) 
110

 Clause 63  speaks about the punishment prescribed for offences related to 
construction, manufacture, sale and alteration of motor vehicles and its 
components.  The Committee finds that proposed substitution is good for checking 
unscrupulous elements in the Motor Vehicle industry both the dealer as well as the 
manufacturer and of course buyer upto some extent.   
(Para 228) 
 As it is a fact that any alteration  or retrofitting which is not permissible 
under this Act is detrimental to the environment as well as for pedestrians and 
commuters.  The Committee thinks that fine of Rupees hundred crore prescribed  
in Section 182 A (2) to be awarded to such m anufacturer who fails to comply with 
the provisions of chapter VII of the Act will act as a deterrent.  
(Para 229) 
 The Committee feels that the proposed enhancement of penalties in 
respective categories is appropriate.  
(Para 231) 
 Amendment in Clause 65 has given some explanation under sub section 
(iv). It was submitted before the Committee   that these explanations may be 
misinterpreted and misread by the law enforcement agencies such as police.  
Jumping a red light means a vehicle has crossed the stop l ine when the light was 
not green but sometimes duration of amber light is too short and a vehicle cannot 
pass from one side to another side and the driver just reaches other side when the 
light is already red and he comes under the ambit of red light jumpi ng. Under 184 
(iv) (d) explanation is passing or overtaking other vehicles in a manner contrary to 
law. One of the  stakeholders submitted that many times heavy vehicle is moving 
slowly in right lane and a car wants to overtake but overtaking is not allowed from 
left and if he does he will commit the offence of wrong side overtaking.  
(Para 233) 
 This Clause seeks to amend Section 184 in order to enhance penalties for 
driving dangerously indulging in such activities during driving which may 
endanger others‟ lives. The Committee feels that sometimes a person who has not 
committed mistake as such but was caught on wrong foot because of others‟ fault, 
then he should not be penalized heavily.  The Committee recommends that before 
applying law, technical things like signals, signages, stop-signs, divider etc. may be 
placed correctly.  Proper training to police officials is also essential.  
(Para 234) 
 At present the police agencies are implementing the provisions as per their 
whims and fancies.  There is no standa rdization of technical aspect which can be 
followed by the public.   
(Para 235) 
 The Committee recommends that the Government should come out with 
appropriate rules and regulations to decide and define what constitute lane 
driving, red light jumping, violation of signals etc.  
(Para 236) 
111

 The Committee also recommends that signage should be uniform based on 
certain technical parameters and standards and the signage should be exclusively 
erected only by authorized authorities such as NHAI on National highway s and 
State PWD Departments for State highways.  
(Para 237) 
 The Committee was informed that draft Road Traffic Regulations are 
pending with the Government.  The Committee recommends that the proposed 
Road Traffic Regulation by virtue of powers conferred b y the Section 118 of the 
Motor Vehicle Act 1988 should be notified along with the present Amendment Bill.  
(Para 238) 
 The Committee further recommends that parts A &B of the first schedule 
of the Act needs revision as the same is not updated and should al so comply with 
the UN Convention of road signs and signals of 1969 to which India is a signatory.  
Road marking, signals and miscellaneous devices should also be included in the 
schedule.  
(Para 239) 
 A stakeholder submitted before the Committee that one w ho has in his 
blood more than 30 MG per 100 ML of blood portion of alcohol to be tested by a 
“breath alcohol analyzer",  comes under the category of person who is drunk.  
There are two tests when a person takes a breath, the breath alcohol tester 
converts it by a formula into blood alcohol ratio.  Now, the Government of India 
has not decided the formula if it is 1:2100; 1:2300.  There are three conversion 
ratio equally used in the entire world based upon the type of a body we have and 
the type of food we ea t.  So, when we talk about drunken driving with breath 
alcohol analyzer, we still don't have a formula (breath to blood alcohol ratio to 
change), but when we talk about going to the laboratory or a breath alcohol 
analyzer, we have to write the conversion b etween breath and blood.  Otherwise, 
we will again run into a huge problem.  Secondly, there is the issue of apparatus.  
Regarding breath alcohol analyzers, there is no stipulation of type approval 
standards what should be a breath alcohol analyzer.  
(Para 241) 
 The Committee heard the views of States, private stakeholders and the 
Ministry also on the menace of drunken driving and also driving after taking 
drugs.  The Committee after hearing the views came to the conclusion that to find 
out the alcohol in the blood of driver is easier but the modalities to trace the drugs 
is not available at present.  It is a fact that the drunk driving is a big menace on 
the road and many accidents take place due to the fact that the driver of the 
vehicle was under the influence of alcohol or drugs while driving.   
(Para 242) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should impose stringent 
penalty on such driver who was caught driving after drinking.  Such driver 
endangers the lives of his own , other occupants of the veh icle and other persons 
on the road.   
(Para 243) 
112

 After hearing the witnesses, the Committee notes that method of testing the 
alcohol in the blood of offender is not foolproof and the standard of "breath 
analyzer"  is also not good enough which could give the authentic report.  The 
Committee recommends th at the Ministry should go for testing machines of 
international standard that should prescribe standards for breath analyzer 
machines and various parameters to decide drunkenness.  
(Para 244) 
 
 The Committee notes that drunken driving is a major cause of road 
accidents.  This  malady needs to be dealt with a firm hand.  The Committee got 
suggestions to the effect that if a drunken driver commit an accident which results 
in the death of persons the former should be dealt under the provisions of culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder under the relevant Sections of IPC.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may amend the 
necessary legislations to include the deaths due to drunken driving as culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder.  
(Para 245) 
 The Committee also recommends that if the drunken driver  commits an 
accident, his action should not be construed as mere 'negligence' rather it should 
be treated as a premeditated commitment of a crime and the drunken driver 
should be made punish able under relevant provisions of IPC depending on the 
consequences of the accident.  
(Para 246) 
 The Committee notes the increase in the penalty to be increased for driving 
when mentally or physically unfit to drive.  The Committee finds the increased 
penalty is appropriate.  
(Para 11) 
 The Committee notes the change in penalty to be incorporated in Section 
187 of the principal Act, which is for the offences committed relating to an 
accident.  
(Para 250) 
 The Committee notes and finds it appropriate to inc rease the penalties for 
the offence of racing and trials of speed.  The Committee feels that the fast driving 
vehicle is a big nuisance on road and it endangers lives of pedestrians as well as 
commuters.  It is further added here that on most of the roads in a place like 
Delhi, speed limit is same what was written some 20 -30 years back.  The 
Committee recommends that speed limit on different roads may be reconsidered 
in view of increasing number of vehicles.  
(Para 251) 
 The Committee notes that speed limit  in Indian roads are up to 80 Km in 
most of the National Highways.  In certain cases the roads were designed for a 
speed up 120 km, but the maximum speed limit permitted is 100 km.  The 
Committee notes that most of the accidents happen due to over speeding  of 
vehicles.  The Committee also notes that most of the vehicles manufactured in 
113

India are with a capability of driving more than 180 -Km/hr.  In some cases the 
vehicles are manufactured for more than 240 Km/hr. capability. These vehicles act 
like a missil e or rocket if involved in an accident. During the deliberations of the 
Committee, one stakeholder was asked to respond on the futility of high speed 
vehicles when the speed limits are upto a maximum of 100 km/hr.  They informed 
the Committee that for acceleration purposes high end speed engines are required.  
They could not give any other explanation.  The Committee feels that these 
manufactures are following standards of European and American countries and 
the same standards and technologies are being implemented in India. 
(Para 252) 
 The Committee recommends that the Government should formulate the 
necessary legislation to limit the acceleration capability of vehicles manufactured 
for use in India to speed limit as per the infrastructure availability of the country.   
(Para 253) 
  The Committee also notes that slow moving vehicles are a hazard in 
National Highways.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that minimum speed 
limit should be prescribed for National Highways according to place and amount 
of traffic.   
(Para 254) 
 Section 190 of the Principal Act speaks about using a vehicle by a person in 
an unsafe condition.  Such vehicle may endanger other‟s lives in a public place; 
can cause bodily injury or damage to property.  Clause (3) speaks about such 
carriage which are dangerous or hazardous nature to human life.  The Committee 
finds that the consequences of  a vehicle which is not fit to run on the road and 
may cause harms to people, environment or damages to other‟s property fall 
under serious category hence increase in penalty is appropriate.  
(Para 256) 
 The Ministry has proposed to omit the Section 191 of the Principal Act 
which deals with the sale of vehicle in or alteration of vehicle to condition 
contravening the Act.  The Committee is unable to u nderstand why this Section 
has to be omitted.  The Committee recommends that the  Ministry should 
prescribe provisions to the effect that  importer or seller of motor vehicle will not 
sell any vehicle which contravenes this Act.  
(Para 258) 
 The Committee notes the proposed amendment.  
(Para 260) 
 The Committee feels that the penalty prescribed for different offences 
under this Clause is little bit on higher side.  The Committee recommends that in 
Section 192 A (1) (i) imprisonment for a term may be kept as  6 months instead of 
one year.  In 192 A 1 (iii) maximum one year should remain there and in 192 A 
1(v) ten thousand rupees is sufficient.  
(Para 261) 
 The Committee finds that the insertion of new section 192 B is a welcome 
step towards allowing only auth orized/registered vehicle to run on the road and 
114

penalty for violation of the rules proposed in 192 B (1) and (2) are justified but the 
Committee feels that in obtaining a certificate based on false representation of 
facts by a person or dealer is a seriou s offence and may be given harsher 
punishment than that proposed.  In 192 B (3) & (4) the Committee recommends 
that such offender may be given imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
minimum 6 months and maximum upto one year.  This may be added in the Bill.  
(Para 263) 
 The Committee is satisfied with the provision proposed in the Section 193 
of the Principal Act.  The Committee feels that in metros number of aggregators 
are increasing day by day and in the competitive situation aggregator and other 
like group/agent may r esort to malpractices to get more profit hence to rein them 
the penalty in sub-section (2) is appropriate.  
(Para 268) 
 The Committee observes that the penalty Clause given in Section 194 of the 
Principal Act is appropriate but at the same time the Committee is of the view that 
today Motor transport is the main source of transporting the goods from one place 
to another and to earn extra profit transporter carry extra loads on their vehicle.  
(Para 272) 
 The Committee feels that extra load on a vehicle not only damages the road 
but it also makes driving the overloaded vehicle risky.  Overloaded vehicles are 
extremely dangerous for the travelling public.  They are the cause of large number 
of accidents. The Committee further adds that the proviso to be inserte d under 
sub-section 1 'C' is a right measure towards curbing this problem.  The 
Committee recommends that the vehicle in no condition should be allowed to 
move ahead unless and until the excess load has been removed from the vehicle 
besides imposing fines for each tone of load.  Harsh penalty may deter transporter 
to indulge in wrong practice of overloading.  At the same time, the Committee 
suggests that at checking points, man power and machinery may be made 
available so that this rule can be implemented successfully.   
(Para 273) 
 The Committee notes that a twenty tonne capacity vehicle often carry 30 to 
35 tonnes.  The Committee feels that the vehicle manufacturers have to redefine 
their technology to ensure that if a vehicle which is overloaded beyond it s axle 
power is immobilized.  
(Para 274) 
 The Committee notes that the linear dimensions of the vehicles which can 
ply on the roads may be prescribed by the Government. Many a times, vehicles 
which are carrying bulky oversized and protruding items like bag asse of 
sugarcane, sugarcanes, husk, cotton, hay chaff of paddy, wheat and cotton etc. are 
hindrances resulting in road accidents and also hindrance to smooth flow of 
traffic.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the vehicles which are 
oversized in linear dimensions should not be allowed to ply on roads.  
(Para 275) 
115

 Clause 77 of the proposed bill gives a new height to penalty to be charged 
by the authority from vehicle owners/drivers etc.  
(Para 281) 
 The Committee feels that under Section 194A penal ty of Rs.1,000 per 
excess person is on higher side and Committee recommends that it should be 
brought down to Rs.200 per person.  Here, it would be pertinent to mention that 
India is a developing country and in many parts of the country especially in rural  
areas, transportation is a problem.  People travel even on roof top of the bus.  At 
many places there is no government transport and people rely on private 
buses/carriages.  To impose penalty is not the solution to the problem.   
(Para 282) 
 The Committee  notes the proposed omission of the Section 195 from the 
Act.  
(Para 284) 
 The Committee was informed that more than half of the vehicles on road 
are without a third party insurance.  The Committee notes that the registration 
tax is one time affair, likewise the third party insurance should also be made a one 
time affair.  The Committee recommends that every new vehicle purchased should 
be made to pay at the time of registration the third party insurance for life time of 
the vehicles.  
(Para 289) 
 The Committee notes the proposed amendment to Section  197.  
(Para 291) 
The Committee notes the proposed amendment  to section 198.  
(Para 293) 
 If a juvenile commits a crime after taking the control of the vehicle with or 
without the consent of his guardian t hen the guardian may be held responsible for 
Commission of  the criminal Act.  Then the punishment under section 199A(2) 
may be evoked.  The Committee agrees with the proposed amendments in Section 
199 A (3), (4), (5) and (6).  
(Para 294) 
 The Committee ag rees with the amendment proposed in this Clause for 
community service as a condition for composition of an offence.  But it is not 
known to the Committee what type of community service is supposed to be 
performed by the offender.  The Committee recommends that while giving 
community service the State should take care that the service to be performed by 
the offender may not be degrading in any way.  The Committee notes that 
compelling the violators to spend time in emergency surgical OPDs of road 
accident victims is a good way of making them understand the consequences.  
(Para 300) 
 The Committee notes the amendment and finds that the penalty under 
Section 201 proposed to be imposed is appropriate.  
(Para 302) 
116

 The Committee observes that the proposed amendment under Section 206, 
sub-section (4) speaks about a police officer/authorized person of State may seize 
the driving license held by such driver who violates Section 183 -driving at 
excessive speed and Section 184 -driving dangerously. Section 185 Dru nken 
driving, 189-Racing and trials of speed; 190 -suing of vehicle in unsafe condition; 
194C-driving overloaded vehicle, 194 -D not wearing protective headgear and 194 
E- failure to allow free passage to emergency vehicles.  The Committee notes that 
the fin es are revised after a period of almost 30 years.  The Committee was 
informed that sanction of Parliament is required for increasing the fines.  That is 
why fine was stagnant in these years which resulted in its non-deterrence on traffic 
offenders.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a Clause should be added 
in this Bill to give effect to increase of fine @10% every year through executive 
orders.  
(Para 306) 
 The Committee agrees with the proposed amendment under Section 210 A 
and B.  
(Para 310) 
 The Committee recommends that the digitalization and making the things 
electronically available should be done on priority but it should not be forced and 
it may be done in a phased manner because some states and some centres within 
the State may not be in a position to switch over to electronically equipped office 
in a short period due to financial shortage and lack of manpower.  
(Para 314) 
 Clause 88: The Committee notes the proposed amendment to be 
incorporate as sub-section (4) of Section 212.  
(Para 315) 
 Section 215-A speaks about the delegation of any power to any person or 
group of persons to discharge any of its powers, functions and duties under this 
Act by the Central and State Governments.  The Committee notes that Section 215 
A provides for delegation of powers, functions and duties conferred under the Act 
to any person or group of persons.  The Committee observes that this is quite 
ambiguous and there are chances of misuse of powers.  The Government has 
already assured the Committee that any delega tion of powers,  functions and 
duties under the Act will be made only to a public servant or a public authority.  
The Committee notes that the scope of public authority and public service is 
having wider connotations and it is a matter of interpretation.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that powers, duties and functions under the Section 215A 
may be delegated only to a Government servant or Government authority.  
(Para 320) 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
No guns be allowed in personal vehicles 
The Committee notes that road rage is one of the daily phenomena 
happening in metropolitan cities and urban areas.  Many a time, in road rage, 
117

licensed guns are used to kill persons.  This is happening mainly because licensed 
guns are carried by persons in  the vehicles without any restriction.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that licenses to fire arms may be restricted in 
such a way that it should not be carried while traveling in personal Motor Vehicles 
in Metropolitan cities and urban areas where traffic jam is the order of the day.   
(Para 321) 
Inclusion of Traffic  and road safety education in school curricula 
The committee notes that there is a need to educate the students about the 
traffic laws, rules and regulations.  In many cases the drivers a nd vehicle owners 
are not aware of the extant rules and regulations related to lane driving, 
overtaking, speed limit, wearing of helmets, seat belts, sounding of horn, free 
passages to ambulances and police vehicles, parking of vehicles, alighting of 
passengers, driving under influence of liquor and drugs, overloading, obeying 
signals and signage etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that traffic and 
road safety education must be made a compulsory part of the school education 
upto the 12 th Standard throughout India.  The Curriculum may contain general 
awareness of traffic rules, existing motor vehicle laws, rules, regulations, messages 
of Govt authorities on road safety etc. Causes of accidents, impact of accidents on 
families and society, economic and s ocial cost of accidents etc should also be made 
part of the curriculum.  
(Para 322) 
The road safety education should impart knowledge, skills and 
understanding of road safety and road safety behavior.  The curriculum should 
also enable the students to bett er understand the risks associated with road use 
and to also develop an appreciation for the reasons for many of the laws and 
regulations in place to protect the drivers, passengers and commuters.  Student 
should learn and understand and practice road safe ty and safe road uses. 
Education needs to take centre -stage as technology and the challenges of driving 
evolve. The students should be evolved as better driver when they get a driving 
license as future citizens.  We should evolve them as personally and soc ially 
responsible road users.  If we are educating the children we may be educating a 
generation of people.  
(Para 323) 
Restriction of Heavy vehicles during early morning 
 The Committee is of the view that the commercial vehicles play a pivotal 
role in the field of commerce and trade and also is an integral part of the country‟s 
economy. The Committee feels that the drivers who are the backbone of running 
the transport system in the country is not a secured lot from any angle whether it 
is their salary, job  condition, working hours, life insurance etc. They are directed 
to drive the vehicles for many days or weeks single handedly.  The Committee 
notes that driving the heavy vehicles for longer duration during the night causes 
fatigue to drivers and due to wo rk pressure and lack of driver‟s concentration 
many a times causes accidents.  Moreover, heavy vehicles and trucks are causing 
major accidents during wee hours.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
118

the government should strictly implement the duty ho urs for the drivers of 
commercial vehicles and also prohibit the driving of commercial vehicles from 
3.00 AM to 5.00 AM in the morning.  The Committee also recommends that 
movement of heavy commercial vehicles may be regulated in the early morning in 
such a  way that the commercial vehicles carrying/supplying movement of 
vegetables, milk and perishable food products are not affected.  The Committee 
further recommends that the Government should make it mandatory for the 
transporters to depute two drivers on a Heavy commercial vehicle having more 
than two axles to drive the vehicle alternately if the vehicle has to cover a distance 
of more than 500 kms.  The Government may take suitable action to amend the 
appropriate Law/Rules to implement the recommendations.  
(Para 324) 
Lane Segregation 
 Another aspect noticed by the Committee is that there is no separate lane 
or segregation of vehicles on roads.  Every kind of traffic from bicycle to two 
wheelers, three wheelers to LMVs, Tempos and Trucks to mega sized vehicles are 
using the same lanes of the roads at their whims and fancies and no one is 
following any lane driving or following any segregated way of traffic movement. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should lay down 
clear cut polic ies for segregation of different type of vehicles on specific lanes on 
the roads. This is possible in majority of our National Highways as these are 
multilane roads. Enforcement of lane driving should be given priority by the 
enforcement agencies.  
(Para 325) 
Insurance manual and a concise traffic rule book 
 The vehicle manufacturers always supply a service manual with every new 
vehicle sold.  The Committee recommends that an insurance manual which give 
details about available insurance products to enable the customers to compare 
different insurance products and choose the best, may be supplied along with the 
service manual.  A concise traffic rules manual may also be supplied alongwith the 
Service manual so that a driver can learn about the traffic rules a nd the fines and 
punishment associated with its violation.  
(Para 326) 
National Road Safety Board 
 The broad aim of the Motor Vehicle Amendment Bill is to enhance road 
safety.  Road safety is a complex resultant of road construction technology, motor 
vehicle technology and the upgradation of skills of road users both vehicle drivers 
and pedestrians.  Mere enhancement of penalties will not solve the problem.  
There is a need to constitute a high powered road safety board and to ensure the 
availability of ade quate funds for technologically upgrading and updating the 
standards.  National road safety fund can be constituted with an additional cess on 
first time sales of new motor vehicles which could fund all these activities.  The 
119

National Road Safety Board may  contain representatives of both Central & State 
Governments. It should have adequate authority to guide the Government.  
(Para 327) 
*****  
 
120

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


121 
 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 29 th September, 2016 in Committee 
Room  A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Shri Mukul Roy   - Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee  
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  
5. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
7. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia  
Lok Sabha 
8. Shri Subrata Bakshi 
9. Shri Ram Charitra  
10. Shri Vinod Chavda 
11. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
12. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
13. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
14. Shri P. Kumar  
15. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
16. Shri Kristappa Nimmala  
17. Shri Rajesh Pandey  
18. Shri Rajesh Ranjan   
19. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
20. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
21. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
22. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B. Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
Witnesses 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
1 Shri Sanjay Mitra Secretary 

122 
 
2 Shri Abhay Damle Joint Secretary 
4, Shri Priyank Bharti Director 
5. Shri Rajeev Lochan Director 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT (MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE) 
6. Ms. Reeta Vasishta Additional Secretary 
7. Shri R. Sreenivas Additional Legislative Counsel 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Membe rs of the Committee  to the first 
meeting of the reconstituted Committee.  The Chairman gave a brief introduction of the mandate 
of the Committee and solicit ed the rich knowledge and experience of the Members on the 
functioning of the Committee.  
3. All th e Members of the Committee introduced themselves and expressed their views 
about the functioning of the Committee.  The Members also congratulated Shri Mukul Roy, M.P. 
for assuming the charge of Chairmanship of the Committee. 
4. The Chairman informed the Co mmittee that the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha has 
referred The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 to this Committee for examination and 
report.  The Chairman further added that since this Bill is very extensive, it needs to be examined 
with due diligen ce and care. The Chairman expressed his hope for co -operation of Members in 
every matter of the functioning of Committee and informed the Members that to understand the 
details of the provisions of the Bill, the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Hi ghways has 
been called to enlighten the Committee about the various amendments proposed in the Bill. 
5. Thereafter, the Chairman, welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and his team of officials and asked them to make the presentat ion on the Bill.  The 
Secretary with the aid of a power point presentation, explained about various aspects on The 
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016.   
6. Members asked questions on various issues and the Secretary replied some of them and 
the Chairman  directed the officials of the Ministry to send the replies of other questions in 
writing to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
7. *     *     *1 
                                                           
1 *** Relates to other matters 

123 
 
8. The Chairman informed the Committee that a press advertisement inviting suggestions 
from the public on the provisions of The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 is under 
process and may be published in the print media shortly. 
9. The Chairman further informed the Committee that the next meeting of the Committee 
will be held on 14 th October, 2016 to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways on  The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016. 
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11. The meeting adjourned at 12: 45 p.m. 
 
  

124 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, the 14th October, 2016 in Committee Room  
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Shri Mukul Roy   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
s   
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore  
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  
6. Shri Rajeev Shukla  
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
8. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
LOK SABHA 
  
9. Shri Ram Charitra  
10. Shri Vinod Chavda 
11. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
12. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
13. Shri P. Kumar  
14. Shri Kristappa Nimmala  
15. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
17. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
18. Shri K. C. Venugopal  
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B. Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
1. Shri Sanjay Mitra Secretary 
2. Shri Abhay Damle Joint Secretary  
3. Smt. Dakshita Das Joint Secretary  

125 
 
4. Shri Priyank Bharti Director 
2. *     *     *2 
 3. Thereafter, the Committee welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways to the meeting to further hear their views on the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 
2016. The Secretary, with the aid of power point presentation, made Clause-by-Clause analysis of 
the Bill.  However, some of the Members pointed out that since there are 89 Clauses in the entire 
Bill to be considered, it is not possible to consider all Clauses at one go as the am endments 
require a very serious attention and discussion from the part of the Committee.  In view of the 
suggestions above, the Committee discussed 35 Clauses for the day.   
4. The Committee then decided to hold a meeting with the Secretaries of 
Ministry/Department of Road Transport of State Governments and  Union Territories 
Administration to hear their views on Bill, in the next meeting of the Committee.  The Committee 
authorized the Chairman to approach Hon'ble Chairman for seeking permission of the same. 
5. The Chairman informed the Committee that the two months' time given to the Committee 
to examine and report on the  Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 ends on 16 th October, 
2016.  So far, the Committee had two meetings to hear the Secretary, Ministry  of Road Transport 
and Highways on the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016.  The Committee could not 
proceed in the matter due to delay in re-constitution of the Committee in the month of September, 
2016 and precious time elapsed during this period. Now, a press communiqué has been published 
in various newspapers on the 11 th October, 2016 to invite suggestions of stakeholders/individuals 
on the Bill for which 15 days' time has been given to the public to express their views before the 
Committee or send their memoranda to the Secretariat.  The Committee wants to hear some more 
Government organizations/insurance companies and other stakeholders in the matter and it needs 
more time to conclude the deliberations on the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016. 
6. Therefore, the Committee decided to request Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to extend 
the period of consideration and report on the  Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 for a 
further period of two months i.e. upto 16 th December, 2016.   The Committee author ized the 
Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman for the purpose. 
7. The meeting adjourned at 4: 45 p.m. 
 
  
                                                           
2 *** Relates to other matters 

126 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25th October, 2016 in Committee 
Room  A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Shri Mukul Roy   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
s   
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee  
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  
5. Kumari Selja  
6. Shri Rajeev Shukla  
7. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
LOK SABHA 
  
8. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
9. Shri Vinod Chavda 
10. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
11. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
12. Shri P. Kumar  
13. Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
14. Shri Kristappa Nimmala  
15. Shri Rajesh Pandey  
16. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
17. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
18. Shri Rakesh Singh 
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
20. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
21. Shri K. C. Venugopal  
  
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
 
WITNESSES  
    11.00 A.M. 

127 
 
SIKKIM 
Sh. S.B.S. Bhadauria,  Secretary, Transport 
MEGHALAYA 
Dr. Sreeranjan Additional Chief Secretary, Transport 
Department 
MIZORAM 
Mr. Umakant OSD 
Mr. R. Remmawia Director, Transport 
ASSAM 
Sh. Ashotosh Agnihotri Secretary, Transport Deptt., 
Sh. Puru Gupta Commissioner of Transport 
Sh. J.C. Handique Joint Commissioner of Transport 
         12.15 P.M. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 
Sh. Sunil Chaudhary Commissioner, Transport 
Captain R.S. Rathore Joint Commissioner 
DELHI 
Sh. Sandeep Kumar Secretary-cum-Commissioner (Transport) 
Sh. K.K. Dahiya Spl. Commissioner (Transport) 
HARYANA 
Smt. Suprabha Dahiya Transport Commissioner  
Sh. Jitender Kumar HCS Secretary, Regional Transport Authority 
UTTARAKHAND 
Ms. Sunita Singh Addl. Transport Commissioner 
Sh. Rajeev Mehra Assistant Transport Commissioner 
CHANDIGARH 
Mr. K.K. Jindal Secretary Transport 
UTTAR PRADESH 
Sh. Aradhana Shukla Principal Secretary, Transport 
Sh. K. Ravinder Naik Transport Commissioner 
Sh. Gangafal Addl. Transport Commissioner 
WEST BENGAL  

128 
 
Sh. Alagapan Bandopadhyay Principal Secretary 
PUNJAB  
Sh. Dipinder Singh Principal Secretary 
Sh. Harmail Singh Transport Commissioner 
    2.30 P.M. 
 RAJASTHAN 
Sh. Shailendra Agrawal Principal Secretary, Transport 
 GUJARAT 
Sh. R.M. Jadav Commissioner (Transport) 
CHHATTISGARH  
Sh. B.V.R. Subrahmanyam   Principal Secy Home 
Sh. A.D. Gautam Secy Home 
Sh. O.P. Pal Addl. Commissioner Transport 
MADHYA PRADESH  
Sh. R.K.Jain Additional Tpt Commissioner 
Sh. Ajay Gupta Deputy Tpt. Commissioner 
ODISHA  
Sh. Samir Kumar Panigrahi Addl. Tpt. Commissioner 
     3.45 P.M. 
 KERALA 
Sh. K.R. Jyothilal Secretary (Transport) 
TAMILNADU 
Thiru Apurva Varma  Principal Secretary to Govt. 
Thiru Satyabrat Sahoo Transport Commissioner 
Thiru T. Ramalinkam Deputy Transport Commissioner 
Thiru Pon. Senthil Kumar Assistant Secretary 
 TELANGANA 
Sh. Sunil Sharma Principal Secretary, Transport R&B 
Deptt. 
Sh. Sandeep Kumar Sultania Commissioner, Transport 
 MAHARASHTRA 

129 
 
Sudhir Shrivastava Additional Chief Secretary (Transport & 
Ports) 
PUDUCHERRY  
Sh. S.D. Sundaresan Transport Commissioner 
ODISHA  
Sh. Samir Kumar Panigrahi Addl. Transport Commissioner 
KARNATAKA  
Dr. Basava Raju Principal Secretrary 
Mr. Maruti Samrani Addl. Commissioner 
 LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
Dr. Reeta Vasishta Additional Secretary 
Sh. R. Sreenivas Additional Legislative Counsel 
2. At the outset, the C hairman of the Committee informed the members that Hon'ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha has granted permission to extend the time for submission of Report on 
the  Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 upto 16 th December, 2016.  The Chairman also 
informed the Members that the meeting has been divided into four sessions to hear the views of 
all the State Governments on the Bill.   
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee  and the 
representatives from various North Eastern States to the meeti ng.  The Chairman informed them 
that the Committee already held two meetings and heard the views of the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways over the Bill.  He has asked the State representatives to make their 
presentation and views/opinions/ points of differences etc. on the Bill with regard to its various 
Clauses.  State Governments of Assam Meghalaya, Mizoram and Sikkim expressed their 
agreement to various Clauses of the Bill.  Meghalaya has expressed their view that there should 
be some measures to a ddress the road safety engineering and time line aspects properly.  
Representative of Sikkim pointed out that there is no instrument under the proposed  Bill to 
identify the persons under the influence of drugs and penalize them. 
4. Thereafter, the Committ ee heard the views of Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Delhi and 
Uttarakhand.  Himachal Pradesh Government has informed that they proposed eleven 
amendments to the Bill at the time of discussion and out of it five were accepted.  Regarding 
charging of penalty, late fee etc, the licensing authorities are using their discretion, which may be 
dispensed  with. Representative of Delhi requested for grant of some more time to furnish their 
comments.  State of Haryana would like to include three wheelers and rickshaws a lso under the 
category of stage carriage.  However, the representative of the Legislative Department informed 
that such amendments could not be done.  Representative of the Uttarakhand also suggested some 
amendments which may suits their State such as cate gorization of stage carriage vehicles, 
issuance of driving license to truck drivers, issuance of vehicle fitness certificates, controlling the 
sale of abandoned vehicles, overloaded vehicles insurance for vehicles etc.   

130 
 
5. Representative of Chandigarh,  U ttar Pradesh, Punjab and West Bengal were heard 
thereafter.  Representative of Uttar Pradesh suggested that the road sign pattern should be made 
easily understandable to ever illiterate drivers on the present ones are very difficult for such 
people to understand.  He also put their views on the issuance of licenses to State RTC vehicles. 
6. The Punjab Government has informed that they are broadly on agreement with the 
Amendment.  He suggested for the requirement of specific time schedules for the private bu ses 
inorder to reduce the interferences and court cases.  He has also suggested to remove the cap on 
the insurance to claims.  The representatives of the West Bengal Government has stated that the 
Bill is over centrist in nature and stated their disagreeme nt to Clauses 12(5); 66A 164 -B, safety 
on national highways etc. 
7. During the post lunch session, the Committee heard the views of Gujarat, Chattisgarh, 
Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh.  The Government of Gujarat supported the Bill.  They have 
suggested some minute amendments to some Clauses.  Representative of Rajasthan stated that 
many suggestions put by them during the meeting held for drafting the Bill has been incorporated 
the Bill.  He has suggested some more reforms to be included in Clauses pertaining  to driving 
licence, registration of vehicles, National transport policy, controlling the traffic and offences and 
penalties.  Chhattisgarh also agreed to the amendments.  They suggested some amendments to 
insurance cap on the accident claims. 
8. After the witness above withdrew, the representative of Kerala put their views regarding 
the Bill.  The representatives of Kerala and Odisha gave a Clause - by- Clause analysis of the Bill 
and put their views on some of the important Clauses. The Committee decided t o further hear the 
representatives of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Chattisgarh and 
Puducherry on 4 th November, 2016. The Chairman asked the States to submit their further 
comments, if any, within seven days. 
9. Members of the Committe e also raised many questions to which the concerned officials 
responded.  The meeting   then adjourned to meet again on 4 th November, 2016 to hear the stake 
holders. 
10. The meeting adjourned at 3.11  p.m.  
  

131 
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:30 A. M. on Friday, the 4 th November, 2016 in Committee 
Room A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Shri Mukul Roy   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee  
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
5. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
6. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Ram Charitra 
8. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
11. Shri Kristappa Nimmala 
12. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
14. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
15. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
     Witnesses 
STATE GOVT. OF TAMIL NADU 
Sh. Apurva Varma  Principal Secretary to Govt. 
Sh. Satyabrat Sahoo Transport Commissioner 
Sh. P. Ramalingam Deputy Transport Commissioner 
Sh. S. Pon. Senthil Nathan Assistant Secretary 
STATE GOVT. OF KARNATAKA 
Dr. B. Basavaraju Principal Secretary to Govt., Transport Deptt. 
Mr. Maruti Samrani Addl. Commissioner, Transport 
Sh. Ashfaq Ahamed RTO 
STATE GOVT. OF TELANGANA 
Sh. Sunil Sharma Principal Secretary, Transport R&B Deptt., 
Government of Telangana 

132 
 
Sh. B. Venkateswarlu  Transport Deptt. 
Sh. P.B. Muni Sekhar Transport Deptt. 
STATE GOVT. OF MAHARASHTRA  
Sh. Praveen Gedam Transport Commissioner 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
Sh. R. Sreenivas Addl. L.C. 
 
      11.00 A.M. 
GENERAL INSURANCE COUNCIL 
Mr. G. Srinivasan CMD, New India Assurance Co. Ltd. 
Mr. K. Sanath Kumar CMD, National Insurance Co. Ltd. 
Mr. Bhargav Dasgupta MD, & CEO, ICICI Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
Mr. S.S. Gopalarathnam MD, Cholamandalam MS General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
Mr. R. Chandrasekaran  Secretary General, General Insurance Council 
Mr. Arvind Shenoy Head (2), technical , General Insurance Council 
Mr. Ketan Ganatra  Sr. Vice President, Claims & Litigations, HDFC Ergo 
General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
SAVE LIFE FOUNDATION 
Miss. Smriti Singh Manager, Policy Advocacy 
Sh. Ravitej M. Prasad Senior Associate, Policy and Research 
INSTITUTE OF ROAD TRAFFIC EDUCATION 
Dr. Rohit Baluja President 
INDIAN FOUNDATION OF TRANSPORT RESEARCH AND TRAINING (IFTRT) 
Sh. S.P. Singh Sr. Fellow 
SOCIETY OF INDIAN AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURERS (SIAM) 
Mr. Vishnu Mathur Director General 
Mr. Sugato Sen Dy. Director General 
Mr. Hardik Makhija Executive Officer 
Mr. I.V. Rao Advisor, Maruti Suzuki India Ltd. 
Mr. Sanjay Tank General Manager, Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. 
AUTOMOTIVE RESEARCH ASSOCIATION OF INDIA , PUNE 
Mrs. Rashmi Urdhwareshe Director 
INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC HEALTH, BENGALURU 
Dr. Mahesh Kadammanavar  
Mr. Amit Karnik  
CONSUMER VOICE 
Mr. Ashim Sanyal COO & Secretary 

133 
 
Mr. Hemant Upadhyay  
Mr. Amarjeet Panghal  
Mr. Nalin Sinha  
ALL INDIA FEDERATION 
Sh. Ashfaq Ahamed President 
Mr. S.S. Velumani Dy. Commissioner  (Retd) 
Mr. P. Anand RTO, Tamil Nadu 
Mr. S. S. Singh ARTO 
Mr. Ramanathan MLO 
Sh. Ajay Jagga,  Advocate, Punjab & Haryana High Court 
ALL INDIA MOTOR TRANSPORT CONGRESS 
Sh. Bhim Wadhwa President 
G.R. Shanmugappa Former President 
Sh. Bal Malkit Singh Former President 
Sh. Amrit Lal Madan Vice President 
Sh. Kultaran Singh Atawl Hon. Chairman 
Sh. Gurinder Pal Singh Former President 
Sh. J.L. Khanna Chairman, Finance Committee 
Sh. Naveen Kumar Gupta  Secretary General 
UTTAR  PRADESH  PARIVAHAN  KARADHAN  SEVA  SANGH 
Sh. Ramesh Chandra Prajapati Chairman 
CUTS INTERNATIONAL, JAIPUR 
Mr. George Cheriyan Director  
Ms. Mahima Kirori Project Officer 
FEDERATION OF CONSUMER ASSOCIATIONS, WEST BENGAL 
Mrs. Mala Banerjee President 
ALL INDIA ROAD TRANSPORT WORKERS’ FEDERATION 
Sh. R. Lakshmiah Vice President 
Sh. Arumugha Nainar Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the States of Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Telangana to the meeting called  on the Motor Vehicles 
(Amendment) Bill, 2016. 
3. First of all, Principal Secretary to the Government of Tamil Nadu submitted before the 
Committee that Tamil Nadu has objections on certain provisions of the Bill. Tamil Nadu 

134 
 
expressed reservations related to sectio ns 8, 9, 11, 41, 44, 56, 64, 66, 69, 74, 88 -A,93 and 140, 
142, 143 & 215. They briefly elaborated these sections also. 
4. Representatives from the Government of Maharashtra emphasized on the need of some 
change to be brought in clauses 2, 4, 5, 9, 10, 16, 20, 22, 24 & 85 to make it more practical. They 
also advocated for bringing down the age -limit to 14-15 years for issuing licenses. As submitted 
by the Transport Commissioner of Maharashtra the Drivers may be allowed to carry various 
documents pertaining to vehicle in electronic form. 
5. The State of Karnataka also expressed their concern over clause -7, clause -8, clause-10, 
clause-16, clause -18 and clause -89. These clauses are related to allow ing a license holder to 
apply to any licensing authority in the State, and also for providing specialized training as desired 
by Central Government from accredited school. 
6. The State of Telangana submitted before the Committee their concern about road 
engineering, road safety and treatment of accident victims and requ ested the Committee to take 
up the matter with the Ministry for making provisions for these things in the Bill. 
7. During the meeting, it was noticed that concerns/objections raised by most of the States 
are same and redressal of their concern is necessary  in the wake of the facts that ultimately the 
provisions of the Act has to be implemented by the States. 
8. In the second half of the meeting representatives from General Insurance Council, Save 
Life Foundation, Institute of Traffic Education, Indian Found ation of Transport Research and 
Training, Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), Automotive Research 
Association of India etc. gave their suggestions before the Committee. 
9. General Insurance Council deposed before the Committee and stated  that the claim 
settlement in accident cases takes a very long time 7 -8 years due to large number of cases 
pending before the Courts and Tribunals and suggested that s ome interim relief or compensation 
may be given to victim or victim’s family just after the accident and if, they are not satisfied then 
they can go to court. They also suggested introducing time limit of six months for reporting 
simple injury and such provision would bring down settlement of accident claims. 
10. The representatives of Insurance C ompanies answered many questions raised by the 
Members of the Committee pertaining to insurance cover.  
11. Save Life Foundation made their presentation and gave suggestions to the  Committee on 
road safety and its related issues. They also pointed out the defect in road engineering and 
suggested for scientific investigation of road accidents.  
12. The organization also requested the Committee for inclusion of provision which could  
regulate the bus, van and other transport vehicles commuting school children  from home to 
school and back.  

135 
 
13. Representative of Institute of Road Traffic Education presented an informative picture of 
road safety issues. He talked about speed limit, road designs, traffic rules, rules violation and 
penalties, putting up signage on roads etc. 
14. The Committee also received suggestions about the provisions to be made in the Bill for 
imposing penalty on non-motorized vehicle rides for traffic rules violation. 
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
16. The meeting was adjourned at 2.04 P.M. 
  

136 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 9 th December, 2016 in Committee 
Room  A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Shri Mukul Roy   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore  
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  
6. Kumari Selja  
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
8. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
Lok Sabha 
9.    Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
10. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
11. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
12. Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
14. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
15. Shri Rakesh Singh 
16. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
17. Shri K. C. Venugopal  
 SECRETARIAT 
Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B. Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting.  Thereafter, 
the Committee considered draft Report on the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 for 
adoption.  The Committee took up the report for consideration and wanted a large number of 
amendments to recommendations on various Clauses of the Bill since the members were seeking 
more time to examine each of the 89 Clauses in a detailed way.  Some of the  members suggested 
that since the Bill is not coming for discussion during the current Session which is upto 16 th 
December, 2016 the Committee should seek two months' time for submission of the Report and 
then finally decided to request the Hon'ble Chairman to seek further extension of time upto 16 th 
February, 2017 to present the Report on the  Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016.   The 

137 
 
Committee authorized the Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for seeking 
permission for the same. 
3.  *     *     * 
4.  *     *       * 
5.  *     *     *3 
6.  The meeting then adjourned at 10.45  A.M. 
  
                                                           
3 *** Relates to other matters 

138 
 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 27th December, 2016 in Committee 
Room  A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Shri Mukul Roy   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  
5. Kumari Selja  
6. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
8. Shri Vinod Chavda 
9. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama  
10. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
11. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
12. Shri P. Kumar  
13. Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
14. Yogi Aditya Nath 
15. Shri Kristappa Nimmala  
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan   
17. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
18. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
20. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
 SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B. Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting.  *    *    *4   
3. Thereafter, the Committee took  up the draft Report for Clause -by-Clause 
consideration on the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016.  Members suggested various 
amendments to different Clauses of the Report.  The Chairman informed the Members that the 
Member who desires to furnish furthe r amendment to any of the Clauses of the Bill, the same 
                                                           
4 *** Relates to other matters 

139 
 
may be furnished to the Secretariat before 17 th January, 2017.  One of the Members pointed out 
that truck/commercial vehicle drivers are doing their job continuously even at odd hours which 
causes fat igue to them and it is a major cause of accident occurring on the highways.  The 
Committee had the view that there should be some Clause in the Bill to regulate the driving hours 
of the commercial vehicle drivers. The Committee then decided to seek the opi nion of the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; and Ministry of Labour and Employment in this 
regard. The Committee also decided to seek the view of recognized Drivers’ Union in the above 
said matter. 
4. The meeting then adjourned at 12.15  P.M. to meet again at 11.30 A.M. on 4 th January, 
2017. 
5.  A verbatim of the meeting was kept. 
  

140 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH  MEETING 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 24 th January, 2017 in Committee Room  
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Shri Mukul Roy   - Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
s   
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  
5. Kumari Selja  
Lok Sabha 
6. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
8. Shri P. Kumar  
9. Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
10. Shri Kristappa Nimmala  
11. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
12. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary   
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the last date of extension pertaining to presentation of Report to the Parliament on the  Motor 
Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016 is 16 th February, 2017 and the Committee has already 
discussed the things  in details on the subject.  Since the time left for presentation of Report is too 
short; the Committee after discussing all the major points adopted the Report on the  Motor 
Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2016. The Committee decided to present the Report to the 
Parliament on 8th  February, 2017. 
3. The Committee, accordingly, authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Kumari Selja , 
M.P. and in her absence Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  , M.P. to present the Report in Rajya 
Sabha.  Kumari Arpita Ghosh, M.P. and in her absence Shri K. C.  Venugopal , M.P. was 
authorized to lay the Report on the Table in Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2017. 

141 
 
4. *     *     *5 
5. The meeting was adjourned at 3.20 P.M. 
 
                                                           
5 *** Relates to other matters 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


142 
 
ANNEXURE 
List of witnesses who appeared before the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
 
29th September, 2016 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
1 Shri Sanjay Mitra Secretary 
2 Shri Abhay Damle Joint Secretary 
4, Shri Priyank Bharti Director 
5. Shri Rajeev Lochan Director 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT (MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE) 
6. Ms. Reeta Vasishta Additional Secretary 
7. Shri R. Sreenivas Additional Legislative Counsel 
 
14th October, 2016 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
Shri Sanjay Mitra Secretary 
Shri Abhay Damle Joint Secretary 
Shri Dakshita Das 
Shri Priyank Bharti 
Joint Secretary 
Director 
 
25th October, 2016 
SIKKIM 
Sh. S.B.S. Bhadauria,  Secretary, Transport 
MEGHALAYA 
Dr. Sreeranjan Additional Chief Secretary, Transport 
Department 
MIZORAM 
Mr. Umakant OSD 
Mr. R. Remmawia Director, Transport 

143 
 
ASSAM 
Sh. Ashotosh Agnihotri Secretary, Transport Deptt., 
Sh. Puru Gupta Commissioner of Transport 
Sh. J.C. Handique Joint Commissioner of Transport 
         
 
 RAJASTHAN 
Sh. Shailendra Agrawal Principal Secretary, Transport 
 GUJARAT 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 
Sh. Sunil Chaudhary Commissioner, Transport 
Captain R.S. Rathore Joint Commissioner 
DELHI 
Sh. Sandeep Kumar Secretary-cum-Commissioner (Transport) 
Sh. K.K. Dahiya Spl. Commissioner (Transport) 
HARYANA 
Smt. Suprabha Dahiya Transport Commissioner  
Sh. Jitender Kumar HCS Secretary, Regional Transport Authority 
UTTARAKHAND 
Ms. Sunita Singh Addl. Transport Commissioner 
Sh. Rajeev Mehra Assistant Transport Commissioner 
CHANDIGARH 
Mr. K.K. Jindal Secretary Transport 
UTTAR PRADESH 
Sh. Aradhana Shukla Principal Secretary, Transport 
Sh. K. Ravinder Naik Transport Commissioner 
Sh. Gangafal Addl. Transport Commissioner 
WEST BENGAL  
Sh. Alagapan Bandopadhyay Principal Secretary 
PUNJAB  
Sh. Dipinder Singh Principal Secretary 
Sh. Harmail Singh Transport Commissioner 

144 
 
Sh. R.M. Jadav Commissioner (Transport) 
CHHATTISGARH  
Sh. B.V.R. Subrahmanyam   Principal Secy Home 
Sh. A.D. Gautam Secy Home 
Sh. O.P. Pal Addl. Commissioner Transport 
MADHYA PRADESH  
Sh. R.K.Jain Additional Tpt Commissioner 
Sh. Ajay Gupta Deputy Tpt. Commissioner 
ODISHA  
Sh. Samir Kumar Panigrahi Addl. Tpt. Commissioner 
KERALA 
Sh. K.R. Jyothilal Secretary (Transport) 
TAMILNADU 
Thiru Apurva Varma  Principal Secretary to Govt. 
Thiru Satyabrat Sahoo Transport Commissioner 
Thiru T. Ramalinkam Deputy Transport Commissioner 
Thiru Pon. Senthil Kumar Assistant Secretary 
 TELANGANA 
Sh. Sunil Sharma Principal Secretary, Transport R&B 
Deptt. 
Sh. Sandeep Kumar Sultania Commissioner, Transport 
 MAHARASHTRA 
Sudhir Shrivastava Additional Chief Secretary (Transport & 
Ports) 
PUDUCHERRY  
Sh. S.D. Sundaresan Transport Commissioner 
ODISHA  
Sh. Samir Kumar Panigrahi Addl. Transport Commissioner 
KARNATAKA  
Dr. Basava Raju Principal Secretrary 
Mr. Maruti Samrani Addl. Commissioner 

145 
 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
Dr. Reeta Vasishta Additional Secretary 
Sh. R. Sreenivas Additional Legislative Counsel 
 
4th November, 2016 
STATE GOVT. OF TAMIL NADU 
Sh. Apurva Varma  Principal Secretary to Govt. 
Sh. Satyabrat Sahoo Transport Commissioner 
Sh. P. Ramalingam Deputy Transport Commissioner 
Sh. S. Pon. Senthil Nathan Assistant Secretary 
STATE GOVT. OF KARNATAKA 
Dr. B. Basavaraju Principal Secretary to Govt., Transport Deptt. 
Mr. Maruti Samrani Addl. Commissioner, Transport 
Sh. Ashfaq Ahamed RTO 
STATE GOVT. OF TELANGANA 
Sh. Sunil Sharma Principal Secretary, Transport R&B Deptt., 
Government of Telangana 
Sh. B. Venkateswarlu  Transport Deptt. 
Sh. P.B. Muni Sekhar Transport Deptt. 
STATE GOVT. OF MAHARASHTRA  
Sh. Praveen Gedam Transport Commissioner 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
Sh. R. Sreenivas Addl. L.C. 
GENERAL INSURANCE COUNCIL 
Mr. G. Srinivasan CMD, New India Assurance Co. Ltd. 
Mr. K. Sanath Kumar CMD, National Insurance Co. Ltd. 
Mr. Bhargav Dasgupta MD, & CEO, ICICI Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
Mr. S.S. Gopalarathnam MD, Cholamandalam MS General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
Mr. R. Chandrasekaran  Secretary General, General Insurance Council 
Mr. Arvind Shenoy Head (2), technical , General Insurance Council 
Mr. Ketan Ganatra  Sr. Vice President, Claims & Litigations, HDFC Ergo 
General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
SAVE LIFE FOUNDATION 
Miss. Smriti Singh Manager, Policy Advocacy 
Sh. Ravitej M. Prasad Senior Associate, Policy and Research 

146 
 
INSTITUTE OF ROAD TRAFFIC EDUCATION 
Dr. Rohit Baluja President 
INDIAN FOUNDATION OF TRANSPORT RESEARCH AND TRAINING (IFTRT) 
Sh. S.P. Singh Sr. Fellow 
SOCIETY OF INDIAN AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURERS (SIAM) 
Mr. Vishnu Mathur Director General 
Mr. Sugato Sen Dy. Director General 
Mr. Hardik Makhija Executive Officer 
Mr. I.V. Rao Advisor, Maruti Suzuki India Ltd. 
Mr. Sanjay Tank General Manager, Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. 
AUTOMOTIVE RESEARCH ASSOCIATION OF INDIA , PUNE 
Mrs. Rashmi Urdhwareshe Director 
11.45 A.M. 
 
INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC HEALTH, BENGALURU 
Dr. Mahesh Kadammanavar  
Mr. Amit Karnik  
CONSUMER VOICE 
Mr. Ashim Sanyal COO & Secretary 
Mr. Hemant Upadhyay  
Mr. Amarjeet Panghal  
Mr. Nalin Sinha  
ALL INDIA FEDERATION 
Sh. Ashfaq Ahamed President 
Mr. S.S. Velumani Dy. Commissioner  (Retd) 
Mr. P. Anand RTO, Tamil Nadu 
Mr. S. S. Singh ARTO 
Mr. Ramanathan MLO 
Sh. Ajay Jagga,  Advocate, Punjab & Haryana High Court 
ALL INDIA MOTOR TRANSPORT CONGRESS 
Sh. Bhim Wadhwa President 
G.R. Shanmugappa Former President 
Sh. Bal Malkit Singh Former President 
Sh. Amrit Lal Madan Vice President 
Sh. Kultaran Singh Atawl Hon. Chairman 
Sh. Gurinder Pal Singh Former President 
Sh. J.L. Khanna Chairman, Finance Committee 

147 
 
Sh. Naveen Kumar Gupta  Secretary General 
UTTAR  PRADESH  PARIVAHAN  KARADHAN  SEVA  SANGH 
Sh. Ramesh Chandra Prajapati Chairman 
CUTS INTERNATIONAL, JAIPUR 
Mr. George Cheriyan Director  
Ms. Mahima Kirori Project Officer 
FEDERATION OF CONSUMER ASSOCIATIONS, WEST BENGAL 
Mrs. Mala Banerjee President 
ALL INDIA ROAD TRANSPORT WORKERS’ FEDERATION 
Sh. R. Lakshmiah Vice President 
Sh. Arumugha Nainar Secretary 
 
***** 