 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
302
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SECOND REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Ninety First Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) 
of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SECOND REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Ninety First Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-x 
 4. REPORT                                1-70 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   71-75 
    6. 
         
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
MINUTES 76-77

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 

ii 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations /observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Ninety First Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
2. The Two Hundred and Ninety First Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 17th March, 
2021 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Ninety First Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
28th October, 2021. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  7th 
December, 2021.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 7, 2021                                                    Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 16, 1943 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAICLAS AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services 
AB Air Bus 
AEO Authorized Economic Operator 
ATN Action Taken Note 
AMT ADS Mediterranean Trials 
AGC Advisory Group on CORSIA 
ACI Aero Club of India 
AIC Aeronautical Information Circular 
AASSC Aerospace & Aviation Sector Skill Council 
APEDA Agricultural and Processed food products Export Development Authority 
A&FW Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
AIAHL Air India Asset Holding Ltd. 
AIESL Air India Engineering Services Limited 
AIL Air India Limited 
ATCOs Air Traffic Control Officers 
ATS Air Traffic Services 
AAIB Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
AME Aircraft Maintenance Engineering 
ACA Airport Carbon Accreditation 
ADRM Airport Development Reference Manual 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AERA Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 
ACSA Allied Communications Security Agency 
AMP Ampere 
ATRS Automated Tray Retrieval System 
AVSEC Aviation Security 

iv 
 
ATF Aviation Turbine Fuel 
BCBP Bar Coded Boarding Pass 
BFFC Basic Fire Fighters Course 
BAPL Bengal Aerotropolis Project Limited 
BIAL Bengaluru International Airport Ltd. 
BVLOS Beyond Visual Line of Sight 
BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa 
BE Budget Estimates 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BMS Business Management Studies 
CORSIA Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs 
CGST Central Goods and Services Tax 
CHIAL Chandigarh International Airport Ltd. 
CCRS Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CFI Chief Flying Instructors 
CIDCO City & Industries Development Corporation of Maharashtra 
CA Civil Aviation 
CAP Civil Aviation Policy 
CAR Civil Aviation Requirements 
CIAL Cochin International Airport Limited 
CPL Commercial Pilot Licence 
CRS Commission of Railway Safety 
CSMIA Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport 
CUTE Common Use Terminal Equipment 
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
C&AG Comptroller & Auditor General 

v 
 
CDR Conditional Route 
CCR Customs Cost Recovery 
D/o AC&FW Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers’ Welfare 
DEPwD Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
DoNER Department of North Eastern Region 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DoT Department of Telecommunications 
DSP Digital Sky Platform 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DAP2020 Directorate of Airspace Policy 2020 
DAN Drone Acknowledgement Number 
ED Executive Director 
EDI Electronic Data Interchange 
ERP Emergency Response Plan 
EGoS Empowered Group of Secretaries 
EESL Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
ELP English Language Proficiency 
FAI Fédération Aéronautique Internationale 
FY Financial Year 
FUA Flexible Use of Airspace 
FRTOL Flight Radio Telephoney Licence 
FAB Fluidized Aerobic Bio 
FMR Fluidized Media Reactor 
FI Flying Instructors 
FRT Facial Recognition Technology 
FTOs Flying Training Organizations 
FAQS Frequently Asked Questions 
GMR Gandhi Mallikarjuna Rao 

vi 
 
GAIL Gas Authority of India Limited 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GR General Remittances 
GGIAL GMR Goa International Airport Limited 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GOI Government of India 
GIA Grant In Aid 
GHG Green House Gases 
GRIHA Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment 
GIFT Gujarat International Finance Tec 
GVK Gunupati Venkata Krishna 
HEMS Helicopter Emergency Medical Services 
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
HLL Hindustan Latex Limited 
HMCA Hon’ble Minister of Civil Aviation 
IEC Importer Exporter Code 
IMD India Meteorological Department 
IAF Indian Armed Forces 
ICG Indian Coast Guard 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IGI Indira Gandhi International  
IGIA Indira Gandhi International Airport 
IGRUA Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
ITC Input Tax Credit 
ILS Instrument Landing System 
I&EBR Internal & Extra Budgetary Resources 
IATA International Air Transport Association 
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 

vii 
 
IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards 
IFSC International Financial Services Centre 
ITU International Telecommunication Union 
iOS iPhone Operating System 
IDERA Irrevocable Deregistration and Export Request Authorization 
JV  Joint Venture 
JVC Joint Venture Company 
KIAL Kannur International Airport Limited 
KINFRA Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation 
LAOP Land Acquisition Original Petition 
LAR Land Acquisition Reference 
LED Light Emitting Diode 
LUH Light Utility Helicopter 
LDB Logistics Data Bank 
MADC Maharashtra Airport Development Company Limited 
MAT Maintenance Access Terminal 
MTOs Maintenance Training Organizations 
MRO Maintenance, Repair and Overhauling 
MIS Management Information System 
MOPA Master Oscillator Power Amplifier 
MTOW Maximum Take-Off Weight 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MWP Meteorological Weather Processor 
MIL MIHAN India Limited 
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoPR Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
MAFI Modernization of Air Field Infrastructure 

viii 
 
MRV Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 
MBBR Moving Bed Biological Reactor 
MLCP Multi-Level Car Park 
MIHAN Multi-modal International Hub Airport at Nagpur 
MIAL Mumbai International Airport Ltd. 
MoT Ministry of Tourism 
NAPCC National Action Plan for Climate Change 
NASP National Aero Sports Policy 
NACCS National Air Cargo Community System 
NCC National Cadet Corps 
NDRF National Disaster Response Force 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NICDC National Industrial Corridor Development Corporation 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation 
NTSB National Transportation Safety Board 
NMIAL Navi Mumbai International Airport Ltd. 
NSCBIA Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NSOPs Non-Scheduled Operators Permits 
NPNT No-Permission-No-Take off 
NER North-Eastern Region 
NVVN NTPC Vidhyut Vyapar Nigam 
OLS Obstacle Limitation Survey 
ONGC Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
PSC Parliamentary Standing Committee 
PGAs Participating Government Agencies 
PSU Passenger Service Unit 

ix 
 
PHL Pawan Hans Limited 
PPEs Personal Protective Equipment 
PAPI Precision Approach Path Indicator 
PAN Presence Across Nation 
PED Principal Executive Director 
PPL Private Pilot Licence 
PDC Probable Date of Completion 
PMIC Project Monitoring and Implementation Committee 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
QCI Quality Council of India 
QRT Quick Response Team 
RTR (A) Radio Telephone operators Restricted certificate - Aeromobiles 
RGNAU Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University 
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RPTO Remote Pilot Training Organisation 
RFP Request For Proposal 
RCC Rescue Coordination Centre 
RTPCR Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction 
RE Revised Estimates 
RMS Risk Based Management System 
RPwD Act Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 
Rwy Runway 
RESA Runway End Safety Area 
SOPs Scheduled Operators Permits 
SAOs Selected Airline Operators 
SLA Service-Level Agreement 
SAC Settlement Advisory Committee 
SRS Software Requirements Specification 

x 
 
 
 
SESF Special Extra Section Flight 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
SARPs Standard & Recommended Practices 
SOP Standard Operating Procedures 
STP Standard Temperature and Pressure 
SOI Survey of India 
SVAMITVA Survey of Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village Areas 
TRA Temporary Reserved Airspace 
TSP Terminal, Storage and Processing 
TOP Tomatoes, Onions   and   Potatoes    
TRCS Tourism Regional Connectivity Scheme 
UDAN Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UT Union Territory 
UIN Unique Identification Number 
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
USA United States of America 
UAS Unmanned Aircraft System 
UTM Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management 
UJALA Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LEDs for All 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
VAT Value Added Tax 
VBM Vande Bharat Mission 
VGF Viability Gap Funding 
VFR Visual Flight Rules 
WPC Wireless Planning and Coordination 
YEIDA Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority 
YIAPL Yamuna International Airport Private Limited 

1 
 
REPORT  
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred Ninety First 
Report on  Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation which was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 17th March, 2021.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 2 8th October, 2021 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:-  
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  6.1, 11.3.1, 12.1, 13.1, 42.1, 44, 46.2, 46.6, 47.1, 49.1, 51.1, 52.1, 
54.1, 55.3, 58.1, 61.1, 62.1, 63.1, 70, 71, 73.1, 75  
Total: 22 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 8.1, 9.1, 10.1, 10.1.1, 10.2.1, 11.3.2, 11.5.1, 11.6.1, 11.7.1, 14.1, 
15.2, 16.1, 17.2, 18.1, 19.3, 20.4, 21.3.1, 2 3.3, 24.1, 25.2, 25.3.1, 26, 28.2, 29.2, 30, 
31.1, 32, 34.1, 36.2, 37.1, 38.2, 39 .2, 40.1, 41.1, 41.2, 43.1, 50.1, 54.2, 54.3, 54.5, 
55.1, 57, 57.1, 59.1, 60.1, 60.A.1, 64.2, 65.1, 66.1, 67.1, 72.1, 72.3, 74.1, 74.2 
Total: 54 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:  6.2.1, 6.3.2, 6.3.3, 11.4.1, 22.3, 23.1, 23.2, 27.1, 33.1, 35.1, 37.2, 
45.1, 46.3, 46.3.1, 48.1, 53.1, 54.4, 55.2, 56.1, 68.1, 69.1 
Total: 21 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.:  Nil  
Total:   Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
Assessment of Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry  
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee observes that excluding the budgetary allocation for Air India Asset 
Holding Limited (SPV) in 2021-22, the projected requirement of the Ministry for all the other 
Schemes under Revenue Section is ₹1358.85 crore, against which BE allocation of  ₹915.16 
crore only has been made. The Committee, therefore, is apprehensive that the budgetary 
allocation made to the Ministry is not in sync with the actual budgetary requirements of the 
Ministry. The Civil Aviation sector has been dealt a huge blow by t he Coronavirus pandemic 
and there is a need for huge intervention to save this sector, in this hour of crisis. The 
Committee notes that it is unreasonable that instead of giving an enhanced budgetary 
allocation, there has been a significant shortfall in the BE 2021-22 allocation of the Ministry. 
This surely is a matter of grave concern. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a 
higher fund allocation should be provided at the RE 2021 -22 stage, to the Ministry, so that 
the Ministry can fulfill its mandate and bolster the growth of Civil Aviation sector in the right 
direction.               
             (Para 6.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and based on the 
requirement of funds under Revenue Section, the Ministry of Finance will be approached for 
allocation of additional budget at RE stage for FY 2021-22. 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik (UDAN) 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)  – Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik (UDAN) -The 
Committee appreciates the positive impact that the RCS Scheme has had, on the growth of the 
Civil Aviation sector in the country. The Scheme has not only made air travel affordable and 
extensive, it has given a massive boost to the devel opment of airports and infrastructure 
development in the Civil Aviation arena. The Committee notes that UDAN has helped airline 
operators in developing sustainable business models and in providing start -up and scale -up 
opportunities to small regional airli nes. UDAN has also provided the much needed impetus 
to the economic development of remote regions and contributed to a more inclusive growth in 
the economic activity across the country. It has also contributed majorly to job growth and 
economic development in the country. 
 (Para 11.3.1) 

3 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) has launched RCS - UDAN on 21 - 10-2016 to 
stimulate regional air connectivity and making air travel affordable to the masses. RCS  - 
UDAN is market driven scheme. The interested airlines based on their assessment of  demand 
on particular routes submit their proposals at the time of bidding under RCS - UDAN from 
time to time.  
2.2 RCS-UDAN is a demand -driven scheme, wherein  airline operators assess the 
feasibility of operation on a particular route and bid under the scheme  from time to time. 
Selection of airlines is done through a transparent bidding process.  
2.3 Four rounds of bidding under RCS -UDAN have taken place since the launch of the 
scheme in October, 2016. Re sultantly, 111 RCS airports including 12 water aerodromes and 
33 helipads have been identified for operation of RCS flights.  
2.4 During the last four years after commencement of the scheme, 778 valid awarded 
routes have been allotted to various airlines and out of which 355 RCS routes connecting 58 
unserved and underserved airports (including 5 heliports and 02 water aerodromes) have been 
operationalized so far.  
2.5 Following the four successful rounds of bidding, the special RCS – UDAN version 
4.1 bidding round focused on connecting smaller airports is in progress which includes routes 
specially requested by the state governments/U nion Territory (UT) administrations and 
earlier cancelled/terminated routes along with a special helicopter and Sagarmala seaplane 
routes. 
 
Lifeline UDAN 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee applauds this timely and valuable, life saving initiative  of the 
Ministry. The Committee wishes to place on record, its appreciation for the role of air 
carriers involved in the Lifeline UDAN operations, under the hub and spoke model, with 
seamless co-ordination between various agencies. 
(Para 12.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. The comments of the Committee are encouraging and have been noted. 
 
 
 

4 
 
Vande Bharat Mission (VBM)  
 Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee places on record its deep appreciation for this massive repatriation 
operation carried out by the Ministry. 
(Para 13.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. The comments of the Committee are encouraging and have been noted. 
 
Development of Airports  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should co -ordinate with the concerned 
stakeholders/entities and sort out issues concerning compensation, clearances and litigation, 
at the earliest. The Committee expects the Ministry to furnish the details of the specific action 
taken in this regard. 
(Para 42.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. Normally, lands are acquired by AAI from the land owners through State Govt. as per 
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act. The land compensation as decided by the State 
Govt. are paid to the land owners by AAI through State Govt. In case, the land owners are not 
satisfied, they approach Hon’ble Courts by filing Writ Petition or Original Suit. These cases 
are called Land Acquisition Reference (LAR) and Land Acquisition Original Petit ion 
(LAOP).  
5.2 AAI is taking all steps to clear all LAR and LAOP case s by disbursing the eligible 
compensation. Other litigation with stakeholders are being resolved through a Settlement 
Advisory Committee (SAC), a three independent member Committee constituted by the AAI 
Board, where one of the Committee member is a retired high court judge. 
 
Providing Passenger Processing System at the Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry, to proactively monitor 
and address the issues faced by the Civil Aviation sector, including the provision for 
Passenger Processing System at the Airports. 
(Para 44) 

5 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. BCAS humbly accepts the appreciation conferred on the part of the Civil Aviation 
Sector. 
 
Srinagar airport  
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee is dismayed to note that regular delay in flight operations and 
cancellation of flights occur at Srinagar airport, due to non-availability of CAT-II or CAT-III 
facility. The Committee fails to understand the reason behind non-installation of CAT II/ CAT 
facilities in Srinagar airport, in the present age of technology and that too, at one of the 
strategic locations of J&K. The Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience and delays 
faced by the flyers, especially Members of Parliament, interna tional and domestic tourists, 
due to such deficiencies at the Srinagar airport. The Committee hopes that Modernization of 
Military Airfields (MAFI) project which is a turnkey project, would enhance the operational 
capability, by facilitating air operations  of civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and 
adverse weather conditions, while enhancing aerospace safety. 
(Para 46.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. Srinagar Airport is a joint user airfield by AAI and IAF. Technical proposal for up 
gradation to CAT -II operation of Srinagar Airport has been forwarded by AAI to IAF on 
18.03.21. IAF has planned upgradation to CAT -II operations at Srinagar airport under MAFI 
(Modernization of Airfield infrastructure) project which is scheduled under Phase II of 
project in November, 2022. In response to AAI proposal dated 18.3.2021, IAF has recently 
furnished their inputs which are under consideration in AAI. Further, HMCA through a DO 
letter dated 16.9.2021 to Hon’ble Raksha Mantri has taken up issue to prepone the installation 
of CAT II facility for efficient and safe utilization of the airport. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee strongly recommends the adoption of best international safety 
practices, in the Civil Aviation sector, particularly at airports, as well as landing of airplanes 
in difficult terrains of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee underlines the need for 
coordinated efforts, for providing competitively priced mechanism, adequate and convenient 
transport, advanced infrastructure facilities and tour ist safety, to cater to the needs of 
domestic and foreign tourists arriving in the region. 
(Para 46.6) 
 

6 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. AAI continuously upgrades and develops all its airports along with airports in Jammu 
And Kashmir as per international best practices, keeping in view the safety and comfort of 
the passengers. 
 
Kannur airport 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee takes note of the steps taken/ proposed to be taken for the expansion 
of Kannur Airport. 
(Para 47.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. No comments. 
 
Kolhapur airport 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee takes note of the upgradation work undertaken at the Kolhapur 
airport and desires that the outstanding issues be sorted out with the concerned authorities, 
without any further delay. 
(Para 49.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1. A land requirement of 64 acre for extension of runway and installation of approach 
light at Kohlapur airport has been projected to the State Govt. of Maharashtra by AAI. 
Ministry has also taken up the issue with the State Govt. The PDC for runway completion is 
December, 2021 and that for construction of New Terminal Building is in July, 2022. 
 
Thanjavur airport 
Recommendation/Observation  
11.  The Committee urges upon the Ministry to sort out both issues, in order to facilitate 
the smooth exchange of land between AAI and IAF. 
(Para 51.1) 
 

7 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1. The suggestion of the Committee has been noted and the matter is being taken up with 
AAI and IAF. 
 
Keshod airport  
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee takes note of the recent developments that have taken place, in respect 
of Keshod Airport, and desires that the matter relating to leasing of land which is pending 
with the Ministry of Defence, be pursued vigorously, so that the process of handing over the 
airport to the Indian Coast Guard, is completed. 
(Para 52.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. The proposal of land lease has already been approved by the Ministry of Defence. An  
MOU between Indian Coast Guard and AAI is likely to be signed shortly. 
 
Airport at Bihar 
Recommendation/Observation  
13.  It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the existing Patna airport is 
under further development, with a stipulated investment of around ₹1200 crores. However, 
while this investment is on, it has also been observed that despite provisioning  a spend of 
₹1200 crores on this project, no additional operational advantage would accrue on the 
operations 83 side. The limitations of non -installation of approach lighting system, CAT -
II/CAT-III ILS and other Navigational aid facilities, which could hav e enhanced the 
operational capacity, will be there. More so, the load penalty would always be there, since 
there would be inherent restrictions on operations during peak summer season. Also, the 
same limitations would accrue during winters and foggy season s. The fact that the AAI was 
fully aware of the expenditure being incurred, without any added operational advantage, is a 
matter of deep concern regarding the process of decision -making. However, since the project 
is already under implementation, the Commi ttee desires that a project for the city -side, at 
Patna, with additional terminal parking capacity and creation of parallel taxi track, should 
be taken up on priority, to justify the investment made so far. 
(Para 54.1) 
 
 

8 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1. The work of construction of a Multi -Level Car Park (MLCP) of 800 cars parking 
capacity with commercial space at top floor and Parallel Taxi Track are under construction at 
Patna airport.  
13.2. The runway length at Patna is 2072 m, which is suitable for AB -320 operations. Due 
to presence of railway track at west and zoo at east, runway extension is not feasible at the 
Patna airport. However, AAI has requested land at east side from Zoo for Runway extension.  
13.3. However, in order to enhance the operational capacity, the work of Apron extension 
including one link taxiway and Parallel Taxi Track has been undertaken by AAI. 
13.4. AAI has taken action for CAT -I ILS of 720 m to improve the operating minima. 
Shifting of DVOR to increase the width of runway strip and trans-installation of Glide Path to 
add one more link taxiway are also being taken up for improving the operational efficiency 
and capacity. 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Airports Au thority of India to 
improve amenities and city side terminal area as well. As Mopa airport is likely to commence 
operations in the next couple of years, it would be a challenge for Dabolim airport to retain 
its traffic. Hence, it is very important that AAI , for maintaining traffic growth and utilization 
of newly created assets and extended facilities, gears up for the challenge that they are going 
to face, by the potential growth of other airports viz., Mopa and Sindhudurg. 
(Para 55.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1. AAI is grateful to the Committee for recognizing the efforts being continuously made 
for improving the amenities in Airside, Terminal and City side. These efforts are continuing 
as well. For dealing with the growing traffic, Parallel Taxi Track has been constructed which 
has reduced the runway occupancy time considerably and with the result Airside capacity has 
increased. Also the work for extension of terminal building in eastern side is awarded, 
however, the Environmental Clearance is awaited to kick start the project. The project is 
expected to be considered by the expert appraisal Committee in the next meetings and efforts 
are on to obtain the environmental clearance. 
 
Karipur Flight Accident  
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee desires speedy investigation into the mishap. 
(Para 58.1) 

9 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1. The investigation process has been completed and consultation are underway with 
Accredited Representative from NTSB, USA in accordance with Rule 14 of Aircraft 
(Investigation of Accidents and Incidents) Rules, 2017. Consultation process is severely 
hampered due to the unprecedented spike in COVID -19 cases. Due to extreme delicate and 
unforgiving situation prevailing everywhere in India, there is likelihood of a delay which 
cannot be anticipated at this juncture. 
 
All Women Cockpit Crew in Air India  
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee is pleased to note such a historical event and applauds the Ministry 
for such an exciting and novel initiative. 
(Para 61.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1. The comments of the Committee are encouraging and have been noted. 
 
Enhanced share of Indian carriers in the international traffic  
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Ministry to enhance the share of 
Indian carriers in the international traffic. 
(Para 62.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1. The comments of the Committee are encouraging and have been noted. 
 
Mobile Air Dispensary and Air Ambulance 
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee recognizes the importance of Mobile Air  Dispensary and Air 
Ambulance, which are life saving. The Committee desires the Ministry to ensure that the issue 
regarding ownership of the scheme for providing air dispensary services in North Eastern 
region, is sorted out at the earliest. The Committee further desires that in the event of lack of 
clarity regarding the disinvestment of Pawan Hans Ltd., the Ministry should take necessary 
action to identify stakeholders other than PHL, for the fruitful implementation of the scheme. 

10 
 
(Para 63.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1. DGCA has already issued relevant CAR in this matter. Thus, any interested airline 
may start these services as per relevant CAR subject to compliance with the extant Rules / 
guidelines issued by Government in this regard. Health is a State su bject. However, MoCA 
being a facilitator for air transport would facilitate these services as per rules and regulations. 
Core Group on Safety and Security  
Recommendation/Observation  
19. On recommendations of the Committee, a Core Group has been constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation to address the safety and security 
aspects. In pursuance thereof, the Committee would like to make the following 
suggestions/recommendations, for inclusion in the mandate of the Co re Group:- (i) Adequate 
arrangements of proper lights and other landing instruments should be made at all airports, 
particularly to cater to flight operations during foggy days. Periodic upgradation of such 
equipments should also be made. An action plan, w ith feasible timelines, should be prepared, 
and steps should be taken to strictly adhere to the timelines. The Competent Authority should 
give detailed reasons in case of delays, if any. (ii) Runways which were created during the 
pre-independence period and are lying idle as on date, should be identified and be developed 
in such a way that they can be used for flight operations in case of emergency situations, such 
as natural calamities and war. 
 (iii) The Core Group should ensure necessary coordination between NHAI/Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways and Ministry of Railways in order to identify stretches/pockets of 
land, along National Highways and Railway tracks, to facilitate emergency lan ding of 
helicopter ambulance in the event of accidents/natural calamities.  
(iv) It should be ensured that international best practices and guidelines are adopted and 
implemented in the operations of helicopter ambulances.  
(v) In order to further strengthen the Core Group, a Sub-Committee, headed by an officer not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary may be formed, comprising the Ministries of (i) Railways; 
(ii) Road Transport and Highways; (iii) Ports, Shipping and Waterways; and (iv) Civil 
Aviation.  
(vi) The Sub-Committees may consider engaging, the services of consultants, who are experts 
in the respective fields, with requisite global exposure and good reputation for the services 
rendered by them.  
(vii) The Sub -Committees should mandatorily report to the  Core Group on Safety and 
Security, on a monthly basis to enable the Core Group to review and monitor the activities of 
these Sub-Committees. 

11 
 
 (viii) Similar Sub-Committees may be formed in the Ministry of Defence  and Home Affairs; 
and ONGC and GAIL. Since these Ministries/ Organisations are not under the purview of the 
Standing Committee, it is suggested that in case of any bottlenecks/logjams in this regard, the 
Standing Committee should be informed accordingly, at the earliest.  
(ix) The revi ew of the activities and progress made by the Core Group should be done 
monthly and after the matters are streamlined and teething problems are sorted out, the 
review meetings may be held on quarterly basis. If need is felt, a fresh legislation may be 
piloted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in this regard, at the earliest.  
(x) The recent glacier burst at Uttarakhand led to loss of precious lives. Provision for 
helicopter landing facilities at ecologically sensitive areas may be considered, to ensure 
effective disaster management operations. For such facilitation, the Core Group should 
actively engage with NDRF also regularly. There is a need for close monitoring of ecological 
changes using the latest technology available, in order to prevent such natural disasters. In 
conclusion, the Committee accentuates the doubtless necessity for very close and effective 
coordination among all the related Ministries/ Departments/ Organizations and entities. 
(Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1. Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for examination in consultation 
with other Ministries/ Departments including Attached Offices of MoCA viz. DGCA and 
BCAS. As per directions of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, a Core Group having 
representations from all the concerned Ministries was formed under the Chairmanship of the 
Secretary, Civil Aviation to work out the modalities for supplementing each other during the 
various types of Accident investigation and suggesting preventive measures to improve safety 
and security standards in these sectors. The first meeting of the Core Group was held on 
23.01.2020 under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Civil Aviation, and various common 
areas of interest with respect to accident investigation and othe r related activities have been 
identified and discussed. 
19.2. 2nd Meeting of the Core Group was held on 16.10.2020. As directed by the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Parliament Standing Committee vide letter dated 06.02.2020 , the Core Group had 
deliberated on the following issues during the meeting . The Nodal officer from NHAI also 
participated in this Committee. 
i. Ways/means and suggestions to prevent accidents in all departments  
ii. Collection of data  from developed countries and examine measures to prevent 
accidents 
iii. Strong networks of all departments to prevent any kind of eventuality. 
iv. Quick Response Team (QRT) in each department to respond in emergency. 

12 
 
v. Facilities for landing helicopters at accident sites. 
vi. Accident record of past 50 years. Reasons of occurrence and p reventive measures 
taken to avoid such accidents. 
vii. Strengthening Commission  of Railway Safety and having such organisation in all 
departments. 
viii. Introduction of world class standards in safety and security. 
19.3. During the meeting, it was decided that the Committee should: 
i. Suggest the areas / points of prevention of accidents which are generic and applicable 
to all departments based on their past experiences for  accident prevention, crisis 
management and post-accident measures.  
ii. List out the helipads and marking them on the Map of the Country. 
iii. Meet once in a quarter to share the learnings and experience with each other.  
19.4. Furthermore, as directed by the Hon’ble Chairman vide letter dated 20.10.2020, 
Secretary, Home Affairs and Secretary, Defence have been advised to nominate their nodal 
officers to participate in the Core Group meeting, being planned in next quarter. The sa me 
was apprised to the Hon’ble Chairman, PSC vide Secretary, Civil Aviation DO letter dated 
27.10.2020 (Annexure-D).    
19.5. Further, Hon’ble Chairman, PSC vide letter dated 20.10.2020, directed to include M/o 
Defence and M/o Home Affairs in the Core Grou p. Accordingly, M/o Defence and M/o 
Home Affairs were requested to nominate a nodal officer (of the level of Joint Secretary) in 
the Core Group, and the same was intimated to the Hon’ble Chairman vide MoCA letter 
dated 27.10.2020.  Thus, the actions, as su ggested by the Hon’ble Chairman, PSC for 
incorporating M/o Home Affairs and M/o Defence have been complied with. 
19.6. Accordingly, the 3rd meeting of the Core Group on Safety was  held on 07.12.2020 
which was inter alia attended by the representative of the Ministry of  Home Affairs and 
Ministry of Defence. 
19.7. The detailed Minutes of the Meeting held on 07.12.2020 are attached as Annexure E. 
19.8. Further, Terms of Reference (ToR) for hiring a consultant to ensure adoption of best 
global safety standards in the respective domain of various ministries of the Core Group is 
being framed. In order to finalize the Terms of Reference for the consultancy a request has 
been made to all the members to identify various areas which require improvements to m eet 
Global Safety Standards and submit the same to the Commission. 
 
 

13 
 
Hotline number among the Ministries for effective co- ordination in case of emergency  
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee welcomes this initiative of the Ministry. 
(Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1. No Comments required. 
 
Huge losses incurred by private airlines 
Recommendation/Observation  
21. The Committee recognizes the fact that the aviation sector has been hit hard by global 
economic slowdown and the Covid -19 pandemic. The Committee understands that the 
adverse effect of the Covid-19 pandemic, on the airlines operating in the country, which were 
already reeling under heavy losses, was unprecedented. While acknowledging the resilience 
shown by the civil aviation sector in  the country, during such trying times, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should turn this situation to its advantage, by bringing in 
immediate and long term measures, to strengthen the civil aviation sector in the country and 
to enable its resurgence. 
   (Para 73.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1. Two Video Conferences were held under the  chairmanship of Secy (CA) with 
Scheduled Domestic Airlines on 12 April, 2021 and  20 May, 2021. Minutes of the meeting 
are attached herewith. Actions are being taken as per the deliberations made in the Video 
Conferences (Annexure F). 
 
Shortage of availability of slots for turboprop aircrafts 
Recommendation/Observation  
22. The Committee notes that there is shortage of availability of slots for smaller 
turboprop aircrafts operations from metros like Delhi and Mumbai, to match the 
requirements of the RCS across the country. The Committee expresses its concern on this 
issue and desires that the Ministry should take urgent timely action to address this concern. 
(Para 75) 
 

14 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1. RCS flights are being operated out of Hindon Airport as well as IGI Airport. Post the 
expansion of IGI Airport which includes 4th runway and associated airside development, IGI 
Airport will have the necessary capacity to operate more RCS flights. 
 
 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Demand made by the Ministry vs. Actual allocation 
1. The Committee is distressed to note that the Ministry has been able to spend only 
64.9% of the enhanced RE allocation of ₹4131.63 crores, which means that the Ministry has 
to spend ₹1450.78 crore in the remaining two months of the Financial Year2020 -21. The 
Committee apprehends significant under utilization of the budgetary funds available with the 
Ministry. At a time when the Government was facing major financial troubles on account of 
the Coronavirus pandemic, the Ministry received a considerable boost of 8.8% at RE 2020 -
21, as compared to BE 20 20-21. Poor utilization of the funds would lead to idling of funds 
which should have been avoided. The Committee would like the Ministry to take stock of 
there as ons which caused the slow pace of utilization of funds and take corrective measures 
to ensure optimum utilization of the allocated funds during the Financial Year 2021-22. 
 (Para 8.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Regarding underutilization of budgetary funds available with the Ministry, it is to 
state that the provisions were increased to Rs.4131.63 crore at RE stage of 2020 -21 from the 
BE of Rs.3797.71 crore with a total increase of Rs.333.92 crore (8.08%).  The utilization of 
BE allocation of budget during the first ten months of the year 2020 -21was Rs.2681.02 crore 
against the allocation of Rs.3817 .06 crore (BE of 3797.71 crore + Rs19.35 crore through 
1stSupplementary) which accounts to 70.23% of BE.  Accordingly,  the balance budget 
available for expenditure during the last two months of the FY 2020 -21 was  Rs.1450.61 
crore (Rs.1136.04 crore plus 3 14.57 crore received through Second and Final 
Supplementary). The actual expenditure for the month of February and March, 2021 was 
Rs.1407.55 Crore (34.07%) of the total allocation of Rs.4131.63 crore.   
1.2 The expenditure of Rs.2681.02 crore during the f irst ten months was against the BE 
allocation only. The allocation of additional funds provided at RE stage was made available 
for expenditure in the last week of March 2021 (after approval of Final Supplementary 
Grant). The expenditure during the last two  months of the year was Rs.1407.55 crore and the 
cumulative expenditure for the entire year was Rs.4088.57 crore which accounts to 98.95% of 
the total allocation of Rs.4131.63 crore made available in 2020-21.  However, the direction of 
the Committee for op timum utilization of allocated funds have been noted for future 
compliance.  
 
 

16 
 
Outstanding C&AG Audit Paras 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee strongly urges the Ministry to scrutinize the reasons behind the delay 
in the submission of ATN and take necessary steps to ensure that such delays are not 
repeated. 
 (Para 9.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 To expedite the pendency of the ATNs on Audit paras, the Meeting of Standing Audit 
Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary (CA) / JS& FA, MoCA have been conducted 
at regular intervals, the last such meeting held on 25.03.2021 under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (CA). This is also being followed up with regular reminders issued at Senior levels. 
The consistent efforts of the Ministry has resulted in submission of 12 ATNs to Audit during 
the last 6 months. Further, this Ministry has already submitted requisite ATNs w.r.t. 15 Audit 
paras to Audit, however, the vetting comments of Audit on these paras are yet to be received. 
The updated status of the Outstanding C&AG Paras has been enclosed as Annexure A.   
Savings and Delays 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee takes note of the Savings of ₹37.01 crores, as furnished by the 
Ministry, which has been resulted under the Head ‘RCS’ for 2018-19 (Revenue), due to 
requirement of less funds towards subsidy to airlines for providing air connectivity in the 
North Eastern Region. 
 (Para 10.1) 
3.1 The Committee desires that it may be informed about the reasons therefor. 
(Para 10.1.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.2 During FY 2018 -19, Rs.37.01 crore (29.84% of Budget allocation of Rs.124.00 cr.) 
were saved under the Budget head "RCS -Subsidies" owing to the reasons that  Alliance Air 
could not operate flights, as required, due to technical snags, weath er conditions etc. of hilly 
areas. Hence, Alliance Air could not operate on all routes and as a result did not submit VGF 
reimbursement claims (under RCS-subsidies) for remaining amount. 
 
3.3 In the FY 2018 -19, ₹ 63,000/ - under Budget Head "RCS - Creation of Capital 
Assets", could not be utilized because of various problems such as obstacles around Airports 
which were protruding into the approach surfaces of the Airports making the airport runway 
length not suitable for the aircraft to land/depart, non -maintenance of Airports in the manner 

17 
 
to be licensed for public use, lack of clarity in the terms of development of the Airport and 
management of the Airports controlled by Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)/ Private 
Operators etc. 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee may be apprised, in detail of the reasons for the delay in the Digital 
Sky Platform Project. 
 (Para 10.2.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The display of map, which envisaged the display of green, yellow and red zones for 
drone flying on the Digital Sky Platform  (DSP), required wide consultations with MHA, 
Security Agencies, IAF, Ministry of Defence etc. to ensure that security concerns are duly 
addressed. The consultations with Security Agencies resulted in delay. Pending the display of 
map on the DSP, sixty-six (66) green zones were approved by security agencies wherein No -
Permission-No-Take off (NPNT) compliant drones can fly through DSP. Drone 
flights were thus facilitated through green zones approved by MHA. 
4.2 In the meanwhile, the Unman ned Aircraft System (UAS) Rules, 2021  were notified 
on 12 Mar 2021 and Phase 1 of the DSP became operational w.e.f. 18 th March 2021. DSP 
was being aligned with the UAS Rules, 2021. However, subsequently a revised and simpler 
version of the Rules (Drone Rul es, 2021) were notified on 25 Aug 2021. DSP is now being 
aligned with the newly notified Drone Rules, 2021. The details are as under:-  
i. The Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) Rules, 2021 were notified on 12 thMarch, 
2021. 
ii. Subsequently, a revised and simpler version of the Rules (Drone Rules, 2021) were 
notified on 25th August, 2021 
iii. The DSP provides a single -window online mechanism to regulate the entire gamut of 
activities relating to operations of drones viz. drone registration, flight permissions, 
operations and post -flight data uploads.  DSP is now being aligned with the newly 
notified Drone Rules, 2021. 
iv. Type Certification of drones will be done by  DGCA or any entity authorized by the 
Director General on recommendation of Quality Council of India (QCI) or an  
authorized testing entity. 
v. Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) experiments are underway.  Two entities have 
already completed the operations. On conclusion  of the experiments the consortia 
shall submit a Proof of Concept (PoC) report to DGCA for acceptance . The feedback 
of the BVLOS experimental operations will help formulate the guidelines in this 
regard. 

18 
 
vi. The draft UAS Traffic Management (UTM)  policy has been submitted by the 
Committee. The UTM Policy is likely to be  finalized as per the provisions of the 
Drone Rules, 2021 and released by 31st December, 2021. 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik (UDAN)  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee takes note of the hurdles and problems faced by the various 
stakeholders, under this Scheme. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take 
strategic steps on a war footing, to ensure that such hitches/glitches are sorted out, to ensure 
the success and viability of the Scheme. The Committee, further, underscores the importance 
of t his Scheme and desires that the Ministry should, pro -actively, espouse the required 
measures, to make certain, that the UDAN scheme is given the necessary fillip, for the 
development and operationalization of potential airports.  
(Para 11.3.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation has been interacting with all stakeholders regularly and 
taking appropriate  steps in order to address problems faced by them for efficient 
implementation of the Scheme.  RCS Cell has taken various measures based  on the 
discussions with the Selected Airline Operators (SAOs) regarding resumption of operations 
post the lockdown necessitated by COVID-19 pandemic. 
5.2 These various measures are being implemented as a response to an unprecedented 
situation and  are  intend ed  to provide  relief  to  the  SAOs  in  the  form  of “Operational  
and financial relaxations/ flexibilities, extension  of flexibility to SAOs of RCS–UDAN 
version 4.0 and allowing 3 year support period for each route ”to help SAOs in commencing 
operations on remaining routes which were operational before the lockdown as well as 
operationalizing new routes under the Scheme. 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. Taking cognizance of the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee desires the 
Ministry to closely and meticulously, monitor the implementation and impact of the UDAN 
Scheme and formulate plans and guidelines to ensure that the benefits of the Scheme actually 
reach the passengers, as per the spirit of the Scheme. 
 (Para 11.5.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 MoCA/AAI (Implementing  Agency) closely and meticulously, monitor the 
implementation and impact of the RCS - UDAN scheme and formulate plans and guidelines 
to ensure that the benefits of the scheme actually reach the passenger, as per the spirit  of the 
scheme. 

19 
 
6.2 The number of passengers  traveled, RCS routes operationalized and flights operated 
under RCS-UDAN as on 20.09.2021 are as under:- 
 Number of Passenger Travelled : Over 74 Lakh 
 RCS routes operationalized  : 369 
 Total Flights Operated  : 146411 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee recognizes the need for co -ordination between/ among the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, with the Ministries of Tourism and Culture, in matters regarding air 
connectivity to important tourist destinations a nd cultural sites in the country. Hence, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation, to work in tandem with the Ministries 
of Culture and Tourism, in order to ensure greater harmony among the concerned Ministries 
who are vital stakeholders in this regard. 
 (Para 11.6.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Ministry of Tourism has been associated with  the Scheme long back andAAI, the 
implementing Agency has offered routes suggested/requested by  that Ministry for bidding 
under the Scheme. As a  result, 46 Tourism routes were awarded under RCS-UDAN version 
3.0. Details of Tourism routes awarded under RCS-UDAN alongwith commencement status 
is at Annexure-B. 
7.2 AAI, the implementing agency has conducted special round of bidding 4.1 under 
UDAN recently for can celled/ terminated and state sponsored routes (State –RCS routes) 
where 6 new , TRCS routes proposed by MoT were also offered for bidding. 
7.3 New TRCS routes proposed by MOT are:- 
1. Prayagraj–Lucknow 
2. Lucknow–Prayagraj 
3. Varanasi–Lucknow 
4. Lucknow–Varanasi 
5. Gorakhpur–Varanasi 
6. Varanasi–Gorakhpur  
 
 

20 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee would like the Ministry, to examine the reasons for non -
commencement of routes that have already been awarded under the UDAN Scheme; to 
identify the bottlenecks in this regard; and to chalk out strategic steps to address the issues 
involved. 
 (Para 11.7.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Under the scheme, the SAOs are obligated to commence RCS flight operations on a 
RCS-route, as part of individual route proposal or a network  proposal within a period of 180 
days from the issuance of Letter of Award or within two months  from the readiness of 
airport, whichever is later,  unless any extension is granted by the Implementing Agency. 
However, sometimes there  is a delay in operational izing routes, for reasons  various which 
include: 
(i) Delay in  upgradation  works due to  non -availability of additional land with 
States/ Ministry of Defence 
(ii) Delay in allocation of funds by State govt. owned airports although 
reimbursement on infrastructure development of RCS airports is done by Ministry 
of Civil Aviation as per the provisions of the scheme. 
(iii) Delay in meeting Regulatory requirements  for licencing of airports by states and 
UTs requiring removal of obstacles in approach  path which involves activ e 
participation by local bodies and resolving public related issues. 
(iv) Delay in obtaining Scheduled Commuter Operators Permit by new entrant 
Airlines, non-availability of suitable aircraft, leasing  issues, long lead time for 
delivery, maintenance issues of small aircraft   difficulties  in procuring spares 
from abroad.  
(v)       Non-availability of slots at metro airports  like Mumbai due to airport capacity 
constraints and at defence airports due to capacity as well as operational reasons. 
(vi)        Collapse of Jet Airways which affected closure of routes awarded to them 
(vii) Also airline business generally has challenging environmen t with low yield and 
high operating costs (partly due to high cost of Aviation Turbine Fuel and other 
services). These challenges have been further aggravated by the COVID -19 
pandemic situation thus having major impact on speedy operationalization of 
awarded routes. 
 
8.2 Corrective steps taken by the Government:-  
 
(i) Periodic review of the progress of upgradation works and removal of bottlenecks 
in operationalization of airports;  
(ii) In order to overcome some of infrastructure issues there has been a special focus 
on awarding and operationalizing routes connecting already  developed airports in 
recent RCS – UDAN rounds;  

21 
 
(iii) To overcome the impact of COVID pandemic situation Government has provided 
certain financial flexibilities as a temporary  measure which include reduced 
performance guarantee and return of additional performance guarantee subject to 
fulfilment of certain conditions and operational flexibilities which include 
flexibility to convert RCS seats to non-RCS seats, flexibility to operate 03 flights 
per week in place of 7 RCS flights per week or 14 priority RCS flights per week,  
suspension of performance criteria and extension in contract period for lockdown 
duration. 
(iv) MoCA has   recently   allowed   Non-Scheduled Operations (NSOP) in fixed wing 
(including seaplanes) apart from operations in helicopters allowed earlier for  
expeditious operationalization of routes. 
(v) It is further added that a special bidding RCS –UDAN version 4.1 has been called 
recently which covered non -operationalized past round routes,  Helicopter routes 
for priority areas, routes  requested specially by State Govt’s/  UTs and sea plane 
routes received from Sagarmala Seaplane Services. 
Unmanned Aircraft System (Drone) 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee takes note of the steps taken to establish an UTM Ecosystem in India 
and hopes that the formulation of UTM Policy would facilitate Drone Traffic Management 
Services for operation of Drones within the air traffic environment, in our air space, and that 
the UAS Rules would provide the requisite regulatory framework Beyond Visual Line of Sight 
(BVLOS) operations, in the country. 
 (Para 14.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) Rules, 2021 were notified on 12 thMarch, 
2021. 
(i) Subsequently, a revised and simpler version of the Rules (Drone Rules, 2021) were 
notified on 25thAugust, 2021. 
(ii) The DSP provides a single -window online mechanism to regulate the entire gamut of 
activities relating to operations of drones viz. drone registration, flight permissions, 
operations and post -flight data uploads.  DSP is now being aligned with the newly 
notified Drone Rules, 2021. 
(iii) Type Certification of drones will be done by DGCA or any entity authorized by the 
Director General on recommendation of Quality Council of India (QCI) or an 
authorized testing entity. 
(iv) Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) experiments are underway.  Two entities have 
already completed the operations. On conclusion  of the experiments the consortia 
shall submit a Proof of Concept (PoC) report to DGCA for acceptance.  The feedback 

22 
 
of the BVLOS experimental operations will help formulate the guidelines in this 
regard. 
(v) The draft UAS Traffic Management (UTM)  policy has been submitted by the 
Committee. The UTM Policy is likely to be  finalized as per the provisions of the 
Drone Rules, 2021 and released by 31stDecember, 2021. 
Drone Directorate 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee opines that the setting up of Drone Directorate is a step forward in 
Strengthening the Drone ecosystem of India, by way of addressing the delays in rolling out 
permission, managing Drone Training Schools and fast tracking Drone certifications. The 
Committee desires the Ministry t o take necessary steps for the proper functioning of the 
Drone Directorate, which will help transform India to be a major global player in the arena 
of Drones 
 (Para 15.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Drone Directorate has been created in DGCA in October, 2020 with an initial 
sanctioned strength of 13 officers with the approval of Department of Expenditure. 
10.2 Drone Rules, 2021 were notified on 25 thAugust, 2021. Under the Drone Rules, 
substantial autonomy of operations has been provided to the manufacturers, importers, 
operators, R&D institutions, etc. In view of this, the existing sanctioned strength in Drone 
Directorate is adequate. 
Digital Sky Platform 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee takes note of the features of the Digital Sky Platform and would like to 
impress upon the Ministry, to take necessary steps to ensure that the project achieves its 
objectives, in an unhindered manner. 
 (Para 16.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The Digital Sky Platform (DSP) provides a single -window online mechanism to 
regulate the entire gamut of activities relating to operations of drones viz. drone registration, 
registration of the  manufacturers and its Pilots,  flight permissions, operations and post -flight 
data uploads. The DSP is under upgradation according to the provisions of the  newly notified 
Drone Rules, 2021. The DSP enables inter alia the following:- 
a. Type Certification of drones. 

23 
 
b. Registration of Unique Identification Number (UIN) 
c. Transfer or deregistration of UAS 
d. Operation of UAS 
e. UAS Traffic Management (UTM) 
f. Issue of Remote Pilot License 
g. Authorisation of Remote Pilot Training Organisation (RPTO) 
h. Fees, Insurance, Offences, Penalties, Appeals; etc. 
11.2 Phase 1 of the DSP, launched on 18thMarch, 2021 has the following features: 
a. Beta Phase: Hosting of Beta Version of Application Developed by AAI 
b. Software Requirements Specification (SRS) preparation for Phase 1 
c. Completion of Testing of Beta Version and Security Certification of Hosted Beta 
Version Digital Sky Application3 
11.3 DSP is now being aligned with the newly notified Drone Rules, 2021. 
Krishi Udan 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee notes that this Scheme would provide the much needed quick cargo 
services to cater to the huge demand in the domestic and international markets, for the farm 
products of the North -Eastern region and other remote areas of the country. The Committee 
is happy to note that the Scheme would ensure that perishable products find good markets 
and market value, in and outside the country, which would otherw ise have gone wasted, 
owing to lack of storage and connectivity. 
 (Para 17.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 MoCA has initiated “Krishi  Udaan” scheme, under which various agricultural 
products such as Coriander, Banana, Banana Leaves, Dry Fruits, Apples, Plums, Shrimps, 
Meat, flowers, Paneer, Pineapple, Cluster Beans, Tea Samples, Tropical Fish, Betel Leaves, 
etc. with special focus to North Eastern Region where 1,000 Metric Tons  (approx..) and a 
total of 70,000Metric Tons (approx.) pan India were handled by AAICLAS alone in Krishi  
Udan scheme during the F.Y2020-21. 
A. AAICLAS is geared up to handle perishable products across the country through its 
already established Cold Storage facilities  at 17 Airports (Cold storage facilities 

24 
 
added in Amritsar, Madurai, Bagdogra, Chennai, Varanasi andIndore), and 
additionally planned  to establish mobile cold storage facilities at  Agartala, 
Dibrugarh, Lilabari, Silchar etc. in the FY 2021-22. 
B. Initially to offset the cost of operating flights u nder the Vande Bharat Mission 
(VBM), the bellies of the flights were used to carry Krishi  Udaan cargo. MoCA has 
initiated “Krishi Udaan” scheme, under which various agricultural products such as 
Coriander, Banana, Banana Leaves, Dry Fruits, Apples, Plums, Shrimps, Meat, 
Flowers, Paneer, Pineapple, Curry Leaves, green vegetables, Custard Apple, 
Drumstick, Cucumber, Cluster Beans, Tea Samples, Tropical Fish, Betel  Leaves, etc. 
with special focus to North Eastern Region. Likewise, the same was continued later  
towards the domestic sector. 
C. M/o Civil Aviation and M/o A and FW are taking proactive steps to assist the farmers 
to establish more cold chains to maintain fresh produces and to protect producers with 
packing and packaging part by establishing more pack h ouses nearby field. 
AAICLAS, JV Airports have created cold storage in their cargo terminals for 
handling of perishable cargo under regulated temperature for longevity shelf life of 
the perishable cargo transported by Air. 
D. The Airports of Himalayan Region  and North East Region are the focus  area on 
development of Air Cargo facilities to facilitate air transportation of perishable Cargo. 
E. Total Tonnage of perishables handled upto 31 st March, 2021 starting from 25 thMarch, 
2020 is:- 
        Domestic Sector: 38,030 MT 
        International Sector: 1,43,624 MT  
F. NER Airports have registered 1032 MT upto 31st March, 2021. 
Sub-Group on Krishi Udan and Krishi Rail 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee appreciates the constitution of the  Sub Groups and hopes that these 
Sub Groups would help address the bottlenecks/ problems faced in the implementation of 
Krishi Udan and Krishi Rail, and ensure the success of the Schemes. 
 (Para 18.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Ministry     of     Food     Processing Industries, Government of India has implemented 
“Operations Greens” as part of Atma -Nirbhar-Abhiyan as on 02.11.2020. Operations Green 
has been extended from Tomatoes, Onions and Potatoes (TOP) to all fruits and vegetables. In 

25 
 
the scheme 50% subsidy o n transportation from surplus production to deficient market and 
50% subsidy on storage, including cold storage are provided. 
A. Accordingly, benefit of subsidy for domestic air cargo movement at the rate of 50% 
of actual fr eight cost of the domestic airline operator and 50%  of th e applicable 
airport’s Terminal Storage and Processing (TSP) and transit/ Transshipment charges 
incurred under air freight operation are extended to the eligible crops which includes 
21 fruits and 20  vegetables air freighted from airports in states/UTs and Chandigarh 
Airport. The subsidy scheme further extended to the beneficiaries till 31.03.2021. 
B. AAICLAS has planned to establish more Domestic Air Cargo Terminals at various 
airports and to multiply t he existing Domestic Cargo Terminals to 33% by F.Y 2023 -
24. 
C. AAI/AAICLAS started Domestic Air Cargo handling from the pax Terminal with the 
permission of BCAs and to use the lean hours. This will facilitate movement of 
sizeable Domestic products, valuables and perishables without interruption to the 
regional hub and further distribution in the Indian Domestic market. 
D. AAICLAS under MoCA jointly works to establish Air Cargo Terminals in the under 
connected Airports by inviting non -scheduled Cargo freighters an d Bonded Truck 
connectivity. 
E. The Airlines which have been participating in Krishi Udaan Scheme are: 
 (i) Air India, (ii)  Air India Express,  (iii) Indigo, (iv) SpiceJet/Spice Express, (v)  Go  
 Air, (vi) Air Asia, (vii) Air Vistara and (viii) Blue Dart Aviation. 
F. The major International Destinations for Agri Products are as follows: Dubai, Sharjah, 
Singapore, Muscat, Kuwait, Dammam, Doha, Riyadh, Jeddah, Bahrain, Philadelphia, 
Los Angeles, London, Abu Dhabi, Frankfurt etc. 
G. The major Dome stic Airports which are contributing in KrishiUdaan are Delhi, 
Mumbai, Bangalore, Kolkata, Chennai, Surat, Vizag, Amritsar, Port Blair, 
Ahmedabad, Lucknow, Guwahati, Agartala, Imphal, Bhubaneshwar, Trichy, 
Mangalore, Coimbatore, Cochin, Srinagar, Jaipur, Hyderabad, etc. 
H. The Airports of Himalayan Region and North East Region are the focus area on 
development of Air Cargo facilities to facilitate air transportation of perishable Cargo. 
Cargo Development works undertaken in the NER Airports areas under:- 
(i) Guwahati – In addition to existing Domestic Cargo Terminal building, one 
more building is ready for commissioning. The security clearance of the same 
from BCAS is in process. 
(ii) Dibrugarh – Domestic Air Cargo Terminal is ready. Security clearance from 
BCAS is in process. 

26 
 
(iii) Domestic Cargo terminals at Silchar, Jorhat, Dimapur, Leelabari and Tezpur   
are also in stage of commissioning for operations. 
Public Private Partnership of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee underlines the need for a comprehensive negotiation and guidelines, 
in the award of airports under PPP model. The Committee urges the Ministry to take note of 
the management model of Kochi International Airport at Nedumbassery, and analyze the 
advantages and liabilities of such a model. The Ministry, may, after such analysis, adopt such 
a concept, if the advantages outweigh the liabilities. The Committee, further, stresses upon 
the need to make sure that the guidelines regarding operationalizing the new airports are 
unbiased, so that all parts of India are benefitted by the same. 
 (Para 19.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 Airport Sector  is one of the Sectors where Public Private Partnership (PPP) was 
implemented first in the country. PPP at airports has evolved with the time and with the 
different models of execution. Cochin International Airport (“CIAL”)  was established as  a 
Greenfield airport way back in 1999 and  is being  managed by Cochin International Airport 
Limited (“CIAL”). Currently, CIAL is having equity participation from the Government of 
Kerala   (32.42%), NRIs (32.49%), Industrialists, Financial Institutions an d Airport   Service 
Providers, with around 18,000 shareholders from 29 countries. When the Cochin airport was 
conceived, the Indian economy had just opened up for the private sector and therefore, there 
were not many takers of the airport projects. And the refore, the State Government of Kerala 
itself executed the project at an estimated project cost of Rs. 200cr. by arranging the 
funds through joint financial   participation of airport users (mainly non -resident Indians), 
Airport Service Providers and the Government.  
14.2 Thus, the current ownership model of   CIAL is the result of financial paucity 
prevailed at that period to fund the   project and the requirement to mobilize fund by alternate 
method and it is a fact that the management of the airport still remains with  the State 
Government which is at the center of the project. 
14.3 Whereas, the concept of PPP at airports has shifted from Government centric to 
Private centric. The efforts of Government of India has been that the airports are substanti ally 
financed by the private investors and management remains with them till the lease period. 
The idea behind this has been that AAI is relieved from running the airports with financially 
sound background and strong passenger throughput which is not the c ase with CIAL. AAI 
gets the revenue share or Concession Fee from these airports which is utilized for 
development of smaller and unviable airports.   Unlike CIAL, there is no financial crunch for 
the   development, modernization, upgrading of PPP brownfield  airports by the   private 
players. Even Greenfield airports like Jewar, MOPA, Bhogapuram, Navi   Mumbai are being 
developed by private players with huge capital expenditure. 

27 
 
14.4 The financial difficulties faced   by State of Kerala during the project fun ding of 
CIAL during the nineties,  which necessitated funding from NRIs and Financial Institutions, 
is not  the case presently and private players are willing to fund  both Brownfield and 
Greenfield airport   projects. 
14.5 Further, if the   companies, which develop, operate and manage the brownfield and 
greenfield   airports offload the shares in future to general public, the shareholding of   these 
companies will be akin to CIAL. 
14.6 As regards Committee's recommendations for unbiased development of   Greenfield 
airports, it is stated that Government of India has notified the Greenfield Airports Policy in 
2008 according to which AAI,  State Government or any other airport developer can develop 
a Greenfield airport in the country with the prior approval of th e Government of India. The 
Policy document is applicable to all parts of the country uniformly and does not discriminate 
against any region/part. 
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee recommends that urgent, substantive steps should be taken to allay the 
widespread concern/fear regarding serious adverse implications of CORSIA on the airlines 
in India. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that India’s interests are 
protected at any cost, keeping in view the vital role played by the Civil Aviation sector in the 
development and growth of our economy. The Committee desires that the concerns of India in 
this regard, should be raised at the diplomatic level effectively. 
 (Para 20.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 India has filed reservations at the 40th ICAO Assembly and proposed the following:- 
(i) The CORSIA Baseline should be fixed closer to date, when India and a number of 
other countries join in 2027. 
(ii) Member State driven principle of stabilizing aviation emissions and attribution of 
responsibility of emission reduction to Member States instead of airline operators. 
(iii) CORSIA Emissions unit eligibility criteria developed by ICAO should be consistent 
with the principles developed by UNFCCC. 
(iv) Opposed the sustainability criteria laid down by ICAO for certifying the sustainable 
aviation fuels as CORSISA Eligible Fuels.  
15.2 Also, the Representative of India (RoI) to the ICAO Council along with BRICS and 
other like-minded countries presented an Oral Report by the Advisory Group on CORSIA 

28 
 
(AGC) which was accepted by ICAO. Accordingly, the ICAO Council approved the 
Structural Review of CORSIA in the next Council session in 2022. 
Flying Training Organizations 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. In order to meet the training requirements for the future growth of aviation sector in 
the country, particularly with reference to the huge demand for trained pilots, the Ministry 
should explore the possibility of creating a funding mechanism for promoting new FTOs. 
 (Para 21.3.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 There are 33 DGCA approved Flying Training Organizations (FTOs) in India  which 
provide pilot training. During the year  2019, more than 400 commercial Pilot License (CPL)  
were issued through Indian FTOs.  The number of CPLs issued by Indian FTOs during 2020 
and till 30thJuly 2021 are 335 and 286 respectively. Various steps have been taken to increase 
the number of pilots trained in India. The steps taken include: 
i. With a view to enhance the number of licensed pilots in the country and also to 
optimally utilise the unused infrastructure at AAI airports, 5 AAI airports (Lilabari, 
Khajuraho, Belagavi, Kalaburgi and Jalgaon) have been selected where FTOs shall be 
permitted to operate with rationalized concession fee. 
ii. The concept of royalty (revenue share payment by FTOs to AAI) has been abolished. 
The Request For Proposal (RFP) for leasing was floated and bids  were successfully 
completed for the 05 airports on 05th March 2021. 
iii. Soft lau nch of two FTOs at Kalaburagi was done on 15 th August, 2021. Six more 
FTOs are to be launched by 31st December, 2021. 
iv. The issue of reduction of VAT on Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) has been taken up 
with the State Governments. Reduction of GST on AvGas  being used by FTOs 
is   being taken up with Ministry of Finance. 
v. The issue of providing of loans to FTOs as a priority sector is being taken up with 
Ministry of Finance. 
vi. DGCA CAR Section 7 Series I Part V has been modified to empower Flying 
Instructors (FI) to authorize flight operations at FTOs. This may help increase the 
flying hours at each FTOs significantly leading to suboptimal aircraft utilization. 
Hitherto, this power has been granted only to Chief Flying Instructors (CFI) and 
Deputy CFIs. 

29 
 
vii. India’s largest flying school IGRUA (Amethi, UP), has been permitted to start pilot 
training at Gondia and Gulbarga to enhance flying hours which get severely affected 
during winter months due to visibility issues. 
viii. IGRUA’s operation and management is proposed to be hand ed over to a private 
operator on a PPP basis for 30 years. This will help replace its ageing aircraft fleet, 
hire more instructors at market salaries, improve the simulator facilities and enhance 
the number of pilots passing out every year. 
ix. The National Av iation University, RGNAU at Amethi is considering degree courses 
for pilots.  This will enhance the career options and encourage more young Indians to 
consider aviation as a long-term career option. 
Aero Club of India (ACI) 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee takes note of the fact that Aero Club of India has worked under the  
Purview of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. ACI has also figured prominently in the Outcome 
Budget and the Annual Report of MoCA. Over the years, the annual audited accounts o f ACI, 
both in English and in Hindi, are placed in both Houses of Parliament. It also has a deemed 
status as an autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Aero Club of India, 
which has a legacy and was responsible for licensing, even during the pre -independence 
days, has been the primary organization promoting Flying Training Organizations (FTOs) 
across the country, by providing them infrastructural support by means of aircrafts and 
equipment provided by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee takes note of the update 
that the Aero Club of India had its official location and headquarters at the Safdarjung 
Airport for over thirty years. The ACI building was constructed on the leased land given to 
them by the Ministry of Tourism. It has be en observed that on the expiry of the lease period, 
despite performing semi-Government function of promoting the FTOs across the country, the 
Aero Club of India was served an eviction notice by imposing a penalty of non -extension of 
lease and thereafter, t hrough a Court order, the eviction was initiated, claiming penalties. 
The Committee feels that since ACI is a body with the support of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation itself, it deserves that the official building be restored to it in recognition of 
performing its role as a support and semi -autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may review the matter 
and issue appropriate instructions to the AAI Board for re -allotment of the said premis es to 
Aero Club of India. 
 (Para 23.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 ACI is not enlisted as an organisation under MoCA as per the Government of India 
(Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. It was given project specific grants in aid in the past by 
this Ministry for procurement of trainer aircraft and other aero sports equipm ent etc. subject 

30 
 
to specific conditions of the grant -in-aid with an objective towards promotion and 
development of aero sports in India. 
 
17.2 The provisions under previous General Financial Rules, 2005, Rule 212(2) provides 
for laying of annual reports an d audited accounts of private and voluntary organizations or 
societies registered under the Registration of Societies Act, 1860, receiving one -time 
assistance/non-recurring grants of Rupees fifty lakhs and above should also be laid on the 
Table of the House, within nine months of the close of the succeeding financial year of the 
grantee Organisations. The annual reports of ACI were laid in terms of generic guidelines 
contained in GFR applicable to an organization receiving such grants in aid. 
17.3 On the request of the Aero Club of India, land measuring 17400 sq. feet was leased to 
M/s. Aero Club of India for 30 years by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The lease expired on 
18.09.2013. The premises was vacated by Aero Club of India on 13.07.2017 after the o rder 
dated 04.07.2017 of Hon’ble High Court of Delhi. The lease rent including interest of about 
Rs.6.15 crore is outstanding against ACI as on 30.11.2020. Since ACI is not paying the 
outstanding dues to AAI , it  has filed an execution petition to recover i ts dues before the 
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi. 
17.4 Since, there is acute shortage of space in Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, hence, AAI is 
utilizing the premises for certification of ATS personnel, Licensing of ATCOs, Certification 
of Aeronautical Station Operator s (ASOs), Rating and Training related procedures of 
ATCOs, Executing and implementing the ICAO Audit requirements, conducting tests for 
English Language Proficiency (ELP) for ATS personnel, etc. 
Maintenance Engineering Training School 
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee takes note of the policy initiatives made by the Ministry for Pilot 
Training Institutes, Flying Training Organizations and Maintenance Engineering Training 
Schools in the country. The Committee hopes that these  initiatives would positively address 
the noticeable shortage of pilots and type rated commanders; and other technical personnel 
for the Civil Aviation sector in the country. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to 
facilitate the Pilot Training Institutes , Flying Training Organizations and Maintenance 
Engineering Training Schools, in executing the onerous responsibility for tapping the 
manpower potential and skilled workforce available in the country. 
 (Para 24.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 There are 33 DGCA approved Flying Training Organizations (FTOs) in India to 
provide pilot training. However, with a view to optimally utilize the unused infrastructure at 
AAI airports and enhance the number of licensed pilots in the country, 5 AAI airports  

31 
 
(Lilabari, Khajuraho, Belagavi, Kalaburgi and   Jalgaon ) have been selected where FTOs 
shall be permitted to operate with highly rationalized concession fee. 
i. The concept of royalty (revenue share payment by FTOs to AAI) has been abolished. 
The Request for  Proposal (RFP) for leasing of land at the said 5 airports has been 
floated by AAI. Based on the outcome of this initiative this liberalized FTO policy 
may be replicated at other airports. 
ii. Soft launch of two FTOs at Kalaburagi was done on 15 thAugust, 2021.  Six more 
FTOs are to be launched by 31stDecember, 2021. 
iii. The issue of reduction of VAT on Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) has been taken up 
with the State Governments. Reduction of GST on AvGas  being used by FTOs 
is   being taken up with Ministry of Finance. 
iv. The issue of providing of loans to FTOs as a priority sector is being taken up with 
Ministry of Finance. 
v. DGCA CAR Section 7 Series I Part V has been issued on 03 February 2021 to 
empower Flying Instructors (FI) to authorize flight operations at FTOs. This m ay help 
increase the flying hours at each FTOs significantly. Hitherto, this power has been 
granted only to Chief Flying Instructors (CFI) and Deputy CFIs, leading to 
suboptimal aircraft utilization. 
vi. India’s largest flying school IGRUA (Amethi, UP), has be en permitted to start pilot 
training in Gondia and Gulbarga to enhance flying hours which get severely affected 
during winter months due to visibility issues. 
vii. IGRUA’s operation and management is proposed to be handed over to a private 
operator on a PPP bas is for 30 years. This will help replace its ageing aircraft fleet, 
hire more instructors at market salaries, improve the simulator facilities and enhance 
the number of pilots passing out every year. 
viii. Total number of DGCA approved Aircraft Maintenance Engine ering (AME) schools 
at present is 49. More than 3200 trainees pass out from these AME schools every two 
years. With a view to meet the increasing demand of aircraft maintenance personnel, 
the AME schools are being strengthened. 
ix. Several initiatives, which i nclude the modifications in the examination pattern, 
standardization of syllabus, initiation of graduation programme for aircraft 
maintenance personnel, revising of granting of licenses are being taken. 
x. Upgradation of AME schools will also be undertaken in ter-alia by affiliating them 
with Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU), India's only Aviation 
University.  An AME school is expected to commence at IGRUA in January 2022.  
Maintenance, Repair and Overhauling (MRO) facilities in India 

32 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Committee takes cognizance of the immense potential that India has, in offering 
MRO facilities in its soil. However, the country has not yet been able to fully exploit the 
opportunities available in this sector. It would  be of a huge loss for the country, if we do not 
tap the vast technical and skill base, at hand, in the country. There is urgent need for the 
creation of a congenial environment in the country to cater to the requirements of the sector, 
which provides bene fits, in terms of jobs, prosperity and boost to the economy. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should give requisite focus on 
the issues presently faced in the MRO sector and chalk out effective as well as strategic steps, 
to ensure that India evolves into a key international player in offering MRO facilities. 
 (Para 25.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 GST on MRO has been reduced from 18% to 5% with full Input Tax Credit 
from 1stApril, 2020. 
i. Transactions sub-contracted by foreign OEMs/MRO to domestic MRO are treated as 
"exports" with zero rated GST from 1st April, 2020. 
ii. Input Tax Credit has been permitted for discharging GST on inter-state stock transfers 
of aircraft engines, parts and spares. 
iii. AAI has come up with a liberal MRO pol icy with significantly reduced liberalized 
land rentals. Royalty (revenue share payment to AAI by MRO Company) has been 
abolished. 
iv. Custom duty has been waived on tools, toolkits and spares imported by MROs. 
v. Relaxed restriction on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years. 
vi. 100% Foreign Direct Investment permitted via automatic route for MROs. 
vii. Extended stay of foreign aircraft in India permitted till completion of MRO work or 6 
months, whichever is earlier. 
viii. Rules simplified for export of lea sed aircraft in complete or knocked -down 
conditions, opening up new opportunities in end -of-lease checks and aircraft 
component recycling. 
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee would like to urge the Ministry to analyze the prospects and take 
necessary favorable action thereon. The Committee realizes the huge potential of such air 
strips and recommends that the Ministry should examine the feasibility of making available, 
such air strips, to FTOs who are willing to open their schools in those areas. 

33 
 
 (Para 25.3.1) 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 With a view to optimally utilize the unused infrastructure at AAI airports and enhance 
the number of licensed pilots in the country, permission for 8 FTOs to be operated from the  5 
airports at Lilabari, Khajuraho, Belagavi, Kalaburgi and Jalgaon has been granted by AAI to 
the successful bidders. 
i. Soft launch of two FTOs at Kalaburagi was done on 15 th August, 2021. Six more 
FTOs are to be launched by 31st December, 2021. 
ii. Based on the outcome of the initiative, this liberalized FTO policy may be replicated 
at other airports. 
 
Rationalization of FTO and MRO charges 
Recommendation/Observation  
21. The Committee welcomes this initiative of the Ministry. 
 (Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 With a view to optimally utilise the unused infrastructure at AAI airports and enhance 
the number of licensed pilots in the country, 5 airports (Lilabari, Khajuraho, Belagavi, 
Kalaburgi and Jalgaon have been identified where FTOs shall be permitted to operate with 
highly rationalised concession fee by the FTOs 
i. The concept of royalty (revenue share payment by FTOs to AAI) has been abolished. 
ii. The Request For Proposal (RFP) for leasing of five airstrips has been floated by AAI 
and the bid process is currently underway. Ba sed on the outcome of this initiative this 
liberalized FTO policy may be replicated at other airports. 
iii. AAI has come up with a liberal MRO policy with significantly reduced liberalized 
land rentals. Royalty (revenue share payment to AAI by MRO Company) has been 
abolished. 
Aircraft financing/ leasing 
Recommendation/Observation  

34 
 
22. The Committee hopes that the steps taken by the Ministry will give the much needed 
impetus to aircraft financing/leasing in the country. 
 (Para 28.2) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 The essential elements of the roadmap to put in place the necessary ecosystem for 
aircraft leasing and financing in India have been implemented. 
22.2 These cover various tax and non-tax measures, including:- 
(i) Exemption from corporate tax for a block period of 10 years within the first 15 years 
for leasing units, 
(ii)  Exemption from Stamp Duty on documents for such transactions carried out from 
IFSC at GIFT-City, 
(iii)Enactment of the IFSC Authority Act providing for a Unified Regulator, 
(iv) notification of "aircraft lease" as a financial product, 
(v) Permission to insurance companies to undertake aircraft insurance and invest in 
leasing and financing business, 
(vi) Enabling pension funds and alternate investment funds to participate in aircraft 
financing, 
(vii)Enabling re -leasing of aircraft and engines within India at the end of expiry or 
termination of an existing lease without physical re-export of aircraft, and 
(viii)Granting waivers from Importer Exporter Code(IEC) and from General Remittances 
(GR) for overseas lessors and fin anciers. Aircraft Leasing Framework was released 
through the IFSC Authority on 19 February 2021. 
22.3 Ministry of Civil Aviation also organized the "India Aircraft Leasing Summit" in 
collaboration with International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) Authority on 26th February, 
2021 at New Delhi with a focus on policy and regulatory reforms undertaken for making 
India an aircraft leasing and financing hub. 
Airspace Control 
Recommendation/Observation  
23. The Committee hopes that the Flexible Use of Airspace (FUA) strategy between civil 
and military users, will render an array of benefits and sustainability to airlines, thereby, 
saving flight time and reducing airline operational costs. 

35 
 
 (Para 29.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 As a result of Flexible Use of Airspace (FUA), the upper airspace of Restricted 
Airspace at and above 33,000 feet in the Northern Sector and above 25,000 feet in the 
Southern Sector have been converted as Temporary Reserved Airspace (TRA). 100 
Conditional Routes (CDRs) have been designed so far, out of which 46 have already been 
implemented. Moreover, 14 danger areas have been de-notified in coordination with Army.  
23.2 An annual fuel saving of Rs.289 Crore, 2 Lac metric tone reduction in CO2 emission 
and reduction of Rs.917 Crore in the operating cost of airlines is expected of this Scheme. 
Recommendation/Observation  
24. The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. 
 (Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 Noted. 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
Recommendation/Observation  
25. The Committee is pleased to note that AAI has set a new benchmark in its endeavour 
to reduce carbon footprint. The Committee exhorts AAI to continue its efforts to conserve 
environment, to the extent possible, and to reduce the adverse impact of carbon emissions on 
the global ecosystem, in line with the national as well as global climate change initiatives. 
 (Para 31.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 Comments of the Committee have been noted and conveyed to AAI. 
Recommendation/Observation  
26. The Committee desires the Ministry to ensure that FRT is employed at the airports is 
infallible. The Committee also urges upon the Ministry to provide all facilities of 
international standards, in its airports. 
 (Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 

36 
 
26.1 DIGI YATRA, an initiative of Ministry of Civil Aviation, is a facial recognition 
enabled e-boarding system for passengers at Indian airports and provides a seamless travel 
experience and reduces queue waiting time. The same is under implementation. 
26.2 The prevailing best practices followed in the world have already been adopted by the 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) while developing Airport infrastructure. 
26.3 The New Passengers Terminal Buildings are being designed in acco rdance with 
design parameters specified in the latest edition of the Airport Development Reference 
Manual (ADRM) published by International Air Transport Association (IATA). 
26.4 Terminal Buildings are being designed to accommodate state of Art technologie s with 
world class facilities. Terminals are being incorporated with technologies to have touch less 
movement of passengers which includes scanners and monitors at various check points such 
as entry gates, immigration etc. Further Body scanners are being p rocured for touch - less 
Security checks at the Indian Airports. 
26.5 To have a smooth Passenger experience, AAI is in process of implementing Bio -
metric Access Control System at 43 airports. AAI also has plan to initiate DIGIYATRA, Bio-
Metric e-boarding system with a facial recognition facilitating seamless passenger movement 
across multiple touch points at Airport Terminal Buildings, being implemented at 4 AAI 
airports Kolkata, Pune, Varanasi and Visakhapatnam. 
26.6 AAI is also emphasizing the barrier fre e environment at the Airport by providing 
ramps, toilets for differently abled persons, braille symbols in lift and auditory signals in lift 
as well as escalators and aerobridges. Efforts are being made to provide ambulifts wherever 
the aerobridges could not be provided. The disabled friendly passenger coaches on airside are 
also being procured. 
26.7 AAI is developing various airports such as Dehradun, Leh, Patna, Port Blair, 
Agartala, Guwahati, Pune, Vijayawada, Trichy, Chennai etc. as world class airports  by 
undertaking the expansion of Terminal Building, Apron and other allied city-side and air-side 
infrastructure. Further, new Greenfield Airports with world class facilities are also being 
developed at Hirasar (R ajkot), Dholera (near Ahmedabad), Mopa( Goa ), Navi -Mumbai, 
Bhogapuram, Jewar (Noida), Holongi  (Itanagar) etc. 
26.8 Simultaneously with the development of airports, AAI is committed to reduction of 
carbon emissions, for developing sustainability and environment friendly infrastructure. This 
includes intiation of Airport Carbon Accreditation Programme for 4 airports - Kolkata, 
Bhubaneshwar, Trivandrum and Varanasi. Providing Rain water Harvesting system at AAI 
Airports namely Chennai, Bhubaneshwar, Rajamundry, Raipur, Jaipur and other airports. 
AAI has set up Sewage Treatment Plants with FMR -Fluidized Media Reactor/ MBBR -
Moving Bed Biological Reactor/ FAB - Fluidized Aerobic Bio Reactor technology at all 
Airports for management of waste disposal and use of the treated recycled water for 
gardening, flushing in toilets. AAI has built in process of constructing Terminal Buildin gs as 

37 
 
Green Buildings of minimum GRIHA ( Green Rating for Integrated Habitat Assessment) 4 
star rating. 
26.9 Further, to facilitate and focus on cargo and logistics, an Allied Services Company 
v.i.z. AAICLAS was formed and terminals are being designed with  provision for cargo 
Automation system. 
 
Implementation of SKYBOOKS360 System 
Recommendation/Observation  
27. The Committee recognizes the utility of SKYBOOKS360 System as a unique 
customized enterprise resource planning solution to provide an integrated e -business to 
airport operators and air navigation service providers and hopes that it would provide 
seamless and integral management of core business processes. 
 (Para 34.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 AAI has implemented SKYBOOKS360 at Multi-Modal International Cargo Hub and 
Airport at Nagpur (MIHAN), Maharashtra Airport Development Company (MADC) and is in 
the process of implementing the system at Chandigarh International Airport Limited 
(CHIAL). AAI would continue to explore possib ilities of implementing SKYBOOKS360 to 
Airport Operators and Air Navigation Service Providers. 
Digi Yatra 
Recommendation/Observation  
28. The Committee, while appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, accentuates the need 
to ensure data privacy and data protection, in the process of implementation of Digi Yatra. 
 (Para 36.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 The solution being implemented by AAI (Biometric Boarding System) as part of the 
Digi Yatra program follows the principles of privacy by design. It will follow all the security 
requirements as defined in the Digi  Yatra policy. Consent from the passenger is taken for 
using the facial biometric for the purpose of identification across the airport touch points 
from the Entry to the Terminal to the Boarding Gates.  
28.2 The bio metric data is purged from the system after 4 hours of the flight departure. 
Apart from this, the solution will also adhere to data protection laws as applicable and 

38 
 
mandated by the GOI. The data in motion will always be encrypted. The data at rest would be 
protected by implementing best in class data security tools coupled with data access controls.  
28.3 The implemented solution will have Periodic Audits, Assessments by independent 
teams to assess the level of security and system resili ence to ensure compliance to applicable 
data protection and security rules. 
 
 
Seaplane Operations in India 
Recommendation/Observation  
29. The Committee takes note of the innovative initiatives taken by the Ministry to 
promote Seaplane operations in the country. Needless to say, the Seaplane services will 
revolutionize the nation’s regional connectivity. The Committee desires that the Ministry 
should ensu re that the necessary amenities, matching up to international standards for 
Seaplane operations, such as terminal buildings, facilitation counters, check -in counters, 
modern ticketing methods, food counters, motels, shopping facilities etc. are provided, f or the 
smooth operations of Seaplanes. 
 (Para 37.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 MoCA introduced a new mode of transportation i.e. seaplane operations from water 
aerodromes under RCS - UDAN. AAI awarded seaplane routes  connecting following          
12 Water Aerodromes, covering 5 states and one UT Lakshadweep under RCS–UDAN:- 
(i) Sardar Sarovar Dam (Statue of Unity), 
(ii) Sabarmati Riverfront, Ahmedabad  and Shatrunjay Damin Gujarat 
(iii) Swaraj Dweep (Havelock Island), 
(iv) Shaheed Dweep (Neil Island)  
(v) Long Island in Andaman and Nicobar Islands  
(vi) Guwahati riverfront  
(vii) Umrangso Reservoir in Assam 
(viii) Nagarjuna Sagar Dam in Telangana 
(ix) Prakasam Barrage in Andhra Pradesh and 

39 
 
(x) Minicoy and Kavaratti in Lakshadweep Islands. 
29.2 A list of sea plane routes awarded to the Selected  Airline Operators in the 3rd and 4th 
round of bidding under UDAN, is at Annexure-C. 
29.3 RCS flight operations between Sabarmati River Front and Statue of Unity has already 
commenced on 31st October, 2020 under NSOP. 
29.4 Ministry of Civil Aviation has been regularly holding meetings with all stakeholders 
for expeditious development of water aerodromes. RCS flight operations from rest of the 
water aerodromes shall be commenced as and when these are ready for operations. 
29.5 Besides, the Special round of bidding 4.1 that is in  progress also includes seaplane 
routes proposed by Sagarmala Seaplane Services. 
Skill Development/ Training 
Recommendation/Observation  
30. The Committee recognizes the fact that the Indian Aviation industry is one of the 
fastest growing markets  in the world and India has a vast talent pool of skilled manpower. 
Initiatives such as ‘Make in India’ campaign and ‘Atmanirbhar’ campaign have given a huge 
boost to industry players. The focus on indigenization in the Civil Aviation sector has created 
a high demand for good technical talent and skill development. The Committee, therefore, 
underlines the need for better interventions for skill development/training in the country, to 
augment the skills of available manpower. The Committee recommends the Min istry to 
formulate futuristic plans for devising tailor -made technical courses for skill development, 
training and research, in consultation with the private sector. The Committee is of the 
considered opinion that the Ministry should endeavour to incorpora te international best 
practices, in the area of skill development. 
 (Para 38.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 At present, there are 32 Flying Training Organisations (FTOs) in India out of which 
29 are functional which impart flying training to students for issuance of Commercial Pilot 
License. There are 186 aircrafts being used for flying training in these 32 FTOs. The training 
capacity of these FTOs was around 350 students in the year 2018, which was increased to 
around 400 students per year in 2020, by str eamlining DGCA regulations with international 
best practices. 
a. The government is planning to hand over the operations and management of India’s 
largest flying school – IGRUA Amethi – to a private operator on a PPP basis.  This 
will help replace its ageing a ircraft fleet, hire more instructors at market salaries, 
improve the simulator facilities and enhance the number of pilots passing out every 
year. 

40 
 
b. There are plans to enable greater collaborations between flying schools across the 
country so that during the low visibility conditions during winters in North India, the 
cadets can continue flying at other airfields. 
c. The national aviation RGNAU at Amethi is considering degree courses for pilots, 
Aircraft Maintenance Engineers (AME), airport managers and ground o perations 
personnel.  This will enhance their career options and encourage more young Indians 
to consider aviation as a long-term career option. 
d. The government is encouraging airlines and airports to adopt schools for pilots, 
AMEs, airports operations. DGC A is working on faster clearances of personnel 
without compromising safety. 
e. The government is working with flying clubs and funding institutions to find ways to 
raise debt for fleet augmentation. 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) 
Recommendation/Observation  
31. The Committee takes serious note of the high ATF prices prevailing in the country. 
The Committee welcomes the steps taken by State Governments in reducing the VAT on ATF 
for the flights operated under UDAN Scheme. The Committee is concerned to note that th e 
State Governments have shown reluctance to reduce the VAT on ATF for other flights. The 
Ministry may follow up and deliberate this issue with the State Governments, in order to 
bring much needed relief and help, to the air passengers, and the Aviation Sector. 
 (Para 39.2) 
31.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the issue of inclusion of ATF under GST 
should be pursued vigorously, by the Ministry, with the GST Council. The Committee hopes 
that the GST Council will consider the proposal favourably. 
 (Para 40.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.2 Besides reducing Sales Tax/VAT on  ATF drawn by airlines at RCS airports to 1% or 
less for a period of 10 years, various State Governments have reduced the applicable tax on 
ATF on non -RCS-UDAN operations  also to within 5%{e.g., Andhra Pradesh, Assam, 
Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat(at some airports), Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar 
Pradesh(at some airports), and West Bengal}. 
31.3 One aspect that is outstanding is bringing ATF under the ambit of Goods and Services 
Tax (GST) at rates which are comparable globally, with full input tax credit (ITC). This 
measure would address this cost -impediment and provide immediate  relief to airlines whose 

41 
 
finances are under severe stress due to the curtailment of international and domestic 
passenger movements resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic.  
31.4 Accordingly, M/o Civil Aviation has requested M/o Finance to bring ATF under the  
ambit of GST as a matter of extreme urgency as last reiterated in June2020, with the 
following proposal for coherence and simplicity in the tax regime:- 
a) Applicable GST rate of no more than 12% on ATF with full ITC. 
b) Output tax on sale of tickets both on bu siness and economy air passenger transport 
services may be levied uniformly @ 12%. 
c) Output tax on other services (viz. air cargo and ancillary services including catering, 
add-ons, etc.) may be levied @12%. 
d) Airlines may be allowed full ITC for GST paid on all goods and services. 
31.5 M/o Finance in its reply dated 8 th August, 2020 stated that as per Article 279A (5)of 
the Constitution, the GST Council shall recommend the date on which the GST be levied on 
ATF, besides petroleum crude, high speed diesel, petrol, and natural gas. As per section 9(2) 
of CGST Act, inclusio n of these products in GST will require recommendation of the GST 
Council. The GST Council, so far, has not made any recommendation for inclusion of ATF 
under GST, and M/o Finance has also noted that the issue has wider ramifications for States. 
It has further stated that in the last few months, prices of ATF have softened considerably and 
unlike petrol and diesel, it did not witness any excise duty increase. 
Development of airport infrastructure 
Recommendation/Observation  
32. The Committee desires the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and 
futuristic Master Plan for the development and expansion of airports in the country, to meet 
the ever growing demand for brand new and better airports. The Committee urges the 
Ministry to ensure that adequ ate parking space and slots are available at the airports. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to formulate necessary policies, schemes and guidelines, 
to attract much needed investment for airport projects. 
 (Para 41.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1 The Master Plans   are developed for Airports considering a 30 years forecast. 
However, the   development plans are prepared for undertaking the construction in 
phases.   Due to the dynamic nature of development, the Master Plans are 
reviewed   regularly b ased on the revised growth forecast. The Aircraft Parking Bays 
are   designed and constructed based on the growth forecast, Airlines schedule 
of   procurement of aircraft, Airlines request for night parking bays at an   airport and future 
traffic demand. Based on the futuristic traffic projections adequate Aircraft parking bays and 

42 
 
slot management are created and planned at the airports, such that it would be able to meet all 
the future traffic demand. 
Recommendation/Observation  
33. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 276 thReport, for ensuring 
sufficient space for commercial shops, while granting approval for new airports. Further, 5 
Star/3 Star hotels and multiplexes should be constructed near the new airports. The 
Committee al so desires that extra land, if any, should not be sold and should be kept for 
future developmental activities. 
 (Para 41.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 AAI has been advised to adhere with the directions of the 276th report of the 
Committee. 
33.2 The Airports Infrastructure Policy, 1997 put major thrust towards increasing the share 
of commercial revenue emerging from non -aeronautical sources to help in optimal 
exploitation of the full commercial potential of airports and make the airports not only viab le 
but capable of generating surpluses for further expansion and development. In the allocation 
of space commercial facilities, airports are required to prepare a Master Plan and follow a 
strict adherence to stipulated procedures, while maintaining suffici ent flexibility in order to 
ensure quality products and services and attract the holders of reputed brand -names. Further, 
the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 prescribes for Hybrid Till framework for economic 
regulation of airports under which 30% of n on-aeronautical revenue will be used to cross -
subsidise aeronautical charges. This framework encourages the airport operators to maximize 
the land use potential of airport for commercial activities. 
33.3 Thus, the airport developers of new airports have no t only freedom but also they get 
incentive for utilizing the airport land for commercial facilities and generate non -aeronautical 
revenue. 
33.4 Further. Airports Authority of India earns revenues from Aeronautical and non -
aeronautical resources. Non -Aeronautical resources include earmarking 10 -15% area of a 
Terminal building for Offices, Retail and F  and B. Also city side land is leased for non -
Aeronautical activities as identified in the AAI Act which include hotels, restaurants, 
warehouses etc. 
Necessary Navigation Aids at all Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
34. The Committee emphasizes the imminent need to employ modern technologically 
advanced navigation aids and facilities at all airports in the country. The Ministry should 

43 
 
urgently chalk out an Action Plan to operate CAT -II/III(B) ILS in all airports, in a fixed time 
bound period. 
 (Para 43.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 Development/ upgradation of equipment at airports is a continuous process depending 
on the traffic demand, availability of land and resources, environment clearance, approval 
from the regulatory authorities, removal of obstructions, etc. AAI is in process of 
advancement of navigational aids and facilities at all the airports in the country. CAT -II/II 
(B) ILS are available at AAI airports as per requirement. 
Pakyong Airport 
Recommendation/Observation  
35. The Committee, during its visit in October, 2018 to Pakyong Airport, observed that 
flight operations were stopped due to poor visibility. The Committee may be apprised, of the 
current status of flight operations from Pakyong Airport. 
 (Para 50.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 Flight operations has been commenced by M/s Spicejet from 23rd Jan, 2021. 
Presently, M/s Spicejet is operating 2 flights per day on Kolkata Pakyong -Kolkata and Delhi-
Pakyong-Delhi routes. 
Airport at Bihar 
Recommendation/Observation  
36. The Committee observes that if the Bihta airport is constructed as a Civil Enclave, it 
would still have the same limitations and constraints faced by the Patna airport. It would be 
a sheer replication of Patna airport, without any distinct operational advantage, except for 
landing A321 category of aircraft. 
 (Para 54.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 Bihta airport has the runway length of 2500m which is suitable for Code C operations 
without load penalty. Considering the limitations of Patna Airport and the exponential 
growth, it was decided to develop the Civil Enclave at Bihta airport to cater to the  demand at 
Patna airport till land for a Greenfield airport is made available.  
36.2 Further, being an operational defence airport, existing airside infrastructure would 
save time and expenditure. The aircraft parking requirements of Patna can also be cate red at 

44 
 
Bihta. Moreover, extension of runway for wide body aircraft and installation of approach 
lights for bad weather is also feasible at Bihta airport subject to the acquisition of land by the 
State Govt. 
Recommendation/Observation  
37. The Committee not es that AAI has asked for additional 191.5 acres of land. The 
Committee observes that if AAI would proceed with the planned expansion of Bihta airport, 
even without having a clear possession of additional 191.5 acres of land, it would result in an 
unsound investment. The Committee, therefore, observes that the proposed Bihta airport has 
still several limitations than any Greenfield project which may be considered for the State of 
Bihar. 
 (Para 54.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1 Considering the limitations of runway at Patna airport for operation of wide bodied 
aircraft, a Civil Enclave at Bihta has been proposed for combined use of Airports Authority 
of India (AAI) and Indian Air Force (IAF). The existing runway length of Bihta Airport is 
8200 feet which can c ater to A -320/A-321 type of aircraft without load penalty. However, 
there is feasibility for extension of runway at Bihta airport to 12,000 feet making it suitable 
for operation of wide bodied aircraft like B-777/B-787 to facilitate international operations as 
well as growth of cargo. The State Government has provided 108 acre of land free of cost to 
AAI for development of Bihta airport. However to make the proposed airport suitable for 
international operations, Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up the m atter with the State 
Government of Bihar for providing 191.5 acre of land for Runway extension, which is yet to 
be handed over to AAI. Further, the invitation to tender for any project depends on 
completion of pre -requisite formalities, which inter -alia in clude availability of land for the 
proposed development. 
Recommendation/Observation  
38. Knowing the capacity enhancement and the future requirement of aviation in Bihar, 
the Committee recommends that the AAI should consider acquiring the land on its own, 
which is at a very nominal price compared to city areas, for the creation of a Greenfield 
project in Bihar as a part of the Prime Minister’s package and to plan the expansion 
requirement of Eastern India, particularly the State of Bihar, which has a popula tion of 
approximately 12 crores. Notably, the State of Bihar is one of the few large States, which 
does not have an international Greenfield airport, yet. The Committee would also like the 
AAI to carry forward the proposal of the new Greenfield airport pro ject to cater to the future 
growth of civil aviation sector in Bihar, in particular, and in the nation, in general. 
 (Para 54.5) 
Reply of the Ministry 

45 
 
38.1 The proposal for Greenfield air port at Sonpur, near Patna is in concept stage. The 
operational feasibility has been checked by a team from   AAI and State Govt. has been 
requested to provide certain information. The   State Govt. has to decide further course of 
action for taking in -principle-   approval from the Steering Committee of Ministry of Civ il 
Aviation. 
 
 
Greenfield Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
39. The Committee recommends that during the entire process of commissioning, 
planning, construction and execution of Greenfield Airports, the environmental and 
developmental aspects should be thoroughly deliberated upon, examined and duly 
implemented. Furthermore, various issues which might crop up during the process, should be 
tackled by the Ministry, without delay and efficiently. 
 (Para 55.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1 The   Approval of Greenfield Airports are based on MoCA’s Greenfield 
Airport   Policy. As per the Policy, the approval is granted in 2 stages. 1 st Stage - Site 
Clearance and 2 nd Stage – In - Principle Approval. The   stage-1 clearance is based on re -
feasibility study undert aken by AAI and NOC   from MoD regarding Airspace clearances. 
While the Stage -2 Clearance is based on NOC from Ministry of Environment and Forest, 
Ministry of Defence, Ministry   of Home Affairs, Ministry of Finance etc. Therefore, it may 
be seen that even  before the approval of the project detailed deliberations are undertaken 
and   projects are thoroughly evaluated for approval. 
39.2 During execution   of the project, any unforeseen issues which come up are referred to 
the   Ministry for early resolution. 
Operationalization of Defence airports for Civil Aviation 
Recommendation/Observation  
40. The Committee desires that the Ministry may submit a detailed note, after due study, 
on the difference between a Greenfield project, a brownfield project and a defence 
brownfield project (civil enclave). All advantages and disadvantages of each category of 
project should be spelt out comprehensively so that State Governments which are willing to 
undertake expansion of civil aviation activities may avail the note for sound decision making. 
 (Para 57) 

46 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1 A Greenfield project means a work which is started from scratch on the unused lands 
where there is no need to remodel or demolish an existing structure. A greenfield airport is an 
aviation facility with greenfield project characteristics. The designation reflects certain 
environmental qualities (using previously undeveloped or empty greenfield land, for 
example) and commissioning, planning and construction processes that are generally carrie d 
out from scratch. While a green field in nature is defined as a wide expanse of natural land 
(meadow, prairie, grassland), here greenfield denotes that a project lacks any constraints 
imposed upon it by prior work or existing infrastructure. As per the G overnment of India's 
Policy, no Greenfield airport will normally be allowed within a distance of 150 kms from the 
nearest existing airport. 
40.2 A brownfield, on the other hand, remodels or improves upon existing facilities. 
Brownfield projects are built o ver Brownfield land or Brownfield site. A Brownfield land or 
Brownfield site means a land which was operational in the past but now is in idle condition. 
Hence, a brownfield airport project is one which develops on the existing facilities.  
40.3 A civil enclave is an area at a military air base allotted for the usage of civil aviation. 
AAI establishes a civil enclave at the existing defence airfield instead of developing a new 
airport. A civil enclave is basically a joint user airport, where the time -slot for civilian and 
defence flights are allotted by coordination between AAI and Defence authorities.  
40.4 The establishment of Greenfield, Brownfield or Civil Enclave depends upon the 
existing circumstances, availability of resources including land, viability of commercial flight 
operations etc. 
Recommendation/Observation  
41. A complete and comprehensive report should be obtained from Airline Operators, 
Airports Authority of India, Air Traffic Control and cargo operators including the DGCA, 
state administration and BCAS to specify the challenges/shortcomings as far as use of Civil 
Enclaves across the country is concerned. 
 (Para 57.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
41.1 At Civil enclaves, AAI has to face the challenge of limited slot availability sometimes 
due to limited watch hours provided by Defense authorities, restriction imposed by Defense 
authorities on civil flight operations for certain period of time during day for military 
operations and also restriction on permissible Runway movements per hour for civil flight 
operations eventually resulting in limited flight movements and connectivity by airline 
operators. 
Karipur Flight Accident 

47 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
42. Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) -The Committee feels that the 
administrative jurisdiction of AAIB under the Ministry of Civil Aviation go against the tenets 
of impartiality and equality, since it may raise the genuine question of conflict of interest. The 
principle of good governance expects the placement of AAIB under a Ministry other than the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, just like CCRS functions under the administrative purview of 
MoCA, though it looks after railway accidents. The Committee  may also be apprised of the 
steps taken for shifting the jurisdiction of AAIB and also to empower AAIB. 
 (Para 59.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
42.1 As per the existing provisions of the Aircraft Act, 1934, Central Government is 
empowered to make Rules interalia, for regulating the manufacture, possession, use, 
operation and securing the safety of aircraft operations etc. Thus, the authority of Central 
Government for superintendence of these bodies is necessary to monitor the proper 
implementation of rul es and administrative functioning of these organisations. Further, the 
power to review the decision of the regulatory bodies in the new amendment provides a 
redressal mechanism/ platform for aggrieved entities.  
42.2 The Civil Aviation Sector, like any oth er sector, requires extensive consultation with 
ICAO, IATA and other stakeholders and interactions with other Ministries/Departments of 
the Central Government, therefore the Ministry has to play an important role. 
42.3 Further, AAIB under Aircraft (Investi gation of Accidents and Incidents) Rules, 2017 
has functional independence in investigation of serious air accidents and incidents under its 
jurisdiction. 
National Aero Sports Policy 
Recommendation/Observation  
43. The Committee is of the view that aero sports have a huge potential for growth, in 
terms of tourism and employment generation, in the country. However, the infrastructure 
needed, to realize such potential, is missing at present. The Committee calls upon th e 
Ministry to formulate a National Aero -Sports Policy to help attract investments, both foreign 
and domestic, in the field of aerosports. The Committee underlines the need for bringing in 
the latest technology, equipments, infrastructure and international best practices, to promote 
aero sports into the country. The Committee also notes that in the process of the creation of 
the National Aero Sports Policy, wider consultation should be held with the stakeholders, 
which should also include Aerosports Wing of the NCC in the Ministry of Defence, State 
Governments, the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Ministry of Tourism, along with 
the Aero Club of India, which is the nodal body for FTOs and aero sports in India. 
 (Para 60.1) 

48 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
43.1 The Ministry recognises that a growth -oriented National Aero -Sports Policy (NASP) 
may help attract investments in latest aerosports technology, infrastructure and best practices. 
i. A Committee has accordingly been constituted by the Ministry on 04 Jan 2021 t o 
prepare the Draft National Aero Sports Policy 2021.  The Committee consists of 
representatives from Ministry of Sports, Ministry of Tourism, DGCA, IAF, NCC, 
Aero Club of India (ACI) and experts from the various aerosports. 
ii. The committee will submit the Draft NASP 2021 which will be uploaded on the 
websites of the Ministry and DGCA for feedback from the public. The policy will, 
inter-alia, address the objectives of growth, investments, employment generation, 
safety and national security in respect of aerosports. 
Flight Radio Telephoney Operator’s Licence (FRTOL) exams 
Recommendation/Observation  
44. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Ministry may 
update the Committee about the response of the Department of Telecommunication, to the 
communication of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, requesting the former, to allow DGCA to 
conduct RTR(A) examination, along with the CPL examination, that is already being 
conducted by DGCA. The Committee feels that since this is a n inter-Ministerial matter at a 
policy level, the Cabinet Secretary should convene a meeting and decide on merits, the issue 
of RTR(A) licenses by DGCA, along with CPL examination, as mandated under ICAO 
guidelines. This will streamline the process of issu e of licenses from a single window and 
also at the same time, create ease of training for pilots in the aviation sector, to meet the 
huge shortfall of trained pilots in the aviation sector in India. 
 (Para 60.A.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
44.1 The International Civil Aviation Organisation(ICAO) mandates the satisfactory 
establishment of  knowledge and skill of an applicant and issuance of Radiotelephone 
Operator’s restricted certificate -Aeromobiles{RTR(A)} as specified in the general radio 
regulations annexed to the International Telecommunication Convention, for operation  of the 
radiotelephone on board an aircraft. Thus, holding of a RTR (A) issued by the Safety 
Regulator is mandatory for operation of the radiotelephone on board an aircraft. In cas e of 
India this license has to be issued by DGCA. 
44.2 However in India, Wireless Planning and Coordination (WPC) Wing of the 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) is the nodal agency to implement International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) Regulations be ing signatory to international convention 
who are also responsible for issuance of RTR (A). As such RTR  (A) is issued by DoT. 
However to comply with ICAO guidelines, based on RTR  (A) issued by Department of 

49 
 
Telecommunications (DoT) and class-I medical certificate, Flight Radio Telephone Operators 
License (FRTOL) is issued by DGCA . 
44.3 The issue was taken up earlier in 2009 through a DO from the then Hon'ble Minister 
of State for Civil Aviation requesting Ministry of Communication and Information 
Technology to empower DGCA under rule 3 of the Indian Wireless Telegraphy (Commercial 
Radio Operators Certificate of Proficiency and License to Operate Wireless Telegraphy) 
Rules 1954. The Ministry of Communication and Information Technology after examining 
the proposal had informed that RTR (A) examination which is the qualifying examination for 
the Flight Radio Telephony Operator's License (FRTOL) issued by DGCA would have to be 
continued to be conducted and certificate issued by the Ministry of Communication 
andInformation Technology. Further, the issue has been taken up with Department of 
Telecommunication to allow DGCA to conduct RTR examination along with the CPL 
examination that is   already being conducted by DGCA. 
Recommendation/Observation  
45. The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry to enhance helicopter 
connectivity in the country. The Committee recommends the Ministry to adopt a futuristic 
approach in connecting important tourist destinations in the country, through helicopter  
services, in a planned manner. The Committee emphasizes the need to ensure adequate 
infrastructure, amenities and facilities at the heliports. 
 (Para 64.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
45.1 As per provisions in the RCS - UDAN, helicopter  operation is permissible only in 
priority area, which defines its applicability in Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Himachal 
Pradesh, North-Eastern Region states and Andaman Nicobar Island and Lakshadweep 
Islands. 
45.2 During RCS-UDAN version 2.0 and 4.0 bidding round, helicopter routes/ networks 
across s tates namely, Assam, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Arunachal 
Pradesh have been awarded  to the helicopter operators to provide connectivity  to Hilly 
Terrains and far-flung areas. To make the  awarded routes operational, 33 heliports/ helipads 
across these five states are to be developed/ strengthened to make them CAR compliant for 
issue of necessary license/ operational authorization by DGCA. 
45.3 Besides, the Special round of bidding 4.1 that is in  progress also includes past round 
cancelled Helicopter routes along with other helicopter routes  that were proposed by State 
Govts. for bidding. 
Air Travel Safety Concerns 
Recommendation/Observation  

50 
 
46. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should accord due priority to the 
safety and security of air travelers, in the light of increasing incidents and examine the 
reasons behind such incidents and take remedial action. 
 (Para 65.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
46.1 BCAS has already issued necessary orders/ circulars to strengthen the Aviation 
Security at Airports. 
I. In Addition, Body Scanner shall be installed at all Hypersensitive/ Sensitive Airports 
at Pre-embarkation security check points in points in phased manner with an aim to 
touch free frisking of passengers and to  ensure zero error for the security matter. This 
will make the passenger screening procedure less intrusive than before. 
II. BCAS has initiated the Radiological Detection Equipment project, in first phase total 
14 Airports have been listed for supply and insta llation and commissioning of 
equipment’s to enhance the security at entry and exist points. 
III. BCAS has initiated the Biometric based Access Control System for issuance of 
biometric enabled smart card Airport Entry permit for employees and various staff of 
entities. 
IV. The Automated Tray Retrieval System (ATRS) has been installed and trails for 
operationalization are undergoing at Delhi and few more airports. 
Aircraft (Amendment) Act, 2020 
Recommendation/Observation  
47. The Committee appreciates the statutory provisions for ensuring zero tolerance in the 
matter of air safety. The Committee is of the view that such an amendment would fulfill the 
requirements of ICAO. The Committee expects that such an amendment will lead to 
improvement in the level of safety and security of aircraft operations in the country. 
 (Para 66.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
47.1 No comments 
Air Cargo 
Recommendation/Observation  
48. The Committee is of the considered view that India has a huge untapped market 
potential in terms of air cargo. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should 
undertake dynamic policy and structural changes in the air cargo sector, in order to ensure 

51 
 
that there is a much desired boom in this sector. The Ministry should also aim towards 
transparency and paperless trade environment in this sector. 
 (Para 67.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
48.1 Single Window Clearance system has been introduced by Customs whereby all the 
Participating Government Agencies (PGAs) have been brought under EDI systems in the 
ICES Programme. CBIC has been continuously engaged in upgradation of the system and 
now to roll out 2.0version with augmented facilities. 
a) Authorized Economic Operator ( AEO) programmes, Deferred Customs Duty 
Payment scheme, increase the RMS programme etc. have been introduced by 
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. 
b) Ministry of Civil Aviation is bringing National Air Cargo Community System 
(NACCS) to bring all the Regulatory Authorities and Cargo stakeholders to a single 
platform. The NACCS has to be integrated with the National Industrial Corridor 
Development Corporation (NICDC)’s Logistics Data Bank  (LDB) in order to 
maintain detailed real time information in the national level. 
c) MoCA has been taking up the simplified online Trans -shipment Cargo procedures 
with CBIC. 
d) Ministry of Civil Aviation is concentrating on development of transshipment of Cargo 
Hub and multi-model transportation. 
e) AAICLAS has been engaged in developing new Air Cargo Terminals on PAN India 
basis in the Tier -II andIII cities and augmenting the infrastructure in the existing 
Domestic and International Air Cargo Terminal for increased Traffic Flow. 
f) MoCA in coordination with Ministr y of Commerce carrying out study to reduce the 
free period for clearance of International Cargo in the Air Cargo Terminals, so as to 
multiply the throughput from the existing freight handling of 3.3 million tons. 
g) PPP model have been implemented and all un -served/under-served Airports in India 
have been identified for development by AAI/MoCA. 
h) MRO concept has been introduced in India to ensure minimize idle time of operating 
Indian Aircrafts. 
i) In coordination with BCAS, RA/RA3programmes have been introduced in  various 
Air Cargo Terminals. 
j) With appropriate Security programmes, BCAS clearance has been activated for the 
Air Cargo movement through the passenger terminals where exclusive Air Cargo 

52 
 
Terminals cannot be established in the near future, by using the lean  hours of 
passenger’s movement. 
k) To establish Air Cargo facility at Airport requires huge investment on infrastructure 
and security equipment’s to meet the security requirements set out by the BCAS, 
besides good sum of recurring operating cost. Adding appli cable Customs Cost 
Recovery Charges (CCR) at new International Cargo Terminals, particularly in Tier-II 
and Tier - III cities makes the business unviable due to cost over -run. As such it is 
strongly suggested to exempt the Customs Cost Recovery Charges at A ir Cargo 
Terminals located in the Tier - II and Tier-III cities for atleast 20 years. This will help 
in promotion and growth of International Air Cargo particularly Export of 
Agro/Animal produces from the smaller cities. 
l) CSMIA has one of the best Cargo Hand ling System "GMAX" which is a web based 
electronic platform digitally connecting all stakeholders resulting in faster, transparent 
and accurate data flow. 
m) Mumbai airport is also an emerging transshipment cargo hub mainly facilitating 
Domestic – International and International – Domestic transshipments. 
Recommendation/Observation  
49. The Committee desires that timely action be taken by the Ministry to address the 
above stated concerns/issues. 
 (Para 72.1) 
49.1 The Committee takes note of the above stated line of action and desires the Ministry 
may furnish periodical information to this Committee, regarding the progress made in regard 
to the same. 
 (Para 72.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
49.2 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for examination in consultation 
with other Ministries/ Departments including Attached Offices of MoCA viz. DGCA and 
BCAS. As per directions of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, a Core Group having 
representations from all the concerned Ministries was formed under the Chairmanship of the 
Secretary, Civil Aviation to work out the modalities for supplementing each other during the 
various types of Accident investigation and suggesting preventive measures to improve safety 
and security standards in these sectors. The first meeting of the Core Group was held on 
23.01.2020 under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Civil Aviation, and various common 
areas of interest with respect to accident investigation and othe r related activities have been 
identified and discussed. 

53 
 
49.3 2nd Meeting of the Core Group was held on 16.10.2020. As directed by the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Parliament Standing Committee vide letter dated 06.02.2020,  the Core Group had 
deliberated on the following issues during the meeting. The Nodal officer from NHAI also 
participated in this Committee. 
i. Ways/means and suggestions to prevent accidents in all departments  
ii. Collection of data  from developed countries and examine measures to prevent 
accidents 
iii. Strong networks of all departments to prevent any kind of eventuality. 
iv. Quick Response Team (QRT) in each department to respond in emergency. 
v. Facilities for landing helicopters at accident sites. 
vi. Accident record of past 50 years. Reasons of occurrence and preventive measures 
taken to avoid such accidents. 
vii. Strengthening Commis sion of Railway Safety and having such organisation in all 
Departments. 
viii. Introduction of world class standards in safety and security. 
49.4 During the meeting, it was decided that the Committee should: 
i. Suggest the areas / points of prevention of accidents w hich are generic and applicable 
to all departments based on their past experiences for  accident prevention, crisis 
management and post-accident measures.  
ii. List out the helipads and marking them on the Map of the Country. 
iii. Meet once in a quarter to share the learnings and experience with each other.  
49.5 Furthermore, as directed by the Hon’ble Chairman vide letter dated 20.10.2020, 
Secretary, Home Affairs and Secretary, Defence have been advised to nominate their nodal 
officers to participate in the Core Gro up meeting, being planned in next quarter. The same 
was apprised to the Hon’ble Chairman, PSC vide Secretary, Civil Aviation DO letter dated 
27.10.2020 (Annexure-D).    
49.6 Further, Hon’ble Chairman, PSC vide letter dated 20.10.2020, directed to include M/o 
Defence and M/o Home Affairs in the Core Group. Accordingly, M/o Defence and M/o 
Home Affairs were requested to nominate a nodal officer (of the level of Joint Secretary) in 
the Core Group, and the same was intimated to the Hon’ble Chairman vide MoCA le tter 
dated 27.10.2020.  Thus, the actions, as suggested by the Hon’ble Chairman, PSC for 
incorporating M/o Home Affairs and M/o Defence have been complied with. 

54 
 
49.7 Accordingly, the 3rd meeting of the Core Group on Safety was  held on 07.12.2020 
which was inter alia attended by the representative of the Ministry of  Home Affairs and 
Ministry of Defence. 
49.8 The detailed Minutes of the Meeting held on 07.12.2020 are attached as Annexure E. 
49.9 Further, Terms of Reference (ToR) for hiring a consultant to ensure adoption of best 
global safety standards in the respective domain of various ministries of the Core Group is 
being framed. In order to finalize the Terms of Reference for the consultancy a request has 
been made to all the members to identify various  areas which require improvements to meet 
Global Safety Standards and submit the same to the Commission.  
 
Miscellaneous 
Recommendation/Observation  
50. The Committee notes that Aero Club of India has played a pivotal role in promoting 
flying training through its 20 affiliated Flying Training Organizations across the country 
ever since independence and giving more than 4000 trained pilots to the nation. The 
Committee desires that DGCA may consider delegating certain promotional and audit 
responsibilities under the Aircrafts Act, 1934 to share the responsibility of maintaining 
checks and fulfilling the mandatory requirements of CPL/PPL at various FTOs. 
 (Para 74.1) 
50.1 In this regard, the Committee is of the view that DGCA may recognize an 
organization, preferably Aero Club of India, as the regulatory body for aero sports and may 
also consider recognizing the Aero Club of India, which is affiliated to FAI, as the nodal 
body to regulate and issue certificates of permit for aero sport activities in the coun try, under 
a regulatory framework prepared by the DGCA. 
 (Para 74.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
50.2 Aero Club of India  is a company registered under companies Act, 1956 and is 
governed by the provision s contained in their Memorandum of Association and Article  of 
Association. The Aero Club of India is not enlisted as an organization under the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation as per the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. 
Moreover, ACI is a company with no government share. Further, regulatory po wers are 
assigned to public regulatory authorities defined under the provisions of the Aircraft Act, 
1934 and regulatory powers/ responsibilities cannot be assigned to a private entity. 
  

55 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Demand made by the Ministry vs. Actual allocation 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee is disappointed to note that a mere token allocation of ₹1 crore has 
been made for ‘Development of Aero Sports’. While the creation of a new budget Head for 
Development of Aero Sports is a welcome move and a step in the right direction, the 
Committee feels that the amount allocated under the same, i.e.,₹1 crore is not sufficient to 
fund the development of Aero Sports in the country. Therefore, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may examine the different projects it can take up under this Head come up 
with revised projections and request the Ministry of Finance to grant additional funds under 
this head at the R.E. 2021-22 stage.            
 (Para 6.2.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 In the past, Ministry of Civil Aviation  was giving project   specific grants-in-aid for 
procurement of trainer aircraft and other   aero sports equipment etc. to Aero Club of India 
with an objective towards promotion and development of aero sports in India. 
1.2 However, considering the need for the development of aero sports in the country, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation is in the process of framing National Aero Sports Policy ( NASP) 
for organised development of aero-sports activities in India. 
1.3 The Ministry would examine any proposal/ project for  promotion of aero sports and 
flying received from any qualified institutions within the frame work of aero - sports policy 
and scheme for development of aero sports as and when formulated by this Ministry and 
budgetary allocation will be revised accordingly.  However, if required, MoF will be 
requested to increase the allocation at RE stage within the framework of NASP. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.4 The Committee is of the opinion that Aero sport, which is one of the adventure 
sports, has gained popularity among the youth worldwide and in India as well. India with 
its breathtaking views of the mountains, sea beaches and the c ountryside, has a great 
potential for Aero sport. It can act as a boost for adventure tourism in the country as well, 
thereby generating employment in the countryside. The Committee therefore expresses its 
concern that despite the aforesaid benefits, a mer e token allocation of Rs one crore has 
been made for the development of Aerosports by the Ministry of Finance. It also expresses 
its concern at the lack of interest shown by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, in this 
promising field. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite the process 
of framing National Aero sports Policy, which would ensure the organized development of 

56 
 
the Aero sport in the country and also proactively examine any proposal received from 
institutions for promotion of aerosports. It also exhorts the Ministry to take up the case for 
increased allocation during budgetary allocations with the Ministry of Finance. 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee notes that ₹ 13.18 crore, ₹ 10 crore and ₹7.33 crore have been 
allocated in BE 2021 -22 for ‘Airports Authority of India –for Hollongi Project’, ‘Airports 
Economic Regulatory Authority of India’ and ‘IGRUA and National Aviation University 
against projected requirement of ₹144.01 crore, ₹ 23.50 crore and ₹16.51crore respectively. 
These allocations are less than even half of the amount projected for these Heads.The 
Committee is constrained to observe that either the projections of the Ministry were 
unrealistic, or the Ministry failed to justify its projections before the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to share it road map for the implementation of these 
projects.           
 (Para 6.3.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 (a)Airports Authority of India - The projection of Rs. 144.01 crore was based on the 
expected construction work of the Hollongi Airport by  Airport Authority of India (AAI). The 
payment to AAI is made on reimbursement basis against the actual expenditure incurred. On 
the basis of actual expen diture incurred by AAI for the said project, the Ministry of Finance 
will be approached for allocation of additional budget at RE stage for FY 2021-22. 
2.2 (b) IGRUA - Transfer of operations and management of IGRUA to a strategic partner 
under Public Priva te Partnership (PPP) is under consideration. Accordingly, a token amount 
of INR 0.01 crore has been allocated to IGRUA during 2021 -22. Rs. 7.32 crore has been 
allocated to Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University under the heads of ‘salaries’, 
‘General’ and ‘capital’ during FY 2021-22. 
2.3 (c)  National Aviation University  – The projections of Rs.16.51 crore at BE 2021 -22 
in r/o Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU)   were made keeping in view the 
following:- 
(i.) New courses of BMS and Basic Fi re Fighters Course (BFFC) were started during 
2020. Hence the intake of students has risen in the year 2021. Some more courses 
might be started in 2021. This will increase the expenditure under the General Head. 
(ii.) The Ordinances of RGNAU  have been noti fied on 18 August 2021.  The 
notification of the ordinances will enable the University to  recruit the personnel as per 
the provisions of the ordinances. Hence, the enhanced projections under the salary 
head. The posts of Vice Chancellor might also be filled up. 
(iii.) Payment to AAI were to be made  for construction of  the RGNAU Building  at 
IGRUA, Fursatganj. Further,  projections under capital head were made keeping in 
view other capital works. 

57 
 
(iv.) Accordingly, Rs.16.50 crore was projected (Rs. 8.45 crore for Grants-in-Aid 
General + Rs. 3.0 crore for Grants -in-Aid Creation of capital assets +Rs.5.05 crore for 
Grants-in-aid Salaries)  as Grants -in-aid to RGNAU during 2021 -22.  Based on the 
actual expenditure, Ministry of Finance will be approached for allocati on of additional 
budget at RE stage for FY 2021-22. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.4 The Committee does not accept the reasons given by the Ministry for the low 
allocations, specifically in the case of construction of Hollongi Airport, where the projected 
amount(i.e.Rs 144.01 crores) was more than ten times the allocated amount(i.e.Rs13.18  
crores). The Committee is of the opinion that there was a lacunae in estimation of the 
projections by the Ministry and reiterates its earlier recommendation and hopes that in 
future due diligence would be maintained while making projections for crucial pr ojects, 
such as the construction of Hollongi Airport, which is important from the military as well 
as civilian point of view, as it will increase connectivity to the remote North-eastern region. 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee underlines the importance of the Hollongi airport, forits proximity 
with a hostile neighbour. Allocation of not even 10% of the amount projected by the Ministry 
is not fair, for such a project of strategic importance. The clarification of the Ministry that 
depending on t he pace of expenditure, the matter of additional allocation will be taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance, at RE 2021 -22 stage, appears to be a very routine one. The 
Committee expects the Ministry to strive hard to expedite the construction of the Hollongi  
airport.            
 (Para 6.3.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The Budget Allocation by AAI for development of the Hollongi airport is Rs.150.00 
Cr. in the Financial Year 2021 -22. The project has been divided into two packages. The 
physical progress of the work of development of runway, apron and allied work, under 
package –I, is 25% with an expenditure of Rs.61.40 Cr. Further, construction of Terminal 
Building, car parking, technical block, residential quarters, E andM workshop, medical centre 
and balance ci ty side development will be undertaken in Phase – II at a cost of Rs. 202 Cr. 
The work has already been awarded to M/s Universal Contractors and Engineers (P) Ltd. on 
03.06.2021 for an amount of Rs.156.28 Cr. The project is to be funded by the Central Govt . 
and AAI in the ratio of 90:10 and sufficient fund for the project is available with AAI. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
3.2 The Committee desires that all the obstacles in the construction of the Hollongi 
Airport will be removed and its completion would be expedited , especially in view of the 
fact that sufficient fund for the project is available with AAI for the said project. 

58 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – UdeDeshKaAamNagrik (UDAN) 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee appreciates the timely action taken by the Ministry in forming a 
Committee to look into the current and future manpower requirement of ATCOs. However, 
merely forming a Committee will not suffice. This should be supplemented with a time bound, 
result oriented approach, to ensure that the operationalization of new airports and air travel 
security do not suffer for want of adequate number of ATCOs. The Committee so constitu ted, 
should meet at regular intervals and expedite its recommendations to enable AAI meet the 
shortage of ATCOs.            
 (Para 11.4.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Meetings of the committee could not be held due to Superannuation of one of its 
Member Shri R.D. Vishwakarma General Manager (Finance) and also promotion of another 
Member Shri O.S. Ekka to the post of ED(ATM) -CAP. However, AAI is in the process of 
reconstitution of the Committee and instructions have been issued to AAI to expedite its re -
constitution. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
4.2 The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that meetings of the Committee 
which was formed to look into manpower requirements of ATCOs could not be held after 
superannuation and promotion of two of its members. The C ommittee hopes that such  
administrative and procedural issues should be  anticipated well in advance and  resolved 
expeditiously to address the core issue of future manpower requirements of ATCOs to 
ensure operationalization of new Airports. 
 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee appreciates the roadmap for IGRUA and earnestly hopes that the 
roadmap should be implemented at the earliest. 
          (Para 22.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 India’s largest flying school IGRUA (Amethi, UP), has been permitted to start pilot 
training in Gondia and Gulbarga to enhance flying hours which get severely affected during 
winter months due to visibility issues. 
5.2 IGRUA’s operation and management is proposed to be handed over to a private 
operator on a PPP basis for 30 years. This will h elp replace its ageing aircraft fleet, hire more 

59 
 
instructors at market salaries, improve the simulator facilities and enhance the number of 
pilots passing out every year. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
5.3 The Committee desires to know about the details of the proposals of handing over 
operation and management of IGRUA to a private operator on PPP basis for 30 years and 
the timeline fixed by the Ministry, so that the proposal may see the light of the day. 
 
Aero Club of India (ACI) 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee would like the Ministry to follow up with ACI, their much awaited 
proposal for budgetary support. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the response 
of ACI on this issue, at the earliest.            
 (Para 23.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The Ministry of Civil Aviation is working on a plan to improve the efficiency of Flying 
Training Organisation (FTO) for providing necessary regulatory support and other assistance 
along with State  Governments for proper functioning of FTOs. Also, considering the need for 
the development of aero sports, Ministry of Civil Aviation is in the process of framing a 
National Aero Sports Policy (NASP) for organised development of aero sports activities in 
India.   
 
6.2 The Ministry would constructively examine any proposal for promotion of aerosports 
and flying received from qualified institutions like Aero Club of India within the framework of 
aero sports policy and scheme for development of aero sports as  and when formulated by this 
Ministry alongwith others. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
6.3 The Ministry may highlight the specific s of the plan to improve the efficiency of 
Flying Training Organization (FTO) and by when the plan is expected to be finalize d and 
implemented. The Ministry may also take note of the recommendations of the Committee 
at Para 1.4 above for development of aero sports in the country. 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee takes note of the fact that training aircrafts and adventure sports 
equipment which were provided by the Aero Club of India to several State Governments 
including the State of Rajasthan, Bangalore Flying Club and IIT Kanpur, have been lying 
unutilized for several years, while the Aero Club of India has been making efforts to retrieve 

60 
 
such aircrafts that are under-utilized or un-utilized by the State Governments. The Committee 
recommends that ACI should be supported by the Government in retriev al of all such 
underutilized or unutilized aerosports assets provided by it for FTOs and development of 
aerosports, since they are Government property.       
 (Para 23.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 ACI was given project specific grants in aid in the past by  this Ministry for 
procurement of trainer aircraft and other aero sports equipment etc. subject to specific 
conditions of the grant -in-aid with an objective towards promotion and development of aero 
sports in India. 
7.2 The grantee organization (ACI) was r equired to adhere to the conditions of grant 
which required optimal utilization of resources procured out of such grants. The Ministry had 
solicited a report requesting ACI to intimate whether the aircrafts procured had been 
optimally utilized and whether a mechanism has been put in place to monitor such 
utilisation. ACI in its reply stated that re -allotment of assets has been done by ACI as and 
when feasible. 
7.3 The specific observation of the Committee is being conveyed to ACI for providing a 
detailed report in the matter. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
7.4 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact that the final objective of 
retrieval of training aircrafts and advent ure sports equipment is yet to be achieved, while 
the e xpensive equipments still lie unutilized and may even become scrap  in due course. 
The Committee is dismayed that the Ministry and the ACI has been engaging in 
procedural issues and even now a detailed report is awaited from ACI. The Committee 
recommends that immediate proactive action may be taken by the Ministry and the ACI 
for retrieval of the training/ adventures sports equipments and utilizing them optimally in 
the best possible manner. 
Domestic Aircraft Manufacturing 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee is gratified to note the timely action taken by the Ministry to promote 
domestic aircraft manufacturing. 
 (Para 27.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 With regard to the project on development of the civil version of Light Utility 
Helicopter (LUH), in pursuance of the decisions taken, HAL has submitted the Feasibility 
Report. The Project was considered in terms of market survey, technologies involved, 

61 
 
certification roadmap, timelines, financial and funding aspects in a meeting held on 
23.02.2021 with D/o Expenditure, NITI Aayog, DGCA, HAL, PHL etc. HAL has now 
provided its comments on the observations raised on the Feasibility Report in the said 
meeting a nd are under consideration of MoCA. Going forward, the Department of 
Expenditure would be approached as soon as the initial queries and vetting of the project is 
completed within MoCA. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
8.2 The Committee urges the Ministry to expedite and complete the utility and other 
procedural issues regarding the development of the civilian version of LUH. The 
availability of LUH, a ‘Made in India ’ product in the Civil Aviation manufacturing 
market, would ensure that domestic buyers do not h ave to approach foreign suppliers  for 
civilian helicopter s, thus  saving a lot of scarce foreign exchange and at the same time 
giving a boost to the civilian helicopter manufacturing industry in India itself. 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that requisite synergy is achieved 
between/amongst the concerned Ministries/Departments, so that airports are well connected 
with other means of transport and tourists/flyers reach their destinations, from the airports in 
a smooth and safe manner.           
 (Para 33.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Comments of the committe e are noted. It is ensured that airports remain well 
connected with road and other means of public transport. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
9.2. The Committee desires to know the specific action plan of the Ministry for 
connectivity of airports with roads and railways in coordination with the Ministry of 
Road, Transport and Highways and the Ministry of Railways. 
AIR SEWA 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. While appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, the Committee recommends that the 
grievances of passengers should be addressed in a time -bound manner. The Committee 
desires that the Air Sewa Platform should be upgraded periodically, so that it fulfills the 
dynamic requirements of the air passengers. The Committee underlines the need for 
formulating the desired SOP for the purpose.       

62 
 
 (Para 35.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 With a view to make the Air Sewa portal more effective, all the organizations have 
been directed to nominate a nodal officer for attending to Air Sewa grievances in a time 
bound manner. The organisations have also been requested to prepare a Standard opera ting 
procedure (SOP) relating to the mechanism and procedure for grievance redressal. The SOP 
shall clearly spell out the timelines for redressal of different categories of grievances.  
10.2. The Ministry is working on the development of the next version o f the Air Sewa 
platform. The updated version of Air Sewa would have features to further ease the travelling 
experience of the air travellers. The current version of the Air Sewa has defined various 
categories of grievances and the corresponding Service -Level Agreement (SLA) time in 
which the concerned stakeholder is expected to respond back to user for the resolution. 
10.3. Air Sewa’s Grievance redressal mechanism is being enhanced to enable the user to 
escalate the grievance to the escalation officer of th e concerned stakeholder if the user is not 
satisfied with the response. Also, provision is being planned to escalate the grievance to the 
escalation officer if a grievance is not closed within the SLA duration for a particular 
grievance category. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
10.4 The Committee hopes that the Ministry will work towards the preparation of SOP 
relating to the mechanism and procedure for grievance redressal at the earliest, for early 
redressal of grievances of passengers. 
 
Seaplane Operations in India 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee also underlines the urgent need to formulate a ‘Seaplane Policy’. The 
Committee desires the Ministry to conduct a feasibility study for landing sea planes in 
Rajasthan and furnish the same to the Committee, including the action taken thereon.  
(Para 37.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation introduced a new mode of transportation i.e. seaplane 
operations from water aerodromes under UDAN. AAI awarded seaplane routes connecting 12 
Water Aerodromes, covering 5 states and 01 UT on the basis of bids received in bidding 
under UDAN.  
11.2. RCS flight operations between Sabarmati River Front and Statue of Unity has already 
commenced on31st October, 2020.  

63 
 
11.3. Decision on the feasibility study for sea plane operations is to be taken by the State 
Government concerned. However, State Government if desires may approach AAI, the 
Implementing Agency for feasibility study 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
11.4 The Committee notes that the decision on the feasibility study on Seaplane 
operations has to be taken by the  concerned State Governments. However, the Ministry 
has also mentioned that the State Government , if it so desires, may approach the AAI, the 
implementing agency, for the feasibility study. The Committee recommends that the AAI 
may proactively send a proposal to the concern ed State Governmen t for the feasibility 
study, instead of waiting for the State  Government to approach it, to address the urgent 
need to formulate the ‘Seaplane policy’. 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the ‘Accessible India Campaign’ 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee applauds the sensitivity and empathy shown by the Ministry, towards 
the genuine needs and concerns of the differently abled people. The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry will be able to fulfill the objective of the campaign to make a barrier free and 
conducive travel environment for differently abled people.      
 (Para 45.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. The 10 Accessibility features, viz., Accessible Route/Approach, Accessible Parking, 
Accessible Entrance to the Building, Accessible Reception (Helpdesk), Accessible 
Corridor/Tactile Flooring, Accessible lift, Staircase with Handrails (Main passenger 
movement zone), Accessible toilets, Accessible Drinking Water Facility and Signage are 
already available at 67 out of 87 airports.  
12.2. For convenience of the divangjans, AAI has formulated the comprehensive 
‘Guidelines for Accessible Airports in India’ contai ning all the details on Accessible Airport 
Infrastructure. The guidelines have been forwarded to the Chief Commissioner of Persons 
with Disabilities by MoCA for vetting and will be finalised after receiving their inputs. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
12.3 The Committee notes that the 10 accessibility features to address the needs of 
differently abled people are available at 67 out of 87 airports only. The Committee directs 
the Ministry to take necessary steps to provide the 10 accessibility features , at the 
remaining 20 airports also  at the earliest. The C ommittee also recommends that in future 
the 10 accessibility features should be part and parcel of the passengers facilities, provided 
during construction of new airports, itself. 
 

64 
 
Srinagar Airport 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee feels that Srinagar, being one of the most attractive tourist places in 
India, visited by a large number of tourists, the absence of CAT -II or CAT -III facility at the 
Srinagar airport hampers the flow of tourists to the Kashmir valley, which in turn affects its 
economy badly. Therefore, the Ministry should impress upon IAF to install such facility at the 
airport, at the earliest.            
 (Para 46.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The request/proposal of AAI to upgrade existing facility to CAT II operations at 
Srinagar Airport is pending with IAF. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
13.2. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will follow up the request/proposal of the 
AAI with the IAF in right earnest and  ensure that the said facility is installed at the 
Srinagar airport to boost tourism in J & K. 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. While taking note of the above mentioned recommendations and facts, the Committee 
observes that MAFI project of the Indian Air Force should decide and cull out those activities 
which are primarily navigational equipment including approach landing systems, PAPI 
runway lights, threshold lights, instruments and equipment etc., where AAI/ATS have a 
unique advantage, as they have been handling these systems across the country, for over 
seven decades. Domestic civil aviation safety is the primary responsibility of the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, DGCA and AAI. The utilization of these navigational aids/ approach landing 
systems/ equipment etc., which have been installed across the country, is primarily done by 
the AAI, which has domain knowledge. They are also familiar with the quality procurement 
processes, maintenance and operational requirements of these instruments which they have 
been using for Civil operations for over fifty years. The Committee recommends that a High 
Level Committee maybe created with the Indian Air Force to cull out those activities related 
to navigation and landing facilities which are, primarily, in the domain kno wledge, with the 
AAI for Civil operations. The Committee recommends that apart from this, the development 
of the rest of the infrastructure planned under the MAFI scheme may continue as envisaged, 
for a greater synergy between civil aviation requirements a nd operational requirements of 
Indian Air Force.            
 (Para 46.3.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The suggestion of the Committee has been noted. 

65 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
14.2 The Committee desires to know whether its recommendations regarding creation of 
a high level C ommittee with the IAF to cull ou t those activities relating  to navigation and 
landing facilities which are, primarily, in the domain knowledge, with the AAI for Civil 
operations, has been examined and if so, the det ails of t he action plan thereof, may be 
shared with the Committee. 
Kushinagar airport 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee takes note of the upgradation work carried out at the Kushinagar 
Airport and desires that the work should be completed within the stipulated time frame.  
 (Para 48.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 On the part of AAI, All the infrastructural works at Kushinagar airport are complete 
and DGCA has granted ‘Aerodrome License – Public Use’ to AAI for Kushinagar airport on 
22.02.2021. An inaugural flight has been planned to airport on 20.10.2021 for which 
Secretary, MoCA has convened a meeting with different Ministries/Departments and State 
Government of Uttar Pradesh (SGoUP) on 28.9.2021 to assess the preparedness of airport for 
commencing operations. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
15.2. The Committee may be informed of the decision taken in the meeting of the 
Ministry with different ministries/departments and State Government of Uttar Pradesh 
held on 28.09.2001 to assess the preparedness of airport for commencing operations. 
Nagpur Airport 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee takes note of the upgradation of amenities available at Nagpur 
Airport. The Committee desires that the selection of Strategic Partner (PPP Partner) may be 
done at the earliest.            
 (Para 53.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1. Since August 2009 MIHAN India Private Limited (“MIL”) has been operating and 
maintaining Nagpur airport. MIL is a joint venture company of Maharashtra Airport 
Development Company and Airports Authority of India who hold 51% equity and 49% 
equity respectively.  

66 
 
16.2. The proposed action and the timeline for selection of a Public Private Partner for the 
operations, management and development of Nagpur airport, is the subject matter of MIL 
who has to come out with the answer for the recommendation of the Committee. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
16.3 The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take follow up action and impress upon 
the MIL, the recommendation of the Committee regarding early selection of a PPP 
partner at Nagpur airport. 
Airport at Bihar 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee notes that there is a proposal for a new Greenfield project in Bihar, at 
Sonpur in Saran, almost 10 kms away from Patna, with easy four -lane road is under 
construction and would be the first Greenfield project in the State of Bihar, catering to the 
civil aviation requirement of the region for the next 50 to 100 years. The Committee would 
like to know the status of this project and whether the Government of India approached the 
State Government of Bihar to indica te the advantages/disadvantages of a Greenfield project 
vis-a-vis a brown field defence project with reference to operations, utilization, future 
expansion, etc.            
 (Para 54.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Pre-feasibility report has been forwarded by MoCA to Govt. of Bihar o n 29.04.2020 
for furnishing comments to the Ministry. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
17.2. The Committee desires to know the progress of the pre-feasilibility report for a new 
green field project in Bihar, at Sonepur in Saran and the comments of the Government of 
Bihar thereon. 
 
Greenfield Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee notes the inconvenience of passengers, who are dropped by the Taxi 
operators at the airport approach point, from where passengers,  including the elderly, have 
to walk up to more than 400 -500 steps with their luggage, to reach the departure gate of the 
Goa Dabolim Airport. An immediate solution should be found by the Airports Authority of 
India for ease of transportation of those passengers who are dropped at the toll entry point of 
the existing airport at Goa-Dabolim. 
(Para 55.2) 

67 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1. The access to the airport departure and arrival is unhindered and all the vehicles are 
permitted to approach the Terminal Building to drop and pick the passengers at Dabolim 
Airport, Goa. However, there are several unions and taxi associations operating in different 
zones of North and South Goa. 
18.2. The Taxi operators do not wish to pay parking charges at Airport and prefer  to park 
vehicle at Highway. Many a times, the arriving passengers do not take taxi from authorized 
prepaid Taxi Counter and prefer to walk down the ramp to board unauthorized Taxis parked 
at the highway. However, continuous efforts are being made by AAI w ith State Govt. and 
local Police to resolve the matter. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
18.3. The Committee expresses its serious concern at the fact that, passengers arriving 
at the Dabolim Airport, Goa, have to walk a long distance and bear the brunt of the 
whims of taxi operators/unions, who do not wish to pay parking charges at the airport 
and park their vehicles on the highways, which is at a considerable distance from the 
airport. The Committee is also dismayed at the fact that though efforts  are being made 
by the AAI with the State Government and local Police, the issue still remains 
unresolved, which exposes the arriving passengers to a high level of risk as regards their 
safety and security. The Committee is of the vie w that Dabolim Airport , Goa, is an 
airport, most frequently used by the domestic and international tourists, for visiting 
Goa, a popular touri st destination worldwide and an unresolved issue , as important as 
passenger safety at the airport, may reduce tourist traffic. The Commi ttee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that the Ministry should intensify their efforts to find an amicable 
solution, in consultation with taxi operators and local police at the earliest, so that the 
arriving passengers can avail of taxis right from the exit  point of the terminal building 
of the airport.   
 
Operationalization of Defence airports for Civil Aviation 
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry and feels that 
the reply is quite evasive. Therefore, the Committee desires that a detailed reply may be 
furnished by the Ministry in this regard.            
 (Para 56.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 AAI has approximately 30 Joint User Airport with Defence. Further 
operationalization of Defence Airfield are being undertaken based on the RCS routes being 
bid for by the Airlines. 

68 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
19.2. The Committee reiterates its recommendations and desires to know the details of 
action taken for further operationalization of Defence Airfields. 
Emergency landing and cancellation of flights 
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee is disturbed to note that the air travelers get a raw deal, many times, 
in cases of emergency landings and cancellation of flights by airlines. The Committee is of 
the considered view that it is incumbent upon the airlines, as well as the AAI, to ensure the 
safety, comfort and health of the passengers, especially women, children and patients. It is a 
matter of concern to the Committee that there a re guidelines in this regard; but they are not 
complied with. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to ensure that the 
guidelines are scrupulously adhered to and that stringent, punitive action should be taken in 
case of violation of the said guidelines.            
 (Para 68.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1. In order to ensure appropriate protection for the air travelers in case of flight 
cancellation, DGCA has issued Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) Section 3 -Air Transport, 
Series M, Part IV titled ‘Facilities to be provided to passengers by airlines due to denied 
boarding, cancellation of flights and delays in flights” wherein the provision have been 
specified for compensation/facilitation for the affected passengers.  
 
20.2. There is no specific CAR/guidelines issued by this office with regard to Emergency 
Landing. However, all airlines are required to have Emergency Response Plan (ERP) and 
they take action accordingly.  
 
20.3. Further, in order to facilitate the passengers, p articularly senior citizens, expectant 
mothers, passengers with disability, first time travellers, etc. DGCA has issued Air Transport 
Circular 02 of 2019 titled " Facilities/Courtesies to esteemed travelling public at airports", 
wherein the provision have been specified to protect the travellers against any form of 
discrimination and to ensure that all esteemed travellers should receive all possible assistance 
during their travel. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
20.4. With reference to the recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry may inform 
whether there is any provision for punitive action, in case of violation of guidelines to 
ensure safety, comfort and health of the passengers. 

69 
 
Cancellation charges 
Recommendation/Observation  
21. The Committee expresses its anguish that there is no uniformity in the cancellation 
charges levied by the airlines. The Committee underlines the need for rationalizing the 
cancellation charges and prescribing an upper limit of cancellation charges that can be 
collected from the passengers. The Committee reiterates its recommendation in this regard, 
made in its 276th Report, requiring the airlines to restrict not more than 50% of the base fare 
as cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge collected should be refunded to the 
passengers on cancellation of tickets. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be able 
to persuade the airlines for such rationalization in the interest of the passengers.     
 (Para 69.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has released a charter of the passengers' right, which 
inter alia, defines certain rights to passengers in case of flight delays, flight cancellations, 
boarding denied due to overbooking, flight diversions, cancellation charges, 
lost/delayed/damaged baggage. To make the passenger charter enforceable, DGCA has inter 
alia amended the Civil Aviation Requirement  (CAR), Section II, Series M, Part II titled, 
“Refund of Airline Tickets to Passengers of P ublic Transport Undertakings”, with the 
following provisions:  
 
(i) Cancellation charges must be indicated prominently at the time of booking.  
(ii) Under no circumstance, the airline or its agent shall levy cancellation charge more than 
the basic fare plus fuel surcharge.  
(iii) The airlines shall not levy any additional charge to process the refund. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
21.2. The Ministry may inform  the Committee , whether a ny study has been done to 
assess the implementation of ‘the Charter of passengers rights’ and the amendments 
thereof, by the various airlines and if so, the details of the study may be furnished to the 
Committee. 
 
  

70 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-N i l - 
 
**** 
 
 
 
  

71 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Demand made by the Ministry vs. Actual allocation        
The Committee is of the opinion that Aero sport, which is one of the adventure sports, has 
gained popularity among the youth worldwide and in India as well. India with its 
breathtaking views of the mountains, sea beach es and the countryside, has a great 
potential for Aero sport. It can act as a boost for adventure tourism in the country as well, 
thereby generating employment in the countryside. The Committee therefore expresses its 
concern that despite the aforesaid ben efits, a mere token allocation of Rs one crore has 
been made for the development of Aerosports by the Ministry of Finance. It also expresses 
its concern at the lack of interest shown by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, in this 
promising field. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite the process 
of framing National Aero sports Policy, which would ensure the organized development of 
the Aero sport in the country and also proactively examine any proposal received from 
institutions for promotion of aerosports. It also exhorts the Ministry to take up the case for 
increased allocation during budgetary allocations with the Ministry of Finance. 
(Para 1.4) 
 
 
The Committee does not accept the reasons given by the Ministry for the low allocatio ns, 
specifically in the case of construction of Hollongi Airport, where the projected 
amount(i.e.Rs 144.01 crores) was more than ten times the allocated amount(i.e.Rs13.18 
crores). The Committee is of the opinion that there was a lacunae in estimation of t he 
projections by the Ministry and reiterates its earlier recommendation and hopes that in 
future due diligence would be maintained while making projections for crucial projects, 
such as the construction of Hollongi Airport, which is important from the mil itary as well 
as civilian point of view, as it will increase connectivity to the remote North-eastern region. 
(Para 2.4) 
 
The Committee desires that all the obstacles in the construction of the Hollongi Airport 
will be removed and its completion would be e xpedited, especially in view of the fact that 
sufficient fund for the project is available with AAI for the said project. 
(Para 3.2) 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – UdeDeshKaAamNagrik (UDAN) 
The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that meetings of the Committee which 
was formed to look into manpower requirements of ATCOs could not be held after 

72 
 
superannuation and promotion of two of its members. The Committee hopes that such 
administrative and procedural issues should be a nticipated well in advance and resolved 
expeditiously to address the core issue of future manpower requirements of ATCOs to 
ensure operationalization of new Airports. 
(Para 4.2) 
 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
The Committee desires to know about the details of the proposals of handing over 
operation and management of IGRUA to a private operator on PPP basis for 30 years and 
the timeline fixed by the Ministry, so that the proposal may see the light of the day. 
(Para 5.3) 
 
Aero Club of India (ACI) 
The Ministry may highlight the specific s of the plan to improve the efficiency of Flying 
Training Organization (FTO) and by when the plan is expected to be finalized and 
implemented. The Ministry may also take note of the recommendations of the Committee 
at Para 1.4 above for development of aero sports in the country. 
(Para 6.3) 
 
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact that the final objective of 
retrieval of training aircrafts and adventure sports equipment is yet to be achieved, while 
the expensive equipments still lie unutili zed and may even become scrap in due course. 
The Committee is dismayed that the Ministry and the ACI has been engaging in 
procedural issues and even now a detailed report is awaited from ACI. The Committee 
recommends that immediate proactive action may be taken by the Ministry and the ACI 
for retrieval of the training/ adventures sports equipments and utilizing them optimally in 
the best possible manner. 
(Para 7.4) 
Domestic Aircraft Manufacturing 
8.2 The Committee urges the Ministry to expedite and complete  the utility and other 
procedural issues regarding the development of the civilian version of LUH. The 
availability of LUH, a ‘Made in India’ product in the Civil Aviation manufacturing 
market, would ensure that domestic buyers do not have to approach fore ign suppliers for 
civilian helicopters, thus saving a lot of scarce foreign exchange and at the same time 
giving a boost to the civilian helicopter manufacturing industry in India itself. 
(Para 8.2) 
 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
The Committee desires to know the specific action plan of the Ministry for connectivity of 

73 
 
airports with roads and railways in coordination with the Ministry of Road, Transport 
and Highways and the Ministry of Railways. 
AIR SEWA 
(Para 9.2) 
 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry will work towards the preparation of SOP relating 
to the mechanism and procedure for grievance redressal at the earliest, for early redressal 
of grievances of passengers. 
(Para 10.4) 
Seaplane Operations in India 
The Committee notes that the decision on the feasibility study on Seaplane operations has 
to be taken by the concerned State Governments. However, the Ministry has also 
mentioned that the State Government, if it so desires, may approach the AAI, the 
implementing agency, for the feasibility study. The Committee recommends that the AAI 
may proactively send a proposal to the concerned State Government for the feasibility 
study, instead of waiting for the State Government to approach it, to address the urgent 
need to formulate the ‘Seaplane policy’. 
(Para 11.4) 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the ‘Accessible India Campaign’ 
The Committee notes that the 10 accessibility features to address the needs of differently 
abled people are available at 67 out of 87 airports only. The Committee directs the 
Ministry to take necessary steps to provide the 10 accessibility features, at the  remaining 
20 airports also at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that in future the 10 
accessibility features should be part and parcel of the passengers facilities, provided 
during construction of new airports, itself. 
(Para 12.3) 
Srinagar Airport 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry will follow up the request/proposal of the AAI 
with the IAF in right earnest and ensure that the said facility is installed at the Srinagar 
airport to boost tourism in J & K. 
(Para 13.2) 
 
The Committee desires to know whether its recommendations regarding creation of a high 
level Committee with the IAF to cull out those activities relating to navigation and landing 
facilities which are, primarily, in the domain knowledge, with the AAI for Civil operations, 
has been examined and if so, the details of the action plan thereof, may be shared with the 
Committee. 
(Para 14.2) 
 

74 
 
Kushinagar airport 
The Committee may be informed of the decision taken in the meeting of the Ministry with 
different ministries/departments and S tate Government of Uttar Pradesh held on 
28.09.2001 to assess the preparedness of airport for commencing operations. 
(Para 15.2) 
Nagpur Airport 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take follow up action and impress upon the 
MIL, the recommendation of the Committee regarding early selection of a PPP partner at 
Nagpur airport. 
(Para 16.3) 
Airport at Bihar 
The Committee desires to know the progress of the pre -feasilibility report for a new green 
field project in Bihar, at Sonepur in Saran and the comment s of the Government of Bihar 
thereon. 
(Para 17.2) 
 
Greenfield Airports 
18.3. The Committee expresses its serious concern at the fact that, passengers arriving 
at the Dabolim Airport, Goa, have to walk a long distance and bear the brunt of the 
whims of taxi  operators/unions, who do not wish to pay parking charges at the airport 
and park their vehicles on the highways, which is at a considerable distance from the 
airport. The Committee is also dismayed at the fact that though efforts are being made 
by the AAI  with the State Government and local Police, the issue still remains 
unresolved, which exposes the arriving passengers to a high level of risk as regards their 
safety and security. The Committee is of the vie w that Dabolim Airport, Goa, is an 
airport, most  frequently used by the domestic and international tourists, for visiting 
Goa, a popular touri st destination worldwide and an unresolved issue , as important as 
passenger safety at the airport, may reduce tourist traffic. The Committee , therefore, 
strongly recommends that the Ministry should intensify their efforts to find an amicable 
solution, in consultation with taxi operators and local police at the earliest, so that the 
arriving passengers can avail of taxis right from the exit point of the terminal bui lding 
of the airport.   
(Para 18.3) 
 
Operationalization of Defence airports for Civil Aviation 
The Committee reiterates its recommendations and desires to know the details of action 
taken for further operationalization of Defence Airfields. 
(Para 19.2) 

75 
 
Emergency landing and cancellation of flights 
With reference to the recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry may inform 
whether there is any provision for punitive action, in case of violation of guidelines to 
ensure safety, comfort and health of the passengers. 
(Para 20.4) 
Cancellation charges 
The Ministry may inform the Committee, whether any study has been done to assess the 
implementation of ‘the Charter of passengers rights’ and the amendments thereof, by the 
various airlines and if so, the details of the study may be furnished to the Committee. 
(Para 21.2) 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

 
  
 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7 th December, 2021 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Tapi Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Shri Dushyant Singh 
16. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
17. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
18. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
  
2.         At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the 
  draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of 
76

 
the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Ninety First Report on the Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) of Ministry of Civil Aviation; and *   *   * 
3.         The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda of the meeting  i.e. consideration of 
the draft Report on Action Taken by the Government o n the Recommendations/ Observations of 
the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Ninety First Report on the Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) of Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee considered the said draft Report and 
after a brief discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
4.  *   *   *    * 
5.  *   *   *    * 
6.  *   *   *    * 
7.  *   *   *    * 
8.  *   *   *    * 
9.  *   *   *    * 
10.  *   *   *    * 
11.  *   *   *    * 
12.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13.       The meeting adjourned at 5:59 P.M. 
  
i 
 
 
                                                           
i * Relates to other matters 
 
77