PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 150
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HERITAGE
SITES BILL, 2009 
RD 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 NOVEMBER, 2009)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 NOVEMBER, 2009)
RD 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 NOVEMBER, 2009)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 NOVEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2009/KARTIKA, 1931 (SAKA)NOVEMBER, 2009/KARTIKA, 1931 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HERITAGE
SITES BILL, 2009
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD NOVEMBER, 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 RD NOVEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2009/KARTIKA, 1931 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—11
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 12—17
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 19—48
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 49—56

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2009-10)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Naresh Gujral
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Thomas Sangma
8. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
*9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
10. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Aditya Nath
12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
13. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
15. Shri Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri P. Karunakaran
17. Shri Jose K. Mani
18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Rajaram Pal
20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
22. Shri S.D. Shariq
23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
24. Shri Dushyant Singh
25. Shri Jitendra Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sugumar
29. Shri Kabir Suman
30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal
*Nominated on 12th September, 2009.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Fiftieth Report of the Committee on the National Commission for
Heritage Sites Bill, 2009*.
2. The Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2009 in pursuance of rules
related to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees. The Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha referred** the Bill to the Committee on the 1st September, 2009 for examination and report
within three months.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of
Culture at its meeting held on 15th September and 24th September, 2009. The Committee also
heard the views of the representatives of INTACH and individual experts at its meeting held on
24th September, 2009. The Committee considered the draft report on the subject and adopted the
same on the 13th November, 2009.
4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the
Ministry of Culture for the assistance and inputs provided during deliberations on the provisions
of the Bill. The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of representatives of INTACH and
individuals who submitted their valuable suggestions on the provisions of the Bill.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
November 13, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Kartika 4, 1931  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.
* Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section 2, dated 26 February, 2009.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, No. 46376 dated 2nd September,  2009.

1
REPORT
The National Commission for Heritage Sites Bill, 2009 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha
on 26th February, 2009. On 1st September, 2009, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in
consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha referred the Bill to the Committee for
examination and Report. Accordingly, the Committee examined the Bill and finalised the Report,
after hearing views of the various experts and the nodal Ministry i.e. the Ministry of Culture.
2. The salient features of the National Commission for Heritage Sites Bill, 2009 (Annexure-I)
are given in the succeeding paragraphs.
2.1 Heritage Sites are cultural assets of immense value which provide identity to the community
and the society and link its past to the future. Preservation and protection of heritage sites is,
therefore, an exceptional necessity. In order to ensure that the international community pursues this
objective, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation adopted the World
Heritage Convention in its General Conference on 16 November, 1972 (Annexure-II). India has
ratified this convention on 14th  November, 1977. Article 5 of this Convention, inter alia, casts certain
obligations on each State Party to ensure that effective and active measures are taken for the
protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage sites situated on its
territory and to take the appropriate legal, scientific, technical, administrative and financial measures
necessary for the identification, protection, conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of heritages.
2.2 The Ancient Monuments and Archeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 enacted by
Parliament and various similar legislations enacted by State Legislatures for the purpose of
protection and preservation of heritage sites do not fully meet obligations cast by the World
Heritage Convention, 1972.
2.3 In fact, the said Ancient Monuments and Archeological Sites and Remains Act empowers
the Central Government to declare only such ancient monuments, archaeological sites and remains
which are in existence for not less then one hundred years to be of national importance. The
Archaeological Survey of India has brought about 3675 monuments and sites under the purview
of the said Act for protection. However, these numbers constitute a very small fraction of the total
number of ancient and heritage monuments in the country. The State Governments have also got
their identical legislations and all the State Governments put together, are not protecting more than
4000 monuments. So, both, Centre and State Governments, put together are only protecting about
8,000 monuments and sites, whereas the number of unprotected monuments and sites may be
much more about two lakhs. This number may still go up about which we do not have any definite
figure.
2.4 Moreover, the present legislations, Central and State, do not extend to modern architectures
of heritage value. As such a large number of heritage monuments both historical as well as
contemporary fall outside the ambit of the said Act. Similarly, various Central and State legislations
for conservation and protection of forests and environment cover a small fraction of the total
number of natural heritages. The concept of ‘cultural’ and ‘natural’ heritage and the scope for their
preservation and protection is very narrow and limited in the existing legislations as compared to

2
the conceptual framework in which the World Heritage Centre of UNESCO considers proposals for
inscription as World Heritage Sites. It is, in fact, much wider encompassing various facets of
heritages including cultural (ancient as well as modern) and natural heritages. In other words, these
aspects are provided in none of our legislations, relating to archaeology, forest and environment.
2.5 Besides, various legislations enacted by State Legislatures have adopted different practices
for preservation of cultural as well as natural heritages which are at variance with not only, each
other but also with the central legislations. As such, there is no uniformity with regard to legislative
measures as well as actual practices for protection and conservation of built heritage.
2.6 Thus, there is a need to provide for an institutional mechanism under a central legislation
which would take a holistic view of protection and preservation of heritage sites in the broadest
possible conceptual framework; provide for a uniform legislative framework and practices in the
area; encompass the entire universe of heritage sites in one way or the other including those which,
at present, are outside the scope of existing legislations; and thus fulfil our obligations under the
UNESCO’s World Heritage Convention of 1972.
Accordingly, the Bill proposes to provide for the following matters, namely:—
(i) to empower the Central Government to notify heritage sites for being entered in the
Heritage Sites Roster maintained by the Commission;
(ii) constitution of the National Commission for Heritage Sites consisting of a Chairperson,
seven members and a Member Secretary;
(iii) functions of the National Commission of Heritage Sites;
(iv) power of the Commission to issue directions;
(v) imposition of fine of ten lakh rupees for contravention of directions so issued; and
(vi) power of the Central Government to issue directions.
3. The Department-related Parliamentary Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture had
held discussions, apart from the Secretary, Ministry of Culture, with some historians, experts and
organizations working in the related fields, before finalizing its views and recommendations. For
example, the Committee had heard the views of the officials of the Ministry of Culture on the
provisions of the Bill on 15th September, 2009. It also heard the views of the Secretary, INTACH
and some individual experts on 24th September, 2009.
4. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to notify heritage sites. Also
Clause 17(1) of the Bill vests power in National Commission for Heritage Sites to recommend, lay
down standards and more so, issue directions to the States in different regards. Members of the
Committee expressed their concern about its possible implications to the States’ autonomy. Despite
assurance by the Ministry of Culture, of having already consulted the States, the Committee
decided to write to all the Chief Ministers of the States and Union Territories, in order to ascertain
their views and suggestions in the matter.
5. The Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that the rationale behind the new legislation
was to put a mechanism in place to ensure that effective and active measures were taken for the

3
protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage situated on its
territory, by taking appropriate legal, scientific, technical, administrative and financial measures
necessary for the identification, protection, conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of this
heritage.
6. During evidence, the DG, ASI stated that the Government of India had launched a National
Mission on Monuments and Antiquities, about two-and-a-half years ago to document all the
monuments, sites, etc., whether protected by the Central Government or by the State Governments
or unprotected. The reason for this exercise was that due to massive urbanisation taking place all
over the country, the monuments and lands adjacent to them were coming under severe threat of
being illegally occupied. In the absence of any adequate legal and other powers, a number of
problems were being faced in protecting these monuments.
7. The Committee was informed that India ratified the Conventions concerning the Protection
of the World Cultural and National Heritage 1972, in the year 1977. Article 5 of the World Heritage
Convention specifically requires the State parties to take effective and active measures for the
protection, conservation and presentation for the cultural and natural heritage.
8. The Committee is surprised to note that India ratified the Convention concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and National Heritage 1972, in the year 1977 and the
Government did not take any actions to bring forth a suitable legislation under the Article
5 of the Convention for the last 32 years. This delay, the Committee feels, amounts not
only to ignoring the spirit of international convention but also not being able to conserve
and protect our valuable heritage sites in the country. In the meantime, number of heritage
sites, protected either by the ASI or the State Archaeology Departments, or the unprotected
ones, were encroached upon, demolished or vanished. The Committee expresses its concern
over such an approach to protecting and preserving nation’s cultural assets and heritage
sites, which provide national identity and are bridge between the past and the future.
Clause 2
9. Clause 2 defines inter-alia various kinds of heritage sites for the purpose of the Bill. The
representative of INTACH submitted that the definition of ‘natural heritage site’ given in Clause 2
was not comprehensive. They submitted that there were various eco systems which were known
as natural heritage sites. They emphasized that terrestrial or aquatic sites or features, including
riverine, wetland, coastal or marine areas, along with their varied biota, processes and occurrences,
that were essentially nature’s creation and/or had ecological, scientific, cultural, spiritual or
aesthetic significance for the present and future generations, and deserved conservation action, and
they should be included in the definition of natural heritage sites as defined in the Bill. The
Committee agrees in principle, with this suggestion and recommends that suitable insertions
be made in Clause 2 appropriately to include the eco systems enumerated above, in the
definitions of Natural Heritage Sites.
10. The representative of INTACH submitted before the Committee that the Cantonment Boards
Act, 2006, provided for making regulations for protection of heritage sites, etc. situated in their
area. But, neither such regulation had been framed nor do they allow any inspection, etc. of the
heritage sites located in the cantonment areas. Therefore, the representatives of INTACH suggested

4
that in clause 2(c), definition of ‘heritage site’, may cover the heritage monuments and sites which
come in the cantonment areas as it was difficult to get information about them. The Committee
notes the suggestion for amending the Clause 2(c) with a view to ensure that heritage sites located
in the area under the control of cantonment boards were also given access to the agencies engaged
in the conservation, protection, etc. of heritage sites. The Committee, therefore, directs the
Ministry of Culture to take it up with the concerned Ministry to see that the necessary
regulation as required under the Cantonment Boards Act was framed, if it has not been
done so far. The Committee is of the view that making suitable amendment/additions for
this purpose in the Clause 2(c) needs to be considered seriously.
11. The Committee also finds that in the Bill, the word ‘roster’ has been used wherein
the description of heritage sites will be maintained. The Committee is not clear as to why
the word ‘roster’ has been used there. The Committee recommends that the word ‘roster’
may be replaced with the word ‘register’ and the relevant clause of the Bill may be
amended accordingly.
Clause 3
12. Clause 3 states that the Central Government may, keeping in view the national importance
of any heritage sites, notify such heritage sites and enter the description of such sites in the
‘heritage sites roster’ maintained by the Commission.
13. The Committee notes that Clause 3 is silent about the manner of notifying the
heritage sites. Also, Clause 24 which provides for rule-making powers, does not talk of
making of rules about the manner of notification of heritage sites. The absence of a
procedure regarding notification of the heritage sites can lead to several complications. It
may also cause a sense of insecurity, particularly amongst the individual owners of the
heritage sites or local bodies or State Governments. In this connection, the Government of
Tripura has suggested the following amendment:—
In Clause 3 of Chapter-II, after words ‘Central Government may’ the words ‘in
consultation with concerned State Government’ be added.
14. The Committee endorses this suggestion and is of the view that there is a need to
do away the confusion about the notification of heritage sites by prescribing the procedure
for this purpose in the Bill itself.
15. The Committee is aware that the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 enacted by the Central Government prescribed the procedure
of notification of monuments of national importance. The Committee does not know
whether the same procedure will be adopted under this legislation also. If not, the position
be made clear and specified in the Bill itself to avoid possible confusion and duplication in
this respect.
16. Clause 3 speaks of notification of heritage sites of national importance. However,
Clause 2 defines the heritage cites of ‘outstanding value’ and nowhere it describes the
heritage sites of national importance. It appears that the term ‘national importance’ has
been used instead of ‘outstanding value’ in Clause 3, inadvertently. Accordingly, the

5
Committee recommends that the term ‘national importance’ may be replaced with the term
‘outstanding value’ in Clause 3.
Clause 5
17. Clause 5 provides for the qualifications of the persons to be appointed as Chairperson and
Members of the National Commission for Heritage Sites.
18. The provisions of Clause 5 were discussed in detail with the representatives of INTACH as
well as with the historians and experts. Some of the experts were very critical of including the
term ‘public administration’ as one of the areas of knowledge and experience from which a person
can be appointed as the Chairperson and Members of the National Commission for Heritage Sites.
General view put forth was that Commission must be a professional body, and that having ‘public
administration’ as a ground for this purpose, possibility of the Commission being converted as a
forum for accommodating retired bureaucrats and civil servants cannot be ruled out. They
suggested that at least five, out of seven members of the Commission, should be purely
professionals not only three as provided in Proviso to Clause 5 (b). The Committee is also of
the view that experience in ‘Public administration’ does not appear to be very relevant as
far as appointing the Chairperson and Members of the Commission is concerned. The
Committee is of the view that the guiding principle should be the contribution of a person
to the conservation and preservation of natural and cultural heritage. Removing the words
‘public administration’ would not preclude the possibility of a retired civil servant who has
made his mark in the relevant areas during his career, to be appointed as its Chairperson/
members. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the term ‘public administration’
appearing in Clause 5 may be deleted.
19. It was submitted before the Committee that for the appointment of the Chairperson
and Members of the Commission, the restrictions of 25 years and 20 years of experience
respectively was not warranted, as it would restrict the choice to a great extent. The
Committee finds merit in this suggestion and feels that the limits of 25 and 20 years of
experience would disqualify the persons with lesser experience but eminently suited for the
assignments. The Commission would thus be deprived of the services of the persons with
training in modern practices and methods in heritage conservation, protection, etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Clause 5 (a) (i) and 5 (b) may be amended to
bring down age restriction suitably.
20. The Committee notes that the Central Government will nominate the Chairperson
and Members of the Commission. The Committee is, however, of the view that in order to
ensure fair play and transparency, selection of the Chairperson and members of the
Commission be done by a Search Committee.
21. The Committee also notes that in the entire framework proposed in the Bill, its
interface with ASI has not been clearly brought out. It is nowhere found in the Bill. ASI
has been a premier organisation serving the country for about 150 years that has done
excellent work in maintaining and preserving our ancient monuments and archaeological
sites. It carries long experience in different methods and practices on which the proposed
Commission would make recommendation or lay guidelines, etc. It would, therefore,

6
certainly be in the interest of the nation and for an effective and smooth functioning of the
Commission that this relationship is made clear in the Bill. The Committee also feels that
the DG ASI or his representative from ASI may also be associated with the Commission
appropriately.
Clause 6
22. Clause 6 deals in terms of office(s) for Chairperson and Members of Commission.
23. The Committee notes that the term of the Chairperson of the Commission has been
restricted to five years with no mention about his/her re-appointment, whereas, in the case
of members, it has been provided that they will be eligible for a second term. If the
intention is not to give a second term to a Chairperson, it should have been mentioned
there. The Committee, however, feels that if the Chairperson is well-qualified, he should be
eligible for another term.
24. As regards the age limit of 65 years, an expert suggested that in a body like National
Commission for Heritage Sites, this upper age limit would not always work as there were
number of internationally acclaimed historians, archaeologists and other experts who may
be well above 65 years of age and still active. The Committee agrees to the above
suggestions and feels that if the Chairperson was well qualified and active, there is no harm
if given another term. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that age limit of 65 years
may be increased, so that the Commission may have the benefit of such people in the field.
The Committee therefore recommends that the Clause 6 may be amended accordingly.
Clause 7
25. Clause 7 prescribed the procedure for filling up of casual vacancies in the
Commission. Committee notes that under this Clause, any person to fill the casual vacancy,
will hold the office for the remainder period only. The Committee is of the view that when
a term of five years has been prescribed for the Chairperson and Members, then there
appears little justification for prescribing the limit of the ‘remainder period’ to fill a casual
vacancy. The Committee recommends that the above limit prescribed to fill the casual
vacancy may be removed and Clause 7 may be amended accordingly.
Clause 10
26. Clause 10 provides that the Commission may, for efficient discharge of its functions,
constitute such Committees, consisting of such number of persons and in such manner as may be
prescribed. Also the Clause 24(2)(b) states that Central Government may make rules for the
constitution of the Committees under Section 10. The Committee noted that nowhere in the Bill the
details regarding composition and functions of the Committee has been provided.
27. In this respect, the Government of Tripura has suggested that the States should be
represented in these Committees to be constituted under Clause 10.
28. The Committee feels that this suggestion of providing due representation to the
States in the Committees deserves to be considered carefully.

7
Clause 14
29. Clause 14 (2) provides that the Commission shall regulate its own procedure. The
Committee, however, notes that nowhere in the Bill it has been prescribed as to what will
be the guiding principle of procedure, based on which the Commission shall regulate its
functioning. The absence of laid down procedure may result in arbitrariness in the
functioning of the Commission. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the procedure
on the basis of which the Commission will regulate its functioning may be provided in
Clause 14 itself or in Clause 24 providing for the rules to be framed under the Bill.
Clause 16
30. Clause 16 provides functions of the proposed National Heritage Commission. Clause 16 (e)
provides to identify and recommend to the Central Government and State Government suitable
measures and methods for conserving and integrating intangible cultural systems with the
conservation and management of the heritage sites. The Committee was informed that the National
Commission for Heritage Sites Bill basically would focus only on the tangible cultural heritage sites;
there was a separate Convention of UNESCO of 2003 which dealt with intangible cultural heritage
sites; and there would be a separate legislation for that. The tangible and intangible heritage,
although they were integrated/required different treatment. As regards intangible cultural heritage
sites, the kind of documentation required, the way it was proceeding on the representative list and
other things were an entirely new area on which the Ministry of Culture and various organisations
were still working. The officials of the Ministry of Culture stated that it will take some time before
a structure emerged regarding making a separate legal provision or whether the current legislations
will cover this aspect also. All these aspects were being worked out.
31. Now, this creates confusion in so far as coverage under this Bill of intangible
heritage is concerned. If these were not to be covered, why have these been included here
in Clause 16 (e)? The Committee feels that position in this regard needs to be amply
clarified and confusion removed.
32. Clause 16(b) states that the Commission would lay down standards for development of
scientific and technical institutions and courses offered by them for preservation and presentation
of heritage sites. Also, under Clause 16(d) Commission is to conduct studies and research for
identification and categorization of heritage sites. However, no specific details have been
provided by the Government about the scientific and technical institutions for which the
Commission is supposed to lay down the standards for their development. Whether the
Government have plans to set up new institution(s) for the purpose or the Commission will
coordinate/interact with the existing institutions through which the studies and research for
identification of heritage sites will be conducted. There are number of institutes and
universities which conduct studies and research in the field of archaeology and offer courses
for preservation, conservation and protection of monuments. In order to ensure that there
is no duplication of efforts in this regard, there is need to identify the existing institutions
and universities which can be developed for these purposes. The proposed Commission may
take the benefit of expertise and infrastructure available there for conducting the studies
and research in these regards.

8
33. The Committee is of the view that with our immense cultural, linguistic,
archaeological, geological and environmental diversities, the Commission should be
developed as a hub and a centre of excellence of all conservation-related activities in the
country. It can also work as a national coordinator for conservation. The Committee
recommends that it should be ensured that the Commission does not add to the existing
institutions working at cross purposes with other agencies in these fields.
34. The Committee is of the view that aims of the National Commission should also be
to spread national heritage conscious and promote awareness about the importance and need
for protection of heritage sites and monuments.
35. The Committee notes the various functions assigned to the Commission. However, no
institutional support for conservation and preservation has been designated. No
standardization of various activities or its processes has been provided.
36. The Committee hopes that the Commission would not function as a supervisor or
overseer but as a facilitator and mentor for organisations working in the field of preserving
our diverse environmental, archaeological and natural heritage.
Clause 17
37. Under Clause 17(1) the Commission has been vested with the power to issue directions to
any person who is the owner of any heritage site to provide access to such sites for the purpose
of its maintenance and preservation, etc. From perusal of the Bill, it is not clear as to what would
constitute the term ‘person’ appearing in Clause 17(1), to whom the Commission will issue
directions. The Clause is silent about the directions to be issued when a heritage site is under the
control of some institution, organisation, Municipal or local bodies, particularly when it is the case
of a State. In this connection, the Committee was informed that the Ministry of Finance had
submitted that the Bill vests sweeping power to the Commission to issue directions which may
impinge upon the powers and duties of the State Governments. In response thereto, the Ministry
of Culture have stated that the Ministry of Law had been consulted in the matter who had opined
that proposed legislation fell within the preview of Article 253 of the Constitution which empowered
the Parliament to legislate on the subject matter of the Bill for the whole of the territory of India.
The Ministry of Culture have further submitted that the power of the Commission to issue direction
was envisaged only in extreme situation wherein the opinion of the Commission on any heritage
site was likely to be endangered, damaged or destroyed by its owner or controller. Since most of
the functions of the Commission were advisory in nature, no conflict was envisaged between the
Central and State agencies, it was argued.
38. The Committee does not agree with the views of the Ministry of Culture that most
of the functions of the Commission are advisory in nature and, therefore, no conflict is
envisaged between the Central and State agencies. When the Clause 17 clearly talks of
Power of the Commission to issue directions to the owner of the heritage sites, it may,
according to the Committee, lead to dispute between Centre and State agencies when the
owner of the heritage site is a State Government, though it may happen rarely. The
Ministry of Culture has heavily depended upon the advice of the Ministry of Law who has
opined that Bill falls under Article 253 of the Constitution and, therefore, there may not

9
be any cause of dispute between the Central and State agencies. The Committee is of the
view that possibility of a conflict between the Central and State agencies can be avoided,
if a transparent procedure of notification of heritage sites were provided in the Bill under
Clause 3. The Committee is of the view that once the process of notification of heritage
sites is completed and a site formed part of the heritage site roster, there may be little
possibility of non-compliance of directions of the Commission for conservation, preservation
or maintenance of the heritage site.
39. A number of heritage sites in the urban areas, are getting demolished by those
agencies that are implementing public sector projects i.e. roads, tourism, and infrastructure.
Therefore, the committee recommends that para 17(1) may be amended so that Commission
may issue directions to any person, agencies which are implementing such public sector
projects, any institution, organization, municipal or local body which is the owner of, or has,
in its possession or control, any heritage site, to provide access to such site for the purpose
of its maintenance and preservation or to desist from doing any act, which in the opinion
of the commission is likely to endanger, damage or destroy such site, and the person
against whom direction is issued shall comply with the direction so issued.
40. The Committee also discussed the right of an individual who has been given direction
under Clause 17 (1). It has, the Committee feels, potential for creating misgivings in the
mind of the owners regarding their liabilities and losses in the process and its use thereafter.
If the heritage property is already being used for commercial purposes in residential area,
they can be allowed to use even after the heritage structure has been maintained.
41. The Committee adopts the remaining Clauses of the Bill without any amendments.
42. The enacting formula and the title are adopted without any changes.
43. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
amendments/additions suggested by it.
44. Although the Committee has examined the provisions of the Bill and given its views/
recommendations on different aspects, it is of the considered opinion that the Bill seeks to
address only a part of the problem bedeviling entire gamut of identification, protection,
preservation, etc. of our valuable national heritage, scattered all over the country. The
proposed National Commission, being an advisory body may prove to be merely an addition
to the plethora of agencies existing at different levels. The Committee has seen for itself
that the demolition of Lal Mahal in Delhi was mainly due to lack of coordination,
monitoring and regular interaction between the Union and State Governments and its
agencies like ASI, State Archaeology Boards, local bodies, police and revenue authorities.
Administrative mechanism required for ensuring protection of heritage sites are not there
at every levels. ASI is greatly handicapped on account of manpower, resources and
necessary legal powers, as a result of which, it is able to protect only 3675 monuments.
State Governments put together are taking care of only about 4000 heritage sites, while
there are estimated about two lakhs unprotected heritage sites in the country.  There is a
distinct lack of required effort at different levels in regard to identification, notification and
preservation/protection of our heritage.

10
45. While under this Bill, the National Commission will have the power to notify the
heritage sites, it does not provide any enabling agency and powers for protecting these sites.
It appears that sole purpose behind bringing this Bill is to fulfil Government’s obligation
under World Convention on National Heritage. Under the Convention, perhaps many more
legislations would be required to be enacted by the Government to fulfill the obligations
imposed on the State Parties by it. In this situation, the Committee cannot but describe the
present Bill as a half-hearted effort which distinctly lacks a holistic approach to tackle the
problems. Ideally, the Government should have brought a comprehensive Bill fulfilling all
the gaps that are existing and encountered in protecting and preserving our national
heritage.
46. The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions, which could not be incorporated in the Bill.
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
47. India being a vast country with immense cultural and natural heritage, a proper
monitoring of all these may not be feasible with a single centered entity. The Committee,
therefore, is of the view that there should be ample support from different agencies from
various regions of the country to assist the commission for its smooth functioning.
Monitoring committees/authorities for the conservation and maintenance of the monuments
need to be provided. Particularly to handle the problems of encroachment of monuments
and sites, the cooperation of the States is crucial.  In this connection the representatives of the
Ministry of Culture informed that they had discussion with the respective State Governments, and
various kinds of formulae are being worked out to take care of the encroachment including the
resettlement and rehabilitation aspect of the encroachers. In the State of Karnataka, the State
Government has worked out a rehabilitation and resettlement plan by taking into consideration the
concerned local people who have encroached on the monuments etc. They agreed to relocate it,
the State Government has now approached for sharing the expenses by the Government of India
and the Government of Karnataka on a 50:50 basis. The Committee feels that since in the
removal of encroachment, the major role has to be played by the State Government,
therefore, their stake has to be properly recognized.
48. The Committee further feels that Headquarters of the Commission may be kept at
a place other than Delhi, as it is already overburdened and finding a suitable place of
accommodating the Commission will be a cumbersome job. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Commission may be located out of Delhi, a place which is the hub of
heritage sites.
49. There must be provision in the Bill for creating a data-bank on all our cultural and
natural sites. The data bank may be created by sending questionnaire to the people at
various levels and the same may be verified by taking the help of students and teachers
of that locality. The questionnaire may be prepared with the help of professional and other
experts who can help in tracing the facts about such sites. Eminent people of the locality/
senior citizens/panchayats may also assist in the project of compiling and verifying the
data.

11
50. As regards encroachment on such sites, the Committee found that there was no
policy in this regard. Further no guidelines on how to reclaim those sites are provided in
the Act. In the absence of those guidelines reclamation of heritage sites under
encroachment will not be possible.

12
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee is surprised to note that India ratified the Convention concerning the
Protection of the World Cultural and National Heritage 1972, in the year 1977 and the
Government did not take any actions to bring forth a suitable legislation under the Article
5 of the Convention for the last 32 years. This delay, the Committee feels, amounts not
only to ignoring the spirit of international convention but also not being able to conserve
and protect our valuable heritage sites in the country. In the meantime, number of heritage
sites, protected either by the ASI or the State Archaeology Departments, or the unprotected
ones, were encroached upon, demolished or vanished. The Committee expresses its concern
over such an approach to protecting and preserving nation’s cultural assets and heritage
sites, which provide national identity and are bridge between the past and the future.
(Para: 8)
The Committee agrees in principle, with the suggestion that terrestrial or aquatic
sites or features, including riverine, wetland, coastal or marine areas, which had ecological,
scientific, cultural, spiritual and aesthetic significance for the present and future
generations, be included in the definition of natural heritage sites as defined in the Bill and
recommends that suitable insertions be made in Clause 2 appropriately to include the eco
systems enumerated above, in the definitions of Natural Heritage Sites. (Para: 9)
The Committee, therefore, directs the Ministry of Culture to take it up with the
concerned Ministry to see that the necessary regulation as required under the Cantonment
Boards Act was framed, if it has not been done so far. The Committee is of the view that
making suitable amendment/additions for this purpose in the Clause 2 (c) needs to be
considered seriously. (Para: 10)
The Committee also finds that in the Bill, the word ‘roster’ has been used wherein
the description of heritage sites will be maintained. The Committee is not clear as to why
the word ‘roster’ has been used there. The Committee recommends that the word ‘roster’
may be replaced with the word ‘register’ and the relevant Clause of the Bill may be
amended accordingly. (Para: 11)
The Committee notes that Clause 3 is silent about the manner of notifying the
heritage sites. Also, Clause 24 which provides for rule-making powers, does not talk of
making of rules about the manner of notification of heritage sites. The absence of a
procedure regarding notification of the heritage sites can lead to several complications. It
may also cause a sense of insecurity, particularly amongst the individual owners of the
heritage sites or local bodies or State Governments. In this connection, the Government of
Tripura has suggested the following amendment:—
In Clause 3 of Chapter-II, after words ‘Central Government may’ the words ‘in
consultation with concerned State Government’ be added. (Para: 13)
12

13
The Committee endorses this suggestion and is of the view that there is a need to
do away the confusion about the notification of heritage sites by prescribing the procedure
for this purpose in the Bill itself. (Para: 14)
The Committee is aware that the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 enacted by the Central Government prescribed the procedure
of notification of monuments of national importance. The Committee does not know
whether the same procedure will be adopted under this legislation also. If not, the position
be made clear and specified in the Bill itself to avoid possible confusion and duplication in
this respect. (Para: 15)
Clause 3 speaks of notification of heritage sites of national importance. However,
Clause 2 defines the heritage cites of ‘outstanding value’ and nowhere it describes the
heritage sites of national importance. It appears that the term ‘national importance’ has
been used instead of ‘outstanding value’ in Clause 3, inadvertently. Accordingly, the
Committee recommends that the term ‘national importance’ may be replaced with the term
‘outstanding value’ in Clause 3. (Para: 16)
The Committee is also of the view that experience in ‘Public administration’ does not
appear to be very relevant as far as appointing the Chairperson and Members of the
Commission is concerned. The Committee is of the view that the guiding principle should
be the contribution of a person to the conservation and preservation of natural and cultural
heritage. Removing the words ‘public administration’ would not preclude the possibility of
a retired civil servant who has made his mark in the relevant areas during his career, to
be appointed as its Chairperson/members. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
term ‘public administration’ appearing in Clause 5 may be deleted. (Para: 18)
It was submitted before the Committee that for the appointment of the Chairperson
and Members of the Commission, the restrictions of 25 years and 20 years of experience
respectively was not warranted, as it would restrict the choice to a great extent. The
Committee finds merit in this suggestion and feels that the limits of 25 and 20 years of
experience would disqualify the persons with lesser experience but eminently suited for the
assignments. The Commission would thus be deprived of the services of the persons with
training in modern practices and methods in heritage conservation, protection, etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Clause 5 (a) (i) & 5 (b) may be amended to
bring down age restriction suitably. (Para: 19)
The Committee notes that the Central Government will nominate the Chairperson
and Members of the Commission. The Committee is, however, of the view that in order to
ensure fair play and transparency, selection of the Chairperson and members of the
Commission be done by a Search Committee. (Para: 20)
The Committee also notes that in the entire framework proposed in the Bill, its
interface with ASI has not been clearly brought out. It is nowhere found in the Bill. ASI
has been a premier organisation serving the country for about 150 years that has done
excellent work in maintaining and preserving our ancient monuments and archaeological
sites. It carries long experience in different methods and practices on which the proposed

14
Commission would make recommendation or lay guidelines, etc. It would, therefore,
certainly be in the interest of the nation and for an effective and smooth functioning of the
Commission that this relationship is made clear in the Bill. The Committee also feels that
the DG ASI or his representative from ASI may also be associated with the Commission
appropriately. (Para: 21)
The Committee notes that the term of the Chairperson of the Commission has been
restricted to five years with no mention about his/her re-appointment, whereas, in the case
of members, it has been provided that they will be eligible for a second term. If the
intention is not to give a second term to a Chairperson, it should have been mentioned
there. The Committee, however, feels that if the Chairperson is well-qualified, he should be
eligible for another term. (Para: 23)
As regards the age limit of 65 years, an expert suggested that in a body like National
Commission for Heritage Sites, this upper age limit would not always work as there were
number of internationally acclaimed historians, archaeologists and other experts who may
be well above 65 years of age and still active. The Committee agrees to the above
suggestions and feels that if the Chairperson was well qualified and active, there is no harm
if given another term. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that age limit of 65 years
may be increased, so that the Commission may have the benefit of such people in the field.
The Committee therefore recommends that the Clause 6 may be amended accordingly.
(Para: 24)
Clause, 7 prescribed the procedure for filling up of casual vacancies in the
Commission. The Committee notes that under this Clause, any person to fill the casual
vacancy, will hold the office for the remainder period only. The Committee is of the view
that when a term of five years has been prescribed for the Chairperson and Members, then
there appears little justification for prescribing the limit of the ‘remainder period’ to fill a
casual vacancy. The Committee recommends that the above limit prescribed to fill the
casual vacancy may be removed and Clause 7 may be amended accordingly. (Para: 25)
The Committee feels that suggestion of providing due representation to the States in
the Committees deserves to be considered carefully. (Para: 28)
The Committee, notes that nowhere in the Bill it has been prescribed as to what will
be the guiding principle of procedure based on which the Commission shall regulate its
functioning. The absence of laid down procedure may result in arbitrariness in the
functioning of the Commission. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the procedure
on the basis of which the Commission will regulate its functioning may be provided in
Clause 14 itself or in Clause 24 providing for the rules to be framed under the Bill.
(Para: 29)
There is confusion in so far as coverage under this Bill of intangible heritage is
concerned. If these were not to be covered, why have these been included here in Clause
16 (e)? The Committee feels that position in this regard needs to be amply clarified and
confusion removed. (Para: 31)

15
No specific details have been provided by the Government about the scientific and
technical institutions for which the Commission is supposed to lay down the standards for
their development. Whether the Government have plans to Set up new institution(s) for the
purpose or the Commission will coordinate/interact with the existing institutions through
which the studies and research for identification of heritage sites will be conducted. There
are number of institutes and universities which conduct studies and research in the field
of archaeology and offer courses for preservation, conservation and protection of
monuments. In order to ensure that there is no duplication of efforts in this regard, there
is need to identify the existing institutions and universities which can be developed for
these purposes. The proposed Commission may take the benefit of expertise and
infrastructure available there for conducting the studies and research in these regards.
(Para: 32)
The Committee is of the view that with our immense cultural, linguistic,
archaeological, geological and environmental diversities, the Commission should be
developed as a hub and a centre of excellence of all conservation-related activities in the
country. It can also work as a national coordinator for conservation. The Committee
recommends that it should be ensured that the Commission does not add to the existing
institutions working at cross purposes with other agencies in these fields. (Para: 33)
The Committee is of the view that aims of the National Commission should also be
to spread national heritage conscious and promote awareness about the importance and need
for protection of heritage sites and monuments. (Para: 34)
The Committee notes the various functions assigned to the Commission. However, no
institutional support for conservation and preservation has been designated. No
standardization of various activities or its processes has been provided. (Para: 35)
The Committee hopes that the Commission would not function as a supervisor or
overseer but as a facilitator and mentor for organisations working in the field of preserving
our diverse environmental, archaeological and natural heritage. (Para: 36)
The Committee does not agree with the views of the Ministry of Culture that most
of the functions of the Commission are advisory in nature and, therefore, no conflict is
envisaged between the Central and State agencies. When the Clause 17 clearly talks of
power of the Commission to issue directions to the owner of the heritage sites, it may,
according to the Committee, lead to dispute between Centre and State agencies when the
owner of the heritage site is a State Government, though it may happen rarely. The
Ministry of Culture has heavily depended upon the advice of the Ministry of Law who has
opined that Bill falls under Article 253 of the Constitution and, therefore, there may not
be any cause of dispute between the Central and State agencies. The Committee is of the
view that possibility of a conflict between the Central and State agencies can be avoided,
if a transparent procedure of notification of heritage sites were provided in the Bill under
Clause 3. The Committee is of the view that once the process of notification of heritage
sites is completed and a site formed part of the heritage site roster, there may be little
possibility of non-compliance of directions of the Commission for conservation, preservation
or maintenance of the heritage site. (Para: 38)

16
A number of heritage sites in the urban areas, are getting demolished by those
agencies that are implementing public sector projects i.e. roads, tourism, and infrastructure.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that para 17(1) may be amended so that Commission
may issue directions to any person, agencies which are implementing such public sector
projects, any institution, organization, municipal or local body which is the owner of, or has,
in its possession or control, any heritage site, to provide access to such site for the purpose
of its maintenance and preservation or to desist from doing any act, which in the opinion of
the Commission is likely to endanger, damage or destroy such site, and the person  against
whom direction is issued shall comply with the direction so issued. (Para: 39)
The Committee also discussed the right of an individual who has been given direction
under Clause 17 (1). It has, the Committee feels, potential for creating misgivings in the
mind of the owners regarding their liabilities and losses in the process and its use thereafter.
If the heritage property is already being used for commercial purposes in residential area,
they can be allowed to use even after the heritage structure has been maintained. (Para: 40)
Although the Committee has examined the provisions of the Bill and given its views/
recommendations on different aspects, it is of the considered opinion that the Bill seeks to
address only a part of the problem bedeviling entire gamut of identification, protection,
preservation, etc. of our valuable national heritage, scattered all over the country. The
proposed National Commission, being an advisory body may prove to be merely an addition
to the plethora of agencies existing at different levels. The Committee has seen for itself
that the demolition of Lal Mahal in Delhi was mainly due to lack of coordination,
monitoring and regular interaction between the Union and State Governments and its
agencies like ASI, State Archaeology Boards, local bodies, police and revenue authorities.
Administrative mechanism required for ensuring protection of heritage sites are not there
at every levels. ASI is greatly handicapped on account of manpower, resources and
necessary legal powers, as a result of which, it is able to protect only 3675 monuments.
State Governments put together are taking care of only about 4000 heritage sites, while
there are estimated about two lakhs unprotected heritage sites in the country.  There is a
distinct lack of required effort at different levels in regard to identification, notification and
preservation/protection of our heritage. (Para: 44)
While under this Bill, the National Commission will have the power to notify the
heritage sites, it does not provide any enabling agency and powers for protecting these sites.
It appears that sole purpose behind bringing this Bill is to fulfill Government’s obligation
under World Convention on National Heritage. Under the Convention, perhaps many more
legislations would be required to be enacted by the Government to fulfill the obligations
imposed on the State Parties by it. In this situation, the Committee cannot but describe the
present Bill as a half-hearted effort with distinct lack a holistic approach to tackle the
problems. Ideally, the Government should have brought a comprehensive Bill fulfilling all
the gaps that are existing and encountered in protecting and preserving our national
heritage. (Para: 45)
The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions, which could not be incorporated in the Bill. (Para: 46)

17
India being a vast country with immense unnatural and natural heritage, a proper
monitoring of all these may not be feasible with a single centered entity. The Committee,
therefore, is of the view that there should be ample support from different agencies from
various regions of the country to assist the commission for its smooth functioning.
Monitoring committees/authorities for the conservation and maintenance of the monuments
need to be provided. Particularly to handle the problems of encroachment of monuments
and sites, the cooperation of the States is crucial. In this connection the representatives of
the Ministry of Culture informed that they had discussion with the respective State
Governments, and various kinds of formulae are being worked out to take care of the
encroachment including the resettlement and rehabilitation aspect of the encroachers. In
the State of Karnataka, the State Government has worked out a rehabilitation and
resettlement plan by taking into consideration the concerned local people who have
encroached on the monuments etc. They agreed to relocate it, the State Government has
now approached for sharing the expenses by the Government of India and the Government
of Karnataka on a 50:50 basis. The Committee feels that since in the removal of
encroachment, the major role has to be played by the State Government, therefore, their
stake has to be properly recognized. (Para: 47)
The Committee further feels that Headquarters of the Commission may be kept at
a place other than Delhi, as it is already overburdened and finding a suitable place of
accommodating the Commission will be a cumbersome job. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Commission may be located out of Delhi, a place which is the hub of
heritage sites. (Para: 48)
There must be provision in the Bill for creating a data-bank on all our cultural and
natural sites. The data bank may be created by sending questionnaire to the people at
various levels and the same may be verified by taking the help of students and teachers
of that locality. The questionnaire may be prepared with the help of professional and other
experts who can help in tracing the facts about such sites. Eminent people of the locality/
senior citizens/panchayats may also assist in the project of compiling and verifying the data.
(Para: 49)
As regards encroachment on such sites, the Committee found that there was no
policy in this regard. Further no guidelines on how to reclaim those sites are provided in
the Act. In the absence of those guidelines reclamation of heritage sites under
encroachment will not be possible. (Para: 50)

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
(Vide Para-2)
AS INTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
26 Feb., 2009
Bill No. VII of 2009
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HERITAGE
SITES BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to constitute a National Commission for Heritage Sites and provide
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organisation Convention held in Paris in
November, 1972, which India ratified in 1977, to ensure effective and
active measures for protection, conservation and presentation of the
cultural and natural heritage situated on the territory of each State
party;
A
ND WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to implement the
decisions to take appropriate legal, scientific, technical, administrative
and financial measures necessary for the identification, protection,
conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of cultural and natural
heritages.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
21

22
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for
Heritage Sites Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission;
(b) “Commission” means the National Commission for
Heritage Sites constituted under section 4;
(c) “heritage site” means a cultural heritage site, a natural
heritage site, a mixed cultural and natural heritage site or a
cultural landscape of outstanding value;
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) “cultural heritage site” shall include,—
(A) monuments, that is to say, architectural
works, works of monumental sculpture and painting,
elements or structures of an archaeological nature,
inscriptions, cave dwellings and combinations of
features which are of outstanding value from the
point of view of history, art or science;
(B) buildings, that is to say, separate or
connected buildings which, because of their
architecture, homogeneity or place in the landscape,
are of outstanding value from the historical, aesthetic,
ethnological or anthropological point of view; and
(C) sites, that is to say, works of man
including industrial or railway heritage or the
combined works of nature and man and areas
including archaeological sites which are of
outstanding value from the historical, aesthetic,
ethnological or anthropological point of view;
(ii) “natural heritage site” shall include,—
(A) natural sites or precisely delineated
natural areas which are of outstanding value
from the point of view of science, conservation or
natural beauty;
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.

23
(B) geological and physiographical formations
and precisely delineated areas which constitute the
habitat of threatened species of animals and plants
and are of outstanding value from the point of
view of science or conservation;
(C) natural features consisting of physical and
biological formations or groups of such formations,
which are of outstanding value from the aesthetic
or scientific point of view;
(iii) “mixed cultural and natural heritage site” shall
include properties which satisfy a part of the attributes of
both cultural heritage site and natural heritage site;
(iv) “cultural landscape” includes cultural properties
representing the combined works of man and the nature
and illustrative of the evolution of human society and
settlement over a time, under the influence of the physical
constraints and opportunities presented by their natural
environment and of successive social, economic and
cultural forces, both external and internal;
(v) “outstanding value”, in relation to a heritage
site, means its cultural or natural significance which is so
exceptional as to transcend the boundaries of the place in
which it is located and is of great importance for the
present and future generations of the country;
(d) “heritage sites roster” means the roster of heritage
sites notified under section 3;
(e) “member” means a member of the Commission and
includes the Member–Secretary;
(f) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the word “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE N ATIONAL C OMMISSION FOR H ERITAGE S ITES
3. The Central Government may, keeping in view the national
importance of any heritage sites, notify such heritage sites and enter
the description of such sites in the heritage sites roster maintained by
the Commission.
Power of
Central
Government to
notify heritage
sites.

24
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central
Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf, there
shall be constituted for the purposes of this Act, a Commission
to be called the National Commission for Heritage Sites.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with the
power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and
immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be
sued.
5. The Commission shall consist of,—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity and
standing who,—
(i) have knowledge and experience of twenty-five
years in archaeology and history, architecture, conservation,
science and technology, environmental science, ecology,
anthropology, sociology, town and country planning or
public administration; and
(ii) are committed to heritage conservation;
(b) seven members to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst persons who have knowledge and
experience of twenty years in archaeology and history,
architecture, conservation, science and technology, environmental
science, ecology, anthropology, sociology, town and country
planning or public administration:
Provided that the Central Government shall, while appointing
the members, ensure that at least one member each is a person
having knowledge and experience in archaeology, conservation
or ecology respectively.
(c) a Member-Secretary to be appointed by the Central
Government from amongst persons who is or has been, in the
service of the Central Government or a State Government, and
has held the post of Secretary to the Government of India or
an equivalent post in the Central Government or State Government
and has experience in archaeology, conservation, environmental
science, ecology or public administration.
6. (1) The Chairperson shall hold office for a term of five years
from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that no person shall hold office as a Chairperson after
he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
Constitution of
Commission.
Composition of
Commission.
Terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson and
members.

25
(2) A member shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for
reappointment for another term:
Provided that no person shall hold office as a member after he
has attained the age of sixty-five years.
(3) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or a
member, as the case may be, the Central Government shall satisfy
itself that the person does not have any such financial or other interest
as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson or
member, as the case may be.
(4) An officer of the Central Government or State Government
on his selection as the Chairperson or a member, as the case may be,
shall have to retire from service before joining as such Chairperson or
member, as the case may be.
(5) The Chairperson or a member as the case may be, may
relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government
notice of not less than three months.
(6) The Central Government may remove from office the
Chairperson or a member, as the case may be, who—
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent;
or
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting
as such Chairperson or  a member, as the case may be; or
(c) has been convicted of any offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as the Chairperson or
a member, as the case may be; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuation
in office detrimental to the public interest.
(7) No such Chairperson or member, as the case may be, shall
be removed under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub-section ( 6) unless
he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the
matter.
7. If, for reasons other than temporary absence, any vacancy
occurs in the office of the Chairperson or a member, as the case may
be, the Central Government shall appoint another person in accordance
with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and the person so
appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the office of the
person in whose place such person is so appointed.
Filling up of
Vacancies.

26
8. The salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the Chairperson or a member, as the
case may be, shall be such as may be prescribed.
9. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be questioned
on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the
constitution of the Commission or any defect in the appointment of a
person acting as the Chairperson or a member, as the case may be.
10. The Commission may, for ef ficient discharge of its functions,
constitute such Committees, consisting of such number of persons
and in such manner as may be prescribed.
11. (1) The Commission may associate with itself, in such
manner and for such  purposes as may be prescribed, any person
whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the
provisions of this Act.
(2) A person associated with it by the Commission under sub-
section ( 1) for any for purpose shall have a right to take part in
discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not pur have a right to
vote at a meeting of the Commission, and shall not be a member for
any other purpose.
(3) The person so associated shall be entitled to such
allowance for attending the meeting as may be prescribed.
12. The Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence
and directions in the conduct of the affairs of the Commission and he
shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Commission,
exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the Commission
as may be prescribed.
13. (1) Subject to the control of the Chairperson, the Member-
Secretary shall exercise and perform such powers and duties as may
be prescribed or as may be specified by the Chairperson.
(2) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be
authenticated by the Member-Secretary.
14. (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary at
such time as the Chairperson may think fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.
15. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission
with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the
efficient performance of the functions of the Commission under this
Act.
Salary,
allowances and
other terms
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and members.
Vacancies, etc.,
not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Commission.
Constitution of
Committees.
Temporary
association of
persons with
Commission
for particular
purpose.
Powers of
Chairperson.
Powers of
Member-
Secretary.
Procedure to
be regulated by
Commission.
Officers and
employees of
Commission.

27
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the officers and employees
appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
F
UNCTIONS OF THE C OMMISSION
16. The Commission shall perform the following functions,
namely:—
(a) recommend to the Central Government or State
Government on short and long term policies in respect of
conservation, protection and management of heritage sites;
(b) lay down standards for development of scientific and
technical institutions and courses offered by them for preservation
and presentation of heritage sites;
(c) formulate guidelines for conservation and management
of heritage sites;
(d) conduct studies and research for identification and
categorisation of heritage sites;
(e) identify and recommend to the Central Government
and State Government suitable measures and methods for
conserving and integrating intangible cultural systems with the
conservation and management of the heritage sites;
(f) publish periodically heritage maps prepared on the
basis of the results of studies and research;
(g) make a list of heritage sites for nomination to the
World Heritage Sites list of United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation;
(h) make recommendations to the Central Government or
State Government on any matter relating to heritage as may be
referred to it by that Government;
(i) make periodical reports to the Central Government on
any matter relating to heritage sites; and
(j) maintain the heritage sites roster containing the
description of the heritage sites notified under section 3 in such
manner as may be prescribed.
Functions of
Commission.

28
17. (1) The Commission may issue directions to any person
who is the owner of, or has, in his possession or control, any heritage
site to provide access to such site for the purpose of its maintenance
and preservation or to desist from doing any act, which in the opinion
of the commission is likely to endanger, damage or destroy such site,
and the person against whom direction is issued shall comply with the
direction so issued.
(2) Any person who fails to comply with the directions issued
by the Commission under sub-section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the
judgment, impose a fine exceeding ten lakh rupees.
(3) The Commission shall authorise a person not below the rank
of the Under Secretary to the Government of India to file a complaint
in the court for contravention of the provisions of this section.
(4) No court shall take cognizance of a complaint made under
this section unless it is made in writing by the person so authorised
under sub-section ( 3).
CHAPTER IV
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
18. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Commission
grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may think
fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the
Chairperson, members and other officers and employees shall be met
out of the grants.
19. The Commission shall prepare once every year, in such
form and within such time as may be prescribed, an annual report
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year,
and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and
the Central Government shall cause every such report to be laid before
each House of Parliament
20. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in
such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be
Power of
Commission to
issue
directions.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Annual Report.
Accounts and
audit.

29
specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such
audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts
of the Commission shall have the same rights and privileges and
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General generally has in connection with the audit of the Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production
of books of account, connected vouchers and other documents and
papers and to inspect the office of the Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed in
this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
21. (1) Without prejudice to the forgoing provisions of this Act,
the Commission shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of
its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions
of policy, other than those relating to technical and administrative
matters, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from
time to time:
Provided that the Commission shall, as far as practicable, be
given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is given
under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question
is one of policy or not, shall be final.
22. The Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of
the Commission shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance
of any of the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
23. No suit or legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairperson,
members or officers of Commission in respect of anything which
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the
Act.
Power of
Central
Government to
issue directions.
Chairperson,
members,
officers and
other
employees of
Commission to
be public
servants.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
45 of 1860.

30
24. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and members
under section 8;
(b) the constitution of Committees under section 10;
(c) the manner and the purposes for which the Commission
may associate any person for assistance or advice under sub-
section ( 1) of section 11;
(d) the allowances payable to the associated persons for
attending the meeting under sub-section (3) of section 11;
(e) the powers and functions of the Chairperson under
section 12;
(f) the powers and duties of the Member-Secretary under
section 13;
(g) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the officers and employees
under sub-section ( 2) of section 15;
(h) the manner of maintaining heritage site roster under
clause ( j) of section 16;
(i) the form and the time for preparation of annual report
under section 19; and
(j) the form of annual statement of accounts under
section 20.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.

31
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Heritage Sites are cultural assets of immense value which provide
identity to the community and the society and link its past to the future.
Preservation and protection of heritage sites is, therefore, an exceptional
necessity. In order to ensure that the International community pursues this
objective, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation
adopted the World Heritage Convention in its General Conference on 16th
November, 1972. India has ratified this convention on 14th November, 1977.
Article 5 of this Convention, inter alia, casts certain obligations on each
State Party to ensure that effective and active measures are taken for the
protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage
Sites situated on its territory and to take the appropriate legal, scientific,
technical, administrative and financial measures necessary for the identification,
protection, conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of heritages.
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,
1958 enacted by Parliament and various similar legislations enacted by State
Legislatures for the purpose of protection and preservation of heritage sites
do not fully meet obligations cast by the World Heritage Convention 1972.
In fact, the said Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act empowers the Central Government to declare only such ancient
monuments, archaeological sites and remains which are in existence for not
less then one hundred years to be of national importance. The Archaeological
Survey of India has brought about 3675 monuments and sites under the
purview of the said Act for protection. However, these numbers constitute
a very small fraction of the total number of ancient and heritage monuments
in the country, the numbers of which run into lakhs. Moreover, the present
legislation does not extend to modern architectures of heritage value. As such
a large number of heritage monuments both historical as well as contemporary
fall outside the ambit of the said Act.
Similarly, various Central and State legislations for conservation and
protection of forests and environment cover a small fraction of the total
number of natural heritages. The concept of cultural and natural heritage and
the scope for their preservation and protection is very narrow and limited in
the existing legislations as compared to the conceptual framework in which
the World Heritage Centre of UNESCO considers proposals for inscription as
World Heritage Sites which is much wider as it encompasses various facets
of heritages including cultural (ancient as well as modern) and natural
heritages. These aspects are not provided in our legislations relating to
archaeology, forest and environment.
31

32
Besides, various legislations enacted by State Legislatures have adopted
different practices for preservation of cultural as well as natural heritages
which are at variance with not only each other but also with the central
legislations. As such, there is no uniformity with regard to legislative measures
as well as actual practices for protection and conservation of built heritage.
Thus, there is a need to provide for an institutional mechanism under
a central legislation which would take a holistic view of protection and
preservation of heritage sites in the broadest possible conceptual framework,
provide for a uniform legislative framework and practices in the area,
encompass the entire universe of heritage sites in one way or the other
including those which, at present, are outside the scope of existing legislations
and thus fulfil our obligations under the UNESCO’s World Heritage Convention
of 1972.
Accordingly, it is proposed to provide for the following matters,
namely:—
(i) to empower the Central Government to notify heritage sites
for being entered in the Heritage Sites Roster maintained by the
Commission;
(ii) constitution of the National Commission for Heritage Sites
consisting of a Chairperson, seven members and a Member-Secretary;
(iii) functions of the National Commission of Heritage Sites;
(iv) power of the Commission to issue directions;
(v) imposition of fine of ten lakh rupees for contravention of
directions so issued; and
(iv) power of the Central Government to issue directions.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW DELHI; AMBIKA SONI.
The 21st February, 2009.

33
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (I) of clause 4 of the Bill provides for setting up of a
National Commission for Heritage Sites.
Clause 8 provides for the salary, allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of Chairperson and members of the Commission.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 11 provides for payment of allowances to
persons who are temporarily associated with the Commission for a particular
purpose.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 15 provides for salaries, allowances and
other terms and conditions of service of officers and employees of the
Commission.
The expenditure on account of salary and allowances of the
Chairperson, members. Member-Secretary and other expenses in connection
with the working of the Commission are required to be borne from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
Recurring expenditure on the constitution of the Commission and
other expenses, which may have to be borne as grant-in-aid to be paid by
the Ministry of Culture, is expected to be approximately rupees sixteen crore
and two lakhs per annum.
The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or
non-recurring nature.
33

34
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to notify the
heritage sites, keeping in view its national importance and to enter the
description of such sites in the Heritage Sites Roster.
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
to provide for the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms
and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and members.
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to provide for the constitution of Committees and the number of
persons who shall constitute the committee.
Sub-clause (l) of clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules to provide for the manner and the purposes for
which the Commission may associate any person for assistance or advice.
Sub-clause (3) thereof empowers the Central Government to provide for the
allowances payable to such associated persons.
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to provide for the powers and functions of the Chairperson.
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to provide for the powers and duties of the Member-Secretary.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules to provide for the salaries and allowances payable
to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and
employees.
Sub-clause (j) of Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules to provide for the manner of maintaining Heritage
Site Roster.
Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to provide for the form and the time for preparation of annual report.
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to provide for the form of annual statement of accounts.
The matters in respect of which the said rules may be made or
notification issued are matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as
such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the proposed Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
34

35
35
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to constitute a National Commission for Heritage Sites and provide for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shrimati Ambika Soni, Minister of Tourism and Culture)

36
ANNEXURE-II
(Vide para-3)
CONVENTION CONCERNING THE PROTECTION OF
THE WORLD CULTURAL AND NATURAL HERITAGE
The General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
meeting in Paris from 17 October to 21 November, 1972, at its seventeenth session,
Noting that the cultural heritage and the natural heritage are increasingly threatened with destruction
not only by the traditional causes of decay, but also by changing social and economic conditions
which aggravate the situation with even more formidable phenomena of damage or destruction,
Considering that deterioration or disappearance of any item of the cultural or natural heritage
constitutes a harmful impoverishment of the heritage of all the nations of the world,
Considering that protection of this heritage at the national level often remains incomplete because
of the scale of the resources which it requires and of the insufficient economic, scientific, and
technological resources of the country where the property to be protected is situated,
Recalling that the Constitution of the Organization provides that it will maintain, increase, and
diffuse knowledge by assuring the conservation and protection of the world’s heritage, and
recommending to the nations concerned the necessary international conventions,
Considering that the existing international conventions, recommendations and resolutions concerning
cultural and natural property demonstrate the importance, for all the peoples of the world, of
safeguarding this unique and irreplaceable property, to whatever people it may belong,
Considering that parts of the cultural or natural heritage are of outstanding interest and, therefore,
need to be preserved as part of the world heritage of mankind as a whole,
Considering that, in view of the magnitude and gravity of the new dangers threatening them, it is
incumbent on the international community as a whole to participate in the protection of the cultural
and natural heritage of outstanding universal value, by the granting of collective assistance which,
although not taking the place of action by the State concerned, will serve as an efficient
complement thereto,
Considering that it is essential for this purpose to adopt new provisions in the form of a convention
establishing an effective system of collective protection of the cultural and natural heritage of
outstanding universal value, organized on a permanent basis and in accordance with modern
scientific methods,
Having decided, at its sixteenth session, that this question should be made the subject of an
international convention,
36

37
Adopts this sixteenth day of November 1972 this Convention.
I. DEFINITION OF THE CULTURAL AND NATURAL HERITAGE
Article 1
For the purpose of this Convention, the following shall be considered as “cultural heritage”:
Monuments: architectural works, works of monumental sculpture and painting, elements or
structures of an archaeological nature, inscriptions, cave dwellings and combinations of features,
which are of outstanding universal value from the point of view of history, art or science;
Groups of buildings: groups of separate or connected buildings which, because of their
architecture, their homogeneity or their place in the landscape, are of outstanding universal value
from the point of view of history, art or science;
Sites: works of man or the combined works of nature and man, and areas including archaeological
sites which are of outstanding universal value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or
anthropological point of view.
Article 2
For the purposes of this Convention, the following shall be considered as “natural heritage”:
natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or groups of such formations,
which are of outstanding universal value from the aesthetic or scientific point of view;
geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated areas which constitute the habitat
of threatened species of animals and plants of outstanding universal value from the point of view
of science or conservation;
natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas of outstanding universal value from the point of
view of science, conservation or natural beauty.
Article 3
It is for each State Party to this Convention to identify and delineate the different properties
situated on its territory mentioned in Articles 1 and 2 above.
II. NATIONAL PROTECTION AND INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION OF THE CULTURAL
AND NATURAL HERITAGE
Article 4
Each State Party to this Convention recognizes that the duty of ensuring the identification,
protection, conservation, presentation and transmission to future generations of the cultural and
natural heritage referred to in Articles 1 and 2 and situated on its territory, belongs primarily to that
State. It will do all it can to this end, to the utmost of its own resources and, where appropriate,
with any international assistance and co-operation, in particular, financial, artistic, scientific and
technical, which it may be able to obtain.

38
Article 5
To ensure that effective and active measures are taken for the protection, conservation and
presentation of the cultural and natural heritage situated on its territory, each State Party to this
Convention shall endeavor, in so far as possible, and as appropriate for each country:
(a) to adopt a general policy which aims to give the cultural and natural heritage a
function in the life of the community and to integrate the protection of that heritage
into comprehensive planning programmes;
(b) to set up within its territories, where such services do not exist, one or more services
for the protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage
with an appropriate staff and possessing the means to discharge their functions;
(c) to develop scientific and technical studies and research and to work out such operating
methods as will make the State capable of counteracting the dangers that threaten its
cultural or natural heritage;
(d) to take the appropriate legal, scientific, technical, administrative and financial measures
necessary for the identification, protection, conservation, presentation and rehabilitation
of this heritage; and
(e) to foster the establishment or development of national or regional centres for training
in the protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and natural heritage and
to encourage scientific research in this field.
Article 6
1. Whilst fully respecting the sovereignty of the States on whose territory the cultural and
natural heritage mentioned in Articles 1 and 2 is situated, and without prejudice to property
right provided by national legislation, the States Parties to this Convention recognize that
such heritage constitutes a world heritage for whose protection it is the duty of the
international community as a whole to co-operate.
2. The States Parties undertake, in accordance with the provisions of this Convention, to give
their help in the identification, protection, conservation and presentation of the cultural and
natural heritage referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11 if the States on whose
territory it is situated so request.
3. Each State Party to this Convention undertakes not to take any deliberate measures which
might damage directly or indirectly the cultural and natural heritage referred to in Articles
1 and 2 situated on the territory of other States Parties to this Convention.
Article 7
For the purpose of this Convention, international protection of the world cultural and natural
heritage shall be understood to mean the establishment of a system of international co-operation and
assistance designed to support States Parties to the Convention in their efforts to conserve and
identify that heritage.

39
III INTERGOVERNMENTAL COMMITTEE FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE WORLD
CULTURAL AND NATURAL HERITAGE
Article 8
1. An Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection of the Cultural and Natural Heritage of
Outstanding Universal Value, called “the World Heritage Committee”, is hereby established
within the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. It shall be
composed of 15 States Parties to the Convention, elected by States Parties to the
Convention meeting in general assembly during the ordinary session of the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. The
number of States members of the Committee shall be increased to 21 as from the date of
the ordinary session of the General Conference following the entry into force of this
Convention for at least 40 States.
2. Election of members of the Committee shall ensure an equitable representation of the
different regions and cultures of the world.
3. A representative of the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and
Restoration of Cultural Property (Rome Centre), a representative of the International Council
of Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) and a representative of the International Union for
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN), to whom may be added, at the
request of States Parties to the Convention meeting in general assembly during the ordinary
sessions of the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, representatives of other intergovernmental or non-governmental
organizations, with similar objectives, may attend the meetings of the Committee in an
advisory capacity.
Article 9
1. The term of office of States members of the World Heritage Committee shall extend from
the end of the ordinary session of the General Conference during which they are elected
until the end of its third subsequent ordinary session.
2. The term of office of one-third of the members designated at the time of the first election
shall, however, cease at the end of the first ordinary session of the General Conference
following that at which they were elected; and the term of office of a further third of the
members designated at the same time shall cease at the end of the second ordinary session
of the General Conference following that at which they were elected. The names of these
members shall be chosen by lot by the President of the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization after the first election.
3. States members of the Committee shall choose as their representatives persons qualified in
the field of the cultural or natural heritage.
Article 10
1. The World Heritage Committee shall adopt its Rules of Procedure.

40
2. The Committee may at any time invite public or private organizations or individuals to
participate in its meetings for consultation on particular problems.
3. The Committee may create such consultative bodies as it deems necessary for the
performance of its functions.
Article 11
1. Every State Party to this Convention shall, in so far as possible, submit to the World
Heritage Committee an inventory of property forming part of the cultural and natural
heritage, situated in its territory and suitable for inclusion in the list provided for in
paragraph 2 of this Article. This inventory, which shall not be considered exhaustive, shall
include documentation about the location of the property in question and its significance.
2. On the basis of the inventories submitted by States in accordance with paragraph 1, the
Committee shall establish, keep up to date and publish, under the title of “World Heritage
List,” a list of properties forming part of the cultural heritage and natural heritage, as
defined in Articles 1 and 2 of this Convention, which it considers as having outstanding
universal value in terms of such criteria as it shall have established. An updated list shall
be distributed at least every two years.
3. The inclusion of a property in the World Heritage List requires the consent of the State
concerned. The inclusion of a property situated in a territory, sovereignty or jurisdiction
over which is claimed by more than one State shall in no way prejudice the rights of the
parties to the dispute.
4. The Committee shall establish, keep up to date and publish, whenever circumstances shall
so require, under the title of “list of World Heritage in Danger”, a list of the property
appearing in the World Heritage List for the conservation of which major operations are
necessary and for which assistance has been requested under this Convention. This list shall
contain an estimate of the cost of such operations. The list may include only such property
forming part of the cultural and natural heritage as is threatened by serious and specific
dangers, such as the threat of disappearance caused by accelerated deterioration, large-scale
public or private projects or rapid urban or tourist development projects; destruction caused
by changes in the use or ownership of the land; major alterations due to unknown causes;
abandonment for any reason whatsoever; the outbreak or the threat of an armed conflict;
calamities and cataclysms; serious fires, earthquakes, landslides; volcanic eruptions; changes
in water level, floods and tidal waves. The Committee may at any time, in case of urgent
need, make a new entry in the List of World Heritage in Danger and publicize such entry
immediately.
5. The Committee shall define the criteria  on the basis of which a property belonging to the
cultural or natural heritage may be included in either of the lists mentioned in paragraphs
2 and 4 of this article.
6. Before refusing a request for inclusion in one of the two lists mentioned in paragraphs 2
and 4 of this article, the Committee shall consult the State Party in whose territory the
cultural or natural property in question is situated.

41
7. The Committee shall, with the agreement of the States concerned, co-ordinate and
encourage the studies and research needed for the drawing up of the lists referred to in
paragraphs 2 and 4 of this article.
Article 12
The fact that a property belonging to the cultural or natural heritage has not been included in either
of the two lists mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11 shall in no way be construed to
mean that it does not have an outstanding universal value for purposes other than those resulting
from inclusion in these lists.
Article 13
1. The World Heritage Committee shall receive and study requests for international assistance
formulated by States Parties to this Convention with respect to property forming part of the
cultural or natural heritage, situated in their territories, and included or potentially suitable
for inclusion in the lists mentioned referred to in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11. The
purpose of such requests may be to secure the protection, conservation, presentation or
rehabilitation of such property.
2. Requests for international assistance under paragraph 1 of this article may also be
concerned with identification of cultural or natural property defined in Articles 1 and 2,
when preliminary investigations have shown that further inquiries would be justified.
3. The Committee shall decide on the action to be taken with regard to these requests,
determine where appropriate, the nature and extent of its assistance, and authorize the
conclusion, on its behalf, of the necessary arrangements with the government concerned.
4. The Committee shall determine an order of priorities for its operations. It shall in so doing
bear in mind the respective importance for the world cultural and natural heritage of the
property requiring protection, the need to give international assistance to the property most
representative of a natural environment or of the genius and the history of the peoples of
the world, the urgency of the work to be done, the resources available to the States on
whose territory the threatened property is situated and in particular the extent to which they
are able to safeguard such property by their own means.
5. The Committee shall draw up, keep up to date and publicize a list of property for which
international assistance has been granted.
6. The Committee shall decide on the use of the resources of the Fund established under
Article 15 of this Convention. It shall seek ways of increasing these resources and shall
take all useful steps to this end.
7. The Committee shall co-operate with international and national governmental and non-
governmental organizations having objectives similar to those of this Convention. For the
implementation of its programmes and projects, the Committee may call on such
organizations, particularly the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and
Restoration of Cultural Property (the Rome Centre), the International Council of Monuments

42
and Sites (ICOMOS) and the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources (IUCN), as well as on public and private bodies and individuals.
8. Decisions of the Committee shall be taken by a majority of two-thirds of its members
present and voting. A majority of the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.
Article 14
1. The World Heritage Committee shall be assisted by a Secretariat appointed by the Director-
General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
2. The Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, utilizing to the fullest extent possible the services of the International Centre
for the Study of the Preservation and the Restoration of Cultural Property (the Rome
Centre), the International Council of Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) and the International
Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) in their respective areas
of competence and capability, shall prepare the Committee’s documentation and the agenda
of its meetings and shall have the responsibility for the implementation of its decisions.
IV. FUND FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE WORLD CULTURAL AND NATURAL
HERITAGE
Article 15
1. A Fund for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage of Outstanding
Universal Value, called “the World Heritage Fund”, is hereby established.
2. The Fund shall constitute a trust fund, in conformity with the provisions of the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
3. The resources of the Fund shall consist of:
(a) compulsory and voluntary contributions made by States Parties to this Convention,
(b) Contributions, gifts or bequests which may be made by:
(i) other States;
(ii) the Un ited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, other organizations
of the United Nations system, particularly the United Nations Development Programme
or other intergovernmental organizations;
(iii) public or private bodies or individuals;
(c) any interest due on the resources of the Fund;
(d) funds raised by collections and receipts from events organized for the benefit of the fund;
and
(e) all other resources authorized by the Fund’s regulations, as drawn up by the World Heritage
Committee.

43
4. Contributions to the Fund and other forms of assistance made available to the Committee
may be used only for such purposes as the Committee shall define. The Committee may
accept contributions to be used only for a certain programme or project, provided that the
Committee shall have decided on the implementation of such programme or project. No
political conditions may be attached to contributions made to the Fund.
Article 16
1. Without prejudice to any supplementary voluntary contribution, the States Parties to this
Convention undertake to pay regularly, every two years, to the World Heritage Fund,
contributions, the amount of which, in the form of a uniform percentage applicable to all
States, shall be determined by the General Assembly of States Parties to the Convention,
meeting during the sessions of the General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization. This decision of the General Assembly requires the
majority of the States Parties present and voting, which have not made the declaration
referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. In no case shall the compulsory contribution of
States Parties to the Convention exceed 1% of the contribution to the regular budget of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
2. However, each State referred to in Article 31 or in Article 32 of this Convention may
declare, at the time of the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance or accession,
that it shall not be bound by the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article.
3. A State Party to the Convention which has made the declaration referred to in paragraph
2 of this Article may at any time withdraw the said declaration by notifying the Director-
General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. However,
the withdrawal of the declaration shall not take effect in regard to the compulsory
contribution due by the State until the date of the subsequent General Assembly of States
parties to the Convention.
4. In order that the Committee may be able to plan its operations effectively, the contributions
of States Parties to this Convention which have made the declaration referred to in
paragraph 2 of this Article, shall be paid on a regular basis, at least every two years, and
should not be less than the contributions which they should have paid if they had been
bound by the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article.
5. Any State Party to the Convention which is in arrears with the payment of its compulsory
or voluntary contribution for the current year and the calendar year immediately preceding
it shall not be eligible as a Member of the World Heritage Committee, although this provision
shall not apply to the first election.
The terms of office of any such State which is already a member of the Committee shall
terminate at the time of the elections provided for in Article 8, paragraph 1 of this Convention.
Article 17
The States Parties to this Convention shall consider or encourage the establishment of
national public and private foundations or associations whose purpose is to invite donations

44
for the protection of the cultural and natural heritage as defined in Articles 1 and 2 of this
Convention.
Article 18
The States Parties to this Convention shall give their assistance to international fund-raising
campaigns organized for the World Heritage Fund under the auspices of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. They shall facilitate collections made by the
bodies mentioned in paragraph 3 of Article 15 for this purpose.
V. CONDITIONS AND ARRANGEMENTS FOR INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
Article 19
Any State Party to this Convention may request international assistance for property forming part
of the cultural or natural heritage of outstanding universal value situated within its territory. It shall
submit with its request such information and documentation provided for in Article 21 as it has
in its possession and as will enable the Committee to come to a decision.
Article 20
Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 13, sub-paragraph (c) of Article 22 and Article
23, international assistance provided for by this Convention may be granted only to property
forming part of the cultural and natural heritage which the World Heritage Committee has decided,
or may decide, to enter in one of the lists mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11.
Article 21
1. The World Heritage Committee shall define the procedure by which requests to it for
international assistance shall be considered and shall specify the content of the request,
which should define the operation contemplated, the work that is necessary, the expected
cost thereof, the degree of urgency and the reasons why the resources of the State
requesting assistance do not allow it to meet all the expenses. Such requests must be
supported by experts’ reports whenever possible.
2. Requests based upon disasters or natural calamities should, by reasons of the urgent work
which they may involve, be given immediate, priority consideration by the Committee,
which should have a reserve fund at its disposal against such contingencies.
3. Before coming to a decision, the Committee shall carry out such studies and consultations
as it deems necessary.
Article 22
Assistance granted by the World Heritage Fund may take the following forms:
(a) studies concerning the artistic, scientific and technical problems raised by the protection,
conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of the cultural and natural heritage, as defined
in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article 11 of this Convention;

45
(b) provisions of experts, technicians and skilled labour to ensure that the approved work is
correctly carried out;
(c) training of staff and specialists at all levels in the field of identification, protection,
conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of the cultural and natural heritage;
(d) supply of equipment which the State concerned does not possess or is not in a position
to acquire;
(e) low-interest or interest-free loans which might be repayable on a long-term basis;
(f) the granting, in exceptional cases and for special reasons, of non-repayable subsidies.
Article 23
The World Heritage Committee may also provide international assistance to national or regional
centers for the training of staff and specialists at all levels in the field of identification, protection,
conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of the cultural and natural heritage.
Article 24
International assistance on a large scale shall be preceded by detailed scientific, economic and
technical studies. These studies shall draw upon the most advanced techniques for the protection,
conservation, presentation and rehabilitation of the natural and cultural heritage and shall be
consistent with the objectives of this Convention. The studies shall also seek means of making
rational use of the resources available in the State concerned.
Article 25
As a general rule, only part of the cost of work necessary shall be borne by the international
community. The contribution of the State benefiting from international assistance shall constitute a
substantial share of the resources devoted to each programme or project, unless its resources do
not permit this.
Article 26
The World Heritage Committee and the recipient State shall define in the agreement they conclude
the conditions in which a programme or project for which international assistance under the terms
of this Convention is provided, shall be carried out. It shall be the responsibility of the State
receiving such international assistance to continue to protect, conserve and present the property so
safeguarded, in observance of the conditions laid down by the agreement.
VI. EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMMES
Article 27
1. The States Parties to this Convention shall endeavor by all appropriate means, and in
particular by educational and information programmes, to strengthen appreciation and
respect by their peoples of the cultural and natural heritage defined in Articles 1 and 2 of
the Convention.

46
2. They shall undertake to keep the public broadly informed of the dangers threatening this
heritage and of the activities carried on in pursuance of this Convention.
Article 28
States Parties to this Convention which receive international assistance under the Convention shall
take appropriate measures to make known the importance of the property for which assistance has
been received and the role played by such assistance.
VII. REPORTS
Article 29
1. The States Parties to this Convention shall, in the reports which they submit to the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on dates
and in a manner to be determined by it, give information on the legislative and administrative
provisions which they have adopted and other action which they have taken for the
application of this Convention, together with details of the experience acquired in this field.
2. These reports shall be brought to the attention of the World Heritage Committee.
3. The Committee shall submit a report on its activities at each of the ordinary sessions of
the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization.
VIII. FINAL CLAUSES
Article 30
This Convention is drawn up in Arabic, English, French, Russian and Spanish, the five texts being
equally authoritative.
Article 31
1. This Convention shall be subject to ratification or acceptance by States members of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in accordance with their
respective constitutional procedures.
2. The instruments of ratification or acceptance shall be deposited with the Director-General
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Article 32
1. This Convention shall be open to accession by all States not members of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization which are invited by the General
Conference of the Organization to accede to it.
2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Director-
General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.

47
Article 33
This Convention shall enter into force three months after the date of the deposit of the twentieth
instrument of ratification, acceptance or accession, but only with respect to those States which
have deposited their respective instruments of ratification, acceptance or accession on or before
that date. It shall enter into force with respect to any other State three months after the deposit
of its instrument of ratification, acceptance or accession.
Article 34
The following provisions shall apply to those States Parties to this Convention which have a federal
or non-unitary constitutional system:
(a) with regard to the provisions of this Convention, the implementation of which comes under
the legal jurisdiction of the federal or Central legislative power, the obligations of the federal
or Central Government shall be the same as for those States parties which are not federal
States;
(b) with regard to the provisions of this Convention, the implementation of which comes under
the legal jurisdiction of individual constituent States, countries, provinces or cantons that are
not obliged by the constitutional system of the federation to take legislative measures, the
federal Government shall inform the competent authorities of such States, countries,
provinces or cantons of the said provisions, with its recommendation for their adoption.
Article 35
1. Each State Party to this Convention may denounce the Convention.
2. The denunciation shall be notified by an instrument in writing, deposited with the Director-
General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
3. The denunciation shall take effect twelve months after the receipt of the instrument of
denunciation. It shall not affect the financial obligations of the denouncing State until the
date on which the withdrawal takes effect.
Article 36
The Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization shall
inform the States members of the Organization, the States not members of the Organization which
are referred to in Article 32, as well as the United Nations, of the deposit of all the instruments
of ratification, acceptance, or accession provided for in Articles 31 and 32, and of the
denunciations provided for in Article 35.
Article 37
1. This Convention may be revised by the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Any such revision shall, however, bind
only the States which shall become Parties to the revising convention.
2. If the General Conference should adopt a new convention revising this Convention in whole
or in part, then, unless the new convention otherwise provides, this Convention shall cease

48
to be open to ratification, acceptance or accession, as from the date on which the new
revising convention enters into force.
Article 38
In conformity with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations, this Convention shall be
registered with the Secretariat of the United Nations at the request of the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Done in Paris, this twenty-third day of November 1972, in two authentic copies bearing the
signature of the President of the seventeenth session of the General Conference and of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which
shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, and certified true copies of which shall be delivered to all the States referred to in
Articles 31 and 32 as well as to the United Nations.

49
MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 Noon on Tuesday the 15th September, 2009 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Naresh Gujral
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
10. Shri Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri P. Karunakaran
12. Shri Jose K. Mani
13. Shrimati Ranee Narah
14. Shri Rajaram Pal
15. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
16. Shri S.D. Shariq
17. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
18. Shri Dushyant Singh
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
20. Shri K. Sugumar
21. Shri Kabir Suman
22. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
51

52
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE
Shri K.N. Srivastava, Director-General, (ASI)
Shri Vijay S. Madan, Joint Secretary
Shri Praveen Srivastava, Addidtional Director-General, (ASI)
Shri Amaresh Singh, Deputy Secretary
Shri A.K. Sinha, Director (Monuments)
Dr. K.P. Poonacha, Joint Director (ASI)
Shri B.L. Meena, Under Secretary
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Chairman also informed the Committee that the National Commission for Heritage Sites
Bill, 2009 has been referred to the Committee for examination and report to the Parliament by
November, 2009.
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. Thereafter, the Committee took up the National Commission for Heritage Sites Bill, 2009 for
consideration and heard the views of the officials of the Ministry of Culture and ASI on the Bill.
The Committee was informed that the Bill had been introduced to fulfill the obligations under the
UNESCO W orld Heritage Convention of 1972 that was ratified in 1977. The Committee, however,
was critical of the fact that Government had taken almost 32 years to bring the Bill and wanted
to know how these obligations were being fulfilled during this period. A power point presentation
was also made about the existing legal and institutional set up at different levels for protection and
conservation of Heritage sites in the country and the problem being faced in doing it effectively.
The need for bringing such a Bill was also explained to the Committee.
11. Members of the Committee sought clarifications on various aspects of the Bill. Those were
replied by the officials of the Ministry. To some queries raised by the Members to which replies
were not forthcoming, the representatives of the Ministry were directed to furnish written replies.
12. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
13. The Committee adjourned at 2.30 
P.M. to meet again on the 24th September, 2009.
*** Relates to other matter.

53
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday the 24th September, 2009 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
6. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
7. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
8. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Mahesh Joshi
10. Shri P. Karunakaran
11. Shrimati Ranee Narah
12. Shri Rajaram Pal
13. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
14. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
15. Shri S.D. Shariq
16. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
17. Shri Dushyant Singh
18. Shri Jitendra Singh
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
20. Shri K. Sugumar
21. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE
Shri Jawhar Sircar, Secretary
Shri Vijay S. Madan, Joint Secretary
53

54
REPRESENTATIVES OF INTACH
Dr. Yogendra Narain, Member-Secretary
Shri Samar Singh
Shri A.G .K. Menon
INDIVIDUAL REPRESENTATIVES
Shri Ranesh Ray
Shri A.R. Ramanathan
Shri Sohail Hashmi
2. At the outset, after welcoming the Members, the Chairman briefed them about the points
that had emerged during the last meeting on the National Commission for Heritage Sites Bill, 2009.
The Chairman noted that Sections 10 and 24(b) providing for the constitution of Committees did
not specify about their membership and other necessary details. The issues like encroachment on
the heritage sites, superiority of the Commission over ASI and qualification and method of selection
of the Members of the Commission were raised by him. He also desired to know whether the
proposed National Commission for Heritage Sites would impinge upon the autonomy of the States
in this regard. The Chairman also sought to know why it took 32 long years after India ratified
the UNESCO convention to bring this Bill.
3. The Chairman then requested the Secretary, Ministry of Culture to brief the Committee on
the points/issues which had remained unanswered in its earlier meeting, in which the Secretary was
not available. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture made a brief explanatory presentation about the
concerns expressed on different issues and hoped that the recommendations of the Committee
would work as a valuable guidance to them.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the INTACH and other experts were asked to emphasize on
those points which have been left in the Bill or those points suggested by INTACH and other experts
which were not incorporated in the Bill, as they were associated with the Bill from the drafting stage.
5. The Member-Secretary, INTACH while welcoming the Bill described it as the first attempt
to bring those heritage sites which were not protected, in the ambit of the Bill. He suggested
modifications in Clause 2 (C) Clause 2 (C) (iv) and added that definition of heritage site should
cover cantonment areas, the aquatic sites and features under the definition. The representatives of
INTACH also deliberated as to how the heritage buildings etc. under private ownership could be
maintained. It was also suggested that the Bill be coordinated with Town and Country Planning Act
and the Municipal Act. The Chairman and Members raised queries on various provisions of the Bill
and the Secretary and representatives of INTACH replied. To several other queries raised by the
Members, the Ministry representatives were requested to give written replies.
6. Members of the Committee also gave suggestions on the protection of heritage sites and
how to penalise persons causing damages to the heritage buildings. They also suggested that the
Chairman of the Commission proposed in the Bill may be selected by a Search Committee and not
by the government alone. Members of the Committee showed their concerns for ignoring the role
of local bodies under this Bill.
7. The Committee, thereafter, heard the views of other experts on the Bill. They were of the
view that the Commission should act as facilitator and mentor for those organizations who are
working in the area of preserving the diverse environmental, archaeological and natural heritage.
They felt the need for documenting and preserving the traditions of our performing and plastic arts
and bringing them within the ambit of the Commission. It was also suggested that upper age limit
for qualifications of members and Member-Secretary may be raised. Further, the Committee desired
that financial outlay should be sufficient to cover the activities to be taken up by the Commission.
8. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 1.30 
P.M.

55
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.45 P.M. on Friday the 13th November, 2009 in Room No. 074,
Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
8. Shri P. Karunakaran
9. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
10. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
11. Shri S.D. Shariq
12. Shri Jitendra Singh
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
14. Shri K. Sugumar
15. Shri Kabir Suman
16. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
17. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee took up the consideration of the draft 150th Report on the ‘National Commission for
Heritage Sites Bill, 2009’. The Chairman informed the Committee that the comments of some of
the State Governments were received on the Bill and the same had been incorporated in the report.
55

56
The Committee discussed the report and members suggested certain changes/modifications in some
clauses of the Bill. The Committee noted that views expressed by the Member and suggested
modification in different clauses of the Bill had already been incorporated in the Bill. The
Committee, therefore, adopted the report with minor modifications/suggestions.
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members and decide the date for
the presentation of Report in the ensuing winter session of Parliament.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 5.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.