  
DEPARTMENT -
ON 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
The National Waterways Bill, 2015 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2015/ Shravana , 1937 (Saka)  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
The National Waterways Bill, 2015 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12 th  August , 2015 
aid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12 th  August , 2015 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
REPORT NO. 
223  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT  
The National Waterways Bill, 2015  
, 2015 ) 
, 2015 ) 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
The National Waterways Bill, 2015 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12 
th  August , 2015) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12 th  August , 2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2015/ Shravana , 1937 (Saka)  
 


C O N T E N T S 
 
       P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION        (ii) 
3. LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS                    (iii) 
4. REPORT                                 1- 21    
5. ANNEXURE                              22-46 
6. 
*MINUTES           - 
7. LIST OF REPORTS                     47-61 
     
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
 
* To be appended at printing stage. 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2014-2015) 
1.  Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2.  Dr. K. Chiranjeevi  
      3. Shri Rajeev Shukla  
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap 
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
6.  Dr. Prabhakar Kore  
7.  Shri Kiranmay Nanda  
8.  Kumari Selja   
 9. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
 10. * Vacant  
Lok Sabha 
11.  Yogi Adityanath 
12.  Shri Vinod Lakhamashi Chavda 
13.  Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama  
14.  Mohammed Faizal 
15.  Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
16.  Shri Rahul Kaswan  
17.  Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
18.  Shri P. Kumar  
19.  Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
20.  Shri Rajesh Pandey  
21.  Shri Srinivasa Reddy Ponguleti 
22.  Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias  Pappu Yadav 
23.  Shri Prathap Simha 
24.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
25.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
26.  Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
27.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
28.  Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari  
30.  Shri K. C. Venugopal  
      31. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer 
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
 
* Vacant w.e.f.. 25 th  July, 2015 due to expiry of  Shri Kalpatru Das, M.P.  
(i) 
  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authori sed by the Committee to present 
on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred T wenty Third Report on The 
National Waterways Bill, 2015*. 
2.  In pursuance of rules relating to the Departmen t-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committees the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referr ed** the Bill as introduced in 
the Rajya Sabha on the 5
th  May, 2015 and pending therein, to the Committee on  21 st   
May, 2015 for examination and report within three months. 
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretar y, Ministry of Shipping and 
senior officers of Inland Waterways Authority of In dia (IWAI); and Ministry of Law 
and Justice, Legislative Department at its meeting held on the 19 th  June, 2015 on 
various provisions of the Bill. The Committee also sought written views from 24 State 
Governments on the Bill. The Committee heard the vi ews of the Ministries of Finance, 
Department of Expenditure; Environment, Forests and  Climate Change; and Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation  on  the  29 th  June, 2015. The 
Committee also heard the views of the NTPC Ltd.; In dian Ports Association and Indian 
Chamber of Commerce on the 17 th  July, 2015.   
4.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of Ministries of 
Shipping; Law and Justice; Finance; Environment, Fo rests and Climate Change; and 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuve nation; IWAI; NTPC Ltd.; 
Indian Ports Association; Indian Chamber of Commerc e; and Confederation of Indian 
Industry for placing before the Committee, the mate rial and information desired in 
connection with the Bill and for clarifying the poi nts raised by the Members on various 
issues related to the Bill.  The Committee also exp resses its thanks to State 
Governments of Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Kerala, Maharas htra, Punjab and West Bengal 
for providing the information sought by the Committee. 
5.  The Committee considered and adopted the Report  at its meeting held on the 
11 th  August, 2015. 
  
 
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH  
NEW DELHI;                      Chairman,  
August 11, 2015                         Department-related Parliament ary Standing  
Shravana  20, 1937 (Saka)                  Committee on  Transport, To urism and Culture.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 5th  May, 2015. 
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No  54263, dated 21 st  May, 2015. 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
CII – Confederation of Indian Industry 
CRZ – Coastal Regulation Zone 
DPR – Detailed Project Report 
EIA – Environmental Impact Assessment  
EXIM  – Export and Import Trade 
HFL – Highest Flood Level 
ICC – Indian Chamber of Commerce 
IFC – International Finance Corporation 
IWAI  – Inland Waterways Authority of India 
IWT   – Inland Water Transport 
J&K – Jammu and Kashmir 
LAD  – Least Available Depth 
MMTPA  – Million Tonnes Per Annum 
MoEF&CC – Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
NATPAC  – National Transportation Planning and Research Centre 
NCT – National Capital Territory 
NER  – North Eastern Region 
NSL – Natural Surface Level 
NTPC  – National Thermal Power Corporation 
NW  – National Waterway 
NWs  – National Waterways 
ODC  – Over Dimensional Cargo 
PPP – Public Private Partnership 
TEFS – Techno-Economic-Feasibility Study 
WAPCOS – Water and Power Consultancy Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

REPORT 
The National Waterways Bill, 2015 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 05 th  
May, 2015. The Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in co nsultation with the Hon’ble 
Speaker, Lok Sabha referred the Bill to the Departm ent-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture on 21 st  May, 2015 for examination and 
report thereon within a period of three months (Annexure-I). 
2. The Bill seeks to make provisions for the existi ng five national waterways and 
declaration of 101 new inland waterways spread amon g 24 States to be National 
Waterways and also to provide for the regulation an d development of the said 
waterways for the purpose of shipping and navigatio n and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
3. The Central Government has so far declared 5 Nat ional Waterways by separate 
Acts of Parliament.  Developmental works on these N ational Waterways are being 
regularly taken up by Inland Waterways Authority of  India (IWAI), a statutory 
organization, set up by Inland Waterways Authority of India Act (85 of 1985), an Act 
of Parliament in the year 1986 to develop, maintain , manage and regulate inland 
waterways for the purpose of shipping and navigatio n and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.   
4. As the Government proposes to declare additional  101 waterways as National 
Waterways by a single Act, it is necessary to bring the five National Waterways already 
declared by individual Acts of Parliament under a n ew Act.  Consequently, the 
following existing Acts are proposed to be repealed: 
(a)  the National Waterway (Allahabad-Haldia stretc h of the Ganga 
Bhagirathi-Hooghly River) Act, 1982; 
(b)  the National Waterway  (Sadiya-Dhubri stretch of  Brahmaputra River) 
Act, 1988; 
(c )  the National Waterway (Kollam-Kottapuram stre tch of West Coast 
Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals) Act, 1992; 
(d)  the National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra stretch of Rivers, Geonkhali-
Charbatia stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-Dh amra stretch of 
Matai River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Act, 2008; and  
 (e)  the National Waterway (Kakinada-Puducherry st retch of Canals and the 
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry stretch of  River Godavari 
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada stretch of River Krishna) Act, 2008. 
5. The Committee discussed the provisions of the Bi ll with the Secretary, Ministry 
of Shipping, senior officials of the Inland Waterwa ys Authority of India and Ministry 
of Law and Justice (Legislative Department); repres entatives of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure); Ministry of Environmen t, Forests & Climate Change; 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on the 
provisions of the Bill. The Committee also heard the views of the major stakeholders of 
the inland waterways such as the National Thermal P ower Corporation Ltd.; Indian 
Ports Association; and Indian Chamber of Commerce o n the Bill. The States being 
major stakeholders, the Committee also sought comme nts from the Chief Secretaries of 
24 States (List given at Annexure-II) to ascertain their views on the Bill.  

6. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee that due to large network of 
feeder State highways, district roads and village r oads, the potential of National 
Highways have been exploited fully. However, absenc e of such a network for 
waterways has resulted in gross underutilization of  the potential of National 
Waterways. State Governments have not been able to take adequate measures for 
development and maintenance of inland waterways due to insufficient financial outlays, 
lack of expertise and other pressing priorities. Th us, only Central Government has to 
take the initiatives to develop this sector.   
7. As per the Constitutional provision, Central Gov ernment can undertake 
development and regulation of an inland waterway fo r navigation, only when it is 
declared as a National Waterway (NW) by an Act of P arliament in line with Entry no. 
24 in List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constit ution. Waterways and navigation 
thereon has been covered in all three Lists of the Constitution, Union List (List- 1), 
State List (List- 2) and Concurrent List (List- 3).  The Entries relevant to navigation in 
these Lists are given at Annexure- III.    
8. The Committee, in its 189 
th  Report on “The Development of National 
Waterways-Potential and Challenges”, had observed t hat even though National IWT 
Policy document prepared in the Ninth Plan prescrib ed for making efforts for pooling 
the resources through captive users and PSUs, with liberal investments in IWT sector, 
the Government has failed to implement the vision o f the policy document in actual 
terms over these years. On the contrary, water tran sport has shrunk even in those areas 
with great potential.  The Committee also noted that lack of adequate policy support for 
the IWT sector was also compounding the problems, l eading to IWT losing its 
competitive edge over other modes of transport. The  other modes of transport received 
policy support and huge investment in developing it s infrastructure, whereas water 
transport seems to have been neglected or has not r eceived the required attention of the 
policy makers and the Government. The Committee had  recommended that 
Government of India should take necessary follow up  action on the Inland Water 
Transport Policy Document of 2001 for the optimum u tilization of our potential in the 
water transport sector. 
9. The Committee had also observed in the above cit ed Report that the national 
highways are contributing to about 40% of the road accidents and trucks being the 
major contributor in this. The water transportation  being the safest mode, can reduce 
road accidents and resulting casualties significant ly. It also reduces treatment and 
rehabilitation costs to a great extent. Moreover, t he land acquisition for the 
highways/roads have been a major problem which is n ot only a sensitive issue, it is 
highly time taking and costly exercise. There is sh ortage of free land for road 
construction. Switching to water mode, therefore, would become the most viable option 
to reduce the dependency on roads, particularly for  the transportation of bulk and 
oversized cargo. Waterways have lots of tourist pot ential especially for pilgrimage as 
many famous pilgrim centres are mainly located on river side. 
10. The Ministry of Shipping has informed the Commi ttee that so far, the steps 
taken before the declaration of National Waterways used to be to conduct a 
hydrographic survey followed by techno-economic fea sibility study or detailed project 
report, seek concurrence of concerned State Governments and obtain several clearances 
such as environment, forest, wildlife and Coastal R egulation Zone, wherever required. 
Thereafter, the financial approval of the project w as also obtained from the competent 
authority (Expenditure Finance Committee/Cabinet) along with in-principle approval of 
the institutional/manpower arrangements which were included in the proposal/ cabinet 

note. All these activities used to take between 2 t o 3 years, after which the actual work 
of development of the NW would start. The developme nt of the waterway (fairway 
development, terminal construction and aids to navi gation) also takes minimum 3 to 4 
years. Hence it is only after 6 to 7 years from the  date of its declaration that a NW can 
be fully developed and used for navigation by comme rcially viable capacity vessels.  
Another 2- 3 years were required for utilization of  the waterway to pick up. In short, 
from the date of identification of a waterway, it w ould take 9 to 10 years for actual 
utilization of a waterway to start.  
11. The Ministry has further informed that keeping in view the urgent need to 
develop this cost-effective and eco-friendly supple mentary and alternative mode of 
transport, such a long waiting period needs to be c urtailed drastically. One way of 
reducing this time period is to declare all the ide ntified waterways as National 
Waterways through single legislation instead of goi ng through the motion of enacting 
separate legislations for each National Waterway so  as to enable the Government to 
undertake their development as and when the need ar ises and the preparatory work and 
funding tie-up is complete. This is the basic objective behind putting up the present Bill 
in the Parliament.  For a ready reference, State-wi se list of the 101 waterways is given 
at Annexure- IV. 
12. The Ministry of Shipping has also informed that  the financial requirement and a 
road map for development of all these NWs will only  be known after the preparation of 
techno-economic-feasibility (TEF) studies and Detai led Project Reports (DPR) of the 
waterways proposed in the Bill. The Bill in its present form is only for the approval of a 
Central legislation to declare one hundred one (101 ) additionally identified waterways 
as National Waterways. Therefore, this Bill per se does not have any financial 
implication at this stage. 
13. The Ministry has argued that due to the longish  process involved, the Central 
Government could declare so far only five National Waterways since 1986. The 
Ministry has further informed that of these five, o nly three National Waterways have 
been made operational and the required infrastructu re has been created thereon. 
Substantial cargo transportation and movement of cr uise/ tourist vessels take place on 
all these three NWs. For the rest two, developmental work is in process. 
14.  During the deliberations, the Chairman, IWAI i nformed the Committee that 
before taking up the rivers given in the Schedule o f the Bill, all the 24 State 
Governments were requested to offer their opinion o n the proposed Bill and that 18 of 
them gave their opinion. While 14 States have suppo rted the Bill, some of them have 
suggested a few rivers to be included in the list.   
15.1. The Committee also enquired about the right o f the State Governments over 
these rivers once they are declared as National Waterways. On this issue, the Chairman, 
IWAI stated: 
“As regards rights of State Governments, after the declaration of National 
Waterways, there is no right of usage of water or u sage of earth beneath the 
water or on the appurtenant land which will vest aw ay from State Governments 
to the Central Government.  So, all the rights, as existing as of date, will 
continue with State Governments.  The only rights, which the Government of 
India and the IWAI will have are (i) to do the dred ging in a certain portion of 
the river, through a channel of 50 mts or 40 mts, d epending on the size of the 
vessel which will move, and (ii) maintain a channel  for the purposes of shipping 
and navigation.  IWAI cannot remove the water, and even the soil, that will be 

removed from beneath the water, and it will be put it on the land allocated for 
that purpose by the State Government and the State Government will use it.  If 
the soil is not usable for any fruitful purpose and  ask IWAI to dump it, they 
would do that. They are also used for reclamation o f land in certain portions.  
And that goes to the advantage of State Governments .  The IWAI gets the 
authority to ensure that no construction takes plac e over the river without its 
clearance. If there are sufficient vertical and hor izontal clearances in a 
waterway, IWAI give a clearance. Like, if it requir e 7 metres between two 
pillars which are being constructed in the water, o r, a 6 metres vertical height 
for the barge to move, IWAI just specify that.  If the designs meet the 
requirements of horizontal and vertical clearances,  the clearance would be 
given very easily.  And there is no other right whi ch vests with the Government 
of India”.   
15.2. On the issue of PPP in development of Waterwa ys, the Chairman, IWAI stated 
that: 
“We have  the IFC, which is a sister concern of the World Bank, advising us how 
to see the PPP. But there are a lot of examples of PPP in terminal development, 
operation and management. So, terminal management i s definitely one clear 
area where PPP is possible”.  
15.3. As regards the staff strength of IWAI, the Co mmittee was informed that they 
have a sanctioned strength of 419 and that there is  a floating staff and staff which work 
under contract with them.  The Committee was also i nformed that IWAI is undergoing 
a reorganization process. 
15.4. In response to the Committee’s query that sin ce many rivers are being used for 
minor irrigation works, what would be the status of  continuing such activities after the 
development of waterways, the Chairman, IWAI replied that: 
“If they are being already drawn through canals bef ore undertaking the 
development work, they will look into the availability of water.  Hydrology study 
is also done to ensure and find out what the availability of water is and what the 
maximum depth that can be achieved. If all the wate r has been drawn out and is 
being used for irrigation, and the State Government  is not willing to give a 
commitment for availability of water round-the-year, then, that will not be taken 
up for development works”.  
15.5. When the Committee pointed out that many of t he rivers listed in the Schedule 
generally remain dry during most of the year, the C hairman, IWAI replied that before 
they take up development, they would also have the feasibility reports with them.  
Some addition, deletion and substitution would be n eeded in the list they have and it 
might undergo small changes accordingly.  
16. During the interactions with the Ministry of Fi nance (Department of 
Expenditure), the Committee raised concern over the  uncertainty about the huge funds 
that would be needed for operationalizing the water ways for purchase of vessels, 
developing infrastructure like railways and intermo dal transshipment facilities, road 
links, harbours and port installations including fi shing harbours, handling equipments, 
warehouses, etc. The Committee also enquired about how the required funds would be 
made available for this; the roadmap ahead for over all financing of the 101 waterways; 
and the details of requests received from the Ministry of Shipping in this regard. 

16.1. Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditur e, has furnished the following 
written reply to the above queries: 
“It is admitted that operationalizing the National Waterways would entail a 
substantial expenditure as and when they are taken up for implementation. 
During the inter-ministerial consultation stage, th is Department had raised the 
need to have an assessment of the total cost and ov erall financial implication 
on the development of the proposed National Waterwa ys for the Central 
Government. However, it was explained in the propos al of the Ministry of 
Shipping that the Central Government will be enable d as per the Constitution 
to undertake development of the National Waterways only after the said 
waterways are declared as such by the Parliament. I n this regard, attention is 
drawn to the Statement of objects and reasons of the proposed Bill which states 
that the extent of development, the prioritization of inland waterways for 
development and related matters shall be finalized after carrying out necessary 
techno-economic feasibility studies through Inland Waterways Authority of 
India consequent upon enactment of the National Wat erways Bill, 2015. 
Therefore, given the Constitutional position, it is  expected that a detailed 
techno-economic feasibility will be carried out for  each of the proposed 
waterway once the law is enacted and that the estimation of required funds will 
become available thereafter. The techno-economic fe asibility studies will also 
enable prioritization of the National Waterways”. 
16.2. It was further argued by the Department of Ex penditure that during 2015-16, 
an outlay of Rs.295.90 crore (BE) has been made for  the inland waterways. Given the 
past trend of expenditure, this is substantially hi gher. This may enable the Ministry of 
Shipping to undertake techno-economic feasibility s tudies on some of the proposed 
National Waterways. Once the estimation of the requ ired funds is given by the 
Ministry of Shipping, the Department of Expenditure  will be able to provide funds 
from the budgetary resources after due assessment a nd evaluation. It was also 
suggested that funds can also be mobilized through contribution by the State 
Governments, Public-Private Partnerships and debt c apital raised from financial 
institutions. 
17. The Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change, in their written 
submission to the Committee, stated that the activi ties to be undertaken during 
development of the waterways, viz ., construction of Ports and Harbours, capital 
dredging and other infrastructure facilities requir ed for navigation, would attract the 
provisions of the Economic Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification, 2006 and Coastal 
Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification, 2011. The proposals so received will be examined 
as per the prevailing law, it was argued.  
17.1. During deliberations on the Bill, representat ives of the Ministry of 
Environment, Forests & Climate Change stated that t he Ministry of Shipping had 
consulted them when the Bill was piloted and that t he Ministry had agreed in writing to 
support the Bill. He also stated that each of the 1 01 waterways will be dealt with on a 
case-to-case basis under the parameters of Environm ent Protection Act, 1986, Wildlife 
Protection Act, 1972, Indian Forest Act, 2006 and C oastal Regulation Zone 
Notification. To a query on whether the Ministry ha d conducted a river-to-river study, 
he replied that they have so far received 3 proposa ls on which the terms of references 
have been issued to IWAI. He also clarified that an  entire river in one go will not be a 
case for environment clearance. 

18. Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
informed the Committee that the following issues pe rtaining to that Ministry need to be 
taken care of during the development of these National Waterways:  
(i)  There is a need to estimate quantum of water requir ed on a week/ 10-
days basis throughout the year to maintain the mini mum depth of water 
in the proposed river stretches/canals for navigabi lity in order to ensure 
that drinking, irrigation and other demands of water do not get impaired. 
(ii)  Technical feasibility in consultation with this Min istry may first be 
established before preparing Detailed Project Repor ts/undertake any 
works in any river/river stretch.  
(iii)  The Central legislation needs to be in consonance w ith the programme 
of Interlinking of Rivers of this Ministry.  The le gislation should keep in 
consideration and sustain the technical feasibility  of Interlinking of 
Rivers programme.  
19. The NTPC which was already using the waterways successfully was asked 
about their experience and opinion on the cargo tra nsport through waterways, the 
bottlenecks faced by them and suggestions thereon. They replied that Farakka is a 
success story for NTPC Ltd. and that they have a ta rget of 3 million metric tonnes per 
annum in seven years' period for Farakka Super Thermal Power Station. Out of that, till 
30 th  June 2015, they have transported 7.75 lakh tonnes of coal. This contract is on and 
transportation is going on.  Its further scope is subjected to availability of domestic coal 
in the country.  The trends are improving right now ; so import will also get tapered 
down and the development has to be kept under monitoring continuously.   
19.1. Regarding the environment clearance which is presently taken on a case-to-case 
basis by the proponent of a particular project, the y suggested that the central authority 
designated for the waterways development can take e nvironment clearance for a 
capacity in that particular route and that it will simplify the process.  Secondly, as per 
some of the studies that have been suggested by the  Ministry of Environment, Forests 
and Climate Change, environment clearances can also  be taken on a centralized basis 
by the authority designated for waterways developme nt and the cost can be booked to 
the proponents as per the quantity transported on case to case basis. 
19.2. The representatives of NTPC Ltd. further info rmed the Committee that they 
have not identified any further waterway routes for  their operations in the country right 
now. The potential, which can be considered subsequently based on the development, is 
the Meja Super Thermal Power Station which is comin g up in Allahabad, Uttar 
Pradesh.   
19.3. To a query over their future perspective on t he use of waterways, representative 
of NTPC Ltd. replied that with the coal production in India improving, they are 
expecting a 12 percent growth during this year and then the imported coal component 
will automatically reduce. As regards the minimum d epth required, he replied that in 
Farakka, it is 2.5 metres. He also stated that the transport cost through waterway is only 
slightly lesser compared to the railways right now,  since the cargo is transported one 
way only.  
19.4. Their reply to a query on the capacity of the  vessel presently used by NTPC Ltd. 
was that the present capacity is 1,500 tonnes. Even  though it was designed for 2,000 
tonnes, they are able to load up to 1,500-1,600 ton nes only because the Least Available 
Depth is only 2.5 metres in the waterway.  

20.1. The representative of IWAI informed the Commi ttee that they will consider the 
suggestions given by the NTPC Ltd. regarding obtain ing the Environmental Clearances 
for operating the waterways. He further stated that  there are two issues in the 
transportation through inland waterways which have now actually started getting 
developed and used. One is infrastructure-related i ssues, that when the dredging is 
done, or when the vessels are moving, then its effe cts on the banks, on the fishers, etc. 
should be considered. The second is related to carg o and vessel specific, which cargo is 
being moved, which vessels are being used, whether they are equipped adequately and 
whether they are environment-friendly or not.  That  perhaps IWAI has to leave to the 
operator; the responsibility may have to be put on the operator. In the present operation, 
IWAI is also helping the NTPC and the operator, Jin dal ITF Limited. But IWAI will 
give more thought on environmental clearance issue for taking a policy decision.  
20.2. The representatives of IWAI further informed the Committee that with regard to 
cost, it is understood that it is marginally lower by 10 per cent or so in the case of 
Farakka. But as far as general comparison with road and rail is concerned, it depends on 
waterway to waterway also. For example, if the wate rway’s depth is only one metre, 
then, definitely inland waterways will not be cheap er.  But, in general, if the waterways 
is well developed, say 2.5 to 3.5 or 4.5 metres dep th, then, those figures are definitely 
right, almost 60-70 per cent of Railways, or even l ess than that. But everywhere it will 
not be necessarily so. If NTPC Ltd. can ensure retu rn cargo like fly ash etc, the costs 
will be reduced further. 
21.1. The representatives of the Indian Ports Assoc iation, while deposing before the 
Committee, informed that this Bill is a welcome ste p for them and that coastal shipping 
and inland transport have to be encouraged in the c ountry. Over the years, though 
efforts have been made, still the share of inland w ater transport has to grow.  If the Bill 
is passed and smaller rivers are connected, there w ill be integrated development of the 
waterways transportation and the cargo can move in a smoother and hassle-free way 
from the ports.   
21.2. In response to Committee’s query on how the p ort sector would be benefited 
from this Bill, the representative of India Port As sociation replied that as on date, ports 
are having a capacity of 1.54 billion metric tonnes  and the traffic they are handling is 
1.05 billion metric tonnes. Some of the ports are v ery congested and they are 
completely choked with transportation. Because of h interland connectivity through rail 
and road, evacuation is a constraint. Government of  India is currently taking measures 
in the Sagarmala Project to see that the evacuation  is smooth and there should not be 
any bottlenecks there. If inland water transport is  developed and waterways are 
connected, then the ports can offload or transfer t he cargo through inland waterways 
more than its present share and lessen the burden on the rail and road. So, that way, port 
congestion will be eased, efficiency will be increa sed and the transportation modal split 
can be easily obtained in the way they desire. As f ar as assessment is concerned, the 
traffic is likely to grow in the years to come in t he major ports as well as minor ports to 
the tune of around 8-9 per cent.  Though the capaci ty is increasing, yet if these inland 
waterways are developed, then traffic flow could al so be managed in a much faster and 
smoother way reducing the turnaround time of ships significantly.   
21.3. Regarding operation of existing waterways, he  said that major ports are 
connected to the waterways, especially, Haldia, Dhamra and Kakinada.  In Cochin also, 
the inland waterways have been linked to one termin al which transports the containers 
from Vallarpadam Terminal to the island terminal at Kochi. Since waterways have been 
helping them to transport the cargo, if more waterw ays are there, obviously the 

evacuation would be much faster. In Kochi, at NW-3,  they used to transport a lot of 
cargo through the inland waterways from Kottapuram to Kochi.  They are joining with 
Government of India for providing the facilities in  inland waterways. They can 
construct (i) the waterway terminals - IW terminals ; (ii) separate jetties; (iii) a separate 
stacking area etc. so that inland waterways and coa stal transportation could get a major 
boost and the exim cargo and coastal cargo could be  fully developed.  The ports will be 
able to construct additional berths as they have th eir own funds. If IWAI also joins 
together, ports can have a joint venture and see to  it that the berths are constructed and 
facilities are provided.   
21.4. The representative of Indian Ports Associatio n informed the Committee that 
Kolkata, Haldia, Cochin, Mormugao, Mumbai and Jawaharlal Nehru Ports are presently 
using the National Waterways. The total tonnage the y have handled last year was 555 
million tonnes, out of which the inland waterways c argo is only 15 million tonnes. 
Eventhough it is not in a big way, but it is taking place.   
22. The representatives of Indian Chamber of Commer ce, in their written 
comments, pointed out the following weaknesses in the Bill: 
• No clear deadline/time limit for issue of requisite approvals and clearances; 
• Mode of financing is not clear although it will be most likely in PPP mode; 
• Centre will bear the cost while States will take th e advantages. Projects 
linking a few States might create problem of co-ord ination as every State 
will fight for more investment; 
• When the existing five waterways are not yet functi onal, it is far-fetched to 
plan developing 101 more in short horizon. Better to work on these existing 
5 first, and then replicate the successful model; and  
• While some projects are driven by commercial motive  (example NW-5), 
some are more politically or geographically importa nt (example NW-2). 
Prioritization of political motives will play an im portant role for the 
development of the project. 
23. In a written submission to the Committee, the C onfederation of Indian Industry 
(CII) stated that the Bill is expected to give a bo ost to inter-modal shift from road and 
rail to waterways thus ensuring reduced carbon foot print and cost. The cost of 
waterways is barely 50 paise per kilometer when com pared with Re.1 for railways and 
Rs. 1.5 for road transport. The proposed Bill can o pen significant private sector 
opportunities in the areas of dredging, barge const ruction, barge operation, barge repair 
facilities, terminal construction, terminal operati on, storage facilities, navigation, 
consultancy etc., which can positively contribute t o economic growth of the country. It 
is estimated that development of waterways sector w ould entail investment of more 
than 1 lakh crore and creation of around 1 lakh emp loyment opportunities. This calls 
for significant capacity building initiatives both at the ground level and also at the 
institutional level. 
24. The Committee also sought the views of the 24 S tate Governments such as 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, NC T of Delhi, Goa, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu& Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Pu njab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
Telengana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, who have a stake in the proposed 101 
National Waterways. They were requested to furnish the replies by the 15 
th  July, 2015. 
Since the Committee got only a few responses, a rem inder was issued to the remaining 
State Governments to expedite their reply latest by  31 st  July, 2015. Despite this, the 

Committee could so far receive responses only from the seven State Governments - 
Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Kerala, Maharashtra, Punjab an d West Bengal. The Government 
of Kerala conveyed their disagreement to declaring of 10 rivers as National Waterways 
in their State. They alternatively suggested inclus ion of some other lakes/rivers already 
being used in that State for water based transportation.  
25. The views received from the State Governments a re given in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
Assam 
 
25.1. The Government of Assam communicated that nin e rivers such as Barak, 
Subansiri, Lohit, Gangadhar, Aai, Beki, Puthimari, Kapili and Dehing may be 
considered for declaration as National Waterways. A ll the rivers require regular 
maintenance for channel depth and navigability. Inc reasing the navigability of the 
above rivers will enhance trade and commerce with B angladesh, Arunachal Pradesh 
and Manipur on one hand and also it will improve th e communication with the interior 
localities of Assam and other adjoining States. 
Goa 
 
25.2. The Government of Goa informed that they have  examined the Bill and agreed 
upon. 
Gujarat 
 
25.3. The Government of Gujarat informed the Commit tee that they have plans for 
the prominent Kalpasar Project for sweet water stor age by constructing a dam across 
the Gulf of Khambhat. National Waterway No. 83 (Sab armati River-212 kms) and 
National Waterway No. 62 (Mahi River 248 kms) falls  in the reservoir of the proposed 
Kalpasar Dam. They stated that concerns and effect of the Kalpasar project may be 
considered and examined during the techno-economic feasibility study of the 
waterways. 
Kerala 
 
25.4. The Government of Kerala informed the Committ ee that they oppose the 
inclusion of the following rivers proposed as National Waterways on account of various 
reasons:  
 (i) National Waterway-48 Kallada river (69 km); 
(ii) National Waterway-75 Pamba river (100 km); 
(iii) National Waterway-65 Manimala  river (67 km);  
(iv) National Waterway-69 Meenachil river (44 km); 
(v) National Waterway-70  Moovattupuzha river (56 k m); 
(vi) National Waterway-18 Bharathappuzha river (61 km); 
(vii) National Waterway- 46 Kadalundy river (53 km) ; 
(viii) National Waterway-54 Korappuzha river (23 km ); 
(ix) National Waterway-23 Chaliyar river (23 km); a nd 
(x) National Waterway-101 Valapattanam  river (39 k m) 
The reasons given by the Government of Kerala for opposing the Waterways are:- 
(i) Existing structures and drinking water sources: 
25.4.1.   As per the proposed Bill, more than 60km length of all the ten rivers from the 
river mouth are declared as National Waterways.  Mo st of the rivers are 100 to 200km 
long and have several installations like drinking w ater intake well, check dams, 
regulators etc. along these stretches.  In addition , several railway bridges, road bridges, 

foot bridges etc. are there which do not have the v ertical clearance specified for 
National Waterways.  It would be impractical to remove all these structures. 
(ii) Pollution and salinity ingression:  
25.4.2.   All the rivers mentioned in the Bill are source for several drinking water and 
irrigation schemes.  If the rivers are dredged for providing required draft, salt water 
ingression would be beyond control and affect the f unctioning of all the schemes.  
Plying of mechanized vessels would also increase po llution of the water body, which is 
the mainstay of drinking water supply.  
(iii) Ecology: 
25.4.3.   Dredging the river bed for providing draf t would be disastrous to the ecology 
of the river system, especially in ecologically fra gile reaches in the upstream of the 
river.  In the river mouth, this would facilitate s alt water ingression, as already pointed 
out.  Sand mining and lowering of river bed has already created adverse effects on most 
of the river systems in the State.  Fish breeding w ill also be affected, depriving 
fishermen the normal catch. 
(iv) Water availability : 
25.4.4.  Unlike the rivers in North India that are snow fed, Kerala rivers are entirely 
dependent on monsoon.  The rivers also have a steep  gradient related to the topography 
of the State. Therefore, it is almost impossible to  create perennial waterways in the 
rivers of Kerala. 
25.4.5.    Government of Kerala suggested the follo wing points for effecting necessary 
modifications in the draft Bill:- 
a) In the proposed National Waterways Bill, 2015, 1 01 waterways have been 
proposed to be declared as National Waterways and u nder the Statement of objects and 
reasons, the Bill says that “the extent of developm ent, prioritization and related matters 
shall be finalized after carrying out necessary tec hno-economic feasibility studies 
through IWAI, consequent upon enactment of the National Waterways Bill 2015”. 
i) It is suggested that only those stretches of wat erway where necessary techno-
economic feasibility studies have been conducted an d found feasible need be declared 
as national water way. 
ii) Wherever Inland Water Authority of India propos es to conduct feasibility study, 
the State’s representation shall be ensured in the proposed feasibility study and the 
State should be given opportunity to be heard and i ts views on feasibility adequately 
taken into account. 
b) Under the Inland Waterways Authority of India Ac t, 1985 the IWAI is vested 
inter alia with the powers of regulation, conservan cy and development of inland 
waterways for the purpose of shipping and navigatio n and matters connected therewith.  
Conservancy includes dredging, training, closure, d iversion or abandoning channels.  
Apparently, for the purpose of navigation, the list ed rivers can be linked by waterways 
leading to inter-basin transfer of water notwithsta nding the fact that water is a state 
subject.  Such apprehensions need to be allayed by specific clause in the Bill. 
c) Once the Bill is passed, any construction or eve n withdrawal of water for any 
purpose apparently including drinking may necessita te consent/approval of IWAI.  In 
densely populated riverbanks like that of Kerala it  would adversely affect and 
slowdown local development. Hence, the Government of Kerala recommended creation 
of appropriate State-level, legal and institutional  framework for the management of 
National Waterways like a high level State Waterway s Management Council/State 

Inland Waterways Authority and all development plan s be undertaken with the 
approval of the Council/Authority. 
d) In the proposed Bill, the present NW-3 Canal has  been renumbered as National 
Waterway 104 and is proposed to include 160 km leng th of the canal as extension of 
NW-3 towards Kozhikode and 78 km towards Kovalam (L atitude      8 ° 24 ′ 11.20 ″ 
North, Longitude 76 ° 58 ′ 9.4 ″ E). Inland Waterways Authority of India, has condu cted 
a techno-economic feasibility study for the two ext ension stretches of National Water 
Way-3 (West Coast Canal) through NATPAC in 2014 and  found that the extension of 
the West Coast Canal towards Kasaragod is feasible.   Therefore the proposed National 
Waterways 104 may be extended upto Kasaragod in the  north (Latitude 12 ° 28 ′ 30.86 ″ 
North, Longitude 74 ° 59 ′ 21.69 ″ East. End point: Thalangara Fishing Harbour) 
25.4.6.   Government of Kerala also proposed the in clusion of the following feeder 
canals under the National Waterways Bills 2015. 
(i) Alappuzha-Changanacherry Canal; 
(ii) Alappuzha-Kottayam Canal; 
(iii) Kottayam-Vaikom Canal; and 
(iv) Athirampuzha Canal. 
Maharashtra 
 
25.5. Comments furnished by the Government of Mahar ashtra are as under: 
(i)   National Waterway-8, NW-49 and NW-99 are part of V asai creek having a 
total distance of 140 km from Vasai creek entrance to Dharamtar via  
Kalyan-Kasheli-Mumbai. However, the stretch of  wat erway from Mumbai 
to Dharamtar creek entrance is not forming a part o f any of the three 
proposed National Waterways included in the Bill. T his should be included 
in the NW-49.  
(ii)  Rajpuri creek and Dabhol creek/Vashishthi river may also be included in the 
proposed waterways.  
(iii)  Specific provisions to protect all the rights of th e State Government over the 
waterway even after its declaration as National Wat erway may be included 
in the Bill.  
Punjab  
25.6.   Government of Punjab informed that they hav e no objection to the proposed 
Bill because it will be beneficial for water based tourism. 
West Bengal  
25.7.  Government of West Bengal informed that they  have no objection to declaring 
the rivers in the State of West Bengal and the Sund arbans waterways as National 
Waterways as mentioned in the National Waterways Bill, 2015. 
26. Since the Committee received very few responses  from the State Governments, 
it asked the IWAI to share the views of the State G overnments as received by them. As 
per the information furnished by IWAI, 19 States ha ve responded to them and  State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Goa, H aryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Telengana, and West 
Bengal, have agreed to the proposal of declaration of National Waterways. However, 
Government of Bihar has made a conditional agreemen t (as narrated in paragraph 28.3) 
to the proposal. Government of Madhya Pradesh has totally disagreed to it.  

26.1. The views of the rest of the State Government s who have replied to the IWAI 
on the Bill are given below: 
 Andhra Pradesh 
 
26.2. Government of Andhra Pradesh confirmed their consent to include 3 waterways 
namely Penna, Krishna and Tungabhadra in the State. 
Bihar  
26.3. Government of Bihar agreed to the proposal of  declaring Kosi, Gandak and 
Sone rivers as National waterways with the following conditions:- 
(i) As a result of the works proposed to be execute d by IWAI for use of these 
rivers as National Waterways, there should not be a ny increase in the 
submergence area nor should it adversely affect the  Highest Flood Level 
(HFL) and Natural Surface Level (NSL). 
(ii) Declaration of these three routes as National Waterways should not in any 
way affect the present entitlement of Water of the State as per: 
a. Gandak Agreement 
b. Kosi Agreement 
c. Bansagar Agreement. 
(iii) The Central Government should bear the cost o f any flood fighting work or 
anti erosion work necessitated due to effect of any  additional structure put 
by IWAI along the river or any work executed in the river. 
(iv) There should not be any adverse effect on the existing infrastructure 
(Barrages, Bridges, Hydraulic structures etc.). In case requirement of 
modification of structures is absolute necessary, i t shall entirely be the 
responsibility of Central Government and the cost will be borne by them. 
(v) Because of declaration of these routes as Natio nal Waterways and to 
facilitate navigational capability, need of only la rge scale dredging (if 
required) be explored, avoiding the construction of  barrages which has an 
adverse effect as experienced in the case of Farrak a Barrage.  In lieu  of 
barrage, dredging (capital dredging and maintenance  dredging) be practiced 
on a regular basis.  In case any barrage or any oth er structure blocking the 
normal river course is proposed the same shall not be undertaken without 
the consent and approval of State Government. 
(vi) Consequence of large scale dredging (if requir ed) in these three rivers will 
certainly need additional dredging in the river Gan ges (the master drain), 
which ultimately has to carry the additional silt o ver burden of these three 
rivers.  This aspect should be clearly articulated that Government of India 
should have the responsibility to arrange for addit ional dredging in river 
Ganges. 
(vii) The right of the Government of Bihar to devel op additional irrigation 
potential on their own should in no way be infringe d with due to the 
declaration of National Waterways of these river routes. 
(viii) Simultaneous with the declaration of river r oute as National Waterways, a 
proper silt management policy be framed by the Cent ral Government with 
the aim of preserving the river flow with its natural silt carrying capacity. 

Government of NCT of Delhi  
26.4.  Government of Delhi gave its consent for the  part Yamuna flows through Delhi 
to be declared as National Waterway and for various  development activities such as 
river conservancy measures including dredging, navi gational aids, terminals and 
storage facilities. However, for carrying out these  activities, prior concurrence of the 
Government of NCT of Delhi will be taken for each project individually. 
26.4.1.  Further, they stated that Government is of  the understanding that formal 
examination of the entire process of activities suc h as dredging etc. will be done by 
environmental and waterways experts without damagin g the ecology of the river 
Yamuna. 
Haryana 
 
26.5.   Government of Haryana stated that the water  of Yamuna River is shared by six 
States i.e., Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Hary ana, National Capital 
Territory of Delhi and Rajasthan. The River flows a long the district boundaries of four 
districts of Haryana i.e. , Yamunanagar, Karnal, Sonepat and Faridabad. The d ischarge 
in the River Yamuna varies from 1400 cusecs in lean  season to 8 lakh cusecs in 
monsoon season. There are four barrages on this concerned stretch of river Yamuna i.e., 
Hathnikund (Haryana), Wazirabad & Yamuna Barrage (D elhi) and Okhla (Uttar 
Pradesh). The Navigation on the river Yamuna throug hout the year would be hindered 
by the existing old bridges.  However, Haryana woul d like to co-operate with 
Government of India, by extending its consent, in d eclaring river Yamuna as a National 
Waterway, without affecting the express right of the State on its rivers. 
Himachal Pradesh  
26.6.    Government of Himachal Pradesh informed th at detailed discussions were held 
on various options available with the State Governm ent regarding exploring the 
possibilities of getting Inland Waterways declared as National Waterways. The 
Government tentatively proposes and agrees in princ iple that following Inland 
waterways may be considered for declaration as National Waterways:- 
 1. Sunni-Kol dam stretch of Sutlej river 
 2. Slapper-Bhakhra stretch of Sultlej & Beas river s 
 3. Nadaun-Pong dam and Bhakhra-Banagana of Beas ri vers 
26.6.1.   However, the issue requires detailed hydr ographic survey and study for which 
expertise and special equipment are also required, that are not currently available with 
the State Government. 
26.6.2.  They have requested that necessary consult ancy/assistance may be provided on 
the technical issues of these inland waterways incl uding possibilities for exploring 
transportation on tributaries of these rivers also. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
 
26.7.  Government of Jammu and Kashmir stated that the State waterways are mainly 
used for tourist purposes and not as a formal mode of transportation.  The State 
Government of Jammu and Kashmir requested to depute some officers well versed with 
the subject so as to conduct a survey and feasibili ty study of the available in-land 
waterways in the State of J & K for declaration as National Waterway accordingly. 
 
 

Jharkhand  
26.8. Government of Jharkhand provided a brief repo rt regarding the project and 
possibilities of navigation in Kharkai and Subernarekha rivers. 
a)   Kharkai River:- 
26.8.1.   Kharkai river originates from Mayurbhanj district, Orissa at an elevation of 
928 m. (22 ° 4 ′ N, 86 ° 23 ′ E).  It traverses through Chhotanagpur plateau & m eets 
Subernarekha river at Jameshdpur. The gradient of r iver is approximately 1 in 200 to 1 
in 300.  Due to steep gradient depth of water in Kh arkai river from November to June, 
it remains approximately below 1 m and discharge ar ound 10 to 20 cumecs. The bed of 
river is rocky also. In monsoon period depth of wat er in river is approximately 2 to 3 
metres. To prepare river as navigational channel, r iver training work, navigational lock 
dredging of river etc. has to be done.  So far no s tudy has been done for navigation 
purpose.  A detailed Feasibility Study is required to be done. The maximum flood 
discharge of Kharkai river has been observed as 6230 cumecs. 
b)   Subernarekha River: 
26.8.2.  Subernarekha basin is the smallest of the various major river basins in India.  
The river is basically a rain fed peninsular river passing through three districts of 
Ranchi, Hazaribag and Singhbhum of Jharkhand, two d istricts (Mayurbhanj & 
Balasore) in Orissa State and two districts (Purulia & Medinapur) in West Bengal State.  
The river rises in Chhotanagapur pleateau near Nagra village in the Ranchi district at an 
elevation of about 740m.  The sources is at (23 °18 ′N, 85 ° 11 ′E) and its confluence in 
Bay of Bengal is at (23 °34 ′N, 85 ° 21 ′E).  Detailed survey of river has not been 
conducted to study the feasibility of navigation. H owever, from observation of topo 
sheet it has been assessed that the bed slope of ri ver is very steep in upper reaches upto 
Chandil Dam (1 in 220 approx.)  The bed is rocky an d depth of water from lean period 
to monsoon varies from 0.5m to 2.5.m. 
26.8.3.   The bed slope of river from Chandil Dam t o Galudih Barrage & Galudih 
Barrage to Kokpara is approximately 1 in 350m which  is very steep.  The depth of 
water varies from 0.5m to 2.5m approximately.  Henc e navigation may not be possible 
between Chandil Dam to Kokpara. The bed slop of riv er from Kokpara to Bahragora is 
1 in 500m which is less steeper than upper reaches.   Also the bed of river is less rocky 
and width of river increases from Kokpara to Bahrag ora. Depth of water from Kokpara 
to Bahragora has been observed to vary from 1 to 3m .  Hence navigation may be 
possible from Kokpara to Bahragora only. The maximu m discharge of Subernarekha 
river has been observed to be approximately 16500 cumecs. 
Madhya Pradesh 
 
26.9. Government of Madhya Pradesh informed that th ey are against declaration of 
any of its waterway as National Waterway for the reasons enumerated below:- 
a. Any of the State waterway declared as National W aterway will indirectly 
transfer the intervention rights to Union Governmen t in the selected reach through 
Clause 14(1)(g) of Chapter-IV of the Inland Waterwa ys Authority of India Act, 1985 
“Regulate the construction and alteration of struct ures on, across or under the national 
waterways;” thereby infringing the constitutional r ights vested in the State through 
Entry 17 of List-II annexed to Seventh Schedule of Constitution. 

b. Rivers flowing through Madhya Pradesh originate within its boundaries and are 
rainfed.  Therefore, these rivers do not carry suff icient non-monsoon flows to cater for 
navigational needs. 
c. Water Resources Development in Madhya Pradesh is  primarily irrigation centric 
with other priority of power generation and release s regulated accordingly create large 
seasonal variation in water levels in the reservoir s.  This will not only need deep 
navigation channels, locks and gates but will also create issues in port location for the 
reason of moving entry points to waterways.  This i s major technical issue in the 
feasibility of navigation beyond the already created dam storages. 
d. Major Dams built on proposed Narmada National Wa terways in Madhya 
Pradesh do not cater for navigation (No locks and G ates have been provided nor would 
it be technically and financially feasible to build  them now for the reason of large 
variation in seasonal water levels in the impoundment). 
e. Environmental protection of Crocodile Park manda ted by law on Chambal 
River restricts any intervention activity in the identified reach.   
f. Release of water for maintaining levels in Chamb al River for navigation will 
depend on cascading system from Gandhi Sagar Dam to  Kota Barrage and also will 
lead to an objective drift by adversely affecting i rrigation supplies.  This will face 
strong public resistance. 
g. Chambal River runs through alluvium and has heav y ground water withdrawal 
in the vicinity through deep tube wells. Therefore,  most of the water released for 
navigation channel will percolate down to deep allu vium making navigation 
unworkable.   
26.9.1.   Summing together the reasons enumerated a bove, an alternative could be that 
the Government of India becomes a facilitator in fu nding feasibility studies and 
development of State Waterways within the State boundaries of Madhya Pradesh. 
26.9.2.  Out of the 101 identified National Waterwa ys six waterways fall on the rivers 
originating in Madhya Pradesh i.e., Narmada, Chambal, Betwa, Tons, Mahi and 
Wainganga.  Out of these three i.e., on Narmada, Chambal and Tons have inter-State 
aspects with Madhya Pradesh. 
26.9.3.  In view of the contents of preceding parag raphs, State Government of Madhya 
Pradesh opposes inclusion of any of its waterway as National Waterway. 
Meghalaya 
 
26.10.  Government of Meghalaya indentified the fol lowing 5 Waterways which can be 
declared as National Waterways:- 
 (a) Simsang River 
 (b) Jinjiram River 
 (c) Ganol River 
 (d) Kynshi River (Jadukata River) 
 (e) Umngot River  
Mizoram 
 
26.11.  Government of Mizoram has conveyed their no  objection to the proposal of 
declaring River Tlawng (Dhaleswari) as one of the N ational Waterways. They have 
also stated that since road transportation is the o nly communication available in the 
State so far, River Tlawng as a National Waterways will benefit the inhabitants of the 

State in respect of transportation of man and mater ials as the river covers major portion 
of Mizoram and connects Assam State. 
Nagaland 
 
26.12.  Government of Nagaland informed that the ri vers in the State of Nagaland do 
not meet the criteria of the NTPC Ltd. recommendati ons of navigable rivers. However, 
about 60 km stretch of Tizu River in between Akhas Bridge under Phek district up to 
the International Border with Myanmar under Kiphire  district can be developed as a 
waterway, with suitable dredging at few locations of the river. 
Rajasthan  
26.13. Government of Rajasthan has informed that th ey are awaiting a study report by 
WAPCOS for exploring the possibility for use of IGNP Canal as navigational canal and 
that report will be provided to IWAI on receipt. 
Telangana 
 
26.14. Government of Telangana stated that six rive rs in Telangana i.e., Manjeera, 
Bhima, Penganga/Wardha, Tungabhadra, Wainganga/Pran ahitha and Krishna are listed 
to be declared as National Waterways. They also  st ated that they welcome the decision 
in-principle and the comments on technical aspects will have to be obtained from the 
irrigation department especially regarding the dept h, width and availability of water 
suitable from navigation point of view. As it needs  detailed in-depth examination, they 
have requested IWAI that a mechanism may be put in place by IWAI in this regard. 
27. The Committee also sought comments from the Sta te Governments who are 
presently using the NW-1 (Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar P radesh and West Bengal); NW-2 
(Assam); and NW-3 (Kerala). Out of the said States,  the comments received from  the 
Government of Kerala is given below: 
27.1.   Benefits/Advantages of the passenger and ca rgo movement through the 
Waterways and Inland Waterways and tourism: 
 Waterways are integral to improved cost-effective and multi-modal transport 
system, where the infrastructure backbone is naturally available.  As a result, the cost of 
developing waterways is much lower than rail and ro ad.  With over 708 km of 
navigable canals and extensive backwaters; rivers a nd lakes, Kerala has unique 
advantage and untapped opportunity for passenger, c argo and tourism development.  
The waterways are environment friendly with the pot ential for carbon credit, require 
negligible land acquisition in a densely populated State like Kerala and are safe mode 
for hazardous and over dimensional cargo.  It would  also reduce congestion on the 
roads and rails. 
27.2    Any erosion of Authority of the State Government over the use of Waterways: 
 The role of Central Government (List I Constitutio nal provision) is limited to 
shipping and navigation on inland waterways declare d by Parliament by law to be 
National Waterways, as regard mechanically propelle d vessels; the rule of the road on 
such waterway.  Carriage of passengers and goods by railway, sea or air, or by National 
Waterways in mechanically propelled vessels is also  under the purview of Central 
Government.  If there arise any conflict in so far as water use is concerned, apparently 
the priority of usage as stipulated in the National  Water Policy would prevail (drinking, 
irrigation, industrial use, power generation & recreation and navigation in that order). 

 However, once a canal is declared a National Water way, any development of 
infrastructure or even for withdrawal of water, the  State should get permission of the 
IWAI which causes delay and undermines the authorit y of the State in local 
development.  Apparently, for the purpose of naviga tion under the IWAI Act, 1985, the 
listed rivers can also be linked by waterways leadi ng to inter-basin transfer of water, 
notwithstanding the fact that water is a State Subject. 
27.3. Problems/Bottle necks faced in this regard: 
 Once any waterway is declared as National Waterway  the jurisdiction with 
respect to regulations and development of Shipping and navigation and matters 
incidental thereto rest with IWAI. So, for every de velopmental activity the clearance 
from IWAI, Delhi would be required.  
27.4     How to resolve the bottlenecks: 
 The Government of Kerala recommends for appropriat e legal and institutional 
framework for the management of National Waterways like a high level National 
Waterways Management Council at State level with re presentatives of State for 
approval of planning, development and regulation wi thin the jurisdiction of the State.  
Secondly, critical technical/development decisions shall be done only after undertaking 
scientific and transparent studies as applicable.  Thirdly, there shall be institutionalized 
arrangements for stakeholder consultation in development of waterways and finally, we 
recommend delegation of powers to State level IWAI offices for clearances.  
27.5 The Co-ordination mechanism existing between t he State and IWAI: 
 The Government of Kerala constituted a coordinatio n committee headed by 
District Collectors concerned and Director, IWAI as  convener to look in to the issues 
related to disposal of dredged materials and remova l/dismantling of fishing net/stakes 
and to ensure speedy implementation.  In the operat ional phase, there exist 
arrangements of inter-departmental coordination on a need based manner at the State 
and District levels chaired by the Minister, Secret aries and Collectors concerned.  The 
good offices of State are also available for IWAI f or trouble shooting, problem solving 
and also for better utilization of National Waterways. 
27.6 Additional information in this regard: 
 Though the inland Waterways have obvious advantage s, the Government of 
Kerala opposed the inclusion of the 10 rivers of Ke rala in the National Waterways Bill-
2015 specifically due to the fact that the advantag es outweigh the disadvantages.  
However, the Government of Kerala proposed the stre tches of NW -3 from 
Kottappuram to Neeleswaram in Kasaragod and Kollam to Kovalam and 4 feeder 
canals viz., (i) Alappuzha-Changanacherry Canal; (ii) Alappuzha -Kottayam Canal; (iii) 
Kottayam-Vaikom Canal; and (iv) Athirampuzha Canal may be included in the Bill for 
declaration as National Waterways. 
28. The Committee received response on the National  Waterways Bill, 2015 from 7 
States, out of the 24 States requested to give thei r opinion on the Bill. Since the time 
given to the Committee to submit the Report to Parl iament was upto 20 
th  August, 2015 
only, it decided to obtain the opinions of the conc erned State Governments which the 
IWAI had already procured from them as part of cons ultations, before the Bill was 
introduced in the Parliament. The IWAI gave the Com mittee responses from 19 States 
out of 24. If we see the responses of the State Governments given to the Committee and 
the IWAI, it is evident that there is consensus among almost 18 States on this Bill.  

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
29. The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by the Government through 
the National Waterways Bill, 2015. The Committee ob serves that declaring 101 
new National Waterways through a single legislation  would enable the 
Government to reduce the cumbersome and time taking  procedure of declaring 
waterways through individual legislations and the follow up actions thereon which 
normally was said to take around 8-10 years. The Co mmittee hopes that this 
enabling legislation would speed up the development  of waterways as the previous 
projects of the five National Waterways were laggin g far behind since they were 
enacted through separate legislations for each National Waterway. 
30. The Committee is, however, constrained to  note  that many of the proposed 
National Waterways, as contained in the Schedule of  the Bill, do not have enough 
water level throughout the year as they are rainfed  rivers. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that during the time of techn o-economic feasibility study, 
this aspect should be taken care of. 
31. The Committee has observed that developmental w orks are not satisfactory 
on the already declared NW-4 and NW-5 as pointed ou t by the Committee in its 
189 th  Report on ‘Development of National Waterways-Poten tial and Challenges’. 
The major impediment in this regard, the Committee understands, was lack of 
financial sanctions for the projects at the initial stages. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that sufficient financial allocations sh ould be made at appropriate 
times for the projects proposed in the Bill, to be made operational as planned by 
the Government. 
32. The Committee understands that the 101 waterway s will be dealt with on a 
case-to-case basis under the parameters of the Environment Protection Act, 1986, 
the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, the Indian Fores t Act, 2006 and the Coastal 
Regulation Zone Notification. As such, getting the required clearances for these 
numbers of Waterways would not be so easy. The Comm ittee, therefore, 
recommends that IWAI may ensure that they get the n ecessary clearances from 
the concerned Ministries on time for these National Waterways as required under 
the provisions of the above Acts. For this purpose,  a special cell may be created 
with the consent of the heads of the concerned Mini stries so that the probable 
bottlenecks at every stage may be cleared without a ny hindrances. The 
Committee also recommends that the Government shoul d take the necessary 
clearances required under the Acts for both the dev elopment and 
operationalization of each waterway, so that the en d users should not face any 
problem in optimum utilization of the waterways. 
33. The Committee was informed by IWAI that the Lea st Available Depth 
(LAD) for a waterway to be made operational in a pr ofitable way must be 2 
meters. The Committee recommends that those waterwa ys which are having a 
naturally available depth of 2 meters and above may  be given top priority for 
starting the various phases of development of these National Waterways. 
34. The Committee recommends that wherever possible , barrages and 
dredging in National Waterways may be undertaken on ly in consultation with the 
concerned State Governments. 
35. The Committee notes that many States have raise d their concerns over 
their natural right for use of river water for vari ous purposes like irrigation, 

drinking, power generation, etc., even after a rive r is declared as a National 
Waterway. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that water is a State subject 
and recommends that the Government must make suitab le provision in the Bill to 
ensure that the States continue to use the water ri ghts as provided in the 
Constitution. 
36. The Committee is of the opinion that there is a  need to make an estimation 
about the quantum of water required on a week/ ten day basis throughout the year 
so that minimum depth of water required in the rive r stretches/canals for 
navigation can be maintained in order to ensure the  availability of water to meet 
the demand for shipping, navigation, drinking, irrigation, etc.  
37. It has been brought to the notice of the Commit tee by some of the State 
Governments that most of the Southern rivers are ra infed ones and that the water 
remains in these rivers only for six months from Ma y to October every year. In 
this context, the Committee recommends that the lat est rain water harvesting 
technology must be adopted to make the rainfed/pere nnial rivers navigable 
throughout the year. The Committee, in this regard,  also stresses for developing 
water reservoirs for conservation of rain water to feed such rivers. 
38. A few State Governments have observed that the IWAI headquartered at 
Delhi is the nodal agency which administers the Nat ional Waterways Acts. They 
have to contact them in Delhi for even smaller matt ers pertaining to the National 
Waterways. At the State level, there is no co-ordin ating or monitoring mechanism 
existing to oversee the National Waterways. The Com mittee, therefore, 
recommends that the creation of a State level Water  Management 
Council/Committee with representatives from the Sta te Governments should be 
considered for overseeing the development of Nation al Waterways and to resolve 
the issues at State level only. Such decentralizati on would, no doubt, speed up the 
process of waterways development. The Committee als o desires that 
institutionalized agencies may be created/ identifi ed for consultation with 
stakeholders in the development of waterways. 
39. The Committee recommends that concerns/views of  the State Governments 
of Bihar, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh on issues su ch as dredging, water 
sharing, environment clearances, availability of eq uipments, technical know-how 
etc. should be taken care of while finalizing the B ill.  The suggestions of Gujarat 
on the Kalpasar Project and of Assam on the nine ri vers concerning the State 
should also be adequately addressed. The concerns raised by Kerala on issues such 
as existing structures and drinking water sources; pollution and salinity 
ingression; ecology; water availability etc. should  also be given proper 
consideration and necessary steps should be taken t o address those concerns, 
before finalizing the Bill. 
40. The Committee recommends that along with the de claration of National 
Waterways, a proper silt management policy should b e framed by the Central 
Government with the aim of preserving the river flow with its natural silt carrying 
capacity.  
41. The Committee recommends that the suggestions a nd concerns put 
forward by all the State Governments may be conside red appropriately. The right 
of the State Governments to develop additional irri gation projects on these 

National Waterways should be ensured after the decl aration of National 
Waterways on these river routes. 
42. The Committee recommends that technical feasibi lity in consultation with 
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
may first be established before preparing Detailed Project Reports/undertake any 
works in any river/river stretch. The Committee als o recommends that the 
Central legislation needs to be in consonance with the programme of Interlinking 
of Rivers in the country.   
43. The Committee also notes from the replies furni shed by the State 
Governments, especially by the Government of Kerala  that the low lying bridges 
and structures across many of these identified wate rways in the States may cause 
hindrance to providing the required vertical cleara nces for operation of the 
vessels. The Committee recommends that the IWAI mus t explore the 
practicability and feasibility of removing the supe r structures and should take a 
clear-cut decision as to who would bear the cost of  reconstruction of these 
overhead projections across the waterways. 
44. The Committee recommends that the following riv ers/canals which have 
great potential for being considered to be develope d as National Waterways, as 
suggested by the State Governments, may be included in the Bill: 
i)  The estuarine creeks and rivulets in the Sundarbans  in parts of 
North and South 24 Parganas comprising rivers in th e estuarine 
delta like Bidya, Matla, Thakurran, Raimangal, Sapt amukhi, 
Muriganga, Gomar, Hogal, Chhoto Kalergachi, Sahebkh ali, 
Karbhenga, Katakhali, and Kalandi  from  West Bengal; 
ii)  Ponniyar from Sathanur Dam to confluence with Bay o f Bengal at 
Cuddalore of Tamil Nadu; 
iii)  (a) Alappuzha-Changanassery Canal (28 km); (b) Alap puzha- 
Kottayam Canal (23km); (c) Kottayam-Vaikom Canal (4 2 km); and 
(d) Athirampuzha Canal (15 km) from Kerala; 
iv)  Extension of Northern limit of  West Coast Canal up to Kasaragod 
instead of Kozhikode and Southern limit up to Kolac hal (Tamil 
Nadu) instead of Kovalam in the proposed National W aterway-104 
(existing waterway NW-3) from Kerala; and 
v)  (a) Vasai Creek-Creek entrance to Kalian via Kashel i-Kasheli to 
Mumbai (Thane creek)-Mumbai to Dharamatar covering an 
approx. distance of 140km; (b) Rajpuri creek-creek entrance to 
Mandad via Vashi covering an approx. distance of 28  km; and (c) 
Dabhol Creek/Vasishti river- from entrance till Kar khavane 
covering approx. distance of 42 km, all from Maharashtra. 
45. The Committee understands that rivers from Megh alaya are not there in 
the list of National Waterways because of gradient issues and other concerns. The 
Committee, however, recommends that feasibility of inclusion of five rivers as 
National Waterways as suggested by the Government o f Meghalaya may also 
examined. 
46. The Committee recommends that in order to achie ve the maximum 
utilization of the waterways, proper road connectiv ity may be provided to the 

river terminals along the waterways. Similarly, rai l connectivity at possible 
terminals may also be worked out during the economi c feasibility survey of these 
National Waterways. 
47. The Committee recommends that movement of conta iner cargo from ports 
should be encouraged through the IWT mode which wou ld enable cheaper cargo 
movement as well as decongestion of the roads. IWAI  should conduct continuous 
dialogue with major PSUs and business entities so t hat they may get regular cargo 
in these National Waterways round the year. Since c argo movement on both the 
sides (to and fro) is a necessity for the success o f the waterways, multi cargo 
transportation must be adopted in various stretches. 
48. The Committee hopes that the proposed Bill woul d open up significant 
private sector opportunities in the areas of dredgi ng, barge construction, barge 
operation, barge repair facilities, terminal constr uction, terminal operation, 
storage facilities, navigation, consultancy etc. wh ich can positively contribute to 
economic growth of the country. 
49. The Committee feels that the development of 101  additional National 
Waterways would give a boost to the tourism sector in the country. Most of the 
States will benefit from this, if ample facilities are provided for tourists especially 
pilgrim tourists, as many of the religious places are connected with rivers. 
50. The Committee observes that current organizatio nal set up and offices of 
the IWAI are not sufficient enough to undertake the  tasks related to 101 new 
waterways. The Committee, therefore, recommends tha t IWAI needs to be 
strengthened with extra manpower and expertise in t he field along with more 
regional offices for better monitoring of its works  in different States which are far 
off from Delhi. 
51. The Committee recommends that the Bill be passe d with formal 
amendments. However, the Committee hopes that while  implementing the 
provisions of the Bill, the recommendations made by  the Committee in the 
foregoing paragraphs will be given due weightage so  that the purpose of 
declaration of the proposed Waterways is not underm ined at all. The Committee 
also recommends that whenever necessary, due consul tations  with and 
concurrence of the State Governments and Ministries  of Environment, Forests & 
Climate; and Water Resources, River Development and  Ganga Rejuvenation be 
made while preparing TEF and DPR and other developm ental plans and for 
related issues for the development of the proposed National Waterways. 
52. Another significant aspect which is conspicuous  by its absence in this Bill is 
the Rule making and laying provisions under this Bi ll. The Committee is at a loss 
to see that a Bill of such a magnitude and importan ce which involves State 
Governments also is silent in this respect. The Com mittee, therefore, recommends 
that provisions of making subordinate legislations and laying therefore before 
both the Houses of Parliament be included in this B ill before it is taken up for 
consideration/passing. 
53. To sum up, the Committee feels that the propose d Bill is merely an 
enabling legislation that seeks to empower the Central Government to develop our 
rivers for water transport which is safer, most eco nomical and environment-
friendly as compared to the existing modes; it is t he need of the hour. But this is 
Constitutionally possible only when our rivers soug ht to be developed for this 

purpose are declared as National Waterways with the  approval of Parliament. As 
the processes of rivers development can be taken up only thereafter, the passage of 
this Bill, therefore, brooks no delay. There appear s to be a general consensus 
among the concerned Union Ministries and Department s as also amongst most of 
the States, except a few concerns/ reservations exp ressed by some States for which 
the Committee has recommended in foregoing paragrap hs to the Central 
Government to take States on board at every stage b y trying to address their 
concerns through mutual consultations. The scheme o f division of powers in 
respect of rivers between three Lists in our Consti tution is very thin requiring, 
therefore, a very cautious and careful approach in this matter. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Bill to be passed with th e amendments wherever 
necessary in the light of its observations/recommendations made in this Report. 
*****  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LIST OF REPORTS OF  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
REPORTS PRESENTED TO THE PARLIAMENT (RAJYA SABHA/LOK SABHA)  
 
REPORT  
NO. 
TITLE OF THE REPORT DATE OF 
ADOPTION 
DATE OF 
PRESENTATION  
1993-94 (5 Reports) 
 
 
1st  Demands for Grants (1993 -94) of Department of 
Tourism 
29.04.1993  30.04.1993  
2nd  Govt. Policy on Private Air Taxi Operation and 
Matters connected therewith 
21.07.1993  17.08.1993  
3rd  Inland Waterways Authority of India (Amendment), 
Bill, 1992 
08.0 9.1993  08.12.1993 (RS)  
09.12.1993 (LS) 
4th  Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings and 
Repeal) Bill, 1992 (with evidence)  
20.10.1993  08.12.1993 (RS)  
09.12.1993 (LS) 
5th  The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993  
(with evidence)  
14.02.1994  16.03.1994  
1994-95 (8 Reports)  
 
6th  The Anti -Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993  29.03.1994  19.04.1994  
7th  The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety 
of Civil Aviation (Amendment) Bill, 1993 
29.03.1994  19.04.1994  
8th  Demands for Grants (1994 -95) of Department o f 
Tourism 
05.04.1994  21.04.1994  
9th  Demands for Grants (1994 -95) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 
12.04.1994  22.04.1994  
10 th  Demands for Grants (1994 -95) of Ministry of 
Surface Transport 
19.4.1994  25.4.1994  
11 th  Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines  28.0 6.1994  24.08.1994  
12 th  Development of Tourism and Transport in North 
East 
29.12.1994  20.03.1995  
13 th  National Highway System  21.02.1995  25.04.1995  
1995-96 (8 Reports)  
 
14 th  Demands for Grants (1995 -96) of Department of 
Tourism 
18.04.1995  26.04.1995  
15 th  Demands for Grants (1995 -96) of Department of 
Civil Aviation 
18.04.1995  26.04.1995  
16 th  Demands for Grants (1995 -96) of Ministry of 
Surface Transport 
04.05.1995  10.05.1995  
17 th  National Highways (Amendment) Bill, 1995  
(with evidence)  
24.05.1995  26.05 .1995  
18 th  Inland Waterways  22.08.1995  25.08.1995  
19 th  Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) 
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995  
(with evidence) 
 
11.10.1995  04.12.1995  
*20 th  Privatisation Policy in regard to Major Ports  04.01.1996  27.02.1996 ( LS)  
28.02.1996 (RS) 
21 st  Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment) Bill, 1995  07.02.1996  28.02.1996 (RS)  

29.02.1996 (LS)  
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th  January 1996.  
1996-97 (8 Reports)  
 
22 nd  Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields  29.02.1996  07.03.1 996  
23 rd  Demands for Grants (1996 -97) of Department of 
Tourism  
21.08.1996  27.08.1996  
24 th  Demands for Grants (1996 -97) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 
29.08.1996  04.09.1996 (RS)  
06.09.1996 (LS) 
25 th  Demands for Grants (1996 -97) of Ministry of Surface 
Transport 
04.09.1996  09.09.1996  
26 th  Demands for Grants (1997 -98) Department of 
Tourism  
08.05.1997  15.05.1997  
27 th   Demands for Grants (1997 -98) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation  
08.05.1997  15.05.1997  
 
28 th   Demands for Grants (1997 -98) of Ministry of Surfac e 
Transport 
08.05.1997  15.05.1997  
29 th   Ship -building and Ship -repair Industry in India  08.07.1997  24.07.1997  
1997-98 (1 Report)  
 
30 th   Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance Air  11.08.1997  14.08.1997  
1998-99 (9 Reports)  
 
31 st   Demands for Grants  (1998 -99) of Department of 
Tourism  
29.06.1998  03.07.1998(RS)  
06.07.1998(LS) 
32 nd   Demands for Grants (1998 -99) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation  
01.07.1998  06.07.1998  
33 rd   Demands for Grants (1998 -99) of Ministry of Surface 
Transport  
01.07.1998  06.07.19 98  
34 th   Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment) Bill, 1998  
(with evidence)  
02.12.1998  04.12.1998  
35 th   Functioning of Air India  01.02.1999  04.03.1999(LS)  
08.03.1999(RS) 
36 th   Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998  
(with evidence)  
26.02.1999  04.03.1999 (LS)  
08.03.1999(RS) 
37 th   Demands for Grants (1999 -2000) of Ministry of 
Tourism  
07.04.1999  19.04.1999(RS)  
22.04.1999(LS) 
38 th   Demands for Grants (1999 -2000) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation  
07.04.1999  19.04.1999(RS)  
22.04.1999(LS) 
39 th   Demands for Gran ts (1999 -2000) of Ministry of 
Surface Transport  
08.04.1999  19.04.1999(RS)  
22.4.1999 (LS) 
1999-2000 (7 Reports)  
 
40 th   Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at the Airport 
in the country 
01.03.2000  07.03.2000(RS)  
08.03.2000(LS) 
41 st   Demands for Grants (2000 -2001) of Ministry of 
Tourism  
03.04.2000  19.04.2000  
 
42 nd   Demands for Grants (2000 -2001) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation  
03.04.2000  19.04.2000  
 
43 rd   Demands for Grants (2000 -2001) of the Ministry of 
Surface Transport  
13.04.2000  19.04.2000  
 
44 th   Disinvestment of Air India  17.8.2000  22.8.2000  
45 th  Functioning and Revival of Central Inland Water 6.12.2000  13.12.2000(LS)  

Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)  15.12.2000(RS)  
46 th   Chartering and Management of flights for Haj 
Pilgrims 
6.12.2000  14.12.2 000(LS)  
15.12.2000(RS) 
2001 (8 Reports) 
 
47 th   Functioning of the Department of Lighthouses and 
Lightships  
14.3.2001  21.3.2001(LS)  
23.3.2001 (RS) 
48 th   Demands for Grants (2001 -2002) of the Department 
of Tourism 
11.4.2001  26.4.2001  
49 th   Demands for G rants (2001 -2002) of Department of 
Culture 
11.4.2001  26.4.2001  
50 th   Demands for Grants (2001 -2002) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 
11.4.2001  26.4.2001  
51 st   Demands for Grants (2001 -2002) of the Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways 
11.4.2001  26.4.2001 (R S)  
27.4.2001 (LS) 
52 nd   Demands for Grants (2001 -2002) of the Ministry of 
Shipping 
11.4.2001  26.4.2001 (RS)  
27.4.2001 (LS) 
53 rd  The Aircraft (Exemption From Taxes and Duties on 
Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000 (with evidence)  
29.10.2001  27.11.2001(RS)  
28.11.2001(LS) 
54 th   Functioning of Border Roads Organisation  28.11.2001  12.12.2001  
2002 (7 Reports) 
 
55 th   Demands for Grants (2002 -2003) of the Department 
of Tourism 
16.4.2002  23.4.2002(LS)  
24.4.2002(RS) 
56 th   Demands for Grants (2002 -2003) of Departmen t of 
Culture 
16.4.2002  23.4.2002(LS)  
24.4.2002(RS) 
57 th   Demands for Grants (2002 -2003) of the Ministry of 
Shipping 
16.4.2002  23.4.2002(LS)  
24.4.2002(RS) 
58 th   Demands for Grants (2002 -2003) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 
18.4.2002  23.4.2002(LS)  
24.4.2002(RS) 
59 th   Demands for Grants (2002 -2003) of the Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways 
18.4.2002  23.4.2002(LS)  
24.4.2002(RS) 
60 th   Development of Tourism in the Country  6.8.2002  21.11.2002  
61 st   The Airports Authority of India  (Amendment) Bill, 
2000 (with evidence)  
11.11.2002  21.11.2002  
2003 (12 Reports) 
 
62 nd   The Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2001  
(with evidence)  
03.2.2003  19.2.2003  
63 rd   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Fifty-eighth Report on Demands for  
Grants 2002-2003 of Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
10.1.2003  25.2.2003  
64 th   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Fifty-seventh Report on Demands for 
Grants 2002-2003 of Ministry of Shipping. 
20.2.2003  25.2.2003  
65 th   Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport  5.3.2003  10.3.2003  
66 th   Demands for Grants (2003 -2004) of the Department 
of Tourism 
8.4.2003  10.4.2003  
67 th   Demands for Grants (2003 -2004) of the Ministry o f 
Road Transport & Highways 
8.4.2003  10.4.2003  
68 th   Demands for Grants (2003 -2004) of Department of 23.4.2003  25.4.2003  

Culture  
69 th   Demands for Grants (2003 -2004) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 
23.4.2003  25.4.2003  
70 th   Demands for Grants (2003 -2004) of the Ministry of 
Shipping 
23.4.2003  25.4.2003  
*71 st   Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial (Amendment) 
Bill, 2003 (with evidence) 
16.10.2003  11.11.2003  
 
72 nd   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Sixtieth Report on Development of 
Tourism in the country. 
29.10.2003  03.12.2003  
73 rd   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Sixty-sixth Report on Demands for 
Grants (2003-2004) (Demand No. 91) of Department 
of Tourism  
29.10.2003  03.12.2003  
2004 (4 Reports) 
 
74 th   Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its 67th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2003-04) of Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
09.01.04  03.02.2004  
75 th   Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its 70th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2003-04) of Ministry of Shipping 
 
09.01.04  03.02.2004  
76 th   Action taken by the Go vernment on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its 68th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2003-04) of Department of Culture 
22.01.04  03.02.2004  
77 th   Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its 69th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2003-04) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
22.01.04  03.02.2004  
2004-2005 ( 12 Reports)  
78 th   Demands for Grants (2004 -2005) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 
14.08.2004  18.08.2004  
 
79 th   Demands for Grants (2004 -2005) of Ministry of 
Tourism 
23.08.2004  26.08.2004  
80 th   Demands for Grants (2004 -2005) of Ministry of 
Culture 
23.08.2004  26.08.2004  
81 st   Demands for Grants (2004 -2005) of Ministry of 
Shipping 
25.08.2004  26.08.2004  
82 nd   Demands for Grants (2004 -2005) of Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways 
25.08.2004  26.08.2004  
83 rd   Functioning of the Commission of Railway Safety  17.11.2004  6.12.2004(RS)  
3.12.2004(LS) 
84 th   Demands for Grants (2005 -2006) of Department of 
Road Transport & Highways 
15.04.2005  29.04.2005  
 
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 
th  November 2003. 

  
85 th   Demands for Grants (2005 -2006) of Ministry of 
Culture 
15.04.2005  29.04.2005  
86 th   Demands for Grants (2005 -2006) of Department of 
Shipping 
21.04.2005  
 
29.04.2005  
87 th   Demands  for Grants (2005 -2006) of Ministry of 
Tourism 
21.04.2005  29.04.2005  
88 th   Demands for Grants (2005 -2006) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 
27.04.2005  
 
29.04.2005  
89 th   The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004 
(with evidence)  
06.06.2005  
 
27.07.2005  
2005-2006  (18 Report) 
 
90 th  Development of Airport Sector with Special 
Emphasis on New Modern Airports 
17.08.2005  23.08.2005  
91 st   Functioning on Archaeological Survey of India  19.9.2005  25.11.2005  
92 nd   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Eighty-fourth Report on Demands for 
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Road Transport 
and Highways 
22.2.2006  
 
27.2.2006  
93 rd  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Eighty-fifth Report on Demands for  
Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Culture 
22.2.2006  27.2.2006  
94 th  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Eighty-sixth Report on Demands for  
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Shipping 
22.2.2006  27.2.2006  
95 th  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Eighty-seventh Report on Demands 
for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Tourism 
22.2.2 006  27.2.2006  
96 th  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Eighty-eighth Report on Demands for 
Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
22.2.2006  27.2.2006  
97 th  
 
Action Taken by the Gove rnment on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Ninetieth Report on the 
‘Development of Airport Sector with special 
emphasis on new modern airports’ 
22.2.2006  27.2.2006  
98 th  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Eighty-third Report on the 
‘Functioning of the Commission of Railway Safety’ 
17.3.2006  21.3.2006  
99 th  The Admiralty Bill, 2005  17.3.2006  21.3.2006  
100 th  The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005  17.3.2006  21.3.2006  
101 st  The Carriage By Road Bill, 2005  17.3.2006  21.3.2006  
102 nd  
 
Demands for Grants (2006 -07) of the Department of 
Road Transport and Highways 
19.5.2006  22.5.2006  
103 rd  
 
Demands for Grants (2006 -07) of the Department of 
Culture 
19.5.2006  22.5 .2006  
104 th  Demands for Grants (2006 -07) of the Department of 19.5.2006  22.5.2006  

 Tourism  
105 th  
 
Demands for Grants (2006 -07) of the Department of 
Shipping 
19.5.2006  22.5.2006  
106 th  
 
Demands for Grants (2006 -07) of the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation 
19.5.2 006  22.5.2006  
107 th  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Ninety-first Report on ‘Functionin g 
of the Archaeological Survey of India 
19.5.2006  22.5.2006  
2006-07 (13 reports) 
108 th   Functioni ng and Performance of India Tourism 
Development Corporation Limited (ITDC). 
12.12.2006  15.12.2006  
109 th   The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006  9.3.2007  13.3.2007  
110 th   The Central Road Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2006  19.3.2007  20.3.2007  
111 th   Action Taken b y the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its One Hundred and Second Report on 
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of 
Road Transport and Highways. 
16.4.2007  14.5.2007  
112 th   Action Taken by the Government on  the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its One Hundred and Third Report on 
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of 
Culture. 
16.4.2007  14.5.2007  
113 th   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its One Hundred and Fourth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of 
Tourism 
16.4.2007  14.5.2007  
114 th   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its One Hundred and Fifth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of 
Shipping 
16.4.2007  14.5.2007  
115 th   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its One Hundred and Sixth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. 
16.4.2007  14.5.2007  
116 th   Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation 
9.5.2007  14.5.2007  
117 th   Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Department of 
Shipping 
 
9.5.2007  14.5.2007  
118 th   Demands for G rants (2007 -08) of the Department of 
Road Transport and Highways 
9.5.2007  14.5.2007  
119 th   Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of 
Tourism 
9.5.2007  14.5.2007  
120 th   Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of 
Culture 
9.5.2007  14.5.2007  
 
 
 
2007-08 (19 reports) 
121 st   The National Waterway (Talcher -Dhamra Stretch of 18.7.2007  16.8.2007  

Rivers Geonkhali -Charbatia Stretch of East Coast 
Canal, Charbatia-Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and 
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006. 
122 nd   The National Wate rway (Kakinada -Pondicherry 
Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly Tank, 
Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River 
Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of 
River Krishna) Bill, 2006. 
18.7.2007  16.8.2007  
123 rd   The Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment) 
Bill, 2007 
 
31.08.2007  05.09.2007  
124 th  The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007  
presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 
17.10.2007  
25.09.2007  17.10.2007 
(Presented to Chairman) 
20.11.2007 
(Presented to House) 
 
125 th   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred and 
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-
08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
02.11.2007  20.11.2007  
126 th  h  The Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee 
contained in its One Hundred Nineteenth Report 
on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the 
Ministry of Tourism 
02.11.2007  20.11.2007  
127 th   Action taken by the government on the 
recommendations/observations of the committee 
contained in its one hundred and eighteenth 
report on demands for grants (2007-08) of the 
department of road transport and highways 
18 Jan 2008 04 Mar 2008 
128 th   Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee 
contained in its one hundred and seventeenth 
report on demands for grants (2007-08) of 
Department of Shipping 
18 Jan 2008 04 Mar 2008 
129 th   Action taken by the government on the 
recommendations/observations of the committee 
contained in its one hundred and twentieth report 
on demands for grants (2007-08) of ministry of 
culture  
18 Jan 2008 04 Mar 2008 
130 th   The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga 
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007 31 Jan 2008 04 Mar 2008 
131st  
 
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports 
and matters related thereto 04 Mar 2008 05 Mar 2008 
132 nd  The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007 15 th  April, 
2008 17 th  April, 2008 
133 rd   The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of 
India Bill, 2007 
15 
th  April, 
2008 17 th  April, 2008 
134 th   Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the 15 th  April, 17 th  April, 2008 

Department of Shipping 2008 
135 th   Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the 
Department of Road Transport and Highways 
24 
th  April, 
2008 28 th  April, 2008 
136 th  Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of 
Tourism 
24
th  April, 
2008 28 th  April, 2008 
13 7th  Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of 
Culture 
24 
th  April, 
2008 28 th  April, 2008 
138 th  Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation 
24 
th  April, 
2008 28 th  April, 2008 
139 th  The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007 24 th  April, 
2008 28 th  April, 2008 
2008-09 (10 reports) 
140 th   Promotion of tourism in Jammu & Kashmir 
11 th  August, 
2008 
20th August, 2008 
(presented to Hon’ble 
Chairman and Hon’ble 
Speaker) 
Presented to Parliament 
on 23.10.08 
141 st   Modernization of Airports 11 th  August, 
2008 
20th August, 2008 
(presented to Hon’ble 
Chairman and Hon’ble 
Speaker) 
Presented to Parliament 
on 23.10.08 
142 nd  Functioning of Private Airports and the related 
issues 
20 
th  October, 
2008 23 rd  October, 2008 
143 rd  Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommondation/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for 
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of 
Shipping 
18 
th  
December, 
2008 
19 th  December, 2008 
144 th   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for 
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of 
Road, Transport and Highways 
18 
th  
December, 
2008 
19 
th  December, 2008 
14 5th  Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
and Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for 
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of 
Tourism 
18 
th  
December, 
2008 
 
19 
th  December, 2008 
146 th   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
and Thirty Seventh Report on Demands for 
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Culture 
18 
th  
December, 
2008 
19 
th  December, 2008 
147 th   Action Taken by the Government on the 18 th  19 th  December, 2008 

Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for 
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 
December, 
2008 
148 th  The National Highways Authority of India 
(Amendment) Bill, 2008 
 
13 February, 
2009 17 February, 2009 
149th Development of Tourism Infrastructure and 
Amenities For the Commonwealth Games 2010 
 
19 February, 
2009 24 February, 2009 
 2009-10 (11 Reports)    
150 th  The National Commission for Heritage Sites 
Bill, 2009 
13 
th  
November, 
2009 
23 
rd  November, 2009 
151 st   
Merger Of Indian Airlines And Air India: Its 
Impact On The Civil Aviation Sector 
 
 
8th  January, 
2010 
21 st  January, 2010 
(presented to Hon’ble 
Chairman and Hon’ble 
Speaker) 
Presented to Parliament 
on 3
rd  March, 2010 
152 nd   Action Taken By The Government On The 
Recommendations/ Observations Of The 
Committee Contained In Its One Hundred And 
Fortieth Report On Promotion Of Tourism In 
Jammu And Kashmir 
9
th  February, 
2010 
3rd  March, 2010 
153 rd   Action Taken By The Government On The 
Recommendations/ Observations Of The 
Committee Contained In Its One Hundred And 
Forty Ninth Report On Development Of 
Tourism Infrastructure And Amenities For The 
Commonwealth Games 2010 
9
th  February, 
2010 
3rd  March, 2010 
154 th   Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of Ministry of 
Tourism 07 Apr 2010 20 Apr 2010 
155 th   Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of Ministry 
Of Road Transport And Highways 07 Apr 2010 20 Apr 2010 
156 th   Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry Of 
Shipping 20 Apr 2010 22 Apr 2010 
157 th   Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of 
Culture 20 Apr 2010 22 Apr 2010 
158 th   Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation 20 Apr 2010 22 Apr 2010 
159 th   Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred and 
Thirty First Report on Closure of Bangalore & 
Hyderabad Airports; One Hundred and Forty 
First Report on Modernisation of Airports; and 
One Hundred and Forty Second Report  
on Functioning of Private Airports 
05 May 2010 06 May 2010 

160 th   
The National Road Safety and Traffic 
Management Board Bill, 2010 14 July  2010 
28 July 2010 (Rajya 
Sabha) 
27 July 2010 (Lok 
Sabha) 
 2010-11   
161 st   The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 2010 8 th  October 
2010 
18 th  October, 2010 
(presented to Hon’ble 
Chairman and Hon’ble 
Speaker) 
Presented to the Houses 
of the Parliament 
1.03.2011 
162 Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred Fifty 
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-
11) of the Ministry of Tourism 
20 Dec 2010 04 Mar 2011 
163 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One hundred Fifty 
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-
2011) of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways 
20 Dec 2010 04 Mar 2011 
164 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hunded Fifty 
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-
2011) of the Ministry of Shipping 
20 Dec 2010 04 Mar 2011 
165 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred Fifty 
Seventh Report on Demands (For Grants (2010-
2011)Ministry of Culture 
20 
th   Dec 
2010 04 th   Mar 2011 
166 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred Fifty 
Eight Report on Demands for Grants (2010-
2011) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
20 
th   Dec 
2010 04 th   Mar 2011 
167 th   Functioning of National Museum 
  
25 
th   Jan. 
2011 
10 th   March, 2011 (R.S.) 
11 th  March, 2011 (L.S.)  
168 th  Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
– Issues and Challenges 
13 th  Apr 2011 04.05.2011 (presented to 
Hon’ble Chairman and 
Hon’ble Speaker) 
Presented to the House of 
the Parliament on 
11.08.2011 
 
169 th   Helicopter operations in India 13 th   Apr 2011  04.05.2011 (presented to 
Hon’ble Chairman and 

Hon’ble Speaker) 
Presented to the House of 
the Parliament on 
11.08.2011  
 
170 th   Modernization of Major Port 27 th  May, 
2011 11 th  August, 2011 
171 st  
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala 
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and National 
School of Drama 
11 
th   Aug 
2011 17 th   Aug 2011 
172 nd   Development of Tourism in North-Eastern 
Region 
11 
th   Aug 
2011 17 th   Aug 2011 
2011-12 
173 rd   The National Highways Authority of India 
(Amendment) Bill, 2011 
13 
th  March, 
2012 15 th  March, 2012 
174 th   Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation 
26 
th  April, 
2012 
27 th  April, 2012 
175. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of 
Culture 
03 May 
2012 07 May 2012 
176. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of 
Tourism 
03 May 
2012 07 May 2012 
177.                                                                                                        Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of 
Shipping 
03 May 
2012 07 May 2012 
178 Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways 
03 May 
2012 07 May 2012 
179 Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty 
Seventh Report on 'Functioning of National 
Museum' 
17 May 
2012 21 May 2012 
180 Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred And 
Seventy Second report on Development of 
Tourism in North-Eastern Region 
17 May 
2012 21 May 2012 
 2012-13   
181 Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations of the 
Committee contained in its  One Hundred Sixty-
eighth Report on Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation (DGCA) -Issues and Challenges” 
18.10.2012 04.12.2012 
182 Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/ observations of the 
Committee contained in its  One Hundred Sixty-
ninth Report on Helicopter Operations in India” 
18.10.2012 04.12.2012 
183 Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for 
05.11. 2012 04.12.2012 

Grants of Ministry of Shipping 2012-13) 
184 Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for 
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13) 
05.11. 2012 04.12.2012 
185 Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for 
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13) 
18.10.2012 04.12.2012 
186 Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
Seventy-fifth Report on the Demands for Grants 
of Ministry of Culture (2012-13) 
05.11. 2012 04.12.2012 
187 Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands for 
Grants of Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways (2012-13) 
18.10.2012 04.12.2012 
188 
Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety 03.01.2 013 
06.02.2013 (presented to 
Hon’ble Chairman) 
Presented to the Parliament 
on 27.02.2013  
189 Development of National Waterways- Potential 
and Challenges 
03.01.2013 06.02.2013 (presented to 
Hon’ble Chairman) 
Presented to the Parliament 
27.02.2013 
 
190 Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and 
Sikkim 
03.01.2013 06.02.2013 (presented to 
Hon’ble Chairman) 
Presented to the Parliament 
27.02.2013  
191 Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation 
02 May 
2013 03 May 2013 
192 Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of 
Culture 
02 May 
2013 03 May 2013 
193 Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways  
02 May 
2013 03 May 2013 
194 Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of 
Shipping 
02 May 
2013 03 May 2013 
195 Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of 
Tourism 
02 May 
2013 03 May 2013 
196 
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga 
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013 
 
20 May, 
2013 
26 
 June, 2013 (presented to 
Hon’ble Chairman) 
Presented to the Parliament 
7
th  August, 2013 
197 The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 
2013 
17 June, 
2013 
26 
th  June, 2013 (presented 
to Hon’ble Chairman) 

 Presented to the Parliament 
7
th  August, 2013 
198 Management of road transport in National 
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges  
23 Aug 
2013 27 Aug 2013 
199 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred and 
Eighty Ninth  Report on the Development of 
National Waterways-Potentials and Challenges 
 
23 Aug 
2013 27 Aug 2013 
200 
Development of Tourism, National Highways 
and Water Transport in Kerala and Cochin 
Shipyard Limited 
23 Aug 
2013 27 Aug 2013 
 2013-14   
201 
Functioning of National Akademis and other 
Cultural Institutions : Issues and Challenges 
 
01 Oct 2013 
17 Oct 2013 (presented to 
Hon’ble Chairman) 
Presented to the Parliament 
17
th  December,  2013 
202 “The Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) 
Bill, 2013 31 Oct 2013 
20 
th  November, 2013 
(presented to Hon’ble 
Chairman) 
Presented to the Parliament 
17
th  December,  2013 
203 Privatization of Services at Airports 31 Oct 20 13 
20 th  November, 2013 
(presented to Hon’ble 
Chairman) 
Presented to the Parliament 
17
th  December,  2013 
204 The Civil Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013 
 
13 January, 
2014 
24 
th  January, 2014 
(presented to Hon’ble 
Chairman) 
Presented to the Parliament 
06 Feb 2014 
205 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred and 
Ninety Two Report on the Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Ministry of Culture 
 
 
17 Dec 
2013 06 Feb 2014 
206 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred and 
Ninety Third Report on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways 
17 Dec 
2013 06 Feb 2014 
207 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One-Hundred 
17 Dec 
2013 06 Feb 2014 

Ninety Fourth Report on the Demands for 
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Shipping  
208 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred and 
Ninety Fifth Report on the Demands for Grants 
(2013-14)of the Ministry of Tourism 
 
17 Dec 
2013 06 Feb 2014 
209 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred and 
Ninety First Report on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation  
17 Dec 
2013 06 Feb 2014 
210 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred and 
Eighty Eighth Report on Functioning of 
Commission of Railways Safety 
18 Feb 2014 19 Feb 2014 
211 
Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi, 
National Museum and other important issues 
pertaining to the Ministry of Culture 
18 Feb 2014 19 Feb 2014 
212 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in its One Hundred 
Ninetieth Report on Development of Tourism in 
Darjeeling and Sikkim 
18 Feb 2014 19 Feb 2014 
213 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in its Two Hundredth 
Report on Development of Tourism, National 
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala and 
Cochin Shipyard Limited 
18 Feb 2014 19 Feb 2014 
214 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Two Hundred First 
Report on Functioning of National Akademis 
and other Cultural Institutions - Issues and 
Challenges 
10 Dec 
2014 12 Dec 2014 
215 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Two Hundred Third 
Report on Privatization of Services at Airports 
10 Dec 
2014 12 Dec 2014 
216 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
Eleventh Report on Upkeep of various 
Monuments in Delhi, National Museum and 
other important issues pertaining to the Ministry 
of Culture. 
10 Dec 
2014 12 Dec 2014 
217 The Anti-Hijacking Bill,2014 4 March, 11 March,  2015 

2015 
218 
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation 
 
16 
th  April, 
2015 28 th   April, 2015 
219 
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Ministry of 
Culture 
 
16 
th  April, 
2015 28 th   April, 2015 
220 
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways 
 
27 
th  April, 
2015 28 th   April, 2015 
221 
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Ministry of 
Shipping 
 
27 
th  April, 
2015 28 th   April, 2015 
222 Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Ministry of 
Tourism 
27 
th  April, 
2015 28 th   April, 2015 
 
 
 
(The above mentioned reports are available on the w ebsite of Rajya Sabha 
http://rajyasabha.nic.in →Committees →Department  related RS-committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture → Reports)  
 