PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 169
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY NINTH REPORT
ON
HELICOPTER OPERATIONS IN INDIA
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11 AUGUST, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 11 AUGUST, 2011)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11 AUGUST, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 11 AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2011/VAISAKHA, 1933 (SAKA)MAY, 2011/VAISAKHA, 1933 (SAKA)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 4  MAY, 2011)TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 4  MAY, 2011)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 4  MAY, 2011)TH
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 4  MAY, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY NINTH REPORT
ON
HELICOPTER OPERATIONS IN INDIA
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 4 TH MAY , 2011)
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 4 TH MAY , 2011)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11 TH AUGUST, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 11 TH AUGUST, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2011/VAISAKHA, 1933 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A BBREVIATIONS USED IN THE REPORT .................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—10
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 11—23

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2010-11)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Narendra Kashyap
5. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Thomas Sangma
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
10. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Aditya Nath
12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
13. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
15. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri P. Karunakaran
17. Shri Jose K. Mani
18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Rajaram Pal
20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
22. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq
23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
24. Shri Dushyant Singh
25. Shri Jitendra Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sugumar
29. Shri Kabir Suman
30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal*
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 19 th January, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Sixty Ninth Report on “Helicopter Operation in India”.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture in its meeting held on the 15
th September, 2009 decided to have an in-depth study on the
Helicopter Operations in India in view of increasing number of helicopter accidents in the recent
past.
3. Apart from a detailed background note obtained from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, the
Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Director General of Civil
Aviation, CMD, Air India Limited and Chairman, Airports Authority of India and CMD Pawan Hans
Helicopters Limited in its meetings held on the 8
th January, 29 th June and 8 th October, 2010. The
Committee also heard the views of representatives of Rotary Wing Society of India on the
8
th October, 2010. In order to get wider views on the subject, the Committee invited the views of
individuals, organizations and institutions on the subject through advertisement in all major national
dailies and vernacular newspapers all over the country.
4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation for providing necessary inputs and clarifications during deliberations on
the subject. The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of the individuals/Associations who
submitted their valuable suggestions on the subject.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 13
th April, 2011.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 13, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Chaitra 23, 1932  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS
AICs Aeronautical Circulars
AAI Airports Authority of India
AIP Aeronautical Information Publication
AMEs Aircraft Maintenance Engineers
A TC Air Traffic Controller
CAE Canadian Aviation Electronics Ltd.
CARs Civil Aviation Requirements
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation
FDTL Flight Duty Time and Flight Time Limitation
ELT Emergency Locater Transmitter
ENR Excess Noise Ratio
FSD Flight Standards Directorate
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization
IFR Instrumental Flight Rules
IHST International Helicopter Safety Team
IMCs Instrument Meteorological Conditions
MEL Minimum Equipment List
NSOPs Non-Scheduled Operators
PHHL Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures
SOPs Scheduled Operators
RWSI Rotary Wing Society of India
VFRs Visual Flight Rules
(iv)

1
REPORT
The history of civil helicopter industry in India can be traced back to 1953 when the first
civil registered helicopter flew in the country. For many years till the year 2004, the growth of
civil helicopters had been sluggish for various reasons. The economic growth of the country
coupled with the liberal aviation policies enunciated by the Government during the last decade had
fuelled the growth of rotary wing aircraft.
2. The formation of Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited (PHHL) in 1986 was one of the
milestones in helicopter operations in the country. PHHL introduced multi-engine helicopters mainly
for transportation of passengers to off-shore oil rigs and for VIP operations. Since then, number
of helicopters in India have steadily grown over the years. Operators have taken up helicopter
operations for off-shore work as well as commercial operations in hilly areas, pilgrimage
operations, aerial work operations, electioneering, medical evacuations, search & rescue,
agricultural operations, power line washing operations, etc.
3. The general safety concerns due to growth of civil aviation sector as well as assessments
and audits of our existing aviation safety mechanism/regulations especially that of helicopter
operation drew the attention of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Transport, Tourism and Culture. Accordingly the Committee decided to take up the helicopter
operations in the country for examination and report to Parliament.
4. The Ministry of Civil Aviation furnished a background note on the subject for consideration
of the Committee. The Committee also took the oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry
of Civil Aviation, Directorate General of Civil Aviation and Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited on the
8th January, 29
th June and 8 th October, 2010. The Committee also heard the representatives of
Rotary Wing Society of India on the 8 th October, 2010. The various aspects of the subject
discussed by the Committee and the Committee’s observations thereon have been brought out in
the succeeding paragraphs of the report.
OVERVIEW OF HELICOPTER INDUSTRY
5. At present, there are 263 helicopters registered in India. The tables below provide a
statistical overview/breakup of the helicopter industry in the country:
Type of operations
Helicopters in commercial operations under : 169
Non-Scheduled Operator’s Permit.
Helicopters owned by Govt./PSU operators : 44
Helicopters operated by Private operators : 50
Single/Twin Engine Helicopters
Single Engine helicopters : 129
Twin Engine helicopters : 134

2
Manufacturer-wise breakdown
Bell Helicopters, USA : 109
Eurocopter, France : 60
Agusta - Bell/Westland, Italy : 28
HAL India (Dhruv - Chetak/Cheetah) : 18
Others*
*Robinson, Sikorsky, Enstrom, Mi-l72, MD,
Scheweier
REGULATIONS GOVERNING HELICOPTER OPERATIONS
6. The regulatory control of helicopter operations are covered under the Aircraft Act 1937,
Aircraft Rules 1937 and the Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs) issued from time to time under
these Rules. However, due to peculiarity of the helicopters, mainly in terms of design, basic
operating principles and operating procedures, certain CARs, Aeronautical Circulars (AICs) and
Advisory Circulars specifically meant for helicopter operations, have also been issued.
7. The training requirements for helicopter pilots have been elaborated in CAR Section 7. The
operating regulations for helicopter operations are based on ICAO Annex 6 Part III and have been
adopted in the form of CAR Section 2 Series O Part IV and V for commercial and private
helicopter operations respectively. The regulations are updated from time to time in accordance with
the amendments introduced by ICAO in Annex 6 Part III, after consultation with the helicopter
industry.
8. To a specific query on the mechanism/rules/regulations/provisions available with DGCA to
ensure that the helicopter pilots follow the laid down rules and regulations, the Committee was
informed that helicopter pilots are subjected to annual proficiency check by the DGCA approved
Examiner for their renewal of licenses. Besides, pilots are subjected to surveillance from time to
time to ensure that they follow regulations.
9. To a further query on the guidelines for operating helicopters in poor visibility conditions
and the action taken by DGCA for violation of such guidelines during the recent years, the
Committee was informed that the guidelines are given in AIP India, ENR 1.1.3, Para 6; CAR
Section 4, Series E Part I,  Para 3.9 and CAR Section 8, Series O Part 1, Para 3. The Committee
was further informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that in poor visibility helicopters are
permitted to operate special VFR flights subject to the following conditions:
(a) When traffic conditions permit, special VFR flights can be authorized subject to the
approval from the unit providing approach control service.
(b) When the ground visibility is not less than 1500 meters, ATC can authorize special
VFR flights provided the helicopter is certified for IFR operations.
(c) Helicopters can be authorized under special VFR for operations in Performance Class
I and Class II when ground visibility is not less than 1000 meters. For such
authorizations, pilot is responsible for meeting the criteria for operations in
performance class I and class II and is required to reflect the same in the flight plan
and report on RT to A TC.

3
(d) For operating helicopter in visibility up to 1000 meters, the helicopter is required to
be maneuvered at a speed that will give adequate opportunity to observe other traffic
or any obstacle in time to avoid collusion.
10. The Ministry further stated that in the recent past, there has been one case of such violation
by one of the Pawan Hans Helicopter-VT-PHR engaged in VIP flight. The helicopter made landing
after sunset. DGCA carried out the investigation and de-rostered the pilot during the course of
investigation. The pilot was later counseled.
DGCA INITIATIVES
11. The Committee was further informed that in order to take effective measures for improving
the safety record of helicopter operations in the country, a helicopter cell in DGCA has been
formed. The cell is headed by a Joint Director General and has experts from airworthiness,
aerodrome standards, air safety and flight operations directorates of DGCA as well as
representatives from the industry, namely PHHL and Rotary Wing Society of India (RWSI). The
objectives and responsibilities of the helicopter cell are as follows:
(i) Review and updating of standards of airworthiness and operations of helicopters in
consultation with helicopter industry;
(ii) Stipulate requirements for operations from improvised helipads, temporary helipads
for seasonal operations, heliports, roof-top operations and other aerial work
operations. This will include the requirements for preparation of Standard Operating
Procedures (SOPs), Minimum Equipment List (MEL), Maintenance Programme and
other technical documents and their approval;
(iii) Plan and conduct audits of helicopter operators including off-shore operations on
annual basis and follow-up on the observations of audits;
(iv) Revision of relevant sections of Schedule II of the Aircraft Rules, dealing with PPL,
CPL and ATPL (helicopters) in line with international standards as per ICAO Annex/
EASA regulations;
(v) Review of FDTL regulations for helicopter pilots;
(vi) Approval of Operations Manual of NSOP applicants (helicopters) and association with
preparedness meetings for the grant of NSOP for helicopter operators. This may
include demonstration flights and demonstration of operational procedures (load and
trim, flight dispatch, evacuation, passenger facilities, FDTL monitoring, flight data
evaluation, external load applications etc.);
(vii) Inspection of helipads for seasonal operations and approval for SOPs for such
operations;
(viii) Coordination with AAI for approval of separate procedures for helicopter operations;
(ix) Matters related to creation of heliports including identification of sites and related
follow-up;
(x) Conducting annual meetings with helicopter operators to review the areas of concern
expressed by them from time-to-time, and the necessary follow-up;
(xi) Compiling and analyzing statistics of helicopter pilots, AMEs, hours of operation in
different categories, surveillance observations, audit findings, etc.

4
12. The Emergency Locater Transmitter (ELT) is a tracking transmitter which aids in the
detection and location of aircraft in distress. The Committee asked about the availability and
operation of ELT in aircrafts and choppers operating in the country. The Committee was informed
that a one-time check of all aircraft operating in the country was carried out by DGCA. During
the check, it was found that out of 1029 operating aircrafts, 909 aircrafts are fitted with ELTs
capable of operating with dual frequency (121.5 and 406 MHz). The remaining 120 aircrafts are
fitted with ELTs capable of operating only on 121.5 MHz. DGCA has issued guidelines to install
ELTs conforming to 406 MHz frequency when operating in Designated land Areas. Earlier, the ELTs
conforming to 406 MHz were not installed due to the reason that Designated land Areas were not
notified by the Airports Authority of India. However, now all operators have been advised to install
ELTs capable of transmitting signals on both 121.5 MHz and 406 MHz frequency by 31/03/2010
irrespective of such notification. During the intervening period, operators have been advised to
avoid operations in hilly terrain and inaccessible areas in case their aircraft is fitted with ELT
conforming to only 121.5 MHz frequency.
SPREADING SAFETY AWARENESS
13. In order to promote safety awareness amongst the personnel involved in helicopter
operations, the DGCA has organized several seminars and a few accident data analysis workshops
at national and international level. An international seminar was held in July 2007 in association with
DGAC France and another seminar was held in association with International Helicopter Safety
Team (IHST) and RWSI. R WSI is also approved to carry out short capsule courses on Special
VFR operations for helicopter pilots.
14. Seminars and the courses for helicopter pilots and engineers have resulted in awareness of
safety issues in respects of helicopter operations. Special meetings are organized and safety
circulars issued prior to Centre/State elections due to increasing use of helicopters by VIPs during
elections. These activities have manifested in improvement in helicopter safety record.
15. When the Committee pointed out the implementation of recommendations of the committees
set up to look into various accidents involving helicopters, it was informed that those
recommendations are being duly addressed. The Committee was further informed that State
Governments’ infrastructure are the main obstacle for a proper planning of helicopter operations.
The State Governments have been advised to build proper infrastructure with meteorological
briefing arrangements, flight planning arrangements and information about obstacles on the way.
The Committee was further informed that the State Governments have been advised to follow the
Civil Aviation Requirements on the helicopter operations issued by the Central Government from
time-to-time.
DEDICATED HELIPORTS AND OPERATING CORRIDORS
16. When the Committee drew the attention of the Ministry towards the increasing number of
helicopter operators in the country and the lack of adequate infrastructure for the industry, the
Ministry of Civil Aviation replied that it had already appointed a committee to identify sites where
heliports could be  built for facilitating the operations without interfering with the normal air traffic
at busy airports. As a result, a dedicated area for heliport has been earmarked at Delhi airport
where a heliport could be built for operations without interfering in the normal traffic. Presently,
AAI are developing special procedures for helicopter operations from the proposed heliports.
Similarly, at Mumbai special procedures have been devised for helicopter operations from Juhu
airport for which trials are being conducted.
17. PHHL has also been allotted substantial area at Sector 37, Rohini, Delhi for establishment
of an MRO and operations facilities. Another heliport is slated to be established in Central Delhi
for convenience of commuters.

5
TRAINING FACILITIES FOR PILOTS
18. The Committee was informed that due to increasing number of helicopters in the country,
there is an urgent need for dedicated helicopter training organization in India. Presently, HAL has
a training academy for helicopter pilots which, however, is inadequate to meet the requirements of
the helicopter industry. To fill up this gap, PHHL has been offered adequate land at the DGCA
managed gliding centre at Pune to establish training academy for pilots. It is also proposed that
National Aviation Training Academy at Gondia will have a helicopter training unit. Once the two
training academies are operational, the gap of demand and supply for civil helicopter pilots is
expected to be eliminated.
19. The Committee was further informed that for 285 helicopters operating in the country,
around 600 pilots are available at an estimate of two-and-a-half sets of pilots for each helicopter.
The Ministry admitted the shortage of pilots for helicopter industry at present.
20. As far as the training facilities available in the country for helicopter pilots, the Committee
was informed that simulator training is considered essential for initial and periodic training of
helicopter pilots as it helps in training pilots to simulate and practice real-time emergency situations.
Presently, one fixed simulator has been established in private sector in Delhi. A full motion simulator
is being established by a HAL-CAE JV company at Bangalore and is expected to be operational by
mid 2010. These state-of-the--art simulator facilities will be capable of adapting docking stations
and Cockpit environment of Bell, Eurocopter and Dhruv helicopters. These initiatives will go a long
way in helping the pilots to cope up with emergency situations.
21. DGCA has also approved a number “of training institutes for imparting ab initio training on
helicopter maintenance. Apart from some of the existing AME training Institutes, PHHL Training
Institute has recently been approved to impart such training. It is apparent that a foundation has
been made for systematic flying and maintenance training which will form the basis for
enhancement of safe helicopter operations in India.
22. During the deliberations of the Committee, it was informed that 80-90 per cent of the civil
fleet comprise of ex-military pilots who have thousands of hours of experience in all kinds of
adverse weather conditions and challenging conditions. The training standards of Indian helicopter
fleet are very high as compared to other countries.
23. The Committee was further informed that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has devised a
procedure to convert some fixed wing pilots into helicopter pilots, since helicopter training is an
expensive proposition. The DGCA has chalked out a regulation that after giving 80 hours training
on helicopter operations, the fixed wing pilots will be given an option to convert themselves as
helicopter pilots. It was further informed that Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited entered into an
agreement with the Air Force and Navy to induct the retired pilots in their wings. Pawan Hans
Helicopters Limited will start the induction of retired pilots on the basis of their profile.
SAFETY AUDITS AND SURVEILLANCE BY DGCA
24. To a query on the annual check audit of helicopter operators, the Ministry informed that
a periodic audit of all helicopter operators is conducted under the planned annual audit and
surveillance programme formulated by DGCA. In addition, special audits have also been planned to
conduct the following audits in the near future:
• Audit of all State Government /Public Sector Undertaking aviation organizations.
• Audit of off-shore helicopter operations and safety aspects at off-shore rigs.

6
25. These audits bring out non-compliance and deficiencies vis-a-vis operating regulations, on
which DGCA takes strict enforcement action in accordance with the laid down procedures. With
the recent augmentation plan of workforce in DGCA, it will now be possible to undertake the
surveillance and audit work in a more vigorous manner. Helicopter division in Flight Standards
Directorate (FSD), DGCA now has four dedicated Flight Operations Inspectors and FSD will now
be in a position to undertake the helicopter related responsibilities in an effective manner.
HELICOPTER ACCIDENT
26. Helicopter operations occasionally come to adverse notice as and when there are some
accidents/incidents involving helicopters. Recent occurrences of the forcible landing/take-off and
helicopters accidents in bad light during the VIP movements, raised the question of existence of
a regulator for helicopter operations in the country. These accidents questioned the effectiveness
of the existing safety and security norms regulating helicopter operation in the country.
27. The Committee was informed that there were seven accidents involving the India Civil
registered helicopters during the period 2007 to 2009. All the accidents were investigated by the
DGCA and the probable causes were identified. The causes recorded were:-
(i) Uncontrollable movement of helicopter during hover exercise and delayed corrective
action by instructor resulted in crash landing of helicopter;
(ii) During landing main rotor blades hit ground crew;
(iii) Non-adherence of Standard Operating Procedures wherein the flight crew failed to
maintain adequate terrain clearance. Bad weather and improper crew detailing who
were not qualified for such operations was the contributory factor;
(iv) During landing pilot experienced loss of tail rotor effectiveness and entered into right
yaw due to changing wind conditions which resulted in loss of control and crash
landing of helicopter. Wrong location of the windsock at the helipad was contributory
factor to the accident.
(v) Helicopter descended below the minimum safe altitude due to bad weather and
collided with the hill en route. Contributory factors are crew did not obtain the
meteorological briefing the departure and selection of improper route by the crew.
(vi) During landing, the helicopter encountered operational problems and landed around
500 meters before the helipad.
(vii) Accident occurred due to loss of control resulting in uncontrolled descent in the
terrain at a very high rate of descent due to entry into severe downdraught.
Contributory factors (i) crew noticed a snag and was engrossed for more than vital
six minutes before the impact in searching for relevant information in the emergency
check list and Flight manual. (ii) The crew was flying in Instrument Meteorological
Conditions (IMC) whereas the flight was cleared for VFR flying and (iii) They had
no intention either to divert or return back to base.
28. When the Committee expressed its concern over recent accidents involving helicopters, the
Secretary during the deliberations before the Committee informed as under:-
“.........there are areas of concern in helicopter operations and general aviation.
The average accident between 1996-2005 was six, which had been reduced to
two in 2009. Two accidents of helicopters happened in 2009. The target is to
bring it down by 80 per cent in the next couple of years which means the

7
average of six accidents between 1996-2000 will be brought down to 80 per
cent. The Government wants to reduce to one or two per year. The accident is
something which can only be ensured up to an acceptable level of safety. There
cannot be any 100 per cent assurance on that. Likewise, on the general aviation
also, the target is to bring the rate of accidents below. As far as investigations
are concerned, all investigations up to 2008 have been completed.
Recommendation data has been generated and are being very strictly monitored.
It is because as a member State of the International Civil Aviation Organization,
we are required to fulfill our obligations of instituting investigations. The
objective of investigation is only to identify deficiencies and to ensure that these
accidents do not occur in future and it raises the confidence of travelling public
and the industry..........in addition to accidents, serious incidents, which means,
which were nearly the accident, have also been included in the investigation and
investigation on these serious accidents have also been concluded. The
Government has full-fledged Accident Prevention Programme in place to
undertake preventive measures. One is to generate awareness throughout the
sector by seminars and workshops. From time-to-time Government issues do’s
and don’ts, like pre-election, pre-for weather, pre-winter. Then, the Government
conducts pre-medical check-ups of the pilots and financial surveillance of the
operators. The Government is undertaking annual surveillance programme, annual
audit, inspections. The Government undertakes enforcement action also in case
of any Shortcoming. There is a mechanism of voluntary reporting also. The
Government does not provide punishment, if somebody informs about the
violations that have taken place that could have caused the accident. The
Government is working is very closely with the Air Transport Industry to
conform to law.”
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
29. The Committee observes that even after a period of almost six decades since its
inception, the helicopter operations in India is still in a rudimentary stage as compared to
that in the western countries in terms of existence of a separate regulatory mechanism,
rules and regulations as well as necessary infrastructure specific to helicopters. The
Committee found that currently, the helicopter operations i.e. rotary wing aircrafts are
being governed by the set of rules, regulations and mechanism under the DGCA which are
meant for the fixed wing aircraft. In view of significant differences between the two, the
Committee feels that there is an urgent need to put mechanism, rules, regulations and the
required infrastructure specific to the helicopter sector in place, without further delay.
30. The Committee also found that currently, helicopters are being used mainly for VIP
operations and transporting people to offshore oil operations. The Committee feels that the
Government has not taken enough steps for expansion of helicopter sector in India. The
Committee is of the opinion that helicopter operations have to be expanded to such other
areas as tourism, medical emergencies, disaster management, maintenance of law and
order, etc.
31. In this connection, the Committee would like to make special mention about the use
of helicopters in medical emergency, a strong case for which was made out by the
representatives of the Rotary Wing Society of India before the Committee. The Committee
is also convinced that this country holds a huge potential for using helicopters in this area.
Many lives can be saved by bringing the accident victims from remote and inaccessible areas
for providing immediate medical help during golden hour. The Committee would like that

8
a Feasibility Study may be got conducted by involving all the stakeholders, government as
well as private, to promote the use of helicopters in those areas.
32. The Committee also feels that promotion of tourism to remote and inaccessible areas
can be done by making helicopters services available for the tourists to such places. The
Committee recommends that the Government should take steps to make heli-tourism more
attractive and affordable by reducing cost of operation through fiscal incentives, lowering
taxes on ATF, waiving off RNFC, rationalizing landing and parking charges after
consultation with the State Governments.
33. Presently, we are having 250 odd helicopters in operation, which are likely to be
increased significantly in the coming areas. In view of the great potential for helicopter
travel in the country, urgent need for dedicated helicopter training organizations can hardly
be over-emphasized. The Committee is not aware about the future requirement of the
trained manpower for the helicopter sector. One gliding centre at Pune and one training
academy at Gondia have been proposed. Currently, we have one fixed simulator in private
sector in Delhi and one full motion simulator is being established by HAL at Bangalore. The
existing training facilities, thus, are inadequate to meet the future requirements of the
industry. The Committee does not know about the status of those centres that were being
set up. It would like to have a status report in respect of the proposed centres.
34. The Committee recommends that the Government should address the issue of
shortage of helicopter pilots on priority since the industry is gaining momentum rapidly The
Committee feels that the Government should appoint a Committee of experts to review the
present system of examination and procedures for award of licenses to pilots. It may
consider creating of national pool of independent examiners, standardize the syllabi,
increase the frequency of examinations and rationalize the charges for skill tests.
35. The Committee further notes that for monitoring proficiency of pilots operating over
250 helicopters, DGCA is having four helicopter Inspectors on secondment basis from the
industry. The Committee feels that efforts should be made to have more Inspectors who are
type qualified and in current flying. In the longer term, the Committee feels that there is
a need to have adequate number of Flight Inspectors with long experience to handle
proficiency monitoring of pilots. While doing so, our future requirements should be kept in
mind.
36. The Committee notes that a number of agencies such as PSUs, corporate houses and
the State Governments are operating helicopters in India. The Committee, therefore, feels
that their involvement will play a major role in providing requisite infrastructure for
helicopter operations in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that wider
consultations needs to be done with all the stakeholders while creating a regulatory
mechanism for this purpose.
37. The Committee notes with concern the instances of forceful landing/take off of
helicopters in low visibility, bad weather and even during nights, which are serious breaches
of aviation security norms. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that at
times technical clearances are given to the helicopters with minor defects to take off. The
technical personnel including pilots are put under pressure not to oppose these deficiencies
due to commercial or other reasons. It happens mainly in the case of chartered helicopters
and those under the State Governments flying VIPs. Such violations of rules have led to
fatal accidents losing several precious lives. Lack of proper maintenance and non-
observance of operating manuals, mechanical failures and lack of required instruments have
been found as the causes of these accidents. It points out towards the ineffectiveness of

9
safety audit and mandatory inspections of the helicopters and other facilities for testing
their airworthiness. The Committee recommends that technical personnel/pilots be provided
adequate legal/administrative protection to decline to fly in the absence of mandatory
technical, weather and other clearances. Some kind of penal provision may be considered
against those putting such pressure on the pilots to fly without proper clearances.
Conversely, the strictest actions be taken against those pilots/technicians who violate these
requirements even under some kind of duress. Their licences may be immediately cancelled
if prime facie they appear to have done so.
38. In order to ensure independent and impartial enquiry into accidents, the Committee
would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation made in its 168th Report which is
reproduced below:
“The Committee is of the view that creation of an independent authority for accident
investigation on an urgent basis will instill confidence in the minds of travelling public.”
39. The Committee recommends that the entire gamut of helicopter operations in India
may be reviewed and adequate/appropriate steps may be taken to ensure safer helicopter
travel. The Committee recommends that guidelines/regulations for take off/landing of
helicopters during low visibility should not only be strengthened but enforced strictly.
40. The Committee notes that Helicopter Cell has been set up in the DGCA. It, however,
is surprised to find that the Helicopter Cell within the DGCA does not have representation
of AAI that provides ATC services. Though there is a provision of coordination with AAI,
the Committee is of the view that for better coordination between AAI and DGCA in this
matter, it would only be appropriate, if AAI is permanently represented in the Helicopter
Cell of the DGCA. The Committee would also like to be informed of the details of the
major observations/decisions made by the Helicopter Cell and the Action Taken for
implementation thereof.
41. For expanding the helicopter operations to the newer areas as has been suggested by
the Committee elsewhere, India will have to have a number of heliports, vertiports and
heli-routes in the country. The Committee also emphasizes the need for developing a
network of helipads and heliports in and around metros as well as in the hilly and remote
parts of the country. The Committee is of the opinion that a dedicated heliport wing may
be established in the Airports Authority of India to oversee the development of heliports
and vertiports and heli-routes in the country.
42. The Committee feels that a concerted coordination mechanism involving Union and
State Governments, meteorological department and other agencies should be evolved to
make helicopter operations safer one. The existing Air Traffic Rules may be reviewed to
eliminate delays in helicopter departures/arrivals from major airports. Flight routing may be
made as direct as possible independent of fixed wing traffic to ease the congestion at the
airports.
43. Since the LTC travellers now constitute a significant number, the Committee is
surprised to find that under CCS (LTC) Rules, they are not allowed to travel by Helicopters.
The Committee is of the view that LTC travellers should also be allowed to travel by
helicopters and the matter may be taken up with the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions for amendment of the LTC rules accordingly.
44. The Committee is surprised to note that around 120 aircrafts which might include
helicopters were not capable of operating in hilly terrains and the operators of such
aircrafts have been advised not to operate in such areas till the necessary instruments

10
(ELTs conforming to 406 MHz) were fitted. Deadline given for this was 31-3-2010. In such
a situation, the Committee feels that the possibility of such aircrafts operating in hilly
areas cannot be ruled out, particularly in view of the lax and inadequate monitoring in the
sector. The Committee only hopes that these instruments would have been placed by the
given date, and if not, all such aircrafts should be grounded and not allowed to fly until they
have compiled with this.
45. The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that the main obstacle for the
proper planning of the helicopter operations has been the lack of proper infrastructure with
the State Governments and they have been advised to build proper infrastructure with
meteorological briefing and to follow the civil aviation requirements issued from the Union
Ministry of Civil Aviation from time to time. The Committee is constrained to note that the
Ministry of Civil Aviation has failed to ensure the cooperation and compliance from the
State Governments for helicopter operations. It, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
may take up these issues with the concerned State Governments proactively to get the
needful done.

11
MINUTES

12

13
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Tuesday the 15 th September, 2009 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Naresh Gujral
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
10. Shri Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri P. Karunakaran
12. Shri Jose K. Mani
13. Shrimati Ranee Narah
14. Shri Rajaram Pal
15. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
16. Shri S.D. Shariq
17. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
18. Shri Dushyant Singh
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
20. Shri K. Sugumar
21. Shri Kabir Suman
22. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
13

14
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee decided that the functioning of Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) may be taken up for examination in view of the number of air accidents involving
helicopters and lack of appropriate and effective regulations to control their movements.
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
13. The Committee adjourned at 2.30 
P.M. to meet again on the 24 th September, 2009.
*** Related to other matter.

15
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 8 th January, 2010 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Naresh Gujral
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Thomas Sangma
8. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
9. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri Jose K. Mani
12. Shrimati Ranee Narah
13. Shri Rajaram Pal
14. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
15. Shri S.D. Shariq
16. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
17. Shri K. Sugumar
18. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
20. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
15

16
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar, Secretary
Shri Rohit Nandan, Joint Secretary
Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Director-General Civil Aviation
Shri R.P. Sahi, Joint Director-General
Shri V .P. Agrawal, Chairman, Airports Authority of India
Shri R.K. Tyagi, Chairman & Managing Director, Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. Thereafter, the Committee took up the ‘Functioning of DGCA and helicopter operations in
India’ for discussion. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation and asked them to apprise the Committee about the details of the activities of performed
by the DGCA and helicopter operations. The Chairman specifically asked about the steps taken
by the DGCA to cope up with the expanding civil aviation sector in the country, staffing pattern
of DGCA, means and methods through which DGCA executed its functions, etc. The Secretary,
Ministry of Civil Aviation briefed the Committee on the above mentioned issues. Thereafter,
Director-General, Civil Aviation explained to the Committee the functioning of DGCA and steps
taken to strengthen it in view of present scenario in aviation sector. To a specific question of
requirement of the additional legislation and powers for the smooth functioning of DGCA, its
Director-General replied that a Committee was examining the issues for revamping the
organizational set up of DGCA.
7. CMD, Pawan Hans Limited also briefed the Committee on the guidelines followed for the
helicopter operations in the Country. The Committee expressed its apprehensions over the absence
of an interface between the DGCA and Defence authorities for helicopter operations in the
country. The Chairman and Members raised several queries to which the officials replied. To
some of the queries raised by the Members, the Chairman directed the Ministry to furnish the
written replies at the earliest.
8. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 1.40 
P.M.
*** Related to other matter.

17
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29 th June, 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Naresh Gujral
5. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
6. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
8. Shri Mahesh Joshi
9. Shri Jose K. Mani
10. Shri Rajaram Pal
11. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
12. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
13. Shri S.D. Shariq
14. Shri Jitendra Singh
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri K. Sugumar
17. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
18. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar, Secretary
Shri Rohit Nandan, Joint Secretary
Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Director-General Civil Aviation
17

18
Shri R.P. Sahi, Joint Director-General
Shri V .P. Agrawal, Chairman, Airports Authority of India
Shri R.K. Tyagi, Chairman & Managing Director, Pawan Hans Helicopter Limited
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Secretary and other
officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Chairman asked the Secretary about the steps taken
for restructuring and further strengthening the exiting regulatory mechanism for the aviation safety.
He also enquired, if there was a proposal to restructure the DGCA to ensure the separation of
policy making and Rule making function with DGCA. The issue of granting autonomous status to
DGCA and adequacy of existing rules, acts and regulations were also raised. In addition, he also
wanted to know reasons for large number of vacant position in DGCA, non-compliance of safety
norms as pointed out by the Tyagi Report on helicopter operations, overlapping of functions of
DGCA and AAI, levels of safety, overload of work on pilots, non-adherence of operations manuals
by them and their poor working conditions, etc. On the issue of recent Mangalore air crash,
Members wanted to know the causes and the follow-up action taken thereafter. The Chairman also
made a specific reference to fulfillment of shortcomings noticed in the Universal Safety Oversight
Audit Programme and the proposed Task Force for strengthening and expanding helicopter
operations in the country. The Members also raised the issue of recent reports on the functioning
of major airports in the country without valid licence.
3. Some Members of the Committee also raised air miss accident cases in Mumbai and other
parts of India.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation made a presentation and replied to the queries
raised by the Committee. He also informed the Committee about the preparation of a road map for
setting up a Civil Aviation Authority to look after the safety functions and other issues related to
aviation sector. Thereafter, Director-General, Civil Aviation explained to the Committee the
functioning of DGCA and steps taken to restructure/strengthen it, in view of expanding scenario
in aviation sector. He informed that a Court of Inquiry has been ordered by Government to look
into the causes of Mangalore accident. Chairman, Airports Authority of India explained the
Committee about the circumstances leading to controversy regarding licensing of airports and
assured that it would be corrected at the earliest.
5. CMD, Pawan Hans Limited also briefed the Committee about the safety aspects related to
the helicopter operations in India, particularly his report on helicopter crash in which former Chief
Ministry of Andhra Pradesh was travelling.
6. CMD, NACIL briefed the Committee on the working conditions of pilots, compliance of
DGCA’s instructions, near air misses of Air India Express flights, and removal of expat pilots.
7. Members raised several queries to which the representatives replied. To some of the queries
raised by the Members, the Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish the replies at the earliest.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 5.50 
P.M.

19
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 8 th October, 2010 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
3. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shrimati Ranee Narah
9. Shri Rajaram Pal
10. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
11. Shri Sharief-ud-Din Shariq
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
13. Shri K. Sugumar
14. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF ROTARY WING SOCIETY OF INDIA
1. A VM K. Sridharan, President
2. Capt. Uday Gelli, President, Western Region
3. Air Cmde B.S. Siwach, Secretary General
19

20
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
1. Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar, Secretary
2. Shri Rohit Nandan, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Nasir Ali, Director
4. Shri R.K. Tyagi, CMD, PHHL
5. Shri V .P. Agrawal, Chairman, Airports Authority of India
6. Shri S. Raheja, Member, Airports Authority of India
7. Shri V . Somasundaram, ED, Airports Authority of India
8. Shri M.C. Kishore, ED & Company Secretary, Airports Authority of India
9. Shri Jyoti Prasad, ED, Airports Authority of India
10. Shri R.P. Sahi, Joint DG, DGCA
11. Shri Pradeep Pathak, Director, DGCA
12. Shrimati Tuhinanshu Sharma, Deputy Director, Airworthiness, DGCA
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses from the Rotary Wing Society of India
and requested them to express their views on the Helicopter Operations in India from the view
point of aviation safety. The representatives of the society presented their views on the current
scenario of Helicopter operations and enumerated the difficulties faced by them and the measures
that could be taken for the expansion of helicopter operations in the country in a more viable
manner and the scope of hep1icopter utilization in the medical field. They also explained the safety
aspects of single and double engine helicopters.
4. Members asked questions, to which the representatives of Rotary Wing Society replied. To
some of the queries raised by the Members, the Chairman directed the representatives of Rotary
Wing Society of India to furnish written replies at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew.
5. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the officials of the Ministry Civil Aviation; CMD, Pawan
Hans Helicopter Limited; and Chairman, Airport Authority of India to the meeting. The Chairman
emphasized the need for restructuring the DGCA so that it was able to come up to the new
challenges posed by the emerging aviation sector in the country. The Committee also conveyed its
concern over the reports of air safety violations which were very common these days. The
Secretary stated that in consultation with International Civil Aviation Authority, the Ministry had
taken number of initiatives with a view to adopt to bring the best international practices in the
Aviation Sector and major up-gradation of the technology has also in progress so that it would be
fully operational by the year 2013.
*** Related to other matter.

21
6. The Secretary also submitted that helicopter operations would expand by addition of new
fleet in the coming months and training programme for the new pilots had been also started. The
augmented fleet would be utilized for tourism, medical fields, disaster management and law and
order situations. Various aspects on air safety, air traffic system etc. were also discussed during
the meeting. Many Members raised questions on air safety, trained manpower, helicopter operations
etc. which were replied by the officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 1.40 
P.M.

22
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 13 th April, 2011 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
3. Shri Narendra Kashyap
4. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri Rajaram Pal
9. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
10. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq
11. Shri Jitendra Singh
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
2. The Committee took up the draft (i)168 th report on the “Directorate General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA) - Issues and Challenges”; and (ii) 169 th report on the “Helicopter Operations
in India” for consideration. After some discussion the Committee adopted the Reports with
minor modification.
22

23
3. The Committee decided to present the Reports to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha during the
inter session period and authorized its Chairman to present the Reports to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya
Sabha.
4. The Committee thereafter considered its future programme and decided to meet on
25
th April, 2011.
5. The meeting adjourned at 12.30 P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.