 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
306
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Ninety Fifth Report on the subject ‘Potential of Tourist 
Spots in the country - Connectivity and Outreach’ 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on   02nd  February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on   02nd  February, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTH REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Ninety Fifth Report on the subject ‘Potential of Tourist Spots in 
the country - Connectivity and Outreach’ 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 02nd  February, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                 1-75 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   76-78 
    6.  
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
MINUTES 79-80

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Ninety 
Fifth Report on the subject ‘Potential of Tourist Spots in the country - Connectivity and 
Outreach’. 
2. The Two Hundred and Ninety Fifth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  27th July, 2021 
to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Ninety Fifth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on 21st 
December, 2021. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  31st 
January, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
January 31, 2022                                                     Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AS Additional Secretary 
AAI Airport Authority of India 
ADB Asian Development Bank 
ADG Additional Director General 
AS Additional Secretary 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
BE Budget Estimate 
BOI Bank of India 
BPR&D Bureau of Police Research & Development 
CBSP Capacity Building for Service Providers 
CFA Central Financial Assistance 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CRIF Central Road Infrastructure Fund 
DEA Department of Economic Affairs 
DGP Director General of Police 
DMC Destination Management Committee 
DoNER Development of North-East Region 
DPPH Domestic Promotion and Publicity 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DTV Domestic Tourist Visit 
DsGP Directors General of Police 
EBSB Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat 
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
ECM Electronic Content Management 
FCI Food Corporation of India 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment 
FTAs Foreign Tourist Arrival 
FTV Foreign Tourist Visit 
F.Y. Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HM (T) Hon’ble Minister of Tourism 
H&R Hotel & Restaurants Division 
HRD Human Resource Development 
IT Information Technology 
ITA International Tourist Arrival 
IATO Indian Association of Tour Operators 
IDD Infrastructure Development Division 
IHM Institute of Hotel Management Catering & Nutrition 
IITTM Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management 
IMCCTS Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism 
Sector 

iv 
 
IRCTC Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation 
IsGP Inspectors General of Police 
LGSCATSS Loan Guarantee Scheme for COVID Affected Tourism 
Service Sector 
LTC Leave Travel Concession 
MDA Marketing Development Assistance 
MICE Meetings, Incentives, Conference/ Conventions & 
Exhibitions/ Event 
MLIs Money-Lending Institutions 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoC&I Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
MoRT&H Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
MoT Ministry of Tourism 
MoPS&W Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
MSMEs Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
NCAER National Council of Applied Economic Research 
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd. 
NCHMCT National Council for Hotel Management & Catering 
NPC National Productivity Council 
NTAC National Tourism Advisory Council 
O&M Operations and Maintenance 
PMU Project Management Unit 
PRASHAD Pilgrimage Rejuvenation & Spiritual Augmentation Drive 
QCI Quality Council of India 
RCS – 
UDAN 
Regional Connectivity Scheme – Ude Desh ka Aam 
Nagarik 
SDS Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
SEIS Service Exports from India Scheme 
SGOs Sectoral Groups of Secretaries 
STC Skill Training & Certification 
UCs Utilization Certificates 
US Under Secretary 
UT Union Territory 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism on the 
recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred Ninety Fifth Report on 
Potential for Tourist Spots in the country – Connectivity and Outreach of the Ministry of 
Tourism which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 27th July 2021. 
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 21st December, 2021 in 
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Repo rt. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.:  11, 28, 29, 31, 34, 40, 42, 49, 55, 59, 60, 67, 72, 80, 85, 92, 97, 100. 
288th Committee Recommendations Paragraphs No. 44, 45, 46, 69, 70, 71, 74, 75, 76, 77, 
123, 124, 125, 126. 
Total: 32 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 19, 23, 24, 33, 43, 44, 48, 53, 54, 58, 65, 70, 71, 75, 76, 77, 79, 84, 87, 93, 
102, 108, 120, 121, 122. 
288th Committee Recommendations Paragraphs No. : 72, 73. 
Total: 27 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 7, 7.2, 8, 10, 10.1, 10.2, 26, 39, 41, 94. 
Total: 10 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: 
 
Paragraph Nos.:  Nil  
Total:   Nil 
 
 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER I  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
PROGRESS REPORT 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1 The Committee also notes that availability of land free from all encumbrances is the 
responsibility of the respective State Governments/ Union Territories. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
(Para 11) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
1.1 Providing the land free from all encumbrances is the responsibility of the State 
Governments/ Union Territory Administrations. As per the draft guidelines of the Swadesh 
Darshan 2.0, land is a non -admissible component and will not be funded under the Swade sh 
Darshan scheme of the Ministry. The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) further vide OM no. SD-
8/10/2020 dated 11.6.2021 has issued the format for „Physical Completion Certificate‟ 
which is to be submitted by Head of the Implementing Agency and Administrative Sec retary. 
Vide this certificate state has to undertake that the facility and the land on which the project 
has been executed will not be transferred/ sold / alienated in any matter whatsoever without 
the written consent and prior approval of the MoT, Government of India and facilities created 
shall be used only for tourism purposes.  
 
1.2 Under the Scheme Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure 
Development, Central Agencies which are the recipient of the financial assistance are 
responsible for making the land available for development & other allied facilities related to 
execution of the project.  
 

3 
 
1.3 Providing the land, free from any kind of encumbrances, is the responsibility of the 
State Governments/ Union Territory Administrations. In t erms of the guidelines of 
PRASHAD Scheme land is an inadmissible item under the scheme and hence, no funds are 
released for the purpose of acquisition of the land for the project.  
1.4 To address the issue of unavailability of land parcels for the approved  works under 
PRASHAD Scheme, as per the check -list for preparation of DPRs for the project under 
PRASHAD Scheme it has been made obligatory on part of the State Government to provide a 
land availability certificate duly signed by an officer of the level of  at least Secretary of 
Tourism Department of the State / UT concerned. In addition, the interventions for which 
land availability is not confirmed by the respective State Government / UT Administration 
are not being approved under the projects in the Scheme.  
 
1.5 Moreover, under PRASHAD Scheme first installment is released only for those 
interventions for which works have been awarded after completion of tendering process by 
the State/UT.  
In addition, further releases are done only for those interventions on which physical execution 
is in progress. To calculate the amount of second or further releases, the costs of works for 
which tender have not been completed or without any physical progress, are not accounted 
for.  
 
 
STALLED PROJECTS 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
2. The Committee notes that for all the projects that have been sanctioned since the year 
2017, only 50 percent of the sanctioned amount was released so far. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to adopt strategies for speedy completion of the stalled 
projects. The Committee is of the view that this will also help in effective utilization of funds 
and skilled manpower to the maximum possible extent. 
(Para 28) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 

4 
 
2.1 Under the scheme Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure 
Development, funds are released to the Central Agency/ implementing agency in three 
instalments as per following details: 
As regards project taken up by IDD of the Ministry under the scheme Assistance to Central 
Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development, funds are released to the Central Agency/ 
implementing agency in three instalments as per following details: 
 
 
1. First instalment – 50% of the Central Financial Assistance amount at the time of 
sanction  
2. Second instalment - 30% of the sanctioned amount on submission of Utilization 
Certificate of the first instalment  
3. Third instalment- 20% of the sanctioned amount on submission of final Utilization 
Certificate by the implementing agency after the entire work  is completed along 
with an affidavit for Management of Assets created and an undertaking for 
maintenance of the same as per applicable GFR. 
 
2.2 The second instalment is released only after receipt of Utilisation Certificate of the 
first instalment. Continued efforts are being made for timely submission of UCs 
2.3 The second instalment is released only after receipt of Utilisation Certificate of the 
first instalment. Continued efforts are being made for timely submission of UCs. 
2.4 Now Ministry is also se tting up IT based monitoring portals for even closer progress 
of the projects. 
2.5 As far as PRASHAD Scheme is concerned, in addition to rigours follow -ups at the 
Division level, timely review done at the Joint Secretary levels with respect to the pending 
Utilizations Certificates.   It may kindly be appreciated that under PRASHAD Scheme the 
only pending UC amount to Rs. 10 Cr. for the fund released for the project “Infrastructure 
Development at Puri, Shree Jagannath Dham – Ramachandi - Prachi River front at  Deuli 
under Mega Circuit”.    Efforts are being put at the top levels of the MOT to neutralize this 
pending Utilization Certificate also. 
 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 

5 
 
 
3 The Committee recommends that an audit of the expenditure incurred under the 
Scheme of 'Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development' should 
also be conducted, the details of which should be uploaded on a web based platform for 
effective monitoring of the progress of the implementation. 
 (Para 29) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
3.1 The expenditure of the Ministry is audited by the designated audited officer (Internal 
as well as Statuary audits) . Further, the Ministry has got engaged third party (Quality 
Council of India) for evaluation of  the projects undertaken by it. 
3.2  Internal audit is conducted from time to time. 
3.3 All the projects undertaken with Ministry of Railways under the joint development of 
creation of amenities and facilities at the identified railway stations are being evaluated by 
QCI. 
 
 
 
INTEGRATED TOURISM DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
4. The Committee observes that the tourism sector not only provides employment to wide 
spectrum of job seekers from the unskilled to the specialized but also makes significant 
contribution to the national e conomy by stimulating other economic factors through its 
backward and forward linkages. Since tourism is multi -sectoral activity and the related 
sector includes airlines, surface transport, hotels, basic infrastructure, etc, the growth of the 
sector cannot  be attained unless issues related to all these sectors are addressed 
simultaneously. The Committee notes from the information furnished by the Ministry that 
with a view to make India a 5 trillion dollar economy by 2024 -25, the SGoS Tourism Sector 
Plan aims at implementation of 21 tourism development projects over the next five years. The 
Committee is of the considered view that if the goal of becoming a 5 trillion dollar economy 
is to be achieved, the Government needs to fastrack the development of these 2 1 tourism 

6 
 
infrastructure projects in collaboration with all the Ministries/ entities concerned. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that convergence and synergy be created across 
programmes of Ministries/ Departments so that the implementation of these 21  tourism 
development projects could be expedited and an integrated development of enabling 
infrastructure through partnerships with all the stakeholders could be accomplished. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the strategies adopted in this regard. 
(Para 31) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
4.1 Ministry of Tourism works in close collaboration with Central Ministries/State 
Governments/various Stakeholders for the development of tourism in the country. Different 
mechanisms and strategies to seek synergy and  convergence with stakeholders for integrated 
development of enabling tourism infrastructure are: 
 
i. National & Regional Conference of State Tourism Ministers are held to discuss 
various issues related to the development of tourism sector in the country. 
ii. National Tourism Advisory Council serves as a ‘Think Tank’ of experts in the field 
of tourism and advises the Ministry on various tourism related issues. It includes 
representatives of various Union Ministries, Trade and Industry Associations and 
Individual Experts in the field of travel and tourism management.  
iii. The Inter -Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) 
facilitates resolution of Inter -Ministerial issues involved in the development of 
tourism in the country.  
iv. A Task Force has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Tourism), 
Govt. of India to address various issues related to tourism as per the 
recommendations of the Sectoral Groups of Secretaries (SGoS) for Tourism 
Sectoral Plan. The Task Force comprises representativ es from the Ministries of 
Civil Aviation, External Affairs, Home Affairs, Railways, Road T ransport & 
Highways, Culture, DoNER, Environment & Forests and IRCTC, ASI. 
 
4.2 Meetings/Consultations are held from time to time with various stakeholders to 
take suggestions/inputs for the development and promotion of tourism sector in the country. 
 

7 
 
i. The last National Conference of Tourism Ministers was held at Ashok Hotel, New 
Delhi in August 2019. The conference was attended by around 20 State Tourism 
Ministers and Senior Officers from State and Central Ministries. In the above meeting 
various issues such as Development of Adventure Tourism, Status of projects 
sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan & PRASHAD Schemes, Bed & 
Breakfast/Homestay Scheme Guidelines as well as be st practices in tourism sector 
and social media campaigns undertaken by the selected State Governments were 
discussed.  
ii. Ministry of Tourism (MoT) organized Regional Tourism & Culture Ministers 
Conference of the North Eastern States on 9th & 10th September 2021at Guwahati, 
Assam to discuss development of tourism and connectivity related issues in the North 
Eastern Region. The North East State Tourism Ministers Conference featured 
presentations by M/o Tourism, M/o DoNER, M/o Civil Aviation, M/o Road Transport 
& Highways and M/o Railways to apprise the participants about the various projects 
and initiatives being taken by the Central Government for the development of North 
Eastern Region. Technical sessions were held to review the progress of the various 
projects sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan and PRASHAD Schemes as well as to 
have discussions on adventure tourism and promotion & marketing. 
iii. MoT organised Regional Tourism and Culture Ministers Conference of the Southern 
Region on 28th & 29th October 2021 in Ben galuru, Karnataka to apprise the 
participants about the various projects and initiatives being taken by the Central 
Government for the development of the tourism in the region. 
iv. The last NTAC was constituted on 27th October, 2016 with the validity of 3 years and 
its tenure ended on 26th October, 2019. Two meetings of NTAC were conducted on 
12.04.2018 and 21 -22 Feb. 2019 at Hotel Samrat, New Delhi and Statue of Unity, 
Kevadiya, Gujarat respectively. The 3rd and last meeting of the NTAC was held on 
04.10.2019 at Paryatan Parv, VIP Lounge, Rajpath Lawns, New Delhi. Several 
suggestions had been raised during the brainstorming discussion on which MoT is 
taking necessary action in close collaboration with Central Ministries/ State 
Governments /various Stakeholders for the development of tourism in the country. 
v. MoT has taken up several issues through the mechanism of IMCCTS. Rationalization 
of e-visa fee, guide license matters, haulage charge on tourist trains, etc. have been 
resolved through the meetings of IMCCTS. 

8 
 
vi. A Task Force has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Tourism), 
which includes representative of several Ministries/ Departments. The first meeting of 
the Task Force was held on 1st September 2020. It was followed up with Virtual 
meeting with the representative of the said Committee in October, 2020.  
4.3 The Task Force headed by Secretary (Tourism) has enabled the MoT to work closely 
with Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, Ministry of 
Railways for the purpos e of enhancing connectivity to tourist destinations. The matter 
regarding monitoring the implementation of tourism routes under RCS -UDAN has been 
expedited and as a result 29 of the 46 tourism routes taken by the bidders under RCS -UDAN-
3, have been made operational. 
4.4 Similarly, the Ministry has forwarded 50 destinations in the first phase to Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways for better road connectivity and way side amenities. Out of 
these 50 destinations, 23 of them are in the jurisdiction of MoRTH and rest are with 
concerned State Government/UT Administration or Border Road Organisation. The matter 
has been taken up with the concerned organisations. In the 2nd phase MoT has sent a list of an 
additional 114 destinations to MoRTH for improvement of road connectivity. 
4.5 The issue of connectivity to tourism destinations including Pilgrimage centres have 
been expedited through the meeting. IRCTC has informed that they have already started a 
number of trains dedicated to the tourism theme destinations, i ncluding pilgrimage 
destinations. 
 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
5 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should also ensure that these projects 
are completed within the designated timeline and the approved cost so that proper air 
connectivity is established between the less connected regions with high tourism potential at 
affordable prices which would provide a boost to tourism industry leading to higher 
employment and greater revenues. 
(Para 34) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 

9 
 
5.1 The Ministry of Civil A viation (MoCA) has constituted a M onitoring -cum-
Coordination Committee under RCS UDAN Scheme in which Ministry of Tourism has also 
been co-opted as the member. Meeting of the Committee is held regularly in order to monitor 
and evaluate the status of the projects.  
5.2 The Monitoring Committee formed by MoCA has met on the following dates during 
the financial year 2020 -21 and 2021 -22to review and monitor the work to be carried out in 
RCS-UDAN:- 08.06.2020, 06.07.2020, 13.08.2020, 14.12.2020, 08.04.2021, 16.10.2021. 
5.3 29 out of the 46 tourism routes have already been made operational. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation has already launched RCS -UDAN-4, under which priority has 
been given to connect the destinations located in North Eastern region of the country. 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
6.  The Committee observes that despite India being endowed with nature's bounty and 
being a land of great tourism potential, its share in International Tourist Arrivals is a meager 
1.23% (Source- India Tourism Statistics at a Glance 2020). Poor connectivity, especially air 
connectivity remains one of the biggest hurdles and is impacting the growth of the Indian 
tourism sector in general and that of International Tourist Arrivals in particular. The issue 
related to connectivity was deliberated with the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 01 -09-2020 
wherein details pertaining to development of 100 airports and 78 routes approved under the 
fourth round of Regional Connectivity Scheme were inter -alia shared. Since the all round 
department of the tourism sector bas the potential to act as the key driver of inclusive growth 
and unless air connectivity improves, the number of high -end tourists is not going to 
increase, the Committee recommends that at least 19 Iconic spots should be taken on priority 
and suitable mechanism be developed to get the above projects implemented within a 
designated time-frame.  
(Para 40) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Development of Iconic Tourist Destination‟ is not yet approved.  
6.2 Under RCS UDAN -3, The Ministry of Tourism, in consultation with stakeholders 
had forwarded a list of important tourist destinations, to the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Out 
of these 46 routes, 29 routes are operationalized and 8 of them (Dibrugarh to Dimapu r/ 

10 
 
Dimapur to Dibrugarh/ Dimapur to Imphal/ Imphal to Dimapur/Agartala to Aizawl /Aizawl 
to Agartala/ Dibrugarh to Imphal/ Imphal to Dibrugarh) are in the North-East Region.  
 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
7. The Committee observes that the availability o f hotel rooms in India is limited 
because of acute shortage of land in cities due to land market distortions and there is a need 
to significantly augment hotel room capacity. In order to meet the requirement of 
accommodation, the Committee recommends that the surplus railway land at railway stations 
may be utilized for constructing budget hotels.  
(Para 42) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
7.1 Construction and operation of hotels is primarily a private sector activity. The 
Ministry has been request the Ministry of Railways to consider allotting railway land for 
constructing budget hotels.  
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
8. The Committee desires that this mode of transport facility should be affordable to the 
tourists who could not afford cruise tourism facilities so that cruise tourism can reach the 
masses.  
(Para 49) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
8.1  Ministry during the meeting of “Cruise Tourism Task Force” will take up the matter 
with State Governments.  
8.2 Development of places of tourist interest including cruise terminals, which are under 
the control of Central Agencies are granted financial assi stance under the scheme Assistance 

11 
 
to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development. The focus under the scheme is 
on the improvement / up-gradation of existing products and developing new tourism products 
to the World Standard.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
9. The Committee desires the Ministry of Tourism to target foreign tourists, Indians 
living abroad, foreign universities etc. digitally to market the country's brand image as one of 
the popular tourist destinations globally and develop specia l travel packages covering three 
to four prominent destinations of every region in the country.  
(Para 55) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
9.1 Ministry of Tourism (MoT) actively markets country’s tourist destinations through 
digital mediums under its promotional campaign including Global Media Campaigns.  
9.2 The MoT, through India Tourism Offices Overseas endeavors to position India as a 
preferred tourism destination in the tourism generating markets to promote various tourism 
products, destinations to increase India’s share in the global tourism market.  
9.3 The objectives are met through an integrated marketing and promotional strategy and 
a synergized campaign in association with the Travel Trade, State Governments and Indian 
Missions abroad. Promotional activities are also undertaken on digital platform. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
10. The Committee is of the view that many advertisement agencies often intend to 
increase their revenue by promoting their services, but fail to connect to their target 
audience. The Committee, therefore,• recommends that advertisements should be designed in 
such a way that they connect to their target audience by even reaching to the remotest part of 
the country and by showcasing its rich heritage and culture.  
(Para 59) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 

12 
 
10.1 The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) undertakes publicity & promotio nal activities across 
the country including remotest parts & lesser known destinations through electronic, digital 
& social media. Also, the Domestic offices of the MoT undertake various promotional 
activities on regular basis across the country.  
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
11. The Committee notes that the Scheme of Domestic Promotion and Publicity including 
Market Development Assistance was launched with the major objective of creating a general 
awareness amongst the domestic population about the tourist destinations and to deve lop 
tourist market within the country. The Committee desires that the Ministry should pay 
attention to how people search for traveling options, how they reach out to travelers at the 
right time and in what way they embrace Facebook / Twitter/ Instagram advertisements.  
(Para 60) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Ministry through its DPPH scheme is creating awareness about the tourist destinations 
among the citizens of the country. Keeping in line with the ongoin g trends and customer 
behavior, the Ministry is actively using various social media platforms such as Facebook, 
Instagram, and Twitter etc. 
 
OVERSEAS PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
12 While appreciating the shift from generic promotion to more focused and niche 
products of the country under the Incredible India 2.0 campaign, the Committee recommends 
that The Ministry should commission surveys for an impact analysis of the campaigns in k ey 
source markets overseas.  
(Para 67) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 

13 
 
12.1 The Ministry of Tourism has a dedicated Media Planning agency which from time to 
time analyze the latest market trends in source markets targeting on the specific products to 
be marketed in that respective markets. Also, it analyzes the impact of the media campaigns.  
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
13 The Committee also recommends that in order to achieve higher international visitor 
levels, country-wise targets of Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) should be worked out and the 
Ministry should focus on diversification of source markets so that countries wh ich offer high 
growth potential but from where present level of tourist is low could be covered.  
(Para 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
13.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted  
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
14. The Committee would like the Ministry to focus on developing adventure tourism 
activities given below and apprise the Committee of the steps being taken for the same:  
Chadar Trek in Ladakh 
White River Rafting in Rishikesh 
 Jim Corbett Safari- Uttarakhand  
Scuba Diving in Andaman Island, Malvan Island and Goa.  
Roopkund Trek- Uttarakhand  
Manali to Leh Bike/ Jeep Trip  
Caving in Meghalaya  
Skiing in Gulmarg and ManaU  
Bungee Jumping in Rishikesh  
River Rafting in Tons Valley- Uttarakhand  
Hot Air Ballooning in Jaipur and Solang Valley  
Dune Bashing in Jaisalmer  
Paragliding in Bir-Billing- Himachal Pradesh  

14 
 
White Water River Rafting in Kullu  
Water sports at affordable prices in Goa  
Skydiving in Mysore  
Flying Fox Adventure in Neernrana- Rajasthan  
Rock Climbing in Satpura  
Sandakphu Trek-West Bengal  
Wildlife Safari in Gir National Park- Gujarat  
Dudhsagar Trek in Goa  
Kayaking in Aguada River- Goa  
Skiing in Kufri  
Cycling in Munnar  
Camping in Coorg  
Tiger Safari in Bandhavgarh National Park- Madhya Pradesh  
Giant Swing in Rishikesh  
Gulmarg-Gondola Ride  
Microlight Flying in Bangalore  
(Para 80) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
14.1 The recommendations of the Committee are well noted and the Ministry with Private 
stakeholders/ State governments/ UTs will take it up in due course of time.  
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
15 As regards the issue of safety/ security in cruise tourism, the Committee recommends 
that operating agencies should have a detailed  operational procedure and only trained and 
skill tested personnel should be allowed to handle tourists at risk -prone sea/ river areas. 
Further, the landings should have facilities of speedboats, trained divers and security people 
lighting facilities, generators and vessel communication systems. 
(Para 85) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 

15 
 
 
15.1 Recommendation of the Committee is well noted and the matter will be taken up with 
the stakeholders.  
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
16. Cruise tourism in India is still in its  nascent stage but India has an immense 
potential to emerge as a leading destination for cruise tourism in Asia. In recent years, India 
has witnessed increase in the number of calls made by cruise ships. However, the Covid -19 
pandemic and enforcement of th e lockdown in its wake bas had a catastrophic impact on 
cruise tourism in the country. Since cruise industry supports multiple shore side businesses, 
the Committee would like the Ministry to make an assessment of the overall damage caused 
to cruise tourism  due to the COVID -19 pandemic – induced lockdown and take remedial 
measures to mitigate its massive cascading effect on the overall travel and hospitality 
industry. 
 (Para 92) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
16.1 The matter may be discussed during the Cruise tourism task force meeting to take 
place on 17.12.2021. 
 
16.2 Major outcomes of the meeting of Task Force on Cruise Tourism held on 
17.12.2021:- 
 
(i) Immigration issues: It was decided that Chairman, Mumbai Ports Trust, to take lead, 
make a detailed analysis, and prepare an action plan along with BOI, which can help 
the passengers in biometrics and other immigration issues. 
(ii) India Cruise Conference 2022: India Cruise Conference 2022 is proposed to be 
organized by MoPS&W on 25th and 26th February 2022 in Mumbai. 
(iii) Tax related issues: It was decided to form a Sub Group led by AS(Revenue) with 
AS(Tourism) and Chairman, Mumbai Port Trust, to bring out a coherent policy for 
taxation structure for the entire cruise industry for customs duty and GST. 
(iv) Incentives for Cruise & Water Transport on lines of "UDAN" Scheme: The Task 

16 
 
Force was apprised by Chairman, Cochin Port Trust about the following prima facie 
observations of the Working Group constituted on Blue Economy consisting of 
representatives from the Industry and Mumbai Port Trust to look into bringing a 
new scheme on the lines of the UDAAN scheme of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
a. There may be possibilities to give some incentives on the lines of UDAAN Scheme, 
which may include incentives on taxation and GST. 
b. As it would not be possible to give incentives to international cruises, domestic 
cruises may be taken into consideration. 
c. LTC scheme should also be extended to cruise sector also. 
d. It was decided that once the Report of the Working Group is finalized, some more 
discussions may be held in the due course 
 
 
TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
17. Tourism is a multi -sectoral activity by multiple services and therefore, the tourism 
industry is one of the largest generators of employment across the world and has the 
potential to emerge as a key economic driver. Servicing the sector with skilled manpow er is 
therefore of utmost importance. The Committee takes note of the fact that the scheme of 
"Capacity Building for Service Providers" aims to train and upgrade manpower at every 
stratum of service. The Committee also notes that under the “Hunar se Rozgar  Tak” 
programme, 11,624 persons have been trained against the target of 19,250 during 2018 -19 
and observes that the tourism sector's annual requirement of skilled manpower is much more 
than the supply from educational and skill training institutions which also gets reduced due 
to attrition. The Committee, therefore, expresses its displeasure at the shortfall in the target 
of trained persons under the Hunar se Rozgar Tak programme and recommends that the 
Ministry should formulate a robust strategy to meet the problem of trained manpower gap. 
(Para 97) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
17.1 Noted for compliance and efforts are being made towards achieving targets.  

17 
 
However, the Ministry of Tourism has put in place the Scheme of “Capacity Building for 
Service Providers” ( CBSP) to provide education, training and certification to the tourism 
service providers at every level. The main objectives of this initiative are to train and up -
grade manpower at every strata of service in order to capitalize on the vast tourism. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
18. The Committee is of the view that the realization of the country's tourism potential 
cannot be tapped without addressing the issue of capacity constraints. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should conduct a tourism industry training pr ovider 
assessment and review available data from previous assessment; work with industry to 
develop a survey instrument that assesses current and projected workforce needs in different 
tourism domains and occupations (e.g., hotels and lodging, travel and t ransportation, etc.); 
focus the assessment on entry -level; and entrepreneurial occupations that can be filled by 
vulnerable populations such as youth  
(Para 100) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
 
288TH COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
288th Committee Recommendation 
 
19 The Committee notes amount of Rs. 1239. 83 crore remained unspent in FY 2020 -21 
on account of the budgetary cuts imposed by the Ministry of Finance in the wake of the 
unprecedented crisis induced by the COVID -19 pandemic, and was surrendered to Ministry 
of Finance on 08 -02-2021. The Committee is concerned that a huge amount of Rs. 1239.83 
crore was kept till the penultimate month of the financial year 2020 -21. The Committee 
observes that India's COVID- 19 induced lockdown was first imposed in March, 2020 an d its 
cost on the Indian economy and economic activities was visible from the very beginning. The 
Ministry should, therefore, have anticipated the unspent provisions well in advance and 
surrendered them promptly instead of keeping them idly parked. Timely surrender of savings 

18 
 
could have been gainfully utilized for other fund -starved projects. The Committee, therefore, 
exhorts the Ministry to gear up its monitoring mechanism so as to ensure realistic assessment 
of budgetary requirements initiated in this regard. 
(Para 44) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
19.1 Recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
19.2 Recommendation of the Committee is noted with the only submission that under the 
PRASHAD Scheme against the R .E. of Rs. 125 Cr. and expenditure of Rs. 124.80 Cr. was 
booked during the FY 2020-21.  
19.3 The funds amounting to Rs.15 Lakh under the DPPH Head are utilized in H&R 
Division to support annual convention of Hosp itality Stakeholder associations as per existing 
guidelines of the Ministry.  
19.4 The funds remained unutilized since no such events were held in the wake of Covid -
19 pandemic.  
19.5 As per the established procedure, the requirement of funds for the Ministry is 
reviewed by the Ministry of Finance at the time of Pre -Budget Meeting held in the month of 
October every year. Before the RE meeting and formal communication in this regard is 
received from the Ministry of Finance it would not be possible to surrender the funds. The 
Ministry of Finance is aware of the actual allocation for the Ministry and any diversion of 
fund for any Ministry which require additional allocation is possible at the level of the 
Ministry of Finance. Formal surrender of fund is beyond formality to be compiled w ith. 
Further, it is difficult to assess the actual requirement of funds for various schemes as the 
expenditure on the infrastructure schemes and promotion and publicity could scale up 
depending on improvement in the Covid situation.  
 
 
288th Committee Recommendation 
 
21 The Committee takes note of the submissions of the Ministry that strict monitoring of 
Utilization Certificates (UCs) is done through the review meetings. The Committee is, 
however, concerned to note that the number of pending UCs under the S wadesh Darshan 
Scheme and Assistance to IHM/FCI/IITTM scheme, and the amount involved therein, are still 

19 
 
substantial This leads the Committee to conclude that the steps taken so far have not yielded 
the desired results. The Committee, therefore, would like  the Ministry to review the 
methodology of monitoring the progress of utilization of funds so that the execution of 
projects under the flagship schemes of the Ministry is not hamstrung by lack of funds. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the measures initiated in this regard. 
(Para 45) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
21.1 The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) has now primarily taken the following measures to 
ensure timely utilization of funds:-  
 
(i) Regular monitoring of the projects by holding review meetings.  
(ii) Informing State Government to utilize the funds unspent at their end.  
(iii) States/UTs are regularly asked to refund the unutilized funds.  
 
21.2 MoT attempts not the release the next installment till the previous installment is not 
utilized to the optimum level. 
21.3 All the implementing agencies have been directed to submit UCs within the stipulated 
timeline as per the sanction order. Release of further installments is withheld till the receipt of 
Utilization Certificates of funds released earlier.  
21.4 It may kindly be appreciated that under PRASHAD Scheme the only pending UC 
amount to Rs. 10 Cr. for the fund released for the project “Infrastructure Development at Puri, 
Shree Jagannath Dham – Ramachandi - Prachi River front at Deuli under Mega Circuit”.  
 
 
288th Committee Recommendation 
 
22 The Committee observes that though tourism contributes significantly to the GDP as 
well as job creation, the quality of data on different sectors of tourism leaves much to be 
desired. Though the Ministry of Tourism has got prepared, through National Council of 
Applied Economic Research, three Tourism Satellite Surveys of India, for assessing the 
contribution of tourism in GDP, there are still serious data gaps in tourism sector. Even the 
basic statistics of the accommodation units, expenditure incurred by foreign and domestic 

20 
 
tourists, impact of the marketing strategies and publicity campaigns are not available. 
Similarly, though the actual implementation of tourism projects takes place at State/UT level, 
most of the States/UTs don't have proper mechanisms for collection of accurate tourism 
statistics. The Committee, therefore, recommends that under the Scheme of Market Research 
for which an allocation of Rs. 20 crores has been made in BE 2021-22, a proper mechanism 
be developed for collection of robust data on different aspects of tourism.  
(Para 46) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
22.1 The observations of the Committee are noted. Further, this is to inform you that the 
Ministry of Tourism (MoT), Government of India compiles data on Domestic &Foreign 
tourist visits (DTV and FTV) based on the information received from the States/UTs. Market 
Research Division of the Ministry regularly coordinates with State/UTs Government for 
providing month-wise DTVs & FTVs data.  
22.2 In order to standardize the methodology for data c ollection by State/UTs, MoT, 
Government of India has developed an approved Standard Tourism Methodology for 
estimation of Data on Domestic & Foreign tourist visitor and shared with all States/UTs.  
22.3 In addition to this, Ministry has taken an initiative  to roll out the methodology across 
all State/UTs and National Productivity Council (NPC) has been given responsibility as 
Project Management Unit (PMU) to facilitate implementation of the standardized Tourism 
Survey.  
22.4 Methodology across all State/UTs of India.  
 
 
288th Committee Recommendation 
 
23. The Committee observes that the tourism, travel and hospitality sector which has 
direct as well as multiplier effect on a host of sectors and contributes significantly to the  
national economy, has suffered unemployment and bankruptcies due to the COVID -19 
pandemic. Though the Government of India has undertaken various fiscal and relief 
measures under the Atmanirbhar Bharat to restore the growth momentum of the economy, 
these m easures have not been supplemented with sector specific credit measures for the 
tourism sector. The Committee notes that as per  the "Report of the Working Group on 

21 
 
Tourism" of the 12th Five Year Plan in India, the travel and tourism sector is estimated to 
create 78 jobs per million rupees of investment compared to 45 jobs in the manufacturing 
sector for similar investment. This critical sector is one of India's large st contributors to 
GDP. The sector which has huge potential to stimulate overall economic growth and can act 
as a catalyst for the recovery of the currently battered economy needs direct Government 
support by way of relief measures like a stimulus package,  rationalization of GST, liquidity 
support, etc.  
 
23.1 The Committee has been informed that governments across the world are undertaking 
measures to mitigate the impact of COVID -19 pandemic on this critical sector. For example, 
the United Kingdom has prov ided a 12 -month business tax rates holiday for all retail, 
hospitality and leisure businesses in England; France has set up a €2 billion Solidarity Fund 
for which many Tourism Businesses will be eligible; in Singapore, tourism businesses 
affected by COVID -19 received wage subsidies of up to 75%. Taking all the above factors 
into account, the Committee is of the considered view that since the COVID-19 pandemic and 
the consequent lockdowns have a crippling blow to the Indian tourism, travel and hospitality 
industry and the whole value chain has been hit hard, the Government needs to provide 
targeted support to the sector. The Committee accordingly recommends that the Government 
should inject tourism sector -specific financial/monetary stimulus in the system and  offer 
immediate liquidity support and rationalization of the GST structure for the sector. The 
Committee observes, even at the cost of sounding repetitive, that such a critical sector 
contributing so much to the GDP and generating employment opportunities  should not be 
ignored, especially when it is in dire straits. The Committee would like the Ministry to pursue 
this matter with the Ministry of Finance with a sense of urgency and promptitude and apprise 
the Committee of their response.  
 
23.2 The National  strategy and roadmap for development of rural tourism is based on 
overarching theme of sustainable and responsible tourism, which will be supported by the 
following strategic pillars: 
(i). Benchmarking of state policies and best practices   
(ii). Digital technologies and platforms for rural tourism  
(iii). Developing clusters for rural tourism  
(iv). Marketing support for rural tourism  
(v). Capacity building of stakeholders  

22 
 
(vi). Governance and Institutional Framework 
(Para No. 69) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
23.3 The “National strategy and roadmap for development of rural Tourism” prepared by 
MOT in December, 2021 will help the rural areas to increase employment, mitigate poverty, 
Capacity building, development of rural clusters etc. The document is likely to overc ome the 
recovery of tourism sector.  
 
23.4 The matter of relief measures was repeatedly taken up with the Ministry of Finance. 
Vide OM No. F. No. 13/38/202 1 -IF-II dated 03.11.2021, the Department of Financial 
Services, the Ministry  of Finance has conveyed  information on Emergency Credit Line 
Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) – Data on support to Tourism and Hospitality Sector.  
 
23.5 As announcement by the Ministry of Finance on 28.06.2021 to provide relief to the 
tourism sector, the Ministry  of Tourism (MoT) has i mplemented the "Loan Guarantee 
Scheme for Covid Affected Tourism Service Sector (LGSCATSS)". Under this loan 
guarantee scheme, loan up to Rs. 10.00 lakh will be extended to each Tour Operators/ Travel 
Agents/ Tourist Transport Operators approved/ recognized by the MoT (MoT), up to Rs. 1.00 
lakh will be extended to each Regional Tourist Guide/ Incredible India Tourist Guide 
approved/ recognized by the MoT and Tourist Guides approved/ recognized by the State 
Govt./ UT Administration.  
 
23.6 The purpose of the  LGSCATSS of the MoT is to provide guarantee coverage for the 
loans provided by the Scheduled Commercial Banks to the above mentioned beneficiaries, to 
discharge their liabilities and restart their business affected due to Covid-19 pandemic.  
 
23.7 Validity of the said scheme is till 31.03.2022 or till the guarantee of Rs. 250.00 crores 
are issued under the scheme, whichever is earlier and would be applicable to all eligible loans 
sanctioned under the scheme on or after 04.10.2021 issuance of LGSCATSS guide lines by 
National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company (NCGTC)] till 31.03.2022. No guarantee fee 
will be charged from the Money Lending Institutions (MLIs) by NCGTC for the credit 
facilities provided under the Scheme.  

23 
 
 
 
 
288th Committee Recommendation 
 
24 Domestic tourism plays an important role in overall tourism development in the 
country. At a time when foreign tourist arrivals have registered a de -growth due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, domestic tourism visits have re -started and are helping to soften the 
blow in a significant way. The Committee, however, observes that despite having a strong 
domestic tourism base coupled with a rapidly rising middle class with disposable incomes, 
domestic tourists, currently represent an extremely small fraction of the tot al population of 
the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should incentivize 
domestic tourism by way of modifying rules and allowing citizens to avail Leave Travel 
Allowance benefit on domestic tours including travel fare and accommodation expenses for a 
period of two year. This give the necessary flip to the sector and help make domestic tourism 
a mainstream part of our economy. 
(Para No. 70) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
24.1 MoT has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance  
 
 
288th Committee Recommendation 
 
25. The Committee observes that India currently has approximately 1% share of global 
MICE (Meeting, Incentives, Conferences, & Events) market. Since MICE forms a large 
segment of tourism business, the C ommittee recommends that the Government should 
incentivize India corporates to undertake domestic MICE and to prevent MICE events from 
going abroad.. 
(Para 71) 
 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 The Ministry has written to all state Governments/ UT Administrations to organize 
MICE related activities in Five important tourist centers spread across the country during 
Off-peak periods i.e. from April to September and Regional directors of India tourism offices 
have been nominated to coordinate the MICE related activities. Pandemic has resulted in 
negligible MICE activities in world incl uding India in the recent past. However the Ministry 
provides financial support to stakeholders for travel overseas to promote MICE tourism in the 
country.  
25.2 The Ministry of Tourism has also written to all Central Ministries/Departments to 
schedule the meetings, conferences, exhibitions, etc., of their Ministries and PSUs at these 
destinations 
 
 
288th Recommendations of the Committee 
 
26. The Committee observes that one of the bottlenecks in tapping the full potential of the 
hospitality sector is the high incidence and multiplicity of taxes. While some States like 
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttarakhand, etc., have accorded industry status to hos pitality sector, 
there is no uniformity in the tax structure across States and the cumulative impact of the 
present tax structure is that room tariffs in the country have become exorbitantly high, 
thereby leading to tourist packages being priced out in com parison to competing destinations 
of other countries who are luring tourists. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that levy 
of taxes on hotels should be rationalized and industrial rates for power supply, water supply, 
property tax should be charged i nstead of the commercial rates. This, in the opinion of the 
Committee, would be a game changer in reviving this badly hit sector due to COVID -19 
pandemic and boost investment in the sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should imme diately initiate policy measures for according Industry status to hotels 
so that benefits of lower rates of electricity, water property tax could be extended to hotels 
and taxes levied on hotels are rationalized and made globally competitive.  
(Para No. 74) 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
26.1 The matter was taken up with all the State Governments / Union Territory 
Administrations vide letter dated 12.10.202 1 from the Secretary (T).  
 
288th Recommendations of the Committee Para 75 
 
27 The Committee notes that based on the representations of the industry stakeholders, 
the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) has taken up several issues with the Ministry of Finance and 
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry for revival of the tourism sector. One of t he issues 
taken up with the Ministry of Commerce is enhanced benefits of 10% under the Service 
Exports from India Scheme (SEIS). Under this scheme, the Government offers domestic 
exporters duty credit Scrips in the range of 5% to 7% of the net foreign exch ange earned, 
depending on the nature of services. The Committee has been given to understand that the 
SEIS Scrips due for the financial year 2019 -20 have not been paid as yet. Since services 
exporters need continued support to survive in these challenging times, the Committee 
recommends that the MoT should increase the scale of its engagement with the Ministry of 
Commerce to ensure that the SEIS credit Scrips due to service providers against their foreign 
exchange earnings are paid without further loss of time.  
(Para No. 75) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
27.1 Continued SEIS benefits to Tour Operators are very much necessary at this stage in 
order to help grow Foreign Tourists arrivals, earn valuable foreign exchange and an engine 
for economic growth and employment generation for the Country.  
27.2 Indian Association of Tour Operators (IATO) has been requesting the M/o Commerce 
& Industry to increase SEIS Scrips percentage from 7% to 10% for the tour operators for the 
year 2019-20.  
27.3 MoT has also conveyed its recommendations to the Department of Commerce, M/o  
Commerce & Industry with the approval of HM(T) for continuation of services Export from 
India Scheme (SEIS) – increase the rate of rewards to 10% to hospitality sector vide OM No. 
46534/2020/O/o US (H&R) dated 30.06.2020.  

26 
 
27.4 MoT has taken up the matter  with the Ministry  of Comm erce vide OM dated 
20.12.2021. 
27.5 The Foreign Trade Policy 2015 -20 of the Ministry of Commerce, Government of 
India, provide for the inclusion of tour operators’  services to get SEIS benefits every year on 
the foreign exchange earned by them during F .Y.s of 2015 -20. For the F .Y. 2019-20 a 
notification has been issued by MoC&I vide dated 23.09.2021 for release of SEIS benefits.  
 
 
288th Recommendations of the Committee 
 
28 The Committee also recommends that given the changed scenario and at a time when 
the tourism sector is faced with the crisis of the century, the notified services be incentivized 
under SEIS at an enhanced rate of 10% for both tour operators and hotels in order to provide 
them cash flow support. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action taken in this 
regard.  
(Para No. 76) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
28.1 Continued SEIS benefits to Tour Operators are very much necessary at this stage in 
order to help grow Foreign Tourists arrivals, earn valuable foreign exchange and an engine 
for economic growth and employment generation for the Country.  
28.2 IATO has been requesting the M/o Commerce & Industry to increase SEIS Scrips 
percentage from 7% to 10% for the tour operators for the year 2019-20.  
28.3 the Ministry of Tourism has also conveyed its recommendations to the Department of 
Commerce, M/o Commerce & Industry with the approval of HM(T) for continuation of 
services Export from India Sche me (SEIS) – increase the rate of rewards to 10% to 
hospitality sector vide OM No. 46534/2020/O/o US (H&R) dated 30.06.2020.  
28.4 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Commerce vide OM dated 
20.12.2021.  
 
 
 
 

27 
 
288th Recommendations of the Committee 
 
29 The Committee observes that as per the provisions contained under IGST law, export 
of goods or services or both are regarded as "zero rated supplies" and GST is not levied on 
export of such goods and services and exporters who earn in convert ible foreign exchange 
are exempted from GST. However the foreign exchange earned by the inbound tour operators 
and hotels are not exempted from GST. The Committee observes that the foreign exchange 
earnings through tourism were to the tune of Rs. 211661 cr ores in 2019. After serious 
reflection the Committee recommends that in order to enhance export competitiveness of 
Indian tourism as also to provide relief to the tourism and hospitality sector, the payments 
received by all the tourism and hospitality enti ties in convertible foreign exchange be 
considered as deemed export and be exempted from GST and the concept of zero -rating also 
be applied to tourism foreign exchange earnings. 
(Para No. 77) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
29.1 The Matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
288th Recommendations of the Committee 
 
30 The Committee reiterates the recommendations made in Para 177 to Para 179 of its 
288th Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministry of Tourism, presented to the 
Parliament on the 9th March, 2021.  
30.1 "Tourism is the largest sector in the economy of the Maldives as it plays a vital role in 
earning foreign exchange revenues and generating employment. In order to promote tourism, 
the M aldivian Government has leased dozens of uninhabited islands to local and foreign 
resort developers. The Committee notes that India has a number of islands. These islands 
have several virgin places, beaches and an array of features to transform them into g lobal 
tourism hotspot. But a lack of strategy has worked as a barrier to such transformations. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to explore the possibility of following the Maldivian model 

28 
 
in places in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep Is lands and facilitating 
leasing of islands to local and foreign resort developers for tourism purposes".  
30.2 "The Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CIRF) is earmarked for various 
infrastructure sectors. The Committee 73 would like the Ministry to help  formulate a policy 
for earmarking of CRIF funds for developing and providing highway link as well as last mile 
road connectivity to tourist destinations, including historical places and temples such as 
Gulmarg, Pahalgaam, Shankracharya Temple, Srinagar, L eh, Ladakh, Manali, Coorg, 
AIIeppey, etc., historical places and temples." 
(Para No. 123) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
30.3 Recommendation of the Committee is noted.  
 
288th Recommendations of the Committee 
 
31. In order to make our country a 365 days tourist destination, connectivity by all the 
modes of transportation is extremely important. The Committee finds absence of proper mode 
of transportation to reach even the most visited tourist destinations like Agra, Tirupati, etc. If 
our country has to be made a major Tourism Hub, the destinations should be well connected. 
The Committee, therefore, desires that a Master Plan should be prepared and shared among 
the Ministries for achieving better . 
(Para No. 124) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
31.1 Recommendation of the Committee is noted.  
 
288th Recommendations of the Committee 
 
32 Religious Tourism in India is one of the key dimensions to boost tourism and to 
attract both domestic and international tourist~ India is already blessed with a large number 
of religious tour ism places for every sect of religion. Places such as Madu, Tirupati, Shird i 
and Sabarimala are few amongst them. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 
Ministry that these tourist places should have proper and frequent air connectivity. Further, 

29 
 
for sites without airport, the Ministry of Tourism should coordinate with the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on priority basis for development of airports, as these tourist places are mostly 
visited by elderly tourists.  
(Para No. 125) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
32.1 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA)  
 
288th Recommendations of the Committee  
 
33 The Committee is of the view that India has a huge potential of religious tourism 
which would enhance India's soft power projection in Southeast Asia which is already 
emerging as a new tourism hub for international tourists across the world. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to embrace the opportunities presented by the North -South Economic 
Corridor in order to encourage travelers from the north of Myanmar and to Southern China 
along with South- East Asian countries, which in turn, may lead to more inte rest in India's 
religious tourism spots and would  definitely boost foreign exchange earnings of lndia.  
(Para No. 126) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
33.1 The observations of the Committee are noted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOESN OT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
PRASHAD SCHEMES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1. The Committee notes that the objectives of the SDS and PRASHAD Schemes inter -
alia include pro -poor tourism concept, active involvement  of local communities and 
generation of sufficient job opportunities for locals as part of the execution and  after 
completion of the projects. The Committee observes that it has often been seen that the local 
people do not benefit from new tourism busines s due to multiple factors like capacity 
constraints, inadequate financial resources for enterprises, lack of business opportunities, 
etc. and also because the poor and marginalized communities do not have the avenues to 
negotiate with tourism companies. Th e Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Government must adopt a proactive interventionist approach to effectively implement the 
SDS and PRASHAD Schemes in line with pro -poor principles. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry in close coordinat ion with State Governments/ Union 
Territories should create robust and clear policies that cater for the needs of locals, expand 
business and employment policies for the poor through capacity building and enterprise 
support and contribute to local liveliho ods. The Ministry must also focus on skill 
development to enable local community to take up skilled jobs during the execution and after 
the completion of projects under the SDS and PRASHAD Schemes. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
1.1 The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) has formulated the guidelines for Swadesh Darshan 
2.0 with the mantra of vocal for local. The strategic  objectives of the revised scheme  include 
enhancement  of the contribution  of tourism to  local  economies,  create jobs including  self-
employment  for local  communities and  to  enhance the  skills of local  youth  in  tourism  
and  hospitality. The  draft  guidelines also  visualize constitution  of  Destination  
Management  Committee  under the chairmanship of  District  Collector. The  ro le  of  the  

31 
 
Destination  Management Committee includes  providing synergy  with  other  schemes and  
programs of Central  and  State Government at the  district  level  particularly  relating  to 
infrastructure development , human capital development, job   creation and entrepreneurship, 
investment promotion and marketing and other  such programmes to develop  and promote 
tourism. Function  of  the  Destination  Management  Committee  also  include  promotion of  
skill  development  and  local  entrepreneurship for  various  tourism services.       
 
1.2 HRD Input -MoT has noted the recommendations of the Committee for compliance. 
 
1.3 MoT started the Destination Based Skill Development training programme at 7 
iconic sites i.e. Taj Mahal at Agra, Humayun Tomb , Red Fort, Qutub Minar at Delhi, 
Mahabodhi Temple at Bihar, Colva Beach at Goa and Kaziranga at Assam in FY 2019 -20 to 
train, upgrade and sensitize the local people residing near these tourism sites and destinations. 
 
1.4 This programme is geared towards enhancing employability, in both rural and urban 
destinations for local community and to upgrade the manpower servicing the tourism sector. 
 
1.5 The Vision Statement of PRASHAD Scheme, inter -alia, includes inclusive and 
sustainable developments with employ ment for the local communities.   In addition, 
Objectives of the scheme also include following: 
 Position tourism as a major engine for economic growth and employment generation; 
 The community based development through ‘Pro Poor’ tourism concept and 
‘responsible tourism’ initiatives. 
 Assure active involvement of local communities through employment generation. 
 Creating awareness among the local communities about the importance of tourism for 
them in terms of increase in sources of income, improved liv ing standards and overall 
development of the area. 
 In addition the scheme aims at promotion of local arts, culture, handicrafts, cuisine, 
etc., to generate livelihood at the identified places. 
 
1.6 As regards achievement of above said goals this is to info rm that the physical 
execution of the projects under PRASHAD Scheme involve local artisans and labourers.  Sale 
counters like kiosks (for sale of pious offerings, local artefacts and produces), Prasad 
counters, food courts, restaurants are also being appro ved and executed under the 

32 
 
Scheme.  These facilities provide direct employments for the locals particularly marginal and 
poor locals.  Maintenance of the facilities developed under PRASHAD Projects like parkings, 
Tourist Facilitation Centres, Cloakrooms, T ourism Interpretation Centres and other tourist 
amenities and public convenience also provide direct employment to the such locals.   Direct 
employment is directly proportionate to the indirect employment. More employment always 
strengthens the local economy further improving financial health of local habitants.  
1.7 Thus it may be seen that the strategic   objectives of the scheme   include 
enhancement of the contribution  of tourism to  local  economies,  create jobs including  self-
employment  for local   communities and   to  enhance the   skills of 
local  youth  in  tourism  and  hospitality 
1.8 MoT has noted the recommendations of the Committee for compliance. 
1.9  MoT started the Destination Based Skill Development training programme at 7 
iconic sites i.e. Taj Mahal at Agra, Humayun Tomb, Red Fort, Qutub Minar at Delhi, 
Mahabodhi Temple at Bihar, Colva Beach at Goa and Kaziranga at Assam in F.Y. 2019-20 to 
train, upgrade and sensitize the local people residing near these tourism sites and destinations. 
1.10 This programme is geared towards enhancing employability, in both rural and urban 
destinations for local community and to upgrade the manpower servicing the tourism sector. 
 
 
TIMELY IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEMES – SWADESH DARSHAN AND 
PRASHAD 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
2. The Committee feels that the progress of implementation of sites under PRASHAD 
Scheme needs to be monitored regularly through a dedicated mechanism to ensure that there 
is no time overrun and cost escalation. The Committee notes that the lockdown due to Co vid-
19 pandemic hampered the construction activities under the SDS and PRASHAD schemes. 
The Committee observes that development of tourism infrastructure under the above flagship 
schemes of the Ministry will not only act as a catalyst to economic developme nt of the 
country but also promote more inclusive growth. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should re -orient its strategy to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on 
implementation of projects under the above schemes so that the targets set out are achieved 

33 
 
in a specified time -frame. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the policy measures 
initiated to accelerate the pace of implementation of projects and effectiveness thereof. 
(Para 23) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
2.1 The Ministry of  Tourism (MoT) between the years 2014 -2015 to 2018 -19 has 
sanctioned 76 projects under13 identified thematic circuits. Till the month of November, 
2021; 16 projects are physically complete. In addition, 31 projects have further completed 
physical progress of more than 80%. The MoT has now fixed the timelines for completion of 
projects as December, 2021; March, 2022 and December, 2022 based on the physical 
progress made in the project. In addition, the MoT is regularly holding review meetings with 
the States/IAs to resolve the bottlenecks and to ensure that the projects are completed in a 
time-bound manner.  
 
2.2 As regards PRASHAD Scheme, the observations of the Committee have been noted. 
However, this is to inform that in order to mitigate the effect of ongoing pandemic, the 
Ministry has proactively started to follow -up aggressively with the concerned State 
Governments for completion of the already approved projects. Extra efforts are also being put 
for removal of bottlenecks and approval of new projects. 
 
2.3 The Committee may kindly appreciate that out of the 37 projects approved under 
PRASHAD Scheme during the period of 2014-15 and onward, 17 projects are complete in all 
respect. Three more projects are likely to be completed during the F .Y. 2021-22. Out of 
remaining 17 projects, 8 projects have been approved during the year 2020-21 only.  
 
2.4 MoT at the levels of Joint Secretary and the Secretary, is regularly holding review 
meetings with the States/IAs to resolve the bottlenecks and to ensure that the projects are 
approved and completed in a time-bound manner. This is to inform that during the months of 
October to December 2021, all the PRASHAD projects have been revie wed at the level of 
Secretary and immediate follow -up calls were made by him to his counterpart in the 
respective State Government. Review and follow -ups with the SGs at the level of Joint 
Secretary/Additional Director General is a continuous process. 
 

34 
 
PPP MODEL FOR SWADESH DARSHAN AND PARSHAD SCHEMES 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
3. The Committee takes note of the of the Ministry that the Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) model bas been explored for certain components of projects under the Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme and PRASHASD Schemes also have a provision to explore for PPP partner 
for operation, maintenance and sustenance of the facilities created. The Co mmittee observes 
that creation of quality infrastructure for developing tourist products and for providing better 
services to both domestic and international tourists is a pre -requisite not only to generate 
employment and achieve broad based and inclusive growth of the economy on a sustained 
basis, but also to have a favorable impact on the preservation of art, culture and heritage. 
However, projects like the SDS and PRASHAD have high social but an unacceptable 
commercial rate of return and are generally ch aracterised by long gestation periods, 
substantial investments, fixed returns due to which they require financial support from the 
Government through appropriate financial investments and incentives. Since the development 
of tourism infrastructure requires  very large investments and cannot be undertaken out of 
public financing alone, the engagement of the private sector in provisioning of tourism 
infrastructure under the SDS and PRASHAD is warranted. The Committee is of the firm view 
that the involvement of  the private sector will not only bring in the efficiencies of the private 
sector and commercial enterprise but will also go a long way in supplementing the scarce 
public sector resources vis -a-vis the requirements of bridging the infrastructure deficit. T he 
Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to meet the funding gap, make SDS and 
PRASHAD commercially viable and facilitate private sector efficiencies in the development 
of tourism infrastructure under the SDS and PRASHAD, the Ministry should formu late a 
transparent policy framework for participation of private operators in developing products 
such as hotels, resorts, convention centers, tourist trains, etc., with the Government acting as 
a facilitator and catalyst and also set up a Viability Gap Fu nding window for tourism 
infrastructure development under the SDS and PRASHAD. 
(Para 24) 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Viability Gap Funding is not envisaged by the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) under 
Swadesh Darshan scheme. The draft guidelines formulated for SD2.0 for operation and 
maintenance of created assets envisage that - O&M plan will be part of the DPR and will be 
evaluated at the time of approval. A plan for management of revenue generating assets, which 
can have public private partnership and non -revenue generating assets, which will require 
budgetary support will be worked out in the project.  
3.2 PRASHAD scheme, a Central Sector Scheme -100% financed by the Government of 
India is meant for the development of pilgrimage and/or heritage tourism infrastructure on 
need-gap analysis basis at the pre -identified destinations/places. Scope of the scheme does 
not include viability Gap Funding. The scheme acts as a catalysis to attract investment from 
private sector at the place/destination developed under the Scheme. Any type of 
accommodation facilities like hotels, resorts, dormitories are commercial activities and thus 
not a dmissible under the scheme. Such activities have been left out for private players on 
commercial considerations.  
3.3 Further, the projects under PRASHAD Scheme are considered and approved on 
receipt of the requests/proposals for the respective State Gover nments/Union Territories. 
MoT allows dovetailing for the big projects envisaged by any State Government / Union 
Territory, including the interventions approved under PRASHAD Scheme and the 
interventions financed by other Government Departments/ PSUs/Banks/  Private bodies etc, 
subject the interventions proposed under PRASHAD Scheme should be identifiable 
distinctly.  
 
AIR CONNECTIVITY 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
4. Connectivity Related Issues- The Committee is of the view that air connectivity is key 
to unlocking India's tourism potential and proper steps must be taken to operationalize the 
remaining routes under RCS - UDAN-3 to meet the emerging demand of tourism industry in 
the region of North-East, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh etc.  
(Para 33) 
 
 

36 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
4.1 The Ministry of Tourism has already requested Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA) to 
Endeavour for providing better air connectivity to ICONIC sites. Under RCS UDAN -3 the 
recommendation of MoT, 46 tourism routes have already been taken by the bidders.  
4.2 Out of these 46 routes, 29 routes are operationalized and 8 of them (Dibrugarh to 
Dimapur/ Dimapur to Dibrugarh/ Dimapur to Imphal/ Imphal to Dimapur/Agartala to Aizawl 
/Aizawl to Agartala/ Dibrugarh to Imphal/ Imphal to Dibrugarh) belong to North -East 
Region.  
4.3 Further, Ministry of Civil Aviation has already launched RCS- UDAN 4, under which 
78 routes have been taken by successful bidding airlines. Most of the routes on RCS-4 pertain 
to North East Region.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
5.  The Committee observes that Vande Bharat trains have been introduced for some 
important tourist destinations. The Committee is of the opinion that some more Vande Bharat 
trains should be introduced on routes such as Jaisalmer -Jodhpur, Jaipur¬Agra, Mumbai-
Nagpur, Howrah-Patna-Varansi, Chennai-Trichy-Madurai-Kanyakumari-Thiruvananthpuram 
and Varanasi -Chitrakoot-Satna-Jabalpur. These are the key places where maximum tourist 
travels and these trains can really mobilize more trains. 
(Para 43) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
5.1 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Railways  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
  
6. The Committee is of the view that in the States of North -East, Uttarakhand and 
Himachal Pradesh, most tourist destinations are reachable by road and entail long travel 
time between the destinations. There is also a lack of roadside amenities including affo rdable 
stay-homes, toilets, and cafeterias in the routes. Also, there is lack of proper intra -State rail 
connectivity. The Committee would, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Tourism should 

37 
 
focus on tackling the above issues and apprise the Committee o f the hurdles being faced in 
the implementation of the road and rail connectivity projects along with the steps taken to 
deal with these issues.  
(Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
6.1 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Railways & MoRTH.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
7. Cruise tourism in India is still a nascent industry, though we have a huge opportunity 
to capture the market because geographically, India is strategically located between Western 
Europe and Asia and every ship to Europe has  to pass through it. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that in order to enable the cruise sector to reshape the Indian travel industry, 
the Government must revamp the country's current Port infrastructure, set up dedicated 
terminals to cater to the needs of tourists and undertake riverfront development on a massive 
scale.  
(Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
7.1 The Ministry of Tourism officials along with the Ministry  of shipping officials is 
regularly holding meetings of the Cruise tourism Task Force along with Port authorities and 
other stakeholders to discuss and implement the policies relating to development of 
infrastructure at various port terminals in India. the Ministry of shipping under “Sagarmala” 
scheme is releasing funds for development of infrastructure at ports.SD and ID division have 
released funds for development of Coastal circuit and creation of Infrastructure at 
Vishakhapatnam port.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
8. Digital Connectivity and Outreach Advances in technology are spurring innovations 
and redefining notions of travel altogether. However, about 70% of the tourism units in India 
come under the category of MSMEs who often lack the necessary technical measures  in their 
workforce to fully reap the budget of digital potentials. The Committee, therefore, 

38 
 
recommends that the Government should chalk out a programme for providing technical 
assistance to MSMEs so that they could digitize their operations. 
(Para 53) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
8.1 The recommendation is noted for compliance.  
8.2 The Indian Culinary Institutes (ICI), Tirupati & Noida campuses and the National 
Council for Hotel Management & Catering Technology (NCHMCT) are being requested to 
chalk out short term programmes for providing technical assistance to MSME so that they 
can digitize their operations. Meanwhile, the Institute of Hotel Management (IHM) Srinagar 
has been requested to hand hold home stay owners of Ladakh who wish to register /classify 
their properties with the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) for online submission of ap plication 
forms.  
8.3 The scope of the Scheme under the HRD does not have any component for providing 
technical assistance to MSMEs for digitization of their operation.  
8.4 MoT does not deal with any MSMEs and at present, there is no scheme/guidelines for  
providing assistance to the MSMEs. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
9. With increasing variations in demand of tourism, the Committee feels that creative 
ways of digitally showcasing the different facets of our Heritage needs to be explored and 
this would require a paradigm shift in understanding customer's travel interests and focus on 
developing alternative attractions. 
(Para 54) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted.  
9.2 the Ministry  of Tourism (MoT) actively uses its social media platforms for 
showcasing country’s various tourism products& destinations including Heritage to 
customers.  
9.3 MoT has launched Incredible India Website & Mobile App with an aim to enhance 
the digital outre ach of the varied tourism offerings across the country to promote tourism. 

39 
 
The website & mobile app are available in foreign languages and has a separate section under 
“experiences” to showcase the rich heritage of our country. 
 
DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
10. The growth in Indian travel and tourism sector has largely been driven by domestic 
tourism. As per the information furnished in the Annual Report 2019-20 of the Ministry, there 
were 1854.93 Million domestic tourist visits during the year 2018. However, in the aftermath 
of Covid-19 pandemic and the enforcement of lockdown, tourists are hesitant about travelling 
due to the fear of Covid -and the tourism sector has been among the worst -hit areas. Since 
revival of inte rnational tourism would take some time, domestic tourism would play an 
important role in reviving the economy. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Government must focus on promoting domestic tourism and adopt aggressive online and 
other marketing  strategies to advertise domestic destinations in a big way so that tourist 
footfall could be increased. 
 (Para 58) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
10.1 Domestic Tourism in the country under Dekho Apna Desh initiative which was 
launched in January 2020. Under this  initiative, the  Ministry is organizing a series of 
webinars in partnership with the stakeholders under the overall theme of Dekho Apna Desh 
showcasing the diverse culture, heritage, destinations and tourism products of the country. As 
on date more than 10 0 webinars co vering different States/ Union Territories have been 
organized as part of the initiative. Dekho Apna Desh initiative is being promoted extensively 
on social media accounts and website of the Ministry and by Domestic India Tourism offices.  
10.2 Since the beginning of the Covid -19 pandemic, Ministry has been consciously 
promoting domestic tourism through its social media platforms, Also, domestic tourism has 
been hol istically promoted through the “ Dekho Apna Desh ” campaign under which the 
Ministry has conducted series of webinar and other promotional activities and events  
 
 

40 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
11 Another concern of the Committee is regarding promotion of tourist sites such as Jim 
Corbett National Park (Nainital, Uttarakhand), Daman and Diu, Rameswaram (Tamil 
Nadu), Shirdi and Lonar Crater Lake (Maharashtra), Jammu and Kashmir, North Eastern 
States, Ladakh region. The Ministry should chalk out ways to promote the above mentioned 
tourist sites digitally so that there is increase in tourist footfall in these regions. This would 
not only help in modernization of tourism infrastructure but also lead to e mployment and 
revenue generation.  
(Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
11.1 The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) is undertaking a series of promotional activities for 
encouraging citizens to travel within the country. The Ministry is regularly organizing 
Tourism Promotional Events, Road Shows, Fam ily Trips, Students Study Tours, Workshops, 
Quiz Programmes, Social Media Promotions etc. under the banner of Dekho Apna Desh, Ek 
Bharat Shrestha Bharat (EBSB) and Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsava.  
11.2 MoT promotes India in a holistic manner including various destinations, tourism 
products such as Wildlife, Wellness etc. as part of its on -going activities, it rele ases media 
campaigns under the “ Incredible India ” brand-line through electronic, digital and other 
mediums.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
12 The objective of Overseas Promotion and Publicity including Marketing Development 
Assistance Scheme is to position India as a favored tourism destination in the tourism 
generating markets overseas and to increase India's sha re of the global tourism market. As 
per information given in the Annual Report (2019 -20) of the Ministry of Tourism, Foreign 
Tourist Arrivals (FT As) were 10.89 Million during 2019 and International Tourist Arrivals 
(ITAs) (which include both FTAs and arri vals of NRIs) were 17.82 Million in the year 2018. 
As a result of the Covid -19 pandemic, tourism has been hit hard and the growth of 
International Tourist Arrivals to India has declined sharply. The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the extent to which I T As are expected to drop as compared to the original 2020 
forecast and whether any targeted marketing strategy has been adopted to revive the growth 

41 
 
of IT As to India. The Committee also takes note of the submission that in order to promote 
and market bra nd India and promote India's share in global tourist arrivals, a synergized 
campaign in association with the Travel Trade, State Governments and Indian Missions 
overseas has been launched. Since the abrupt fall in ITAs and the resultant plunge in the 
tourism sector has wiped out many small and medium sized firms that had  
catered to tourists overseas, the Committee recommends that financial assistance be provided 
to approved tourism service providers for undertaking the tourism promotional activities 
overseas.  
(Para 70) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
12.1  Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) in India 
Year FTAs (in Millions) 
2018 10.56 
2019 10.93 
2020 2.74 
Source: Bureau of Immigration 
12.2  International Tourist Arrivals (ITAs) in India 
Year ITAs (in Millions) 
2018 17.42 
2019 17.91 
2020 6.33 
Source: Bureau of Immigration 
 
12.3 Ministry of Tourism (MoT), under the revised Marketing Development Assistance 
(MDA) Scheme, extends financial assistance to tourism service providers approved by the 
MoT, Govt. of India or the respective State Government / Union Territory (UT) 
Administration, for undertaking promotion and marketing of India in the overseas markets.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
13 Foreign Tourist footfall is one of the key aspects of emerging tourism industry.  

42 
 
The Committee in this regard, would like the Ministry to follow the strategy given below, 
point-wise, to advertise country's image as one of the prominent tourist attractions globally:-  
Highlighting the main tourist attractions.  
Identification of target visitors.  
Obtain and utilize data to get to know your visitors.  
Focus on Branding country's rich heritage and culture.  
Seek Public Private Partnerships.  
Create a compelling destination website.  
Engagement Marketing. Training and Skill development programme for professionals.  
Giving visitors an immersive experience.  
Using Social Media platforms.  
Attracting Influencers/ travel operators.  
Exploring various online advertising methods. 
Creating offline overseas marketing strategies.  
(Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) has put in place the Scheme of “Capacity Building 
for Service Providers” (CBSP) to provide education, training and certification to the tourism 
service providers at every level. The main objective of this ini tiative is to train and up -grade 
manpower at every strata of service in order to capitalize on the vast tourism potential of the 
country to the fullest and to provide professional expertise to the local populace in the 
tourism sector both in urban as well as rural areas.  
13.2 Under the CBSP Scheme a programme for existing professionals to upgrade their 
professional skill has also been initiated under Skill Training & Certification (STC).  
13.3 The MoT under its Overseas promotion and publicity Scheme promo tes India as a 
holistic destination in the tourism generating markets overseas to attract foreign tourists and 
increase India’s share of the global tourism market. The above objectives are met through an 
integrated marketing and promotional strategy, and a  synergized campaign in association 
with the Travel Trade, State Governments and Indian Missions.  
13.4 The specific elements of promotional efforts undertaken overseas include advertising 
in print, electronic, online and outdoor media, participation inter national Fairs & Exhibitions, 
organizing Know India Seminars, Workshops, Road Shows and India Evenings, Brochure 
Support, Joint Advertising with Travel Agents / Tour Operators, organizing and supporting 
Indian Food and cultural festivals, production of publicity material and organizing 

43 
 
familiarization tours for overseas tour operators/media/opinion makers etc. to visit the 
country under the Hospitality programme of the MoT.  
13.5 Incredible India website- MoT has launched the Incredible India website, with the aim 
to provide more information about India as a tourist destination, and where our value lies. 
The website also boasts a clean design and intuitive and consistent site -wide navigatio n 
system, with improved menu functionality that directs tourists to the information, most 
relevant to them. It is also fully responsive with mobile devices, making it easy to navigate on 
a wide range of web browsers and portable devices. MoT has introduced  a range of new 
content to the website, including a Google 360 that features virtual video content to provide 
tourists with a walk through of our tourist attractions. In addition, the Incredible India website 
provides more personalized content across the g lobe, based on tourist interest and video 
content designed to help the tourist make the right decisions about their visit to India, through 
more robust and regulated electronic content management solutions (ECM) and with advance 
analytics capability of cap turing the tourist engagement on Incredible India website. The 
website is currently available in Hindi, English, Arabic, C hinese, Spanish German Russian, 
Japanese and Korean languages.  
13.6 Incredible India Mobil e App - the MoT has launched the Incredible India mobile 
application, to cater to the mobile friendly generation and digital initiatives of the government. 
Incredible India App is an innovative project of MoT to assist the international and domestic 
tourist to showcase India as a holistic destinatio n, revolving around major experiences such 
as spirituality, heritage, adventure, culture, yoga, wellness and more. The mobile app has 
been designed keeping in mind the preferences of the modern traveler. The app follows the 
trends and technologies of inter national standards and has been equipped with features to 
assist the traveler in each phase of their journey to India. The Mobile App is currently 
available in Hindi, English, Arabic, Chinese, Spanish, French, German and Russian 
Languages. 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF ADVENTURE TOURISM 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
14 Despite its unique endowments of biodiversity and having unparalleled natural 
resources and 73 percent of the diverse Himalayan range for exploration, adventure tourism 

44 
 
in India is at a nascent stage and the country is yet to exploit the immense potential of 
adventure tourism which can make India around the year destination. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry must come out with a policy document focusing on 
harnessing the potential of a dventure tourism in a safe and environment -friendly manner. 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the specific measures initiated to promote and 
exploit the adventure tourism. 
 (Para 75) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 MOT has formulated the guidelines f or development of Adventure tourism in the 
country. The guidelines which are in public domain focus on development of adventure 
tourism in a safe and sustainable environment. Guidelines provide a vision document to the 
state Governments/Private stakeholders for promotion of adventure tourism in the country. 
Task Force on Adventure Tourism has been set up in October 2016 with Secretary (Tourism) 
as chairman to act as a forum for resolving issues related to development and promotion of 
Adventure Tourism in the country The Committee will be apprised of the initiatives taken in 
due course of time.  
14.2 With focus on Adventure Tourism, the MoT has formulated a draft National Strategy 
and Roadmap for Sustainable Tourism.  In order to make the document more comprehensive, 
the MoT has invited comments/ suggestions on the draft Strategy document from concerned 
Central Ministries, State Governments and Industry stakeholders. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
15 The Committee is aware that in order to boost and regulate adventure tourism in 
India, the Ministry of Tourism had issued guidelines for Adventure Tourism in the year 2018. 
The Committee would like to know whether all the States adopted and implemented th e 
guidelines. The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that the adventure tourism 
guidelines are followed by all the States/UTs as it would go a long way in promoting inbound 
adventure tourism. The Committee also recommends a dedicated promotional c ampaign be 
launched to promote lndia as an adventure tourism destination.  
(Para 76) 
 
 
 

45 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
15.1 As tourism is a S tate-subject, the Guideli nes provides a platform to the S tate 
Governments/Union Territories to follow the same for increase  in adventure tourism 
activities The same have also been forwarded to the State Governments and Union Territory 
Administrations for compliance. The Central Financial Assistance (CFA) is being extended to 
various State Governments/ Union Territory Administra tions for development of Tourism 
Infrastructure in destinations including Adventure Tourism destinations.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
16 The Committee noticed that inbound adventure tourism in India is growing by 5 -7 
percent annually and domestic adventure tourism is growing by 20 -25 per cent (as per the 
Survey Report of the Indian Tourism and Hospitality Industry). According to market rese arch 
experts, over one billion travelers experienced adventure tourism globally and India 
attracted just over 3.4 Million adventure tourists in 2015 as compared to Western nations 
which attracted relatively higher numbers. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that the 
Ministry should apprise it of the reasons for the slow growth of adventure tourism industry 
and why is there a lack of clear cut policy instance on it  
(Para 77) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
16.1 Due to corona pandemic there is sizeable decline in foreign tourist foot falls in the 
country. However promotion of Adventur e tourism activities namely Hot -Air ballooning, 
Trekking, safaris, mountaineering activities is on the rise in domestic segment.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
17 Since India is a highly populated country, amusement parks sector has a very high 
growth potential in the country. The Committee is therefore, of the considered view that 
promotion of amusement parks will boost tourism, social infrastructure and revenue 
generation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism in close 

46 
 
coordination with the States/ UTs should chalk out a roadmap for promotion of the 
amusement parks sector and also explore the possibility of lowering the GST.  
(Para 79) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
17.1 Amusement parks require huge financial resources and only private stakeholders on 
the lines of Disney World can undertake the development of amusement parks. FDI and 
Domestic funding for such projects with tax rebate policy may help the development of this  
particular segment.  
 
 
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF TOURISTS  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
18 Poor experiences with regard to safety and security of tourists lead to a negative 
image of tourist site/ country in the mind of tourist, whether domestic or international. The 
Committee recommends that in the light of the security concerns at tourist dest inations, 
watchful tourist police and other law and order force supported by smart intelligence should 
be introduced with efficient communication systems at airports, Ports, railway/ bus stations 
etc.  
 
(Para 84) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
18.1 Security of tourists is essentially a State Government subject. However, the Ministry 
of Tourism (MoT) has taken up the matter with all State Governments/Union Territory (UT) 
Administrations for setting up of dedicated Tourism Police. With the effort s of MoT, the 
State Governments/UT Administrations of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh have deployed tourist police in one form or the other.  
 
18.2 MoT has been seeking support of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) for taking up 
the matter with the State Governments. The MHA had forwarded a concept paper on Tourist 

47 
 
Police as discussed during the DsGP and IsGP conference held in 2015. Further, a s desired 
by the MHA, a list of 25 tourist sites which could be taken as pilot project for formation of a 
separate police unit in the States/UTs. A tanning module, as given by IITTM for imparting 
training was also forwarded to Ministry of Home  Affairs (MHA ). The MHA had  also 
circulated a letter to all the Chief Secretaries of all state Governments/UT Administrations 
asking for the training to be imparted. 
18.3 To develop a comprehensive framework, Bureau of Police Research and 
Development (BPR&D) commission ed a study on Tourist Police Scheme wherein ADG, 
MoT was also  involved. The report is very comprehensive in its analysis and 
recommendations and once implemented at the pan - India level will enable to create a 
framework for tourist safety. MoT has requested MHA for convening a meeting of the DGPs 
of the State/UT for implementation of Tourist Police Scheme at the Pan-India level.  
18.4 MoT got a study conducted by Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel Management 
(IITTM), an autonomous institute u nder its control, to understand the requirement of tourist 
police and sensitizing the tourist police so created towards the needs of the tourists. MoT 
forwarded a copy of this Study report titled “Functioning of Tourist Police in States/UTs & 
Documentation of Best Practices”  to all the State Governments/UT Administration with the 
request to create a separate unit of police in the respective states/UT and also to sensitize 
them about the needs of the tourists.  
18.5 The MoT has set up a 24x7 Multi -Lingual To urist Info -Helpline on the toll free 
number 1800111363 or on a short code 1363 in 12 Languages including 10 international 
languages (German, French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, 
Korean, Arabic), Hindi and English for domestic a nd foreign tourists to provide support 
service in term of information relating to Travel in India and to offer appropriate guidance to 
tourists in distress while travelling in India.  
18.6 The MoT along with all stakeholders, including the Tourism Departments of all States 
and UTs, have adopted the 'Code of Conduct for Safe & Honorable Tourism' which is a set of 
guidelines to encourage tourism activities to be undertaken with respect for basic right like 
dignity, safety and freedom from exploitation of both tourists and local residents in particular, 
women and children. 
18.7 The Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) has prepared a detailed 
report of developing the Scheme for Tourist Police, which may act as a template for the 
States and Union Territories for setting up the State/UT Tourist Police.  

48 
 
18.8 The contents of the report covers the relevant issues such as development of Standard 
Operating Procedures, setting up of Control Room Systems, defining the role and 
responsibility of Tourist Polic e, uniform for Tourist Police personnel, training program, and 
scheme for incentivization for 'Tourist Police', etc. "Tourist Police" may be added as a new 
Chapter in the State and UT Police Administration. An appropriate state mechanism may be 
developed for coordination, headed by the district/UT Police Chief.  
18.9 The Report has been conceived to suggest a Model Structure of the Tourist Police 
Wing, specialized in tourism policing, which should address the aspects such as Command 
and Control, legislative  and Executive empowerment of Tourist Police, Organization, 
Strength, and Charter of Duties, etc. The gender ratio of Policemen in Tou rist Police is 
reposed at 50:50 . The tourist Police personnel shall be deployed at the major tourist 
attractions, including monuments, entry and exit points, i.e., airport, railway stations and bus 
terminals, religious places, shopping areas, entertainment areas, etc., where tourists might 
need help. 
18.10 A training programme of requisite duration may be organized to train a nd equip them 
with the security related requirements of the tourism industry. It has been proposed to include 
the following aspects, inter -alia, under their purview to take care of -To ensure that no 
harassment is caused to the tourists by the touts, begga rs and cheats. To help tourists at the 
Railway Stations, Airports, Bus Terminals, important tourist places, in getting transport and 
providing information about Hotels/Restaurants without any hassle, making the travel of the 
tourists hassle free by immedia te intervention  in case of any mis -happening, providing 
support to the victims when they are cheated, their belongings are stolen, or whenever they 
fall prey to any other mischief or wrongdoing, imparting etc.  
18.11 The 'Tourist Police Scheme' has been pr oposed in the report at twenty -five important 
tourist places covering 39 tourist sites spread across various States and UTs. The vision of 
preparing this document is to have a tourist friendly police for ensuring safe environment for 
tourists visiting India, and the creation of a positive image of India.  
18.12 The ensuing task would, thus, involve bridging the gap  between 'expected standards 
of Tourist Po lice' and the 'take off lev el'. The image, a tourist carries, must inspire a 
prospective visitor to include India as a preferred destination.  
 
 
 
 

49 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
19 Development of Cruise Tourism -The Committee takes note of the measures taken for 
the development of cruise tourism but would like to be apprised of the efficacy of the above 
measures in promoting India as a cruise tourism destination.  
 (Para 87) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
19.1 Tourism task force next meeting will be taking place on 17.12.2021 under the co -
chairmanship of Secretary (Tourism & Shipping) along with SGs/ UTs and other stake 
holders. 
19.2 Major outcomes of the meeting of Task Force on Cruise Tou rism held on 
17.12.2021:- 
(i) Immigration issues: It was decided that Chairman, Mumbai Ports Trust, to take lead, 
make a detailed analysis, and prepare an action plan along with BOI, which can help 
the passengers in biometrics and other immigration issues. 
(ii) India Cruise Conference 2022 : India Cruise Conference 2022 is proposed to be 
organized by MoPS&W on 25th and 26th February 2022 in Mumbai. 
(iii) Tax related issues : It was decided to form a Sub Group led by AS(Revenue) with 
AS(Tourism) and Chairman, Mumbai Port Trust, to bring out a coherent policy for 
taxation structure for the entire cruise industry for customs duty and GST. 
(iv) Incentives for Cruise & Water Transport on lines of "UDAN" Scheme : The Task 
Force was apprised by Chairman, Cochin Port T rust about the following prima facie 
observations of the Working Group constituted on Blue Economy consisting of 
representatives from the Industry and Mumbai Port Trust to look into bringing a new 
scheme on the lines of the UDAAN scheme of the Ministry of Civil Aviation:- 
a. There may be possibilities to give some incentives on the lines of UDAAN Scheme, 
which may include incentives on taxation and GST. 
b. As it would not be possible to give incentives to international cruises, domestic 
cruises may be taken into consideration. 
c. LTC scheme should also be extended to cruise sector also. 
It was decided that once the Report of the Working Group is finalized, some more 
discussions may be held in the due course. 
 

50 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
20 The Committee is also  of the opinion that establishing a 24 -hour tourist service 
center, providing a complete cruise logistics service, inviting foreign cruise operators to 
inspect special resources in India, cooperating with Taiwan, Japan and South -East Asian 
countries for pr omotion of cruise tourism and setting up a special Government unit for the 
purpose would boost India's cruise industry. 
(Para 93) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
20.1 The Ministry of shipping will be requested to provide the inputs.  
 
 
IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON TRAVEL AND HOSPITALITY SECTOR  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
21The Committee in Paras 44 to Para 77 of its 288th Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -
22) of the Ministry of Tourism (MoT), presented to the Parliament on the 9th March, 2021 
has done a rigorous analysis of the impact of Covid -19 pandemic on Tourism, Travel and 
Hospitality sector and covered the gamut of issues arising there from and made substantive 
recommendations thereon. The Committee therefore does not consider it necessary to repeat 
the details contained in its 288th Report in this Report. The Ministry may refer to Para 44 -77 
of the 288th Report and take appropriate remedial measures. (Paras 44 to 77 are  given in 
Annexure-C for ready reference)  
(Para 102) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
21.1 MoT has engaged National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) in 
January, 2021 to conduct study on India and the Coronavirus Pandemic: Economic Losses for 
Households Engaged in Tourism and Policies for Recovery. The key findings of study are:  

51 
 
a. Due to overall economic slowdown during 2020 -21, tourism economy or tourism 
direct gross value added (TDGVA) saw a fall of 42.8 percent in Q1; 15.5 percent in 
Q2 and fall of 1.1 percent in Q3.  
b. Due to significant drop in tourist arrivals and hence tourism expenditure, during the 
pandemic, it is estimated that TDGVA plummeted by as much as 93.3 percent in Q1 
of 2020-21 over its level in the same quarter of previous year. It picked up slightly to 
post a fall of 79.5 percent in Q2 and that of 64.3 percent in Q3.  
c. A significant number of direct jobs were lost in the tourism sector once the lockdown 
was implemented.14.5 million direct jobs during Q1, 5.2 million during Q2 and 1.8 
million direct jobs during Q3 are expected to have lost as compared to estimated 34. 8 
million direct jobs in tourism sector in the pre-pandemic period of 2019-20.  
 
288th COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
288th Committee Recommendation (Para 72) 
 
22 The Committee observes that the Government under the leadership of Prime Minister 
Narendra Modi has set a target of taking the economy to 5 Trillion dollar Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) by 2024. It has been widely accepted that the tourism sector in the cou ntry 
has the potential to emerge as key economic driver for this economic growth and can create 
large scale employment. The Committee feels that the country can make giant leap towards 
reaching the 5 –trillion dollar GDP target by focusing on this critical  sector. However, this 
cannot be achieved without the active cooperation from the state and Union Territories - 
because a comprehensive set of strategies for a diversity of actions from macro to micro 
level, including product and infrastructure development,  marketing, branding promotion 
planning , policy and investment would need to be developed and the multiple challenges 
thrown up by capacity constraints and inadequate policies would need to be addressed. The 
Committee, however, notes that the Travel and T ourism Sector does not figure in the Central, 
State or Concurrent List. Ours is federal Policy making and implementation are fragmented 
across levels of Government and coordination between them is often lacking due to absence 
of clearly defined mandate. Since tourism is a Multi- Sectoral activity, inclusion of tourism in 
the Concurrent List an important role in facilitating the issue involved with multiple 

52 
 
Ministries/ Organizations at Central level as well as with the States/Union Territories to 
create convergence and synergy of actions across multiple agencies and programmes. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that Tourism be included in the Concurrent List. 
(Para 72) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
22.1 The MoT is considering getting a Study conducted to examine the various aspects 
related to bringing the subject of Tourism on the Concurrent List. 
 
 
288th Committee Recommendation (Para 73) 
 
23 The Committee observes that the hospitality industry is in huge distress under the 
impact of the COVID -19pandemic and is looking at mass unemployment and pan India 
bankruptcies. The Committee notes from the written submissions of the MoT that all star -
rated hotels with a project cost of over Rs. 200 crores were granted infrastructure status by 
their inclusion in the Harmonized Master List of Infrastructure sub -sectors vide gazette 
Notification dated 07.10.2013 which lapsed three years after notification via  sunset clause. 
The Ministry's proposal for grant of infrastructure status to investment in hotel industry of 
over Rs. 50 crore and in towns with less than 5 lakh population has been turned down by the 
Ministry of  Finance. Subsequently, the Ministry of Fin ance was requested to grant 
infrastructure status to hotel projects with lower investment, i.e. hotel capex above Rs. 25 
crore (excluding land) capex, but the Department of Economic Affairs is yet to respond to the 
proposal. The Committee has been given to  understand that the Reserve Bank of India has 
equated the hotel sector with real estate which leads to lending at high interest rate from 
banks. The Committee observes that shortage of quality accommodation to tourists is a big 
deterrent to development of  tourism. One of the key impediments for investment in the 
hospitality and hotel sectors has been the non -availability of credit at low interest terms. 
Considering the fact that construction of hotels is highly capital intensive and  has a long 
gestation pe riod with a long break even period, availability of quality hotel has a direct 
correlation to the Ministry's vision of taking the share of India's Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
(FTAs) from 0.75% in 2019 to 2% by 2025. The Committee is of the considered view tha t 
there is an imperative need to accord infrastructure status to hotel projects with capex above 

53 
 
Rs. 25 crore ( excluding land) and include the same in the infrastructure lending list of the 
RBI. The Committee exhorts the Ministry of Tourism to immediately  bring the above 
recommendation to the notice of the Ministry of Finance who should enumerate their policy 
stance on this issue with a sense of urgency and expediency and bring down this threshold 
limit to Rs. 25 crore. This move will attract more investme nt in hotel projects which in turn 
shall drive employment generation. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the decision 
taken by the Ministry of Finance in this regard so that the matter could be 
deliberated/pursued with them in the right earnest. The Committee is convinced that 
according infrastructure status to hotels will not only attract more investments in hotel 
projects but also go a long way in reviving the growth momentum of this sector which has 
witnessed a major slump since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.  
 (Para 73) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
23.1 The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) had moved a proposal to the DEA, Ministry of 
Finance for grant of Infrastructure status to investment in hotel industry of over Rs. 50 Cr and 
in towns with less than 5 lakh population, which could accelerate creation of additional hotel 
rooms and help generate both direct and indirect jobs. However, the said proposal was 
rejected by DEA vi de notification dated 12.05.202 0 citing the reason that it will crowd out 
the flow of credit to the other core infrastructure sectors. Recently , as part of tourism sector 
revival plan from COVID 19 pandemic , Ministry of Finance, has been requested to consider 
grant of infrastructure status to the hotel industry for lower investments i.e. hotel capex above 
INR 25 Cr. (Excluding land) to bring mid -segment properties under the ambit of 
infrastructure to give a boost to investment in the accommodation sector. The matter will 
again be taken up with the Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
24 The Committee observes that the tourism and hospitality industry is reeling under the 
impact of Covid-19 pandemic. With business coming almost to a standstill, the unprecedented 
crisis has shaken the very foundation of this vibrant sector. Hospitality and tourism sector is 
a very important component of our economy as it has the potential to stimulate other 

54 
 
economic sectors through its backward and forward linkages and contributes significantly to 
the national economy as well as the creation of jobs in the country. It also earns huge foreign 
exchange for the country. The Committee is, therefore, of the considered view that this sector 
which right now is in huge distress needs strong liquidity and policy support from the 
Government/ Financial Institutions/ Ban ks to bounce back. The Committee notes from the 
information made available to it that as part of Atma Nirbhar Bharat Package, RBI had 
permitted a term -loan moratorium and working capital interest deferment w.e.f. 01.03.2020 
to 31.08.2020 alongwith an asset  classification standstill for that period and other measures 
to enhance liquidity. In view of the fact that the situation continues to be dire and due to 
stagnation of cash flows in the wake of Covid-19 pandemic, the tourism and hospitality sector 
stakeholders are unable to repay existing dues as per their existing repayment tenor, the 
Committee recommends that the moratorium on all working capital, principal, interest 
payments, loans and overdrafts may be further extended, bringing in liquidity and allowi ng 
for business continuity without categorizing the companies as NP As. The Committee is of the 
firm view that such a moratorium will go a long way in salvaging the entire tourism and 
hospitality industry.  
(Para 108) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
24.1 The following are the various fiscal relief measures announced by the Government, 
expected to benefit the Indian Hotel Industry:  
 
(i) The Government announced Atmanirbhar Bharat Package vide which Rs.3.00 lakh 
crore collateral free automatic loan has been mad e available for MSMEs. The loan 
will have 4- year tenure and 12-month moratorium.  
(ii) The Government waived off PF contribution for three months for organizations with 
less than 100 pax and 90% of their employees earn below Rs.15000.  
(iii) Under Atmanirbhar Bharat package, PF contribution of both employer and employee 
has been reduced to 10% each from existing 12% each for all establishments covered 
by EPFO for three months  
(iv) Deferment of TCS up to October 2020 
(v) Return filing deferred for thre e months with no penal interest for companies up to 
Rs.5.00 Crore, rest @ 9% penal interest 

55 
 
(vi) The Central government also gave relief from various regulatory compliances under 
Income Tax Act, companies Act and GST Act for varying period in the wake of 
COVID-19 crisis to ensure business continuity and survival. 
(vii) The RBI extended moratorium on term loans till 31st December 2020 
(viii) The Central Government has also given relief from various regulatory compliances 
under Income Tax Act, Companies Act and GST Act for var ying periods in the wake 
of Covid-19 crisis to ensure business continuity and survival 
(ix) The Government announced the Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
(ECLGS) 3.0 on 31.3.2021 to support eligible Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) and business  enterprises in meeting their operational liabilities and 
restarting their business. The scope of the scheme was enlarged to cover business 
enterprises in Hospitality, Travel &Tourism and Leisure & Sporting sectors. The 
validity of ECLGS (ECLGS 1.0, ECLGS 2.0 & ECLGS 3.0) was extended up to 
30.06.2021 or till guarantees for an amount of Rs. 3.00 lakh crore are issued. Last 
date of disbursement under the scheme was extended to 30.09.2021. The details of 
guarantees issued under the scheme are given below: 
 
Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) Tourism and Hospitality Scheme wise 
data as on 30.09.2021 
Industry Nature Support 
Under 
No. of 
Guarantees 
Issued 
Amount of Guarantees issued on 
account of loans sanctioned under 
the scheme (in Rs. crore) 
Travel & Tourism ECLGS 3.0 2,732 1,371.62 
Hospitality ECLGS 3.0 3,160 5,430.96 
Hotels, 
Restaurants, 
Tourism 
ECLGS 2.0 218 3,403.90 
Tourism, Hotels 
& Restaurants 
ECLGS 1.0 96,219 3559.43 
Total 1,02,329 13,765.91 
 

56 
 
(x) Ministry of Finance has given concurrence to release Service Exports from India 
Scheme (SEIS) scrips on 16.06.2021. Earlier, several Industry stakeholders had 
flagged appeals to the Government to release SEIS Scrips for 2019 -20 and DGFT 
had put a detailed proposal for the allocation for SEIS for e xports made during 2019-
20. Taking all circumstances into account, the Department of Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance has given concurrence to the proposal of Department of Commerce for 
continuation of SEIS for 2019-20 with a financial allocation of Rs.2061 crore subject 
to the condition that the amount will be provided through Expenditure Budget 
following the procedure of providing a New Minor Head 
(xi) On 28th June 2021, the Government announced a stimulus package to boost diverse 
sectors of economy affected b y COVID -19 pandemic and provide impetus for 
growth and employment measures. Accordingly/o Tourism, Government of India has 
launched 'Loan Guarantee Scheme for Covid Affected Tourism Service Sector 
(LGSCATSS)‟.The scheme aims at extending loan to the distressed tourism sector to 
help them discharge their liabilities and restart their business affected due to Covid -
19 pandemic. Loan upturns. 10.00 lakh each may be availed by MoT approved Tour 
operator/Travel Agents/ Tourist Transport Operators. Loan upturns. 1.00 lakh each 
may be availed by RLGs/IITGs approved by MoT and Tourist Guides approved by 
State Govt. UT Administration. Scheme has been made operational through NCGTC, 
guidelines available on NCGTC website. 
(xii)  Operational Recommendations for safe resumptio n of business with easing of 
lockdown restrictions have been issued for various segments of the travel and 
hospitality industry and circulated amongst all stakeholders. 
(xiii) With a view to prepare for a post -COVID 19 revival, the Ministry has formulated 
and issued detailed operational guidelines for Covid safety and hygiene for hotels, 
restaurants, B&Bs/Home stays and Tourism Service Providers on 08.06.2020 to 
facilitate smooth resumption of business. 
(xiv) With an aim to incentivize stakeholders in the Tourism indust ry, the Guidelines for 
the scheme of Market Development Assistance (MDA) for providing financial 
support to stakeholders for the promotion of Domestic Tourism have been modified 
to enhance the scope and reach of the scheme, so as to provide maximum benefit s to 
the stakeholders. Additional promotional activities have been incorporated including 
online promotions and the extent of financial assistance permissible has been 
enhanced. 

57 
 
(xv) Validity of approval or certification of hotels and other accommodation units whose 
project approval/ re -approval and classification/ re -classification have expired/ were 
likely to expire has been extended put 31st March 2022. 
(xvi) The Guidelines of the Marketing Development Assistance Programme under the 
Overseas Promotion and Publicity  Scheme has been modified to enhance the scope 
and reach of the scheme, so as to provide maximum benefits to the stakeholders in 
the tourism industry. 
 
The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance vide OM dated 20.12.2021.  
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
25 The Committee is aware that in view of the uncertainties created by the resurgence of 
Covid-19 Pandemic, the RBI on 5th May, 2021 has announced Resolution Framework 2.0 for 
Covid-related stressed assets of individual borrowers and small businesses. Restruc turing 
under the Resolution Framework 2.0 can be invoked up to so" September, 2021. Borrowers 
having aggregate exposure of up to Rs. 25.00 crores and who have not availed restructuring 
under any other scheme and who are classified as "standard" as on 31st March, 2021 are 
eligible for the window of resolution under Resolution Framework 2.0. Tourism entities, 
hotels and restaurants meeting the criteria are also eligible under the Scheme. In respect of 
individual borrowers and small businesses who have availed  restructuring of their loans and 
where the resolution plan permitted a moratorium of less than two years, financial 
institutions have been permitted to use Resolution Framework 2.0 to modify such plan to the 
extent of increasing the period of the moratori um or extending the residual tenure up to a 
total of two years. Considering the fact that the Covid -19 induced crisis has led to a shut -
down of the Travel and Tourism industry, it may take 2 -3 years for the tourism and 
hospitality industry to see a return to some semblance of normalcy in its operations. The 
Committee therefore recommends that the period for restructuring for this Sector be extended 
up to March, 2023. 
(Para 120) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 

58 
 
25.1 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance vide OM dated 
20.12.2021. 
    
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
26 The Committee simultaneously recommends that the Government/ financial 
institutions should put in place a robust mechanism to prevent abuse of the restructuring 
route for ever greening of faulty loans prior to impact of Covid-19 pandemic.  
 (Para 121) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
26.1 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance vide OM dated 
20.12.2021.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
27 The Committee notes that under Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS 
2.0 entities, subject to certain conditions, are eligible for additional funding as a collateral 
free Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line (GECL). The loans provided under ECLGS 2.0 have 
a 5- year tenor with a 12 month morat orium on repayment of principal. Given the fact that 
the Covid -19 pandemic has had a debilitating impact on hospitality sector, the Committee 
recommends that the repayment period for the hospitality industry under ECLGS 2.0 be 
extended up to 10 years. 
 
 (Para 122) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
27.1 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance vide OM dated 
20.12.2021.  
 
 
 

59 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
 
TOURISM CIRCUITS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1. The Committee is constrained to note that despite the SDS being launched way back 
in January, 2015, only one of the 15 thematic circuits under the Scheme has been completed 
and the physical progress in res pect of the remaining 14 circuits ranges from 16 percent to 
90 percent which is far from being satisfactory. The Committee recommends the Ministry that 
all the destination points covered under the thematic Ramayana circuit; Buddhist circuit and 
Himalayan c ircuit have high tourist value and mythological significance, which will go a 
long way in promoting cultural and heritage value of the country besides earning valuable 
foreign exchange income. Even the important thematic circuits that have potential of  
attracting  both international and domestic tourists, the physical progress and development 
of amenities in these circuits from 2015 is less than 70%. Therefore, we cannot give impetus 
to tourism without providing an integrated approach where apart from good  stay 
arrangements, multi modal connectivity and wayside amenities should also be developed. 
Hence the potential of many tourist sites under these identified circuits is still untapped. 
Since the creation of good tourism infrastructure is a per -requisite towards attracting more 
tourist, both domestic and international, to the tourist destinations and also has had its 
multiplier effect in terms of employment generation and increased National and State 
revenues apart from improving the country's tourism produ ctive capacity, the Committee 
recommends that the Government must take stringent measures for expediting the completion 
of remaining 14 thematic circuits in a time bound manner. 
(Para 7) 
  

60 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
1.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) between 
the years 2014 -2015 to 2018 -19 has sanctioned 76 projects under 13 identified thematic 
circuits. Till the month of November, 2021, 16 projects are physically complete. In addition, 
31 projects have further c ompleted physical progress of more than 80%. The MoT has now 
fixed the timelines for completion of projects as December, 2021; March, 2022 and 
December, 2022 based on the physical progress made in the project. In addition, the MoT is 
regularly monitoring t he progress of projects sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan scheme 
through regular review meetings and instructions are given to the implementing agencies to 
complete the projects on a priority basis. 
 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
1.2 The Committee desires to know the details of the progress made in completing 
the remaining thematic circuits which are under implementation. The Committee again 
deplores the slow pace of progress made in the creation of thematic circuits, which is 
essential for boostin g tourism. The Committee also desires to know the outcome of 
meetings between the Ministry and other implementing agencies so far. 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE TOURISM 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2. According to a Report by NITI Aayog on 'Sustainable Tourism in the Indian 
Himalayan Region', the Indian Himalayan Region (IHR) tourism bas experienced a 
continued growth and increasing diversification over the last few decades and is expected to 
grow at an  average annual rate of 7.9% from 2013 to 2023. Keeping in view the tourist 
potential of this area, the Committee recommends that tourist sites under the Himalayan  
  

61 
 
circuit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme should be developed on priority basis with modern 
infrastructure and air connectivity to boost both domestic and Buddhism is not limited to 
India only but is also followed in countries such as Cambodia, Thailand, Myanmar, Bhutan, 
Sri Lanka, Singapore, Vietnam and Japan. The Committee is also aware of the potential of 
Buddhism tourist sites in India especially in the North -Eastern region. The Ministry had 
already identified Buddhism and North -East circuits among the 15 thematic circuits of 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme. The Committee would, therefore, recommend th at sites under 
these two circuits should be developed on priority in an integrated manner to attract tourists 
from the above mentioned countries which would not only boost foreign exchange earnings 
but will also generate employment opportunities in the country. 
(Para 7.2) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
2.1 Recommendation of the Committee is noted. The projects sanctioned under 
Himalayan and Buddhist theme are under different stages of implementation.  
 
2.2 However, to promote Buddhist circuit in the Domestic Market, the Ministry of 
Tourism (MoT) in collaboration with IRCTC had organized a Buddhist Circuit Family tour 
and Conference from 4th - 8th October 2021 at Bodhgaya and Varanasi.  
 
2.3 Under development of Himalayan and eco-tourism circuit with funding from Swadesh 
Darshan scheme, Tourist circuits in the states of Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and J&K 
with sustainability factor.  
 
2.4 MoT has already emphasized on the air connectivity of the Buddhist destinations in 
India to the Buddhist Source Markets. It has requested the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) 
to take necessary action in this regard. Recently, inauguration of International  Airport at 
Kushinagar by Hon'ble PM is on important development in this regard.  
  

62 
 
 
2.5 The MoT has sanctioned 10 projects under North East Circuit for an sanctioned 
amount of Rs. 836.30 Crores, 5 projects under Buddhist Theme for Rs. 325.53 Cr. and 7 
projects under Himalayan Theme for Rs. 603.04 Cr. under its Swadesh Darshan scheme.  
  
2.6 The  MoT  envisages  to    develop  world  class infrastructure  for    the  use of  
tourists    under these  projects.  The MoT  through its regular review    meetings is trying to    
complete the projects in a time bound manner. 
 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
2.7 The Committee desires to know the status of air connectivity provided by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation in IHR tourist sites under Swadesh Darshan Scheme and the 
outcome achieved by the Ministry in collaborating with IRCTC to organize Buddhist 
Circuit Family Tours and Conferences at Bodhgaya and Varanasi. The Committee is 
interested in knowing the funding details regarding the development of Himalayan, eco-
tourism, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh  and J&K circuits with sustainability facto r 
under Swadesh Darshan scheme. 
 
 
RURAL TOURISM 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3 The Committee observes that rural tourism is one of the few emerging dimensions of 
the Tourism industry, but is very less emphasized upon. Till date, only two projects have been 
approved under the rural circuit of SDS and funds were released only for the o ne. India 
being rich in tradition of arts, crafts and culture, rural tourism, if exploited intelligently in a 
sustainable manner has the potential to provide sustainable livelihood to rural communities. 
Rural areas especially in the States of Himachal Prad esh,  , Odisha, Kerala, North -east 
region etc. are still unexplored and needs to be focused upon. The Ministry should develop  
 
 

63 
 
schemes/ programmes that showcase the rural life, art, culture and heritage at rural 
locations, thus benefiting the local commu nity economically and socially by enabling 
interactions between the tourists and the locals for a more enriching tourism experience. The 
Committee simultaneously recommends that the Government should adopt a proactive 
interventionist approach to ensure that the pro-poor tourism approach leads to redistribution 
of resources and opportunities to the poor and marginalized and addresses the larger picture 
of poverty reduction because a well -coordinated programme for tourism infrastructure 
development can give s ignificant returns and can create sustainable livelihood in the rural 
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that more rural areas should be included in 
tourism circuits in the country so that connectivity to these areas is boosted with 
infrastructure development for ease of travel and the goal of pro -poor tourism i.e., to bring 
out benefit to the poor and marginalized through tourism activities is realized.  
(Para 8) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
3.1 Ministry of Tourism (MoT) has come out with a “National Strategy and Roadmap for 
Development of Rural Tourism” which encompasses all aspects relating to sustainability, 
increasing employment and livelihood opportunities and preserving the local arts, herit age, 
culture and will not only enrich the experiences of tourists but will help in elimination of 
poverty in the rural areas. The policy document lays emphasis on use of digital technologies. 
The MoT will conduct ranking of the States on Rural Tourism, wit h the key objective to 
foster competitiveness and encourage States to work proactively towards developing rural 
tourism with the overarching objective of promoting sustainable and responsible tourism. It 
will be implemented as a capacity development exercise to encourage mutual learning among 
all states and to provide support in policy formulation and implementation. Digital marketing 
policy has been circulated to all the State Governments/ Union Territories.  
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
3.2 The Committee notes that t he Ministry of Tourism (MoT) will conduct ranking 
of the States on Rural Tourism, with the key objective to foster competitiveness and  
encourage States to work proactively towards developing rural tourism with the 
overarching objective of promoting sustainable and responsible tourism. The 

64 
 
Committee wishes to know the progress made in this regard and the timeline set for the 
process. 
 
ICONIC TOURIST SITES’ DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. The Ministry had identified 19 Iconic tourist sites such as Taj Mahal and Fatehpur 
Sikri (Uttar Pradesh); Ajanta & Ellora (Maharashtra); Humayun's Tomb, Red Fort and 
Qutub Minar (Delhi); Colva ( Goa); Amer Fort (Rajasthan); Somnath and Dholavira 
(Gujarat); Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh); Hampi and Mysore (Karnataka); Mahabalipuram 
(Tamil Nadu); Kaziranga (Assam); Kumarakom (Kerala); Konark (Odisha); and Mahabodhi 
Temple (Bihar). The Committee would re commend that development of these sites should be 
taken up in a prioritized manner and each target should be fixed and a clear project 
implementation timeline should be created for completion of the projects as all these sites 
have the potential to attract both international and domestic tourists. 
(Para 10) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
4.1 Recommendation of the Committee is noted.  
4.2 The scheme for “Development of Iconic Destinations” has been appraised by the 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting  dated 15.10.2021 and the Cabinet note 
has been submitted. However, the scheme is yet to be approved by the Cabinet. 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
4.3 The Committee desires that the Ministry should expedite the process of 
implementation of the Scheme for “Development of Iconic Destinations” after receipt of 
the Cabinet approval. The Committee also recommends that the plans should be 
devised beforehand so that the outcome is achieved at the earliest. 
 
 
 

65 
 
BOTTLENECKS IN ICONIC SITES/ DESTINATIONS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5. The Committee notes that pursuant to the Budget announcement of 2020 -21, the 
Ministry of Tourism has identified 19 Iconic sites for development as world class tourist 
destinations. Since the project involves various central Ministries, State Governments/ U nion 
Territories and other stakeholders, the Committee recommends that a robust coordination 
mechanism of the concerned Central Ministries, State Governments/ Union Territories and 
other stakeholders be put in place for prompt resolution of issues/ bottlenecks.  
(Para 10.1) 
 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
5.1 Recommendations of the Committee is noted.  
5.2 Provisions for robust co -ordination mechanism has been made in the guidelines for 
“Development of Iconic Tourist Destination”. The scheme is under submission for approval.  
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
5.3 The Committee may be apprised of the guidelines for robust coordination 
mechanisms that involves various ministries in the Tourism sector development and 
also desires to know about the time line for the Project Scheme for development of 
Iconic Sites and Destinations. 
 
 
AIR CONNECTIVITY TO THE ICONIC SITES/ DESTINATIONS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6. The Committee notes that the Ministry had identified 19 Iconic tourist sites for 
tourism infrastructure development in the country. Since most of these tourist sites are hugely 

66 
 
popular among international tourists, these sites should have proper air connectivity. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Ministry that the Iconic tourist sites that have 
domestic airports only, and their status should be converted to that of  an international 
airport on priority basis for ease of travelling of international travellers. Further, the Iconic 
tourist sites which do not have direct air connectivity; a proposal for development of 
Greenfield Airports should be initiated at such touri st sites in order to boost both domestic 
and international tourism. 
(Para 10.2) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
6.2 Ministry of Tourism has already requested Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) to 
endeavour for providing better air connectivity to ICONIC sites. Under RCS UDAN-3, on the 
recommendation of MoT, 46 tourism routes have already been taken by the biding Airlines 
and the among the routes identified include some of the ICONIC sites - Bodhgaya, 
Kushinagarh, Bhubaneswar, Agra, Aurangabad etc. 
6.3 A list of 46 tourism routes under RCS -UDAN-3 and their current status as given on 
the portal of Airport Authority of India (AAI) is given below: 
 
Status of RCS Udan Tourism Routes as on 29.11.2021 
Sl. No. Route Status 
1 Agra to Bhopal Commenced  
2 Bhopal to Agra Commenced  
3 Agra to Indore Yet to be operationalized 
4 Indore to Agra Yet to be operationalized 
5 Bengaluru to Mysore Commenced  
6 Mysore to Bengaluru Commenced 
7 Dibrugarh to Dimapur Commenced  
8 Dimapur to Dibrugarh Commenced  
9 Dimapur to Imphal Commenced  
10 Imphal to Dimapur Commenced 
11 Gaya to Kushinagar Yet to be operationalized 

67 
 
12 Kushinagar to Gaya Yet to be operationalized 
13 Lucknow to Saharanpur (Sarsawa)* Yet to be operationalized 
14 Saharanpur (Sarsawa) to Lucknow* Yet to be operationalized 
15 Port Blair to Shibpur (Diglipur) Yet to be operationalized 
16 Shibpur (Diglipur) to Port Blair Yet to be operationalized 
17 Shimla to Kullu Yet to be operationalized 
18 Agartala to Aizawl Commenced  
19 Aizawl to Agartala Commenced 
20 Ahmedabad to Udaipur Commenced 
21 Udaipur to Ahmedabad Commenced 
22 Amritsar to Jaipur Commenced  
23 Jaipur to Amritsar Commenced 
24 Amritsar to Kolkata Commenced  
25 Kolkata to Amritsar Commenced 
26 Amritsar to Patna Commenced  
27 Patna to Amritsar Commenced 
28 Aurangabad to Udaipur Yet to be operationalized 
29 Udaipur to Aurangabad Yet to be operationalized 
30 Bhopal to Udaipur Commenced  
31 Udaipur to Bhopal Commenced 
32 Bhubaneshwar to Varanasi Commenced 
33 Varanasi to Bhubaneshwar Commenced 
34 Bikaner to Jaisalmer Yet to be operationalized 
35 Jaisalmer to Bikaner Yet to be operationalised 
36 Delhi to Calicut (Kozhikode) Commenced  
37 Calicut (Kozhikode) to Delhi Commenced  
38 Delhi to Khajuraho Yet to be operationalised 
39 Khajuraho to Delhi Yet to be operationalised 
40 Dibrugarh to Imphal Commenced  
41 Imphal to Dibrugarh Commenced 
42 Jodhpur to Udaipur Yet to be operationalised 

68 
 
43 Udaipur to Jodhpur Yet to be operationalised 
44 Rajamundhry to Vishakapatnam Commenced  
45 Vishakapatnam to Rajamundhry Commenced 
46 Varanasi to Patna Commenced  
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
6.4 The Committee desires to know the time and funding required by those airports 
which have not been operationalized yet, under the RCS - UDAN Scheme. The Ministry 
may apprise the Committee of the number of Greenfield airport projects implemented 
so far in the year 2020-21. 
 
 
BUDGETARY SHORTFALL 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
7. The scrutiny of the above table reveals significant shortfall in release of funds as 
compared to the sanctioned funds in respect of several schemes of tourism infrastructure 
development. For example, the shortfall witnessed in the amount released vis -a-vis the 
amount sanctioned in 2017 -18 in respect of Sound and Light Show Project at Yadavindra 
Gradens, Pinjore, Haryana; Light and Sound Show Project at Puttaparthy, Andhra Pradesh; 
and Light and Sound Show Project at Red Fort and Purana Quila, Delhi is to be the tune of 
Rs 300.00 lakhs, Rs. 354.34 lakhs and Rs 685.00 lakhs respectively. No reasons have been 
adduced by the Ministry for the shortfall. Since the above projects have been conceiv ed with 
the aim of developing and improving tourism infrastructure, the Committee expects the 
Ministry to urgently address the pending issues pertaining to the above projects to avoid 
delays and cost escalation in their implementation. The Committee expect s to be apprised of 
the action taken to address the recurrent problem of delays and cost overrun in 
implementation of projects. 
(Para 26) 
 
 

69 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
7.1  
Name of the project Sanctioned 
amount 
(Rs. in 
lakhs) 
Released 
amount 
(Rs. in 
lakhs) 
Status 
Sound and Light 
Show at Yadavindra 
Gardens, Pinjore, 
Haryana – ITDC 
600.00 300.00 Ongoing. The completion of the project is 
delayed for want of approval of the 
revised script. Matter is being taken up 
with the State Government. 
Sound and Light 
Show at Puttaparthy, 
Andhra Pradesh – 
ITDC 
708.00 354.33 Ongoing. Work has been delayed due to 
the COVID 19 pandemic. Presently in 
progress. 
Sound and Light 
Show at Red Fort, 
Delhi (Purana Quila) 
– ITDC 
1404.00 685.00 Delay in according principal Approval by 
ASI led to the delay in completion of the 
project. The matter has now been resolved 
and work is in progress. 
The status of the projects mentioned in the report is given as under: - 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
7.2 The Committee is concerned about the delay of these projects due to ongoing 
pandemic and desires that the Ministry of Tourism may devise alternate plans to 
address the issues/ lacunae that can be tackled throughout the pandemic. 
 
TOURISM UPLIFTMENT THROUGH ROAD-RAIL 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
 
8. The Committee observes that despite the fact that easy access to the wayside facilities 
is a pre-requisite for the development of tourism, there is an appalling lack of wayside  

70 
 
amenities for long distance travelers. It is in this context that the development of wayside 
amenities at Varanasi -Gaya; Lucknow -Ayodhya-Lucknow; Gorakhpur -Kushinagar; and 
Kushinagar-Gaya-Kushinagar assume added significance. The Committee recommends that 
the Government  must ensure that the implementation of above projects also enables local 
artisans and local craftsmen to sell their products to commuters during their journey and 
generates employment opportunities for local youths and farmers. The Committee also 
recommends that the wayside amenities should be integrally planned and developed 
alongwith the highways and expressways.  
(Para 39) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
8.1 The Ministry of Tourism (MoT) has been continuously been recommending important 
tourist places Iconic Si tes , Buddhist Sites and UNESCO World Heritage Sites with the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRT&H) for improving road connectivity and for 
setting up of wayside amenities, prominent signage's and beautification of the area, at a 
distance of 15-20 kms. on either side of the tourist destination. The MoRT&H has informed 
that out of the 50 destinations identified by MoT, 23 fall under the purview of the MoRT&H 
/National Highway Authority of India (NHAI), where work is in progress.  
8.2 For the remaini ng 27 tourist sites, MoT has addressed letters to the respective State 
Governments and PWD for improvement of connectivity and provision of wayside facilities 
as these roads did not fall under the purview of MoRT&H.  
8.3 Virtual meetings were held with the  State/UT Tourism Departments on 24th and 25th 
November, 2020 to get their inputs and suggestions on tourist destinations which require road 
connectivity and wayside amenities. Based on the inputs received from the State 
Governments/UTs a list of 114 desti nations has been prepared and further shared with the 
MoRT&H for improving road connectivity to these tourist sites.  
8.4 In addition it is submitted that meeting of the senior officers of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation (MOCA) , MoRTH & MoR have been held regularly.  
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
8.5 The Committee desires the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) to coordinate with the 
State Governments to provide for more wayside amenities to identified stop -points at 
highways. The Committee would like to be apprised of the agencies involved in 
providing wayside amenities in collaboration with the MoT and Ministry of Road, 
Transport and Highways (MoRT&H)  and the initiatives taken by each of the agencies . 
The Committee desires to know the outcome of the m eetings held with the senior 
officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA), (MoRT&H) and Ministry of Railways 
(MoR). 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
9. The Committee takes note of the fact that during the Secretary (Tourism)'s interaction 
with the representative of the M oR, development and upliftment of traveler's amenities found 
mention and the representatives of M oR has assured to ascertain the factual position in this 
regard and report back. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the factua l position in 
this regard. 
9.1 Out of 22 Railway stations for the joint development with of Railways and MoT, the 
railway station of Puri, Agra, Cantt., Guwahati, Kamakhya R ailway Statiuon are complete 
and Thiruvananthapuram, Tirupati are nearing completion. 
 (Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.2 22 railway stations have been sanctioned for joint development of tourist amenities by 
the Ministry of Railways (MoR) and Ministry of Tourism (MoT), on 50:50 cost sharing basis. 
The identified railway stations are:- 
(1) Hyderabad (2) Hospet (3) Agra Cantt. (4) Rae Bareli (5) Ajmer(6) Jaipur (7) 
Kamakhya (8) Chittorgarh(9) New Jalpaiguri (10) Gaya (11) Madurai 
(12)Rampurhat(13) Thiruvananthapuram; (14) Kurukshetra (15) Amritsar (16) 
Aurangabad (17) Nanded (18) Puri (19) Ta rakeshwar (20) Rameshwaram (21) 
Tirupati (22) Guwahati. 

72 
 
(2) Total sanctioned amount is Rs. 108.53 Cr. as per MoT share, out of these, the Puri, 
Agra Cantt., Guwahati, Kamakhya Railway Station are complete and 
Thiruvananthpuram and Tirupati are nearing completion. 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
9.4 The Committee recommends the  Ministry of Railways (MoR)  to provide details 
of the budgetary allocations for joint development of wayside amenities at the 
sanctioned railway stations. The details of completed railway stations with developed 
wayside amenities may also be shared with the Committee.  
 
 
TAXATION SUPPORT 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
10.  The Committee takes note of the fact that the five Major Ports at Mumbai, Goa, 
Mangalore, Cochin and Chennai have been developed to be cruise destinations with 
dedicated terminals. The Committee desires to know whe ther the cruise terminals at the 
above Ports have produced the desired results. The Committee also desires to be apprised 
whether the present structure of levy of taxes needs any changes/ modifications to tap the 
tremendous potential of cruise tourism in India.  
(Para 94) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
10.1 The statement of the projects mentioned the report is given as under: -  
 
List of projects sanction under the Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure 
Scheme for Development of Cruise Terminal 
S.N. Year Name of 
State 
Name of Project Agency Amount 
sanction
ed 
Amount 
Utilized 
1 2012- Tamil Nadu Cruise Passenger Facilities Chennai 1724.66 1274.66 

73 
 
13 Centre in the existing 
Passenger Terminal at 
Chennai Port 
Port Trust 
2 2016-
17 
Maharashtra Central Financial 
Assistance to Mumbai Port 
Trust for Development of 
KanojiAngre Lighthouse as 
a tourist Destination 
Mumbai 
Port Trust 
1500.00 1500.00 
3 2017-
18 
Maharashtra Upgradation/ 
Modernization to 
International Cruise 
terminal at Indira Dock, 
Mumbai. 
Mumbai 
Port Trust 
1250.00 1250.00 
4 2016-
17 
Kerala Development of a 
Walkway/ Promenade on 
Willington Island, Cochin, 
Kerala 
Cochin 
Port Trust 
901.00 826.59 
5 2016 Kerala Central Financial 
Assistance for upgrading of 
Births & Backup area of 
Ernakulam Wharf 
Cochin 
Port Trust 
2141.00 1912.80 
6 2018-
19 
Kerala Developing infrastructure 
at Cochin Port Cruise 
Terminal 
Cochin 
Port Trust 
120.79 96.63 
7 2018-
19 
Kerala Creation of additional 
tourism facilities at the 
Cochin Port Trust 
Walkway 
Cochin 
Port Trust 
466.47 466.47 
8 2018-
19 
Goa Improvement of 
immigration facility and 
deepening of existing 
cruising berth at 
Mormugao 
Mormugao 
Port Trust 
1316.40 658.20 

74 
 
9 2021-
22 
Goa Creation of facilities for 
International and Domestic 
Cruise Vessels at 
Mormugao Port, Goa by 
Mormugao Port Trust 
Mormugao 
Port Trust 
5000.00 2500.00 
 
 
Further Recommendations/ Observations 
 
10.2 The Committee desires to know the details of taxation support required by the 
Ministry to develop Cruise Tourism potential in India and if the present structure of 
taxation needs to be modified for the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

75 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendations/ Observations:  NIL 
 
Replies of the Ministry: NIL 
 
* * *  
 
 
  

76 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE. 
 
TOURISM CIRCUITS 
 
The Committee desires to know the details of the progress made in completing the 
remaining thematic circuits  which are under implementation. The Committee again 
deplores the slow pace of progress in the creation of thematic circuits, which is 
hindering the es sential tourism boosting and development. The Committee also desires 
to know the outcome of meetings held between the Ministry of Tourism and other 
implementing agencies so far. 
(Para 1.2) 
 
SUSTAINABLE TOURISM 
 
The Committee desires to know the status of air connectivity provided by the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation in IHR tourist sites under Swadesh Darshan Scheme and the outcome 
achieved by the Ministry in collaborating with IRCTC to organize Buddhist Circuit 
Family Tours and Conferences at Bodhgaya and Varanasi. The Committee is interested 
in knowing the funding  details regarding the development of Himalayan, eco-tourism, 
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh  and J&K circuits with sustainability factor  under 
Swadesh Darshan scheme. 
(Para 2.7) 
RURAL TOURISM 
 
The Committee notes that t he Ministry of Tourism (MoT) will conduct ranking of the 
States on Rural Tourism, with the key objective to foster competitiveness and encourage 
States to work proactively towards developing rural tourism with the overarching 

77 
 
objective of promoting sustain able and responsible tourism. The Committee wishes to 
know the progress made in this regard and the timeline set for the process. 
(Para 3.2) 
 
ICONIC TOURIST SITE DEVELOPMENT 
 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should expedite the process of implementa tion 
of the Scheme for “ Development of Iconic Destinations”  after receipt of the Cabinet 
approval. The Committee also recommends that the plans should be devised beforehand 
so that the outcome is achieved at the earliest. 
(Para 4.3) 
BOTTLENECKS IN ICONIC SITES/ DESTINATIONS 
 
The Committee may be apprised of the guidelines for robust coordination mechanisms 
that involves various ministries in the Tourism sector development and also desires to 
know about the timeline for the Project Scheme for development of Iconic Sites and 
Destinations. 
(Para 5.3) 
 
AIR CONNECTIVITY TO THE ICONIC SITES/ DESTINATIONS 
 
The Committee desires to know the time and funding required by those airports which 
have not been operationalized yet, under the RCS -UDAN Scheme. The Ministry ma y 
apprise the Committee of the number of Greenfield airport projects implemented so far 
in the year 2020-21. 
(Para 6.4) 
 
BUDGETARY SHORTFALL 
 
The Committee is concerned about the delay of the three Sound and Light projects, 
mentioned by the Ministry of Tou rism, due to ongoing pandemic and desires that the 
Ministry may devise alternate plans to address the issues/ lacunae faced in the ongoing 
pandemic. 
(Para 7.2) 

78 
 
TOURISM UPLIFTMENT THROUGH ROAD-RAIL 
 
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) should coordinate with the 
State Governments to provide wayside amenities to identified stop -points at highways. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the agencies involved in providing wayside 
amenities in collaboration with the MoT and the Ministry of Road, Transport and 
Highways (MoRT&H) and the initiatives taken by each of the  agencies. The Committee 
also desires to know the outcome of the meetings held with the senior officers of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA), (MoRT&H) and Ministry of Railways (MoR). 
(Para 8.5) 
 
 
The Committee recommends the  Ministry of Railways (MoR)  to provide details of the 
budgetary allocations for joint development of wayside amenities at the sanctioned 
railway stations. The details of completed railway stations with developed wayside 
amenities may also be shared with the Committee.  
(Para 9.4) 
 
TAXATION SUPPORT 
 
The Committee desires to know the details of any taxation support required by the 
Ministry to envisage and develop Cruise Tourism potential in India and if th e present 
structure of taxation needs to be modified for the same. 
(Para 10.2) 
 
* * * 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

 
 
  
 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st January, 2022 in Committee Room 
- '4', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Dr. Sonal Man Singh 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
10. Shri Margani Bharat 
11. Shri Tapir Gao 
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Shri Prince Raj 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider  and adopt 
the following Reports:- 
 
A.        Draft Action Taken Report on - 
79

 
 
(i) *   *   *   * 
(ii) *   *   *   * 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
as contained in its Two Hundred Ninety Fifth Report on the subject ‘ Potential of 
Tourist Spots in the country - Connectivity and Outreach’. 
(iv) *   *   *   * 
(v) *   *   *   * 
(vi) *   *   *   * 
B.        *   *   *   * 
(i)         *   *   *   * 
(ii)        *   *   *   * 
(iii)       *   *   *   * 
(iv)       *i   *   *   * 
 
 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
  
 
 
 
                                                           
* Relates to other matters 
80