 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Pausha 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
338
_ 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 2022) 
  
 
 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2023)

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry 
of Tourism 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Pausha 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2023)

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
4. REPORT                                1-49 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   50-58 
6. ANNEXURES        59-66 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
67-69

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Smt. Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary\ 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Thirty Eighth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee  contained in its Three 
Hundred Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Tourism. 
2. The Three Hundred  Eighteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  14th March, 
2022 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred  Eighteenth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on 14th 
November, 2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  22nd 
December, 2022.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 22, 2022                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Pausha 1, 1944 (Saka)                                      Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
ADG Additional Director General 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ATO Adventure Tour Operators 
BE Budget Estimates 
BPR&D Bureau of Police Research & Development 
BRO Border Road Organisation 
Capex Capital Expenditure 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CBSP Capacity Building for Service Providers 
CGST Central Goods and Services Tax 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CRZ Coastal Regulation Zones 
DGP Director General of Police 
DGsP/DsGP Director Generals of Police 
DoNER Development of North-East Region 
DoT Department of Tourism 
DSCR Debt Service Coverage Ratio  
EBITA Earnings before interest, taxes, and amortization 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee  
F&B Food and Beverage 
FCI Food Craft Institutes 
FEE Foreign Exchange Earning 
FTA Foreign Tourist Arrival 
FY Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Production 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HM Hotel Management 
IA Implementing Agencies  
ICI Indian Culinary Institute 
IGsP/IsGP Inspector Generals of Police 
IGST Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
IHM Institute of Hotel Management Catering & Nutrition 
IITTM Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management 
ITA International Tourist Arrivals  
ITDC India Trade Development Corporation 
IRCTC Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation 
LRS Liberalized Remittance Scheme  
MHA  Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MSDE Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship  
NCAER National Council of Applied Economic Research  
NCHMCT National Council for Hotel Management and Catering 
Technology 

iv 
 
NEP National Education Policy 2020 
NGO Non-Governmental Organizations 
NHAI National Highways  Authority of India 
NIL Nothing in line/zero 
NITI National Institute for Transforming India 
O&M Operations & Maintenance 
OTA Online Travel Agents 
POS Point of Sale 
PPP  Public Private Partnership 
PRASHAD Pilgrimage Rejuvenation & Spiritual Augmentation Drive 
PWD Public Works Department 
RE Revised Estimates 
RoD Record of Discussion  
SD 1.0 Swadesh Darshan Scheme-1.0 
SD 2.0 Swadesh Darshan Scheme-2.0 
SEIS Services Exports from India Scheme  
SG State Government 
SGoS Sectoral Groups of Secretaries 
TCS Tax Collected at Source  
UC Utilization Certificate 
USD/ US$ United States Dollar 
UT Union Territory 
WB West Bengal 
WTTC World Travel and Tourism Council  
 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism on the 
recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred and Eighteenth Report on 
Demands for Grants 2022 -23 of the Ministry of Tourism which was presented to b oth the 
Houses of Parliament on 14th March, 2022. 
 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 14th November, 202 2 in 
respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report. The replies ha ve been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 20, 21, 32, 80, 98, 106, 108, 120 
Total: 8 
 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which t he Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 19, 69, 72, 82, 87, 91, 109, 125, 127, 129, 139 
Total: 11 
 
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry h ave not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 22, 30, 31, 65, 66, 67, 68, 71, 78, 79, 81, 86, 92, 107, 110, 115, 116, 121, 122, 
123, 128, 130, 141 
Total: 23 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: 70, 133, 140 
Total:  3 
 

2 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
II) ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2022-23 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. From a perusal of Table No. 2, the Committee is constrained to note that there is a 
substantial underutilization of the budgeted funds during the FY 2021 -22. Against the RE 2021 -
22 allocation of Rs. 969.80 crore, only 47.70% amounting to Rs. 462.55 crore could be spent till 
the 31st January, 2022. It means that the remaining expenditure would have to be squeezed in 
the last two months of FY 2021 -22. Since as per norms stipulated by the Ministry of Finance, 
there is a ceiling o f 25% on expenditure in the last quarter, occurrence of huge savings is a 
certainty. It may be pertinent to mention here that a zero based budgeting exercise which 
requires that budget request be evaluated thoroughly, starting from zero base, is in practic e and 
the financial outlays are earmarked based on factors like past trend of expenditure, stages of 
formulation/implementation of various projects, the pre -projects approvals etc. Therefore, 
savings of Rs. 1056.97 crore vis -à-vis the BE 2021 -22 allocation  not only betrays fiscal 
indiscipline by way of underutilization of the earmarked funds which will have an adverse 
bearing on infrastructure development oriented activities of the Ministry, but is also indicative of 
shortcomings in budgetary planning and m onitoring of the budgeted funds. The Committee 
observes that a resource constrained country like India cannot afford to keep a vast chunk of its 
resources locked up and surrendered towards the end of the financial year. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends  that realistic projection of fund requirements should be given utmost 
priority at the highest level of the Ministry so that the Budget Estimates are formulated with 
application of proper financial yardsticks and large variations between the Budget Estimat es, 
Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure needs to be avoided. The Ministry must also pay 
attention to streamlining its monitoring mechanism and ensure optimal and more efficient 
deployment and utilization of its financial resources for smooth execution  of its programmes 
within the approved cost and designated timeline. 
(Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The observations/recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee have been taken note of.  
It is submitted that during the financial year 2021 -2022, against the RE allocation of Rs. 969.80 
crores, the Ministry could incur expenditure to the tune of Rs. 803.90 crores, which comes to 

3 
 
 
82.89%. There are a several reasons which led to less expenditure by the Ministry during the first 
two quarters of the financial ye ar. The pandemic situation was still prevailing in the country and 
the implementation of various Schemes of the Ministry was severely affected.  Further, the 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme was under review by the Government and no new projects we re 
sanctioned during the year. The Global Media Publicity was not carried out due to the pandemic 
situation and ban on operation of international commercial flights resulting in  lack of 
international tourism. 
1.2 Major two schemes of the Ministry of Tourism viz. Swadesh Darshan and PRASHAD are 
being implemented by the State/UT Governments and further release of the fund depends based 
on timely utilisation of fund earlier provided.  
1.3 Pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee, suitable instructions were g iven to 
the Program Divisions of the Ministry to apply due diligence while projecting budgetary 
requirements. The Ministry is closely monitoring the expenditure status periodically at the 
highest level. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee also takes a serious note of keeping the unspent provision of Rs. 1056.97 
crore till the close of financial year 2021 -22 despite reduction in the budgetary outlay at the RE 
2021-22 stage, in disregard of the provisions of General Financial Rules requiring the unsp ent 
provisions in a grant to be surrendered to the Ministry of Finance as soon as these are foreseen, 
without waiting for the last day of the financial year. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should exercise greater fiscal prudence, an d ensure that unspent budgetary 
provisions are surrendered timely in future. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The observations/recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance in future.  
It is, however, submitted that the allocations under RE and BE were decided by the Ministry of 
Finance at the RE Meeting held in October, 2021 and the Ministry of Financ e is aware of the 
additional resources available by way of cut imposed on the BE allocation of the Ministry. After 
communication of the RE/BE ceiling, and before communication of the Technical Surrender, the 
Ministry is required thoroughly review the alloc ation to be made to each Scheme/components of 
a Scheme and Non -Scheme activities keeping in view the reduced allocation. It is humbly 
submitted that the Ministry of Tourism has 20 Domestic and 7 Overseas Offices under it besides 
the Ministry. It operates s everal Schemes and there a number of components under different 
Schemes.  Also the non-Scheme segment has a number of activities spread over the Ministry, all 
India Tourism Offices and Overseas Offices. The technical surrender of funds would have to be 

4 
 
 
done Scheme -wise/Head-wise and before intimating the surrender, the actual requirement of 
funds, based on the RE allocation, under different Heads of Account - both Scheme and Non -
Scheme is required to be assessed based of inputs from all the concerned agenci es. Once the 
funds are surrendered to the Ministry of Finance, Head -wise, no further adjustment would be 
possible. Accordingly, intimation of the Technical surrender of funds took some time. However, 
as per the recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry  would certainly make all efforts to 
intimate the technical surrender at the earliest. 
 
 
III) CONTRIBUTION OF TOURISM TO GDP 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee observes that despite the fact that India offers a diverse portfolio for 
travel and touris m, the share of India's International Tourist Arrivals (ITAs) in the ITAs of the 
world was merely 1.57 per cent in 2020. There is increased competition among various countries 
to attract foreign visitors. There is, therefore, an imperative need for India t o prepare suitable 
market strategy to attract foreign visitors. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry in collaboration with a professional body should carry out market research of foreign 
tourist source markets to identify the expectations , requirements, psychographics, demographics 
and many other aspects of a foreign tourist willing to travel to India, thereby enabling to create 
a strategic plan to revive inbound tourism. The research should be conducted with an objective 
to provide an aut hentic feedback, roadmap and recommendations to the Ministry of Tourism 
with respect to inbound tourism in India and provide a blueprint on the various policy objectives 
and infrastructure development needed to strengthen inbound tourism in the country. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
V. INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF TOURIST CIRCUITS AROUND SPECIFIC  
THEMES (SWADESH DARSHAN) 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee recommends that the various circuits under the Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme should be developed using the Hub and Spoke Model which can draw tourists from the 
popular religious destinations towards other unexplored destinations that are positioned near 
the major destinations. 
(Para 80) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. 
4.2 The Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its Swadesh Darshan Scheme in the form of 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0. As per the guidelines, the vision of the Swadesh Darshan 2.0. is to 
develop sustainable and responsible tourism desti nations in the country  and with the mission to 
create a robust framework for integrated development of tourism destinations in partnership with 
the States/UTs and local governments for promoting sustainable and responsible tourism in the 
country. 
4.3 As per the guidelines for  SD 2.0, the States will prepare a S tate Perspective Plan 
analysing tourism potential of various destinations based on the following: 
(i) Major tourism attractions, offerings and themes; 
(ii) Connectivity by Air, Rail and Road including local travel; 
(iii) Connectivity to any tourist circuit; 
(iv) Current tourism eco system at the destination; 
(v) Future tourism potential at the destination; and 
(vi) State support for the destination 
 
4.4 The Ministry will select 2 -3 destinations of the State for development based on the State 
Perspective Plan and availability of funds. 
 
 
VIII. CRUISE TOURISM 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee observes that despite being endowed with 7500 km coastline and a vast 
network of lakes and rivers, and a steady increase in the number of ships and cruise passengers 

6 
 
 
calling on Indian ports over the past few years, cruise tourism in India is still at a nascent stage. 
Though various initiatives have been taken by the Ministries of Tourism and Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways to develop India as destination as well as source market for cruise tourism and 
increase the number of cruise shipping calls  and passenger arrivals, India's enormous cruise 
potential still remains untapped. While appreciating the initiatives taken by the Ministries of 
Tourism and Posts, Shipping and Waterways to develop India as an attractive cruise tourism 
destination, the Committee recommends that the following measures may also be taken: 
(i) Training institutions for various services in cruise tourism be developed. 
(ii) The taxation structure in this segment may be revamped to bring down cost for passengers, 
making cruise shipping aff ordable for middle class population that constitute the major 
portion of Indian demographics. This will go a long way in boosting participation of the 
middle class in this segment of tourism. 
(iii) Synergy between the various stakeholders of this industry like c ruise companies; tour 
operators, and immigration and customs departments may be utilised to optimise the gains 
for all. 
(iv) An effective promotional campaign be developed to put Indian Cruise industry on the 
Global map. 
(Para 98) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
 
IX. DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY (DPPH) SCHEMEINCLUDING  
MARKET DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee observes that in most countries with a large population, domestic tourism 
is the foundation of a vibrant tourism industry. India also has a strong domestic tourism base 
which is evident from the fact that Domestic tourism visits were 2321.98 million during 2019. 
However, owing to the prolonged COVID -19 pandemic, the erstwhile booming tourism and 
hospitality sector has taken a severe beating due to which the number of domestic tourists 
slumped to 610.22 million during 2020 registering a negative growth of 73.3%. The trajectory of 
international tourism remains uncertain because new COVID -19 variants are emerging in some 
parts of the world due to which new restrictions are being introduced. With the rapid pace of the 
nation-wide COVID vaccination, the revival of the Indian economy has gained momentum and 
Indian tourist destinations have ri sen to prominence as a result of strong pent -up demand and 

7 
 
 
the relaxation of domestic restrictions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the publicity 
campaigns of the Ministry should be focused on following safety protocols and helping restore 
confidence among tourists and promoting domestic tourism. 
(Para 106) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 It is submitted that the Ministry of Tourism  through in its social media handles, 
undertook campaigns focusing on following in safety protocols and promoting India as a safe 
destination for tourists to visit and highlighting the latest Covid-19 protocols for travelling to and 
within India. The social media handles are also being used to bring forward and highlight many 
lesser known destinations all over the country so that domestic tourists can have many more 
options. 
6.2 Further, the recommendations of the Committee have also been noted for compliance. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee observes that high net worth Indian nationals opt for foreign tourism 
instead of domestic tourism. One of the reasons behind this is the exhaustion of the timeworn 
tourist destinations and absence of new avenues. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
unexplored and unexploited tourist destinations should be identified, developed and marketed to 
revive the curiosity of high -end domestic tourists and the publicity campaign should aim at 
persuading high end domestic tourists to substitute domestic tourism for foreign tourism. 
(Para 108) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. 
7.2 Domestic tourism holds substantial promise for the growth of  tourism in the country, 
which can significantly contribute to the Indian economy. The Government has launched 
“Dekho Apna Desh”, a major campaign for promoting domestic tourism.  The Ministry of 
Tourism has now revamped its Swadesh Darshan scheme in the fo rm of Swadesh Darshan 2.0 . 
As per the guidelines, the vision of the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 is to  develop sustainable and 
responsible tourism destinations in the country. The Scheme will focus on developing Tier -II 
and Tier-III destinations to create more opportunities for domestic travellers. 
 
X HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes that tourism is a labour -intensive industry and a multi -sector 

8 
 
 
activity characterized by multiple services provided by a range of suppliers and,  therefore, this 
sector has huge potential for generation of jobs and absorption of a substantially higher 
workforce. The Committee notes from the Market Pulse data supplied by the Ministry , that the 
hospitality and allied sectors face huge deficit in trai ned manpower. As against annual 
requirement of 902890 for 2022, the total supply including attrition is only 84128 and the 
demand-supply gap is to the extent of 818762. Tourism sector is likely to witness a boom post 
pandemic because there is lot of pent-up demand for travel. This boom may bring an exponential 
demand for the workforce at managerial, supervisor and skilled levels in hospitality and tourism 
sector. This leads the Committee to the irresistible conclusion that the existing institutional 
capacities would be unable to fulfill the estimated additional requirement of manpower in the 
hospitality 80 and allied sectors. The Committee is of the view that since training is a key 
intervention and issues of human resource development and capacity building are extremely 
important, the r ealization of the country's huge, barely tapped tourism potential cannot be 
realized without addressing the challenges of capacity constraints. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should adopt a proactive interventionist approach to give  a major 
boost to the various initiatives relating to human resource development for the hospitality and 
tourism sector through convergence with the private sector. 
(Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Noted for compliance. 
8.2 Ministry of Tourism is imple menting Scheme for Capacity Building for Service Provider 
under which various private institutions have been involved to conduct various capacity-building 
programs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
II) ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2022-23 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that although there has been marginal increase in the budgetary 
outlay for the Ministry from Rs. 2026.77 crore for FY 2021-22 to Rs. 2400.00 crore for FY 2022-
23, it is still lesser than the BE 2020 -21 allocation of Rs. 2499.83 crore. Though the BE 2022-23 
allocation is 18 -41% higher than the BE 2021 -22 outlay, there is a substantial shortfall of Rs. 
537.92 crore vis-à-vis the projected demand of Rs. 2937.92 crore by the Ministry for FY 2022 -23 
and that too at a time when this sector is reeling under losses in the wake of COVID -19 
pandemic. The Committee notes that this budgetary outlay for 2022 -23 has been reduced to Rs 
416 crore as compared to the BE 2021 -22 of Rs. 668.72 crore under the head - Promotion and 
Publicity. The Committee find s this reduction alarming because the tourism and hospitality 
sector has been hit the hardest by COVID-19 pandemic and with massive job and revenue losses, 
it is essential that the Government promotes India on all possible platforms, both national and 
international, as a safe and must -visit destination and for this, instilling confidence among 
tourists through use of technology with the help of skilled manpower, investment in skilling, 
reskilling and upskilling is an imperative need. The Committee, therefor e, apprehends that the 
marginal increase of Rs. 333.77 crore in the budgetary allocation for 2022-23 is inadequate as it 
will be consumed by inflation. The Committee is simultaneously appreciative of the fiscal 
constraints faced by the Ministry of Finance due to deceleration in the growth rate in the Indian 
economy on account of global and domestic slowdown in the aftermath of COVID -19 pandemic. 
The Committee observes that with the accelerated pace of vaccine roll -out and easing of 
restrictions, the Indian economy has started to rebound and the additional resources would 
become available as a result of revenue buoyancy in FY 2022 -23. Given the fact that the 
activities of the Ministry harness the direct and multiplier effect on economic development and 
employment generation in the country and integrated development of infrastructure and facilities 
through effective partnerships and convergence with stakeholders can propel India to a higher 
growth trajectory, the Committee recommends that depending on better fi nancial performance 
and greater absorption capacity of the Ministry, quantum of funding for the Ministry of Tourism 

10 
 
 
be enhanced at the RE 2022 -23 stage. Simultaneously, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should initiate and implement better fiscal discipline and ensure that the scarce 
financial resources do not remain parked idling. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The observations/recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee have been taken note of. It 
is submitted that the Ministry has been given a fairly good allocation of Rs. 2,400/ - crores under 
BE 2022-2023.  This allocation is more than the BE allocation of Rs. 20 26.77 crores during the 
Financial year 2021 -2022. International tourism has still not picked up momentum. The 
Government of India has changed the funding procedure for various central sector schemes. 
Now, funds could be released only after the unspent bala nce with the Implementing Agencies 
(IAs) become NIL. Accordingly, the unspent balances with the IAs have become reduced 
drastically. However, in this process, the IAs had to return the unspent amount lying with them 
which in turn resulted in non -release/delayed release of fund for the projects under the four 
schemes viz. Swadesh Darshan, PRASHAD, Assistance to Central Agencies, and Assistance to 
IHMs/FCIs etc. The revised procedure prescribes nomination of a Central Nodal Agencies for 
release of fund for above four schemes and utilisation of fund by the Implementing Agencies are 
done on just-in-time basis. Promotional activities through digital network i.e. through Incredible 
India website and social media platforms are given highest importance to reach out to the target 
audience. On the domestic front also more and more emphasis is being given on digital publicity, 
which is in keeping with the requirements of the time and which is also cost effective.   
 
IV) IMPACT OF COVID -19 PANDEMIC ON TOURISM, TRAVEL AND  
HOSPITALITY SECTOR 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee in its 288 th Report had recommended that to provide relief to the tourism 
and hospitality sector so as to enhance export competitiveness of Indian tourism, the payments 
received by all the tourism and hospitality entities in convertible foreign exchange be considered 
as "deemed export" and exempted from GST and the concept of zero rating be applied to tourism 
foreign exchange earnings. In this connection, the Ministry in its action Taken Notes had stated 
that "…this is a policy decision to be taken by GST Council, a re ference from Ministry of 
Tourism is being made to GST Council in this regard…" The Committee reiterates its 

11 
 
 
recommendation that tourism services provided to foreign tourists in India on receipt of foreign 
exchange should be treated as "deemed export" and s uch transactions should be zero -rated for 
GST without stopping the flow of input credits. 
(Para 69) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance has examined the matter. The 
comments are submitted as under:   
2.2 Export of Services is defined at section 2(6) of the IGST Act, 2017 as " the supply of any 
service when the supplier of service is located in India; the recipient of service is located outside 
India; the place of supply of service is outside India; the payment for such se rvice has been 
received by supplier of service in convertible foreign exchange...... and the supplier of service 
and the recipient of service are not merely establishments of a distinct person....".  Thus, there 
are few conditions for service to qualify as export. In the issue under consideration, place of 
supply of tour operator service is the place where the service is performed. The place of supply 
of hotel accommodation service is the location of the premise. Accordingly, such services do not 
qualify as export as place of supply is not outside India. 
2.3 Tour operator services supplied to a foreign touri st are also not zero rated as “ zero rated 
supply” means any of the following supplies of goods o r services or both, namely: -(a) export of 
goods or services or both; or (b) supply of goods or services or both to a special Economic Zone 
developer or a special Economic Zone developer or a special Economic Zone unit"  (Section 16 
of IGST Act, 2017 refers). 
2.4 Only supply of goods manufactured in India to certain specific recipients are classified 
as deemed exports under section 147 of the CGST Act , 2017 . “Deemed exports ” means such 
supplies of goods as may be notified under Section 147. ( Section 2(39) of the CGST Act, 2017 
refers). 
2.5 The GST Council in its 47 th meeting held on 28 th and 29th June, 2022 has recommended 
relief to the tour operators by recommending the foreign component of a tour provided to foreign 
tourist (where such tour involved both dom estic and foreign component) would not attract GST. 
The recommendation would be prospective and come into effect from the 18th July, 2022. 
 

12 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3 The Committee also observes that SEIS is the only incentive for service exporters and, 
therefore, imposing a limit on the total entitlement under the SEIS at Rs 5 crore per exporter will 
impact top revenue producers adversely. Larger organizations fetch vo lume based on higher 
reliability and are necessary to increase the footfall in India. Capping the SEIS benefit at Rs. 5 
crore will force companies to split up entities to continue to avail full benefits which will not be 
helpful. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take up with 
the Ministry of Commerce this issue so that the capping of Rs 5 crore for SEIS benefit is 
removed. 
(Para 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The Foreign Trade Development Officer, Department of Commerce , Ministry of 
Commerce & Industries has communicated that for FY 2019 -20, SEIS benefits were capped at 
Rs 5 Cr and rates for eligible service categories have been reduced across the board by 2% (7% 
rates have come down to 5% and 5% rates have come down to 3%) because of  budgetary 
constraints imposed by the Ministry of Finance, for implementing the Scheme. 
 
V. INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF TOURIST CIRCUITS AROUND SPECIFIC  
THEMES (SWADESH DARSHAN) 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Diamond Triangle of Odisha comprising of three Buddhist sites, namely Ratnagiri, 
Udayagiri and Lalitgiri, is a lesser known tourist destination and is largely unexplored. The 
Committee recommends that the Diamond Triangle be included under the Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme for development of tourist facilities around these important Buddhist sites. 
(Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The development of tourism is primarily the responsibility of the State Government/UT 
Administration. However, Ministry of Tourism under its schemes of „Swades h Darshan‟ and 
„National Mission on Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation Drive 

13 
 
 
(PRASHAD)‟ provides financial assistance to State Governments/UT  Administrations/Central 
Agencies for development of tourism infrastructure in the country.  The projects are sanctioned 
subject to availability of funds, submission of suitable Detailed Project Reports, adherence to 
scheme guidelines and utilization of funds released earlier etc. 
4.2 The Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its Swadesh Darshan scheme in the form of 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0.   As per the guidelines, the vision of the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 is 
to develop sustainable and responsible tourism destinations in the country and with the mission 
to   create a robust framework for integrate d development of tourism destinations in partnership 
with the States/UTs and local governments for promoting sustainable and responsible tourism in 
the country. 
4.3 As per the guidelines for    SD 2.0, the States will prepare a State Perspective Plan 
analysing tourism potential of various destinations and the Ministry has also circulated the 
format to the States / UTs for formulation of the State Perspective Plan. 
 
VI. THE NATINOAL MISSION ON PILGRIMAGE REJUVENATION AND  
SPIRITUAL AUGMENTATION DRIVE (PRASHAD) 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee also notes that 3 -4 new projects are proposed to be sanctioned under the 
PRASHAD Scheme and exhorts the Ministry to quickly move towards completing all pre -project 
activities and obtaining statutory clearances s o that all the bottlenecks are removed and the 
financial outlay earmarked for the purpose could be made full use of. The Committee desires to 
be kept apprised of the progress made towards finalization and operationalization of the above 
new projects under the PRASHAD Scheme. 
(Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 ATN: The list of Projects approved under PRASHAD Scheme in the year 2021-22: 
 

14 
 
 
Name of State Name of the Project Approved 
Cost 
(₹ in Cr) 
Uttarakhand Augmentation of Pilgrimage Infrastructure 
Facilities and Gangotri and Yamunotri Dham in 
Uttarakhand under PRASHAD Scheme 
54.36 
Punjab Development of Chamkaur Sahib at Rupar, 
Punjab under PRASHAD Scheme 31.57 
Gujarat Development of Pilgrim Plaza with Queue 
Management Complex at Somnath Gujarat 49.97 
  
5.2 Physical and financial status of all the projects approved under PRASHAD Scheme has 
already been provided in reply to Para 86 above. 
5.3 In addition to above, a number of projects for development of pilgrimage infrastructure at 
Simhachalam in Andhra Pradesh, Bom -Jesus Church in Old Goa, Rameshwaram are at advance 
stages of approval. This is to be submitted that identification of new tourism destinations/places 
(Pilgrimage and/or Heritage) and approval of projects for tourism infrastructure development 
there under PRASHAD Scheme is a continuous process which is done on receipt of suitable 
project proposals from the respective State Governments/Union Territory Administrations in line 
with the scheme guidelines. 
 
VII. DEVELOPMENT OF ICONIC TOURIST DESTINATIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that the proposal of the Ministry of Tourism for development of 19 
iconic tourist sites as world class touri st destinations has been approved by the Expenditure 
Finance Committee on the 15 th October 2020 with an outlay of Rs. 5109 crore for the period FY 
2020-21 to FY 2025 -26 and been submitted for seeking approval of the Cabinet. The Committee 
is dismayed at the snail's pace of progress made in the matter which is evident from the fact that 
almost five months have elapsed since the proposal was approved by the EFC but the approval 
of the Cabinet is still pending. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to e xpedite 
addressing all pending issues and start expeditious implementation of this project of vital 
importance so that the allocated sums of Rs.  130 crore for 2022 -23 could be utilized efficiently 
and the avowed objectives of this project achieved. 
(Para 91) 

15 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The Ministry  of Tourism has formulated the S cheme “Development of Iconic 
Destinations” which was appraised by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in October 2020 
for Rs. 5109 Crore. The scheme is not yet approved by the Government. 
 
IX. DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY (DPPH) SCHEMEINCLUDING  
MARKET DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee recommends that on the lines of World Tourism Rankings and "Swachh 
Survekshan", a competitive Tourism Ranking System should be introduced amongst Indian cities 
which would provide the impetus for them to create, maintain and promote more and more 
tourist spots within their cities. This ranking system may be updated every year and the cities 
with podium finishes in varied categories may be incentivised 
(Para 109) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Ministry of Tourism has developed a Tourist Destination Assessment Framework for 
evaluation of tourist destination and their associated sites in areas of infrastructure and 
cleanliness. A total of 185 cultural and natural sites covering around 52 destinations (cities) all 
over the country. 
7.2 The tourist destination assessment framework would include the following four key 
elements and an indicative list of sub-elements for evaluation: 
Elements Sub-elements 
 Accessibility Transport access to tourist site, Quality of roads, Proximity to tourist 
site, Public conveniences along roads/streets, Quality and availability 
of accommodations etc. 
Amenities Information centers, Manual Guides/Radio Guides, Parking facility, 
F&B services at the site, Illumination at the tourist site, Presence and 
condition of the signage, POS/e-payment facility for ticketing etc. 
Safety and 
Security 
Availability of tourist helpline, Emergency rescue facilities, 
Availability of evacuation routes, Medical facilities, Availability of 
tourist police etc. 
Hygiene Sewerage and drainage system, Garbage disposal, Availability and 
cleanliness of toilets, Presence of cleaning staff, Availability and 
Quality of cleaning machineries etc. 
 
 

16 
 
 
7.3 The assessment of selected tourist sites and Destination would be conducted via on -site 
assessments on above mentioned parameters through direct observations and stakeholder‟s 
feedback. A scoring methodology has been developed which would be used for analysing the 
findings of on -ground tourist sites/destination assessment. Based on the same, tourist 
destinations would be finally ranked. 
 
XI. ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES FOR TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE  
DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee observes that the creation of tourism infrastructure by way of roads, 
cruise terminals, railway connectivity, and medical facilities has its multiplier effect in terms of 
overall economic growth and employment generation  and acts as a catalyst to economic 
development of the country. Under the Scheme, "Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism 
Infrastructure Development", a total of Rs. 62.85 crores has been released to various Central 
Agencies for creation of tourism rel ated infrastructure. To make an assessment of the success of 
this Scheme, the Committee desires to be furnished with the total number of projects sanctioned 
and taken up for implementation, along with the released amount vis -à-vis the sanctioned budget 
during the last 5 years, year-wise. 
(Para 125) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 A total no. of 23 projects were sanctioned and taken up for implementation during the 
last five years i.e. 2017 -18, 2018 -19, 2019 -20, 2020-21 and 2021 -22. The year -wise released  
amount vis-a-vis sanctioned budget is as under: - 
(Amount in Cr.) 
S.No Year No. of Projects Sanctioned 
Budget 
1 2017-18 6 70 
2 2018-19 5 70 
3 2019-20 4 70 
4 2020-21 4 80 
5 2021-22 4 90 

17 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee observes that easy access to tourism destinations and facilities for easy 
movement within the destinations are prerequisites for the development of tourism. However, 
road connectivity has been one of the impediments for the growth of tourism in India. It is in this 
context that the list of 50 Tourist Destinations submitted by the Ministry of Tourism to the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways assume significance. The Committee notes that out of 
the 50 destinations selected for road connecti vity, 23 destinations fall under the purview of 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways/NHAI where the work is going on. However, no 
forward movement seems to have been made as regards road connectivity to the remaining 27 
tourist sites which are under the  purview of the State Governments. Though the Ministry of 
Tourism has taken up the matter with the concerned State Governments, it has not had the 
desired result. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should once 
again take up this matter at the highest level with the concerned State Governments and impress 
upon them that better connectivity to the tourist sites will unlock more tourism opportunities for 
the State and the economic benefits will flow into their economy in the shap e of increased State 
revenues and employment as road connectivity is one of the fundamental components for 
successfully developing tourism market. The Committee desires to be apprised of the efforts 
made in this regard and the outcome thereof. 
(Para 127) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The meeting of the Task Force constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Tourism), Govt. of India to address various issues related to tourism as per the 
recommendations of the Sectoral Groups of Secretaries (SGoS) for Touris m Sectoral Plan, met 
on 23.09.2022. The Task Force comprises representatives from the Ministries of Civil Aviation, 
External Affairs, Home Affairs, Railways, Road T ransport & Highways, Culture, Do NER, 
Environment & Forests and IRCTC, ASI. 
9.2 During the me eting, MoRTH was requested to provide the updated status of the project 
of connectivity and wayside amenities at 27 and 114 destinations sent to them. 
9.3 Further, it is to inform that out of these, few of the identified destinations were under the 
purview of Border Road Organisation (BRO). BRO has informed that work has already been 
completed for road connectivity to Kargil (Ladakh) and the work is in progress for connectivity 

18 
 
 
to the places at Pangong Lake (Ladakh), Rishikesh (Uttarakhand) & Dimapur (Nagaland). 
9.4 Also, Wayside amenities have been developed at 14 places (10 States), e.g.: 
Srigovindpura, Bilouchi, Gobindpur, Budbud, Dobaspet (Yedehalli), Shoolagiri, Gowravaram, 
etc.   
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee observes that last mile connectivity to several tourist destinations is a 
deterrent to promotion of tourism. Since last mile connectivity is a key driver for promotion of 
tourism, the Committee recommends that while preparing Master Plan for connectivity to tourist 
destinations, last mile connectivity should mandatorily be included in the concept and the 
Detailed Project Report. 
(Para 129) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The Ministry of Tourism under its Swadesh Darshan scheme has sanctioned funds for 
development of last mile connectivity. 
10.2 The Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its Swadesh Darshan scheme in the form of 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0. An illustrative list of components which can enhance tourism potential, 
and would be considered in the SD 2.0 Scheme is part of the g uidelines of SD 2.0 and includes a 
component of connectivity. 
XII SAFE AND HONOURABLE TOURISM 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee notes that 14 States have deployed tourist police in one form or the other. 
Keeping in mind the importance of safety and security of tourists, the Committee in its 275 th and 
288th Reports presented to the Parliament on the 3 rd March 2020 and 9 th March 2021 
respectively, had recommended that the Ministry of Tourism should take up the matter with the 
remaining States. The Committee is, therefore, dismayed to note that no further headway has 
been made by the remaining States towards creation and deployment of tourism police at major 
tourist destinations. Safety and security of the tourists are a determining factor for choosi ng a 
destination and also vital for providing quality services in tourism and, therefore, the 
destinations must have an image of utmost tourist safety and security. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its earlier recommendation that Tourist police should be set up in all important tourist 

19 
 
 
destinations of each State/UT and should provide travellers security through a spirit of courtesy 
and friendliness. 
(Para 139) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The Ministry of Tourism has taken up the matter with all State Governments/Union 
Territory (UT) Administrations for setting up of dedicated Tourism Police. With the efforts of 
Ministry of Tourism, the State Governments/UT Administrations of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Goa, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh have deployed  tourist police, in one form 
or the other. 
11.2 Ministry of Tourism has been seeking support of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
for taking up the matter with the State Governments. MHA had forwarded a concept paper on 
Tourist Police as discussed during the DsGP and IsGP conference held in 2015. Furth er, as 
desired by Ministry of Home Affairs, a list of 25 tourist sites which could be taken as pilot 
project for formation of a separate police unit in the States/UTs. A tanning module, as given by 
IITTM for imparting training was also forwarded to Ministr y of Home. Ministry of Home 
Affairs had also circulated a letter to all the Chief Secretaries of all State Governments/UT 
Admn. asking for the training to be imparted. 
11.3 To develop a comprehensive framework, Bureau of Police Research and Development 
(BPR&D) commissioned a study on Tourist Police Scheme wherein ADG, Ministry of Tourism 
was also involved. The report is very comprehensive in its analysis and recommendations and 
once implemented at the pan - India level will enable to create a framework fo r tourist safety. 
Ministry of Tourism has requested Ministry of Home Affairs for convening a meeting of the 
DGPs of the State/UT for implementation of Tourist Police Scheme at the Pan-India level. 
11.4 Ministry of Tourism got a study conducted by Indian In stitute of Tourism & Travel 
Management (IITTM), an autonomous institute under its control, to understand the requirement 
of tourist police and sensitizing the tourist police so created towards their needs. Ministry of 
Tourism forwarded a copy of this Study  report titled “Functioning of Tourist Police in 
States/UTs & Documentation of Best Practices to all the State Govts/UT Admn. with the request 
to create a separate unit of police in the respective States/UT and also to sensitize them about the 
needs of the tourists. 
 

20 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
II) ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2022-23 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. Scrutiny of Annexure I reveals to the Committee that a number of Utilization Certificates 
are pending under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, Assistance to Central Agencies, Assistance to 
IHMs/ FCIs/ NCHMCT/ IITTM and PRASHAD and the cumulative amount involved therein is to 
the tune of Rs. 184.55 cr ore. Since conditionality regarding submission of Utilization 
Certificates is a bar for release of funds, the pendency of Utilization Certificates and the amount 
involved therein have implications for further release of funds and impinges on the effective 
implementation of tourism infrastructure projects formulated by the Ministry. Though the 
Ministry has taken some measures to liquidate pending UCs , given the fact that pending UC s 
pertain to projects sanctioned as far back as 2010 -11, it is obvious that a lot still remains to be 
done. The Committee, therefore, desires to be informed of the detailed action plan on bringing 
down the pendency and the success achieved so far so that a fair assessment can be made about 
the efficacy of the plan. 
 (Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Only one UC for Rs. 10.00 Cr released in March 2015 as the first installment for the 
project "Infrastructure Development at Puri, Shree Jagannath Dham -Ramachandi-Prachi River 
front at Deuli under Mega Circuit” in PRASHAD Scheme was pending in the year 2021-22. 
1.2 The project could not be step ahead beyond 5% physical p rogress due to non-availability 
of CRZ and other statutory clearances. Despite rigorous follow -ups and meetings with the State 
Government no progress in the matter could b e recorded. Finally, State Government directed the 
implementing agency to close the project in view of the proposed Master Plan of the SG for 
overall development of Puri area. As per the Record of discussion (RoD) dated 15 th March 2022, 
dissonance between DoT, Government of Odisha and ITDC (Implementing Agency) on 
expenditure line items reported viz. Centage Charge, Architect fees, Legal expenses and 

21 
 
 
demolition cost. The implementing agency has been requested to provide the details of the same. 
Post settlem ent of this the SG would be able provide final UC and may further refund the 
unspent balance (with interest if applicable). 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 The Committee is concerned about the delay in final UC submission in project -
"Infrastructure Development at Puri, Shree Jagannath Dham -Ramachandi-Prachi River 
front at Deuli under Mega Circuit” of the PRASHAD Scheme , which has been pending 
since 2015. The Committee is of the  view that non-submission or undue much delay in UC 
submission defeats the very purpose of legislative control over the public purse and could 
lead to schemes being locked up or diverted. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
identify the issues causing delay in payment of vari ous expenditure line items with the 
ITDC and take appropriate measures to ensure submission of UCs regarding the said 
project within the stipulated time. The Committee would like to know the plans of  the 
Ministry to settle the issue of expenditure project fund/cost involved with the ITDC. 
1.4 The Committee observes, that the Ministry‟s  reply does not indicate/ furnish any 
information regarding the UCs which were previously shown pending under various other 
Schemes as per the  Para 18 of the 318 th Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the 
Ministry, and there is no assurance that these UCs were successfully submitted  or their 
amounts were fully cleared. The Committee desires the Ministry to furnish a clear reply as 
regards the remaining UCs whic h were shown pending under its various Schemes  and 
whether their pendency has been brought down by the Ministry. 
 
III) CONTRIBUTION OF TOURISM TO GDP 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes that as per the World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC), prior to 
the COVID -19 pandemic, Travel and Tourism accounted for 10.4% of global GDP. In many 
parts of the world, tourism is a major engine of growth. The Committee in its 275 th Report 
presented to the Parliament on the 3 rd March, 2020 had noted that the contribution of tourism to 
national GDP was over 10% for most countries where tourism happens to be the main driver of 
national economy. However, in India which has unique endowments of biodiversity, forests, 
rivers, its rich culture and heritage and many World Heritage sites, the tourism sector has not 

22 
 
 
proved to be the proverbial engine of growth for our economy. This is evident from the fact that 
India's total share in global international arrivals remains a modest 1.57% against the target of 
3 per cent s et by the NITI Aayog to be achieved by 2022. Similarly, the contribution (direct and 
indirect) of tourism in the GDP and the total jobs in the country are estimated to be 5.16 per cent 
and 15.34 per cent respectively during 2019 -20. The Committee is of the  firm view that if India 
has to move towards becoming a USD 5 trillion economy and a global economic powerhouse, as 
envisioned by our Hon'ble PM Shri Narendra Modi, then the contribution of tourism to India's 
GDP has to be raised from the current 5.16% to 10% in the next five years. The Committee, 
while welcoming the various measures taken by the Ministry to double the contribution of 
tourism to India's GDP, feels that the vast untapped potential of India as a tourism destination 
cannot be realized unless t ourism is included in the Concurrent List of the Constitution of India. 
Taking note of the fact that Travel and Tourism does not figure in the Centre, State or 
Concurrent Lists and since in a federal polity like ours, the responsibility for policy making a nd 
implementation of tourism projects are fra gmented across different levels -Central and State 
Governments and coordination between them is often lacking due to absence of clearly defined 
mandate, the Committee in its 288 th Report had recommended inclusion  of tourism in the 
Concurrent List. Since tourism is yet to be included in the Concurrent List, the Committee 
reiterates its recommendation for inclusion of tourism in the Concurrent List of the Constitution 
of India. The Committee is convinced that this w ill go a long way in channelizing the 
development of tourism and positioning and maintaining tourism development as a national 
priority. 
(Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Travel & Tourism Sector has backward and forward linkages with other sectors of the  
economy, like transport, construction, handicrafts, manufacturing, horticulture, agriculture and 
involves multiple issues falling under the purview of both Centre and State Governments. 
Ministry of Tourism being the nodal Ministry for the development of t ourism sector in the 
country has set up several mechanisms for holding consultations with the State Governments, 
Central Ministries and private stakeholders on different subjects to create convergence and 
synergy across multiple agencies and programme for the development & growth of tourism 
sector in the country. These steps have been able to create robust mechanism for facilitating the 
implementation of the tourism policies and programmes, resulting in the growth of the tourism 
sector over the years. The F oreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) increased from 5.78 Million in 2010 
to 10.93 Million in 2019. Similarly, Foreign Exchange Earnings (FEEs) from Tourism increased 

23 
 
 
from Rs. 66,172 crore in 2010 to Rs.2,11,661 crore in 2019. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.2 The reply of the Ministry does not address the issue. The Committee has time and 
again raised the matter of inclusion of Tourism in Concurrent List in its previous 
recommendations (refer to Para 4.2 of the 298 th Report and Para 72 of the 288 th Report of 
the Committee). The Committee is of the view that inclusion of Tourism in the Concurrent 
List will help in simplifying the issues of the pandemic -hit Indian Tourism Sector since 
tourism is a multi -sectoral activit y and inclusion of tourism in the Concurr ent List will 
play an important role in facilitating the issues involved with multiple Ministries/ 
Organisations at Central level as well as with the States/Union Territories to create 
convergence and synergy of actions across multiple agencies and program mes. The 
Ministry should inform the Committee whether any action has been taken by the Ministry 
on this longstanding recommendation of the Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee observes that Emirate of Dubai does not have the abundant wealth of 
natural oil reserves and nor does it have a pre -existing plethora of natural, historical and 
internationally significant tourist sites. Despite that, it has emerged as a multi -billion dollar 
economy and amongst the world's most visited tourist de stinations, all based on the 
Government's tourism centric approach towards national policy making. The Committe e wishes 
that India should also endeavour  to imbibe creating potential for tourism in the very core of its 
policy making. Although tourism is an important activity in India, its share in global market is 
extremely small and the potential of tourism sector in India is yet to be unleashed. The actual 
implementation of tourist projects takes place at State/UT level but in most of the States/UTs, the 
outlay for Department of Tourism is meager. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in 
order to give policy push to the tourism industry, a National Tourism Council chaired by the 
Prime Minister and composed of Chief Ministers or Tourism Ministers of all States should be 
established. This National Council should be an empowered legislative body on the lines of GST 
Council. This will enable fast -track Centre-State level tourism decision making, leveraging and 
utilizing full synergies of India's tourism potential across all our States. 
(Para 31) 
 

24 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The Ministry has formulated a draft National Tourism policy after due consultation with 
identified Central Ministries, State Governments/UT Administrations and Industry stakeholders. 
Draft Note for Cabinet on the above policy was circulated for inter -ministerial consultations and 
comments/views of the Ministries/Departments have also been received. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2 The Committee believes that „Vision without action is a daydream, and action 
without a vision is a nightmare.‟ Merely drafting a National Tourism Policy is not 
sufficient for the development of Indian Tourism Sector, which requires resolving issues of 
the industry stakeholders . The C ommittee believes that vision combined with action can 
bring a huge change and therefore  reiterates that a National Tourism Council should be 
created in the line of GST Council to directly make recommendations to the Union and 
State Governments on various issues of the Indian Tourism Sector  and its stakeholders . 
The Committee also desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry regarding 
views/comments received in inter-ministerial consultations in this regard. 
 
(IV) IMPACT OF COVID -19 PANDEMIC O N TOURISM, TRAVEL AND  
HOSPITALITY SECTOR 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism had assigned National Council of 
Applied Economic Research (NCAER) to prepare a report on the impact of the COVID -19 
pandemic on the tourism sector. The Ministry has shared with the Committee the findings of the 
study conducted by NCAER. The Committee notes that one of the key findings of the study is that 
due to supply -side shock, tourism economy saw a fall of 42.8% in April -June 2020, 15.5% in 
July-Sep 2020 and 1.1% in October -December 2020. The Committee also notes that NCAER in 
its Study Report has made certain recommendations for the revival of the tourism sector. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action taken by the Ministry on the findings of the 
NCAER. 
(Para 65) 

25 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. Ministry of tourism has already 
circulated the study report to the State/UT Governments for taking necessary action. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2 The Committee would like to be informed in detail of the specific action taken by 
the Ministry and of the State/UT Govts with regards to the recommendation in the NCAER 
Study Report. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee observes that the tourism and hospitality industry is one of the worst hit 
sectors by COVID -19 pandemic and is in huge financial distress. The highly infectious novel 
coronavirus continues to thwart the sector as new COVID -19 variants keep on  emerging. Apart 
from providing mass employment, income and foreign exchange for the country, this sector has 
an economically beneficial cascading impact on other sectors such as airlines, infrastructure, 
transportation, accommodation, facilitations systems, etc. As per data furnished by the Ministry, 
during the year 2019 -20, this sector provided 79.86 million jobs directly and indirectly and 
generated 5.16% of India's GDP. As per the data furnished by the Ministry in the Table 9 above, 
the potential job lo ss in tourism has been estimated to be 20.8% in the year 2020 falling from 
4.01 crore in 2019 to 3.17 crore in 2020 and the total revenue loss suffered by the hospitality 
sector has been estimated to be Rs. 89,813 crore in 2020. Therefore, this sector need s an urgent 
boost for revival. The Committee notes that a proposal of the Ministry of Tourism regarding 
grant of infrastructure status to investment in hotel industry of Capex over Rs. 25 crore 
(excluding land) is under consideration of the Department of E conomic Affairs since long. The 
Committee observes that construction of hotels is highly capital intensive and it takes long for 
hotel projects to reach operational profitability. COVID has aggravated this and the current 
crisis is threatening the existenc e of hotel business for organizations in the Hospitality Sector 
because availability of lending by banks and financial institutions that have turned risk averse, 
especially towards hospitality sector, have reduced for contact-intensive sectors. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that hotel projects with Capex above Rs. 25 crore (excluding land) be 
accorded infrastructure status and included in the Infrastructure list of the RBI so that long term 
funds are accessible at lower interest rates and the gap bet ween return expectations and debt 

26 
 
 
cost is bridged. The Committee is of the view that according of infrastructure  status to hotel 
projects with C apex above Rs. 25 crore will not only help build quality accommodation supply, 
but will also have an enormous ec onomic multiplier effect across the length and breadth of the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the policy stance of the Government in this 
matter be spelt out within three months from the presentation of this Report.  
(Para 66) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2 The Committee notes that the Indian Hospitality Industry has faced a severe dent 
due to the pandemic and according Indian Hospitality Industry infra status with Capex 
above Rs. 25 crore (excluding land) to the sector will reduce the operating costs for 
hospitality players through subsidized rates of electricity and water charges, property tax, 
development tax etc. and also attract investments in the Sector. The Committee is confident 
that this move will fuel the Indian economy to achieve „atmanirbharta‟ in the post-
pandemic future. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee takes note of the submissions made for relief measures for the survival of 
the Travel, Tourism and Hospitality Industry. The Committee is aware that the Reserve Bank of 
India had consti tuted an Expert Committee with Shri K.V. Kamath as the Chairman to make 
recommendations on the required financial Parameters in respect of borrowers eligible under 
the COVID Resolution Framework and the recommendations of the Expert Committee on the key 
financial parameters, i.e., Total Outside Liabilities/ Adjusted Total Net Worth; Total Debt/ 
EBITA; Current Ratio; Debt Service Coverage Ratio; and Average Debt Service Coverage Ratio 
had been accepted by the Reserve Bank of India. The Committee has been inf ormed that the 
timeline to achieve the four ratios has been moved from March, 2022 to September, 2022. 
However, the deadline for the most important financial metric, i.e., Total Outside Liabilities/ 
Adjusted Total Net Worth has remained unchanged, i.e., Ma rch 2022. The Committee observes 
that the Indian economy has encountered a "once in a century" crisis due to COVID -19 

27 
 
 
pandemic and the Travel, Tourism and Hospitality Industry is one of the hardest hit, revival from 
which is unlikely to happen for the next 3-4 years because India is already facing a third wave of 
infections driven by the Omicron variant and tourists' footfall has come down significantly due to 
the vicious cycle of restrictions in the wake of COVID -19. The possibility of many more such 
waves and new variants of coronavirus emerging in India cannot be ruled out. On account of the 
above factors, the Travel and Hospitality Industry has witnessed a huge dip in business. Since 
the Tourism and Hospitality Sector is a major engine of economic growth  in terms of growth of 
GDP, forex earnings and employment generation, it is imperative that the revival of this sector 
should be at the forefront of the efforts of the Government. There is, therefore, an imperative 
need for Government to pull this sector o ut of the COVID -19 recessionary conditions. The 
Committee, therefore, lends its Parliamentary support to the demand of the Travel, Tourism and 
Hospitality industry and recommends that in view of the adverse impact of the third wave of 
COVID-19 pandemic and  the resultant recessionary conditions and the difficulties faced in 
revival of businesses and meeting the operational requirements, the deadline for achievement of 
all five financial parameters, i.e., (i) Total Outside Liabilities/ Adjusted Total Net wort h, (ii) 
Total Debt/ EBITA, (iii) Current Ratio, (iv) Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) and (v) 
Average Debt Service Coverage Ratio under the Resolution Framework relating to operational 
performance of borrowing entities be deferred to September, 2023 and the repayment schedule 
be extended from December 2022 to December, 2023. 
(Para 67) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The matter was taken up with Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance and they have 
intimated that that the input in the matter is NIL. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.2 The Ministry may further clarify the matter and the communication received from 
the Department of Revenue. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. Taking into account the fact that one of the bottlenecks in tapping the full potential of the 
hospitality sector is the high incidence and multiplicity of taxes in the country which has led to 

28 
 
 
tourist packages being outpriced in comparison to those availab le in competing destinations, the 
Committee in its 288 th Report had recommended that policy measures for according Industry 
status to hotels be initiated. The Committee notes that though some states like Maharashtra, 
Gujarat, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, etc., have accorded Industry status to hospitality sector, there 
is no uniformity in the tax structure across States. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry of Tourism should work out a strategy for inclusion of Hospitality Sector in the State 
and Central industrial policy so that this sector is conferred Industry Status by all the States. The 
Committee is of the firm view that conferring of Industry status will give a big boost to this 
Sector and help its faster recovery as it will allow the Sect or to avail lower electricity and water 
tariff, lower property tax, rationalization of license fees and simplified approval process for  
hotel projects and operations. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the specific 
measures taken by the Government in this regard and the outcome thereof.  
(Para 68) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 According of Industry Status to hotels is the prerogative of the State Governments. The 
Ministry of Tourism, Government of India has strongly advised all the States to provide 
“Industry Status” to hospitality projects by issuing suitable policy guidelines to provide capital 
subsidy on new investments to hospitality projects and power tariff, water tariff & property tax 
at industrial rates to encourage investment in the sector. In  addition to Maharashtra, Gujarat, 
Madhya Pradesh and Kerala, States such as Karnataka, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand have 
already taken steps in this direction. The matter has again been taken up with the other States. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
7.2 The Committee applauds the initiative taken by the 8 states - Maharashtra, 
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand in 
according “Industry Status” to the Hospitality projects , and recommends the Ministry to 
track progress status of the initiative in these States and ensure its successful 
implementation. However, there‟s still a long way to go, given that the remaining 20 Indian 
States are yet to take up such an initiative.  The Committee desires to know whether any 
thoughts/ views on granting “Industry Status” to Indian Hospitality Sector have been 
conveyed by the remaining States/ UTs to the Ministry. 
 

29 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee in its 288 th Report had observed that under the Service Exports from 
India Scheme (SEIS) the Government offered domestic exports duty credit scripts in the range of 
5% to 7% of the net foreign exchange earned depending upon the nature of services and 
recommended that at a time when the tourism  sector is faced with the crisis of the century, the 
notified services be incentivized at an enhanced rate of 10% for both tour operators and hotels 
in order to provide them with cash flow support. The Committee notes that the much awaited 
extension and the details on the Services Exports from India Scheme for FY 2019 -20 have been 
notified by the Directorate General of Foreign Trade vide notification No. 29/2015 -20 dated 
September 23, 2021. The Committee is, however, disappointed to note that SEIS benefits for the 
tourism sector has been granted at 5 per cent on net foreign exchange earnings as opposed to 
earlier 7 per cent. SEIS rates for hotels have been reduced to 3 per cent from earlier specified 
rate of 5 per cent. Entitlement under SEIS for services ex ports has also been capped at Rs. 5 
crore per exporter. The Committee observes that the reduction in percentage of SEIS benefits 
comes at a time when the tourism and hospitality industry is struggling to recover their losses or 
even to stay afloat in many cases. The Committee would like to point out that the travel and 
hospitality businesses are expected to be very subdued due to the decline in business scenario 
post COVID-19 pandemic and there is an imperative need to infuse some liquidity into this cash -
strapped sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take 
the SEIS rate reduction issue with the Ministry of Commerce and impress upon them that the 
dependency of the hospitality industry is high on import of goods to ma intain global standards 
which warrants SEIS benefits to be lucrative to reduce the import cost and, therefore, the scrips 
generated by the travel and hospitality sector should be allowed at the rate of 10% vis -à-vis the 
existing rates and the SEIS benefits should also be extended for further period of two-three years 
for enabling cost savings. 
 (Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The Foreign Trade Development Officer, Department of Commerce, Ministry of 
Commerce & Industries has communicated that the SEIS Scheme has not been extended beyond 
FY 2019-20. 
8.2 For FY 2019-20, SEIS benefits were capped at Rs. 5.00 Cr and rates for eligible service 
categories have been reduced across the board by 2% (7% rates have come down to 5% and 5% 
rates have come down to 3% ) because of budgetary constraints imposed by the Ministry of 

30 
 
 
Finance for implementing the Scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.3 The Committee observes that the objective of introducing the Service Exports from 
India Scheme ( SEIS) is to promote t he export of notified services in the international 
market. The Committee is of the view that since the Indian Tourism Industry has faced one 
of its worst phases over the past year -and-a-half and endured „debilitating hardships,‟ the 
SEIS benefit would hav e provided some financial succour and help tide over the crisis . 
Capping the SEIS rates during the recovery period may or may not be a right decision. 
The Committee is confident that there must be some other benefits that can be introduced 
by the M/o Finance for Indian Services Exporters , about which the Committee may be 
apprised. The Committee also desires to know whether any cost -benefit analysis has been 
done in this regard for withdrawal of the SEIS benefits from 7% to 2%. 
 
V. INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF TOURIST CIRCUITS AROUND SPECIFIC  
THEMES (SWADESH DARSHAN) 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee notes that some projects under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme which aims 
to develop world-class infrastructure in the circuit dest inations and enhance the contribution of 
tourism to the local economies, have witnessed massive financial and physical 
underperformance. Out of the 76 projects sanctioned for a revised cost of Rs. 5503.83, 34 
projects have been physically completed and 9 p rojects sanctioned for Rs. 671.32 crore have 
registered physical progress and financial performance ranging from 10 per cent to 49 per cent 
and 4 per cent to 55 per cent respectively. The projects witnessing physical and financial 
underperformance pertain to the Himalayan Circuit in Jammu and Kashmir, Eco Circuit in 
Jharkhand, Rural Circuit in Kerala, Spiritual Circuit in Maharashtra, Eco Circuit in Punjab and 
North-East Circuit in Tripura. The Committee observes that the creation of tourism 
infrastructure is the very foundation on which Indian tourism is to be built and a prerequisite 
towards improving the country's tourism productive capacity and attaining economic growth. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should analyze the reasons behind the 
underperformance of the above infrastructure projects and take remedial measures accordingly. 

31 
 
 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the measures taken to speed up execution of the above 
projects. 
 (Para 78) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The Ministry of Tourism has taken multiple actions to expedite progress of the projects 
which primarily include the following: - 
(i) Regular review meetings are held at senior level to monitor progress of the projects. 
(ii) States/Implementing Agencies have to regularly update  progress of the project on the 
scheme dashboard. 
(iii) The Ministry of Tourism has fixed completion timelines to all the States/UTs to complete 
the projects. 
(iv) The Ministry of Tourism has issued directions that all the State Governments/ UT 
Administrations/ Implementing Agencies must complete the projects sanctioned under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme within the approved timelines. If the sanctioned components are 
not completed in the given timeframe, expenditure incurred on the works undertaken 
beyond the completio n timelines will have to be borne by the respective State 
Governments/ UT Administrations/ Implementing Agencies. 
9.2 The Ministry of Tourism has issued instructions to the States/ UTs that the Ministry of 
Tourism will not sanction new projects under Swade sh Darshan Scheme 2.0 to the States/ UTs, 
which fail in successful completion of the already sanctioned projects and adhere to the 
instructions issued by the Government of India from time to time. 
9.3 The Ministry of Tourism has also developed a dashboard w hich is required to be updated 
by the State/ UTs on real time basis and also includes provisions for reporting physical and 
financial progresses of the project. 
9.4 It is now reported that almost 39 projects sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan Scheme are 
now p hysically complete whereas multiple other projects are also under advance stages of 
completion. 
9.5 The physical and financial progress of the projects sanctioned in Jammu and Kashmir, 
Eco Circuit in Jharkhand, Rural Circuit in Kerala, Spiritual Circuit in  Maharashtra, Heritage 
circuit in Punjab and North East Circuit in Tripura as on 31st March, 2022 is placed at Annexure-
I. 

32 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.6 The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for slow progress in both 
physical and financial areas. The Committee also suggests the Ministry to take the 
advantage of the regional, national and international linkages developed in North Eastern 
States so far in the tourism front and also follow a market -oriented approach in promoting 
the North-Eastern Circuit tourism across the country and at international level. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee observes that Spiritual Tourism holds a special place in India and also 
appeals to international tourist s as it presents an immersive spiritual experience. The presence 
of several sacred destinations of various faiths in the country makes these destinations among 
the most visited sites globally. Since infrastructure sector is a key driver for spiritual tourism, the 
Committee recommends to streamline the development of the entire religious tourism circuit in 
each region/area as it will increase the carrying capacity of these destinations which is required 
to meet the large influx of tourists at these destinations.  
(Para 79) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. 
10.2 The Ministry of Tourism under its Swadesh Darshan Scheme sanctions funds for tourism 
infrastructure development. 
10.3 Under this scheme 76 projects under different thematic circuits have already been 
sanctioned for about Rs. 5450 Cr. in various States and UTs, which are under different stages of 
implementation. Spiritual circuit theme is one of the identified theme under which a total of 13 
projects have been as per the details indicated at Annexure-II. 
10.4 The Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its Swadesh Darshan Scheme in t he form of 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0. As per the guidelines, the vision of the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 is to develop 
sustainable and responsible touris m destinations in the country and with the mission to create a 
robust framework for integrated development of tourism destinations in partnership with the 
States/ UTs and local governments for promoting sustainable and responsible tourism in the 

33 
 
 
country. 
10.5 In addition, the Ministry of Tourism also provides financial assistance to the States/UT 
under its „PRASHAD‟ scheme with the objective of integrated development of identified 
pilgrimage and heritage destinations.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.6 The Committee notes that against the sanctioned amount of Rs. 737.01 cr., only Rs. 
501.94 cr. has been released for the projects under the Spiritual Circuit. The Committee 
desires to be apprised of the reasons in this regard. 
10.7 Spiritual Tourism ow ns a prodigious canvas in Indian States of Kerala, 
Maharashtra, and Rajasthan harbouring splendid and far -famed pilgrimage sites, 
magnificently built temples, powerfully acclaimed religious places. The Committee notes 
that while Kerala has been given a meagre Rs. 3.88 cr. contrary to the sanctioned Rs. 69.47 
cr., Rajasthan and Maharashtra have been giv en Rs. 68.24 cr. and Rs. 24 cr. against the 
sanctioned amounts of Rs. 89.93 cr. and Rs. 47.53 cr. The Committee desires to be apprised 
of the reasons for the low amount release as regards the State of Kerala  and why approx. 
22 crores have been reduced from the sanctioned funds for the States of Rajasthan and 
Maharashtra. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee also desires to be apprised whether any of the projects being 
implemented under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme have witnessed cost escalation and time 
overruns. If so, the details thereof, may please be informed to the Committee at the earliest. 
(Para 81) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Time over-run has been seen under various projects of the Swadesh Darshan scheme. 
11.2 Now, the Ministry of Tourism has fixed deadlines for completion of the projects by June, 
2022 and December, 2022. 
 

34 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
11.3 The Committee reiterates its des ire to be apprised of the details of projects which 
have had cost escalation and time overrun. 
 
VI. THE NATINOAL MISSION ON PILGRIMAGE REJUVENATION AND  
SPIRITUAL AUGMENTATION DRIVE (PRASHAD) 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes that as on 31.01.2022, 37 projects have been approved under the 
PRASHAD at an approved cost of Rs. 1210 crore and the total release at the end of FY 2021 -22 
is expected to be to the tune of Rs. 807.00 crore. The Committee observes that India is a land of 
pilgrimages and this scheme focuses on developing and identifying pilgrimage sites across India 
for enriching the religious tourism experience and is, therefore very important from the point of 
view of overcoming seasonality and promoting India as a 365 days destinati on. The Committee, 
therefore, desires to be furnished with a status note on the physical and financial progress of 
each of the projects under the PRASHAD Scheme since its launch. 
(Para 86) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The information on the Physical and Financial progress (as on 21.10.2022) of the projects 
approved under PRASHAD scheme is at Annexure -III. It may be seen that out of 40 approved 
projects, physical execution of 19 has been completed. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
12.2 The Committee notes in the Annexure-III furnished by the Ministry that in projects 
sanctioned five years ago or before 2017 -18, the „ Development at Hazratbal‟ in Jammu & 
Kashmir and „Infrastructure Development at Puri, Shree Jagannath Dham – Ramachandi 
- Prachi River front at Deuli under Mega Circuit‟ in Odisha have achieved lesser progress 
rates than expected, i.e. 68% and <5%,  the latter being a more concerning matter for the 
Committee, needs a valid reason from the Ministry for an inordinate delay in its 
completion. The Committee is of the view that projects taking longer than five years may 
incur high cost and schedule/time o verruns, which will put extra financial burden and 

35 
 
 
resource crunch on the Ministry and implementing agencies involved. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to devise adequate monitoring mechanisms to ensure the timely 
completion of these projects. 
12.3 The Committee applauds the Ministry‟s efforts in achieving 100% completion rate 
for 19 projects under the PRASHAD Scheme. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will 
achieve full progress of the remaining projects with more than 60% completion rate in 
stipulated time through its meticulous efforts and planning , and recommends the Ministry 
to keep it informed about the progress achieved in this regard. 
 
VII. DEVELOPMENT OF ICONIC TOURIST DESTINATIONS 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. Besides the Tourism Ministry which is the nodal Ministry, several other Ministry such as 
Ministries of Culture, Road Transport and Highways, Ports, Shipping and Waterways, etc., are 
involved in the Iconic Sites Projects. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation 
made in its 288 th Report that convergence among the Ministries concerned should be ensured 
and role of these Ministries in implementing the projects should be clearly delineated so that 
they are able to pinpoint the roadblocks and concrete action can be taken whil e implementing 
the projects. 
(Para 92) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The recommendation of the committee noted.  The Ministry of Tourism has formulated 
the scheme “Development of Iconic Destinations”, which is not yet approved by 
the Government.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
13.2 The Committee desires to be apprised of the status of fund allocated for the Scheme, 
“Development of Iconic Destinations,” reason for delay in getting approval and steps taken 
by the Ministry to speed up the approval process . The Committee notes that cooperation is 
necessary to maintain the convergence among Ministries and ensuring  a proactive role of 
all the Ministries involved in the said Scheme. The Committee desires to know whether any 

36 
 
 
master plan has been chalked out by the Ministry to ensure better cooperation of all the 
Ministries at the execution stage after the Scheme gets approved. 
 
IX. DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY (DPPH) SCHEMEINCLUDING  
MARKET DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee also recommends that niche tourism avenues such as medical tourism, 
Buddhist tourism, sports tourism, ayurveda tourism, yoga tourism, spiritual tourism, adventure 
tourism, culinary tourism, cruise tourism, etc. should be promoted aggressively through the 
media campaigns 
(Para 107) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 Medical and Wellness Tourism, Cruise Tourism, Adventure Tourism etc. have been 
identified as niche tourism products for development and promotion by the Ministry. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
14.2 The Committee desires to be apprised about the action taken in detail by the 
Ministry to promote the abovementioned areas of Niche Tourism. 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. A very rapidly emerging trend in global tourism scenario, especially amongst the youth is 
that of Night Tourism. Though India has opened some of its monuments for public to visit in 
night, it is still in a very nascent stage. Sufficient information is also not available regarding the 
participating sites, their timings and other such detai ls. The Committee, therefore, desires that 
the Ministry should focus on night tourism and make more sites available for visit during night, 
allow extended hours, provide exhaustive information on websites and social media pages and 
aggressively market the concept. This will open a new dimension of looking at our existing 
tourism heritage and invite repeat visitors.  
(Para 110) 

37 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 The Ministry of  Tourism under its Swadesh Darshan Scheme provides financial 
assistance to the States/UTs for development of tourism infrastructure at the destinations in the 
country. The destinations/facilities developed under the scheme are also promoted through 
Social Media handle of the scheme. The Operation & Maintenance of the assets created under 
the scheme is usually done by the respective State Government/ UT Administrations/ Agencies 
responsible for O&M of the assets. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
15.2 The Ministry has not addressed the specific  issue of Night tourism in its reply. 
Promoting Night Tourism and nightlife in a way, would boost overall tourism of the 
country. A 24 -hour city status renders the daylight hour variation across the world less 
relevant and t ourists struggling to adapt to new time zones on a tight schedule may also 
find it convenient to visit a city which makes it easy for them to shop, dine and go 
sightseeing in night as well. Alongside permanent illuminations of the monuments across 
the country, the Committee recommends the Ministry to promote light/lantern festivals,  
all-night art festivals,  floating illuminated boats/yachts, candle-lit processions , and 
multimedia projections etc. which have already become popular in various countries. The 
Committee is of the view that lack of awareness is one of the reasons why night tourism has 
not taken off in the country yet. The Committee recommends the Ministr y to take  
appropriate steps to aggressive ly promote Night Tourism in India  and adopt initiatives to 
provide concessions/relaxation in fares/duties to night-time convenience stores/24X7 shops. 
 
X HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee notes with concerns that in order to generate sufficient manpower in 
order to meet the needs of the tourism and hospitality industry, the Ministry extends assistance 
to State Governments and Union Territories for establishment of Institutes o f Hotel 
Managements and Food Craft Institutes. As of now 47 Institutes of Hotel Management and 14 
Food Craft Institutes have been set up with the support of the Ministry and one Central IHM at 
Jagdishpur, Uttar Pradesh is under construction. Given the fact that India faces intense shortage 
of trained manpower at various levels of the travel and hospitality sector, the Committee is of the 

38 
 
 
view that the existing institutional capacities would not be able to meet the requirement of 
trained manpower in the tour ism and hospitality sector. As this sector has great potential for 
creating enormous number of jobs, the Committee recommends that the gap at the skill level 
should be bridged and new IHMs and FCIs in the States/UTs that have not been covered as yet, 
should be established to enlarge the quality and quantity output of human resources requ ired by 
the hospitality sector. 
(Para 115) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 The Ministry of Tourism, under the Scheme of Financial Assistance to the 
HMs/FCIs/IITTM/ICI/NCHMCT etc., extends Central Financial Assistance for setting up State 
IHM and Food Craft Institute upon receiving proposals from the concerned State Govts/UT 
Administrations. 
16.2 New proposals received, if any, from the State Govt./UT administration will be 
considered in accordance with the Scheme Guidelines. 
16.3 In addition Private Institutions are also coming up in this field and getting their affiliation 
from NCHMCT, increasing the supply of trained manpower in the hospitality sector. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
16.4 The Committee would like to know the status of new proposals received from the 
State Govt.s/UT Admn.s which have been considered under the Scheme of Financial 
Assistance to the HMs/FCIs/IITTM/ICI/NCHMCT. The Committee may also be appri sed 
of the number of Private Institutions affiliated with the NCHMCT to train manpower in 
the field of travel and hospitality. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the physical and financial progress in 
respect of the 3 Food Craft Institutes which have been sanctioned to be set up in the State of 
Madhya Pradesh. 
(Para 116) 

39 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Status of physical and financial progress in respect of the three FCIs is as below: 
Name of 
the Project 
Sanctioned 
amount 
(Amount in 
lakh) 
Released 
amount 
(Amount 
in lakh) 
Expenditure 
(Amount in 
lakh) 
Physical Progress 
FCI 
Balaghat 
475.00 160.00 0.33 Up to plinth level (work in 
progress) 
FCI Dhar 750.00 254.00 99.98 Main Institute building at plinth 
level and Girls hostel footing 
work completed. 
FCI 
Shahdol 
750.00 254.00 124.00 Admin Block, Ground Floor Slab 
Work in progress, Boys & Girls 
Hostel Plinth work started. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
17.2 The objective of Food Craft Institutes is to provide instructions and training in all 
the Craft and skills, both theoretical and practical, and all the organizational and 
management techniques, required for the efficient functioning of Catering Establishme nts, 
Restaurants, Cruise Lines, Airlines, Entrepreneurship or industrial establishments etc. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to employ modern techniques  and speed up the 
development of three Food Craft Institutes at Balaghat, Dhar and Shahdol (all in Madhya 
Pradesh). The Committee is of the view that these FCIs may become  an important source 
of revenue , and will prove  beneficial for the tourism and hospitality sector , and thus , 
recommends that such FCIs be encouraged in each Indian State in or der to bring out the  
best opportunities for the Indian youth in the field of food crafts and skill enhancement. 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee is of the view that there is an imperative need for the hotel management 
institutes to be updated and integrated with the hotel industry. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the complete curriculum of the hotel management institutes be revised. The 
curriculum also needs to be updated regularly to reflect the constantly changing dynamics of the 
industry in the post COVID era.  
(Para 121) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 The IHMs are constantly in touch with the Industry and even in their Board, there are two 

40 
 
 
members from the Industry. As suggested by the NCHMCT, the faculties regularly visit the 
Industry to make aware of the new trend, if any to follow in the Institute and also to coordinate 
for campus placement. 
18.2 Revision of complete curriculum of the IHMs considering the changing dynamics of the 
Industry, post-COVID is under process, which will also take care of the guidelines of NEP 2020. 
Outline of the new curriculum has already been designed after getting inputs from Industry and 
academicians. Subject wise detailing of inputs is underway through the subject experts.     
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
18.3 The Committee is of the view that Indian Hotel and Tourism is rapidly expanding, 
given the surging demand from travellers, sustained efforts of government and private 
travel agents and creation of employment opportunities  simultaneously to boost the 
market. Today‟s highly competitive and dynamic environment requires a skilful 
workforce, specially trained in handling the modern challenges in the competitive game of 
the industry. A Curriculum enriched with new learning paradigms, modern methodologies 
and attributes for Staff Training at Hotel Industry will serve  as a strong service -based 
philosophy in achieving customer satisfaction and business success. The Committee desires 
to be apprised of the outline of the new curriculum  IHMs designed after obtaining inputs 
from Industry Academicians/Experts. 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee in its 288 th Report had observed that till the year 2015 -16, the ‘Hunar Se 
Rozgar Tak’ Programme was geared only towards the creation of employable skills. However, 
with the adoption of Common Norms on Skill Development notified by the Ministry of Skill 
development an d Entrepreneurship, it has been made mandatory on the part of the Training 
Provider Institutes to arrange placement/self -employment for at least 70% of the certified 
trainees within three months of completion of the course. The Committee would like to be 
updated whether the implementing agencies have adjusted to this provision. The Committee also 
desires to be apprised of the Training Service Provider Institutes who have lagged behind the 
targets set in this regard. The Committee also recommends that the Mi nistry should closely put 
in place an intensive monitoring mechanism for fulfilment of the norms stipulated by the Ministry 
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship.  
(Para 122) 

41 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Due to spread of COVID-19 pandemic for the last two financial years, the placement 
percentage in the Hospitality Sector has been reduced. The Institutions are gradually getting the 
certified trainees placed as far as possible. However, the hospitality Sector is yet to come out of 
the impact of COVID-19 pandemic and it may take some more time before the sector is able to 
function in the normal mode. Ministry in this context dialogue with the industry in this matter. 
19.2 Moreover, the Ministry does not release the 20% of Base Cos t (Last tranche) which is 
linked to the placement of the training programme to the Institute who does not fulfil the norms 
stipulated by Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE).  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
19.3 Skills and compete ncies are a function of the economic development and social 
development of any country and bring advancement and excellence to a country like India, 
which needs to achieve the twin target of economic growth and inclusive development 
through GDP growth of 8 % to 9% . The Committee if of the view that a credible, sound 
and aspirational national system is needed to facilitate skill development in the country and 
would like to know the  status and efficacy of the  norms and guidelines stipulated by the 
MSDE for the placement of training programme to Institute(s). 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee notes that a number of programmes like Hunar Se Rozgar Tak, Skill 
Testing and Certification, Entrepreneurship Programmes, Tourism Adventure Courses, etc., 
have been launched under the Scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers to provide 
education, training and certification to the tourism service 81 providers. Though the Ministry 
has supplied the information regarding the number of persons trained and cer tified under the 
programmes of Capacity Building for Service Providers, it has not furnished the annual targets 
fixed and the actual achievement made in respect thereof under the scheme of Capacity Building 
for Service Providers in 2021 - 22. The Committee,  therefore, desires to be apprised of the 
achievements made vis-à-vis the targets fixed, programme-wise, under the CBSP in 2021-22. 
(Para 123) 

42 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 Ministry of Tourism had set a target of 63,600 persons for the financial year 2021 -22. 
The details of persons were to be trained are as follows:- 
S.No. Category of the programme Target Achievement 
1 No. of fresh/new service 
providers trained under skill 
development category 
46900 12746 
2 No. of existing service prov iders 
trained under re-skilling category 16700 7983 
 
20.2 Due to the spread of COVID-19 pandemic, the training had to be suspended. However, a 
total of 20,729 persons were trained/certified during the FY 2021-22. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
20.3 With the gov ernment‟s aggressive  campaigning of  „Make in India‟  and the 
accelerated growth in the economy, the demand for skilled manpower in the country has 
risen. The Committee is constrained to note that against the target of 63,600, only 20,729 
persons have been trained/certified so far. The Committee is of the view  that training adds 
structure to an organization/industry‟s learning and development of employees and  
shortage in the trained and skilled  workforce may lead to lower customer satisfact ion of 
the tourists. The Committee recommends the Ministry to adopt appropriate mechanisms to 
achieve the set target and utilize the „demographic dividend‟ through vigorous branding 
and facilitating the active involvement of PPP since there is a huge scope  of generation and 
supply of skilled workforce in India. 
 
XI. ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES FOR TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE  
DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee notes that Ministry of Tourism has shared with the Ministry of Road 
Transport a nd Highways a new list of 114 destinations for improving connectivity to these 
destinations. Good road, railway or air connectivity to tourist destinations is of paramount 
importance to attract domestic as well as foreign tourists because when these destin ations are 
well connected, entrepreneurs in hospitality sector, tour and travel operators become confident 
of making investments and promoting these destinations. The Committee, therefore, recommends 

43 
 
 
that a dedicated mechanism be put in place for planning,  coordination and completion of the 
road connectivity projects to the 114 tourist destinations. 
(Para 128) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 The meeting of the Task Force constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Tourism), Govt. of India to address various  issues related to tourism as per the 
recommendations of the Sectoral Groups of Secretaries (SGoS) for Tourism Sectoral Plan, met 
on 23.09.2022. The Task Force comprises representatives from the Ministries of Civil Aviation, 
External Affairs, Home Affairs,  Railways, Road T ransport & Highways, Culture, Do NER, 
Environment & Forests and IRCTC, ASI. 
21.2 Meetings/Consultations are held from time to time with various stakeholders to take 
suggestions/inputs for the development and promotion of tourism sector in the country. 
21.3 In addition, Ministry of Tourism on regular intervals has been seeking the progress on the 
improvement of road connectivity and development of Wayside amenities on recommended 
tourist routes under the control from Ministry of Road Transpor t and Highways P WD 
department State Government/UT Administration and Border Road Organisation. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
21.4 The Committee may be apprised of the status and outcome of the meeting of the 
Task Force constituted under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, M/o Tourism and the 
steps taken by the Ministry to address the various issues related to tourism as per the 
recommendations of the SGoS for Tourism Sectoral Plan. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. There is lack of good wayside amenities including toilets at several tourist destinations 
which causes inconvenience to tourists and discourages them from visiting such places. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should focus more on the improvement of 
wayside amenities at tourist destinations to facilitate travellers. 
(Para 130) 

44 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 Identification of sites for tourism development is done as per the relevant scheme 
guidelines and in consultation with the State Government/UT Administration. 
22.2 It is to inform that Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned 1 project specifically on Wayside 
amenities in Uttar Pradesh & Bihar under  the Swadesh Darshan Scheme SD 1.0 and the details 
are as follows: 
S.No. 
 
Circuit/San
ction Year 
Name of the Project Amt. Sanctioned 
(Rs. In Crore) 
1. Wayside 
Amenities 
2018-19  
Development of wayside Amenities 
in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar at 
Varanasi - Gaya - Kushinagar in 
collaboration with MoRTH 
15.07 
 
22.3 The Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its Swadesh Darshan scheme as SD 2.0 and 
the new projects will be considered following a destination and tourist -centric approach. The 
guidelines and the format for State Perspective Plan of SD  2.0 has been shared with all the State  
Governments/UT. Based on the State Perspective Plan s ubmitted by the States/UTs, the 
destinations will be selected by the Ministry of  Tourism for development after following due 
procedures as stipulated in the scheme guidelines. 
22.4 It is to inform that the projects approved by the Ministry of Tourism under  Swadesh 
Darshan 1.0, sanctioned the funds for basic facilities such as toilets, last mile connectivity, 
benches, CCTV etc. Similarly, under th e guidelines of Swadesh Darshan 2.0 issued by the 
Ministry of Tourism, there is a provision to approve toilets, s olid waste management, first aid 
centres, CCTV etc. in the selected destinations. 
22.5 Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned for Development of 22 v iew points in the North 
Eastern States at an estimated cost of Rs. 49 crores, which also includes Toilet facili ties. These 
cover the following States: 
               Nagaland (2 view points) - Rs.5.77 crores 
               Meghalaya (3 view points) - Rs.6.26 crores 
               Mizoram (9 view points) - Rs.12.78 crores 
               Arunachal (4 view points) - Rs.6.25 crores 
               Manipur (3 view points) - Rs.5.93 crores 
               Sikkim/WB (1 view point) - 3.70 crores. 
 
 

45 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
22.6 The Committee applauds the Ministry‟s efforts in developing wayside amenities 
under the S wadesh Darshan Scheme since  India is fast evolving  as a potential economic 
trigger with the development of wayside amenities along the highways and byways across 
the country, consisting of retail fuel outlets, electric re -charging, eating joints, food courts, 
public conveniences and other commuter friendly services like drive -through food pick up 
points, which  will not only support small businesses, create jobs, but will also give a big 
boost to the local economy.  The Committee would like to know the pe rcent progress 
achieved in the Wayside Amenities 2018-19 project - „Development of wayside Amenities in 
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar at Varanasi  - Gaya - Kushinagar in collaboration with M oRTH,‟ 
and whether more wayside amenity projects have been taken up in remaining Indian States 
and whether any cooperative mechanisms have been created with other Ministries for the 
same. The Committee also desires to know the status of „State Perspective Plan.‟ 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. Adventure tourism in  India has a huge potential for growth as India offers the keen 
adventurers a fascinating range of thrills and activities to choose from. The Ministry of Tourism 
has issued guidelines for approval of Adventure Tourism Operators which is a voluntary 
scheme. The Committee notes that Adventure Tourism is largely unorganized and unregulated. 
The Committee, therefore, feels that there is an urgent need to regularize the Adventure Tour 
Operators Market and promote registration of companies indulging in these acti vities on a 
centralized platform to increase credibility and enforce safety regulations. 
(Para 141) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 Tour operators/ Travel Agents/ Tourist Transport Operators are registered with the local 
authority.  
23.2 To ensure standardized services for tourists, the Ministry of Tourism, Govt. of India in 
accordance with its guidelines, gives recognition to different categories of service providers in 
the Travel and Hospitality industry including Tour Operators/ Travel Agents/ Tourist Transport 

46 
 
 
Operators etc. for five years, in each category. This is purely a voluntary scheme and is not 
mandatory for the service providers to seek approval of the Ministry of Tourism, for conducting 
their business. Ministry of Tourism is not the regulatory authority. 
23.3 Hence, it may not be possible to create centralized platform for registration of companies 
indulging in Tourism activities. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
23.4 The Committee observes that Asian countries - specifically India, China and the 
Caribbean islands are primary hotspots in the adventure tourism industry right now, apart 
from middle-eastern Europe. India having vast amount of adventure locations and a lot of 
potential in development and expansion of the Adventure Tourism, taking initiatives for 
Adventure Tour Operators to enable them to operate without much hassle will go a long 
way. However, competitive market pressures may force the Adventure Tour Operators 
(ATOs) to cut corners and operate “close to the edge” in order to remain financially viable, 
which indicates the short -term perspective for the industry. The Committee therefore 
recommends the Ministry to bring out some mandatory accreditation system to ensure 
adequacy of their in frastructure to strengthen safety of tourists in the adventure tour 
locations, especially the high -risk adventure zones across the country.  The Committee also 
recommends formulating appropriate policies/guidelines to address issues of the adventure 
tour operators and so that this sector could have a long -term and sustainable future in the 
Indian tourism industry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
IV) IMPACT OF COVID -19 PANDEMIC ON TOURISM, TRAVEL AND  
HOSPITALITY SECTOR 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that Finance Act, 2020 which was announced just before the start 
of COVID -19 crisis, inter alia, came up with new insertion of Tax Collected at Source (TCS) 
provisions under Section 206C (1 G) (a) of Income Tax Act, 1961 pertaining to TC S @ 5% on 
foreign remittance through Liberalized Remittance Scheme (LRS) and under Section 206C 
(1G)(b) pertaining to TCS@5% on selling of overseas tour packages by tour operators. The 
Indian Tour Operators face challenges to match the prices offered for o utbound tours in 
comparison to foreign tour service providers due to additional burden of taxes which include 
GST and newly inserted TCS provisions under Section 206C of the Income Tax Act, 1961 
because overseas agents and Online Travel Agents (OTAs) do no t charge the same since their 
base is out of India. The Committee is of the view that the above TCS provisions will not only 
increase the cost of packages sold by Indian tour operators, they will also shift all sales of 
outbound tourism to overseas suppliers, thereby denying the Government of income tax and GST 
revenue. These newly inserted TCS provisions, therefore, are detrimental to tourism business in 
India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to allow domestic tour operators a 
level playing field in comparison with foreign tour operators in the market of outbound tourism, 
the above mentioned TCS provisions be rolled back. The Committee is of the view that once TCS 
on outbound tourism is withdrawn, it will enable the Indian Travel Agents and Tour Operators to 
stage a recovery post the pandemic. 
(Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The matter has been taken up with the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. 
Their Reply is awaited. 

48 
 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
1.2 The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
XI. ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES FOR TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE 
DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes that with a view to providing enhanced amenities and facilities for 
tourists at railway stations, or 22 projects have been sanctioned by the Ministry of Tourism at a 
cost of Rs. 108.54 crores. Though more than ten years have elapsed since their sanction in FY 
2011-12, their full operationalization is still a far cry. The C ommittee is unhappy at the 
continuing delay in full operationalization of these projects and is constrained to observe that 
the desired priority has not been accorded to the upgradation of facilities and amenities at the 22 
railway stations selected for th e purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends with all the 
power at its command that concrete steps be taken to translate into reality the vision of 
developing top -class facilities at the 22 railway stations within a designated timeline. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 133) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The meeting of Tourism Task Force constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary 
(Tourism), Govt. of India to address various issues related to tourism was held on 23.09.2022, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Road Transport and Ministry of Railways attended the 
meeting. Ministry of Railways was requested to get the work completed at the earliest. Ministry 
of Railways has assured that they will revert to M/o Tourism with an updated status on the 
projects. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
2.2 The Committee desires to be apprised of the outcome of the Tourism Task Force 
Meeting held on 23.09.2022 and the reply of the M/o Railways as regards the delay in 

49 
 
 
operationalization of the 22 projects, for provision of enhanced amenities at 22 railway 
stations, sanctioned in FY 2011-12. 
 
XII SAFE AND HONOURABLE TOURISM 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee is aware that the tourist police system  prevails in other countries also. 
The Committee would like the Ministry of Tourism to document such best practices from these 
countries and help adopt such practices in our country. The Committee desires to be kept 
apprised in this regard. 
(Para 140) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 To adopt the best practices for tourist police system the Ministry of Tourism has 
organised the National Conference of DGsP/IGsP & others of all States/UTs in connection with 
Tourist Police Scheme on 19 th October, 2022. The development would be shared with the 
Committee. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observations: 
3.2 The Committee  would like to know the outcome of the National Conference of 
DGsP/IGsP and others of all States/UTs held on 19 th October, 2022 regarding the Tourist 
Police Scheme. 
 
* * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
 
 
       
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
II) ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2022-23 
The Committee is concerned about the delay in final UC submission in project -
"Infrastructure Development at Puri, Shree Jagannath Dham -Ramachandi-Prachi River 
front at Deuli under Mega Circuit” of the PRASHAD Scheme, whic h has been pending 
since 2015. The Committee is of the view that non -submission or undue much delay in UC 
submission defeats the very purpose of legislative control over the public purse and could 
lead to schemes being locked up or diverted. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
identify the issues causing delay in payment of various expenditure line items with the 
ITDC and take appropriate measures to ensure submission of UCs regarding the said 
project within the stipulated time. The Committee would lik e to know the plans of the 
Ministry to settle the issue of expenditure project fund/cost involved with the ITDC. 
(Para 1.3) 
The Committee observes, that the Ministry‟s reply does not indicate/furnish any 
information regarding the UCs which were previously shown pending under various other 
Schemes as per the Para 18 of the 318 th Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the 
Ministry, and there is no assurance that these UCs were successfully submitted or their 
amounts were fully cleared. The Committee desire s the Ministry to furnish a clear reply as 
regards the remaining UCs which were shown pending under its various Schemes and 
whether their pendency has been brought down by the Ministry. 
 (Para 1.4) 
III) CONTRIBUTION OF TOURISM TO GDP 
 The reply of the Ministry does not address the issue. The Committee has time and 
again raised the matter of inclusion of Tourism in Concurrent List in its previous 
recommendations (refer to Para 4.2 of the 298 th Report and Para 72 of the 288 th Report of 
the Committee). The Committee is of the view that inclusion of Tourism in the Concurrent 

51 
 
 
List will help in simplifying the issues of the pandemic -hit Indian Tourism Sector since 
tourism is a multi -sectoral activity and inclusion of tourism in the Concurrent List will 
play an  important role in facilitating the issues involved with multiple Ministries/ 
Organisations at Central level as well as with the States/Union Territories to create 
convergence and synergy of actions across multiple agencies and programmes. The 
Ministry should inform the Committee whether any action has been taken by the Ministry 
on this longstanding recommendation of the Committee. 
(Para 2.2) 
 The Committee believes that „Vision without action is a daydream, and action 
without a vision is a nightmare.‟ Mere ly drafting a National Tourism Policy is not 
sufficient for the development of Indian Tourism Sector, which requires resolving issues of 
the industry stakeholders. The Committee believes that vision combined with action can 
bring a huge change and therefor e reiterates that a National Tourism Council should be 
created in the line of GST Council to directly make recommendations to the Union and 
State Governments on various issues of the Indian Tourism Sector and its stakeholders. 
The Committee also desires to  be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry regarding 
views/comments received in inter-ministerial consultations in this regard. 
(Para 3.2) 
(IV) IMPACT OF COVID -19 PANDEMIC ON TOURISM, TRAVEL AND  
HOSPITALITY SECTOR 
 The Committee would like to be informed in detail of the specific action taken by 
the Ministry and of the State/UT Govts with regards to the recommendation in the NCAER 
Study Report. 
(Para 4.2) 
 The Committee notes that the Indian Hospitality Industry has faced a severe dent 
due to the pandemic and according Indian Hospitality Industry infra status with Capex 
above Rs. 25 crore (excluding land) to the sector will reduce the operating costs for 
hospitality players through subsidized rates of electricity and water charges, property tax, 
development tax etc. and also attract investments in the Sector. The Committee is confident 
that this move will fuel the Indian economy to achieve „atmanirbharta‟ in the post -
pandemic future. 

52 
 
 
(Para 5.2) 
 The Ministry may further clarify the matter and the co mmunication received from 
the Department of Revenue. 
(Para 6.2) 
 The Committee applauds the initiative taken by the 8 states - Maharashtra, 
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand in 
according “Industry Status” to the Hospitality projects, and recommends the Ministry to 
track progress status of the initiative in these States and ensure its successful 
implementation. However, there‟s still a long way to go, given that the remaining 20 Indian 
States are yet to take up suc h an initiative. The Committee desires to know whether any 
thoughts/ views on granting “Industry Status” to Indian Hospitality Sector have been 
conveyed by the remaining States/ UTs to the Ministry. 
(Para 7.2) 
 The Committee observes that the objective of introducing the Service Exports from 
India Scheme (SEIS) is to promote the export of notified services in the international 
market. The Committee is of the view that since the Indian Tourism Industry has faced one 
of its worst phases over the past year -and-a-half and endured „debilitating hardships,‟ the 
SEIS benefit would have provided some financial succour and help tide over the crisis. 
Capping the SEIS rates during the recovery period may or may not be a right decision. 
The Committee is confident that t here must be some other benefits that can be introduced 
by the M/o Finance for Indian Services Exporters, about which the Committee may be 
apprised. The Committee also desires to know whether any cost -benefit analysis has been 
done in this regard for withdrawal of the SEIS benefits from 7% to 2%. 
(Para 8.3) 
V. INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF TOURIST CIRCUITS AROUND SPECIFIC  
THEMES (SWADESH DARSHAN) 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for slow progress in both 
physical and financial areas. The Com mittee also suggests the Ministry to take the 
advantage of the regional, national and international linkages developed in North Eastern 
States so far in the tourism front and also follow a market -oriented approach in promoting 

53 
 
 
the North-Eastern Circuit tourism across the country and at international level. 
(Para 9.6) 
 The Committee notes that against the sanctioned amount of Rs. 737.01 cr., only Rs. 
501.94 cr. has been released for the projects under the Spiritual Circuit. The Committee 
desires to be apprised of the reasons in this regard. 
(Para 10.6) 
 Spiritual Tourism owns a prodigious canvas in Indian States of Kerala, 
Maharashtra, and Rajasthan harbouring splendid and far -famed pilgrimage sites, 
magnificently built temples, powerfully acclaimed religious  places. The Committee notes 
that while Kerala has been given a meagre Rs. 3.88 cr. contrary to the sanctioned Rs. 69.47 
cr., Rajasthan and Maharashtra have been given Rs. 68.24 cr. and Rs. 24 cr. against the 
sanctioned amounts of Rs. 89.93 cr. and Rs. 47.53 cr. The Committee desires to be apprised 
of the reasons for the low amount release as regards the State of Kerala and why approx. 
22 crores have been reduced from the sanctioned funds for the States of Rajasthan and 
Maharashtra. 
(Para 10.7) 
 The Committee reiterates its desire to be apprised of the details of projects which 
have had cost escalation and time overrun. 
(Para 11.3) 
VI. THE NATINOAL MISSION ON PILGRIMAGE REJUVENATION AND  
SPIRITUAL AUGMENTATION DRIVE (PRASHAD) 
The Committee notes in the Annexure-III furnished by the Ministry that in projects 
sanctioned five years ago or before 2017 -18, the „ Development at Hazratbal‟ in Jammu & 
Kashmir and „Infrastructure Development at Puri, Shree Jagannath Dham – Ramachandi 
- Prachi River front at Deuli  under Mega Circuit‟ in Odisha have achieved lesser progress 
rates than expected, i.e. 68% and <5%, the latter being a more concerning matter for the 
Committee, needs a valid reason from the Ministry for an inordinate delay in its 
completion. The Committee  is of the view that projects taking longer than five years may 
incur high cost and schedule/time overruns, which will put extra financial burden and 
resource crunch on the Ministry and implementing agencies involved. The Committee 

54 
 
 
recommends the Ministry to devise adequate monitoring mechanisms to ensure the timely 
completion of these projects. 
(Para 12.2) 
 The Committee applauds the Ministry‟s efforts in achieving 100% completion rate 
for 19 projects under the PRASHAD Scheme. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will 
achieve full progress of the remaining projects with more than 60% completion rate in 
stipulated time through its meticulous efforts and planning, and recommends the Ministry 
to keep it informed about the progress achieved in this regard. 
(Para 12.3) 
VII. DEVELOPMENT OF ICONIC TOURIST DESTINATIONS 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the status of fund allocated for the Scheme, 
“Development of Iconic Destinations,” reason for delay in getting approval and steps taken 
by the Ministry to speed up the approval process. The Committee notes that cooperation is 
necessary to maintain the convergence among Ministries and ensuring a proactive role of 
all the Ministries involved in the said Scheme. The Committee desires to know whether any 
master plan has been chalked out by the Ministry to ensure better cooperation of all the 
Ministries at the execution stage after the Scheme gets approved. 
(Para 13.2) 
IX. DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY (DPPH) SCHEMEINCLUDING  
MARKET DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
 The Committee desires to be apprised about the action taken in detail by the 
Ministry to promote the abovementioned areas of Niche Tourism. 
(Para 14.2) 
 
 
 
 The Ministry has not addressed the specific issue of Night tourism in its reply. 
Promoting Night Tourism  and nightlife in a way, would boost overall tourism of the 
country. A 24 -hour city status renders the daylight hour variation across the world less 
relevant and tourists struggling to adapt to new time zones on a tight schedule may also 
find it convenient  to visit a city which makes it easy for them to shop, dine and go 
sightseeing in night as well. Alongside permanent illuminations of the monuments across 
the country, the Committee recommends the Ministry to promote light/lantern festivals, 

55 
 
 
all-night art festivals, floating illuminated boats/yachts, candle -lit processions, and 
multimedia projections etc. which have already become popular in various countries. The 
Committee is of the view that lack of awareness is one of the reasons why night tourism has 
not taken off in the country yet. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take 
appropriate steps to aggressively promote Night Tourism in India and adopt initiatives to 
provide concessions/relaxation in fares/duties to night-time convenience stores/24X7 shops. 
(Para 15.2) 
X HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 The Committee would like to know the status of new proposals received from the 
State Govt.s/UT Admn.s which have been considered under the Scheme of Financial 
Assistance to the HMs/FCIs/IITTM/ICI/NCHMCT. The Committee may also be apprised 
of the number of Private Institutions affiliated with the NCHMCT to train manpower in 
the field of travel and hospitality. 
(Para 16.4) 
 The objective of Foo d Craft Institutes is to provide instructions and training in all 
the Craft and skills, both theoretical and practical, and all the organizational and 
management techniques, required for the efficient functioning of Catering Establishments, 
Restaurants, Cruise Lines, Airlines, Entrepreneurship or industrial establishments etc. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to employ modern techniques and speed up the 
development of three Food Craft Institutes at Balaghat, Dhar and Shahdol (all in Madhya 
Pradesh). The Committee is of the view that these FCIs may become an important source 
of revenue , and will prove  beneficial for the tourism and hospitality sector, and thus, 
recommends that such FCIs be encouraged in each Indian State in order to bring out the 
best opportunities for the Indian youth in the field of food crafts and skill enhancement. 
(Para 17.2) 
 The Committee is of the view that Indian Hotel and Tourism is rapidly expanding, 
given the surging demand from travellers, sustained efforts of government and private 
travel agents and creation of employment opportunities  simultaneously to boost the 
market. Today‟s highly competitive and dynamic environment requires a skilful 
workforce, specially trained in handling the modern challenges in the competitive game of 
the industry. A Curriculum enriched with new learning paradigms, modern methodologies 
and attributes for Staff Training at Hotel Industry will serve as a strong service -based 
philosophy in achieving customer satisfaction and business success.  The Committee desires 

56 
 
 
to be apprised of the outline of the new curriculum IHMs designed after obtaining inputs 
from Industry Academicians/Experts. 
(Para 18.3) 
 Skills and competencies are a function of the economic development and social 
development of any country and bring advancement and excellence to a country like India, 
which needs to achieve the twin target of economic growth and inclusive development 
through GDP growth of 8% to 9%. The Committee if of the view that a credible, sound 
and aspirational national system is needed to facilitate skill development in the country and 
would like to know the status and efficacy of the norms and guidelines stipulated by the 
MSDE for the placement of training programme to Institute(s). 
(Para 19.3) 
 With the government‟s agg ressive campaigning of „Make in India‟ and the 
accelerated growth in the economy, the demand for skilled manpower in the country has 
risen. The Committee is constrained to note that against the target of 63,600, only 20,729 
persons have been trained/certified so far. The Committee is of the view that training adds 
structure to an organization/industry‟s learning and development of employees and 
shortage in the trained and skilled workforce may lead to lower customer satisfaction of 
the tourists. The Committee recommends the Ministry to adopt appropriate mechanisms to 
achieve the set target and utilize the „demographic dividend‟ through vigorous branding 
and facilitating the active involvement of PPP since there is a huge scope of generation and 
supply of skilled workforce in India. 
(Para 20.3) 
XI. ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES FOR TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE  
DEVELOPMENT 
 The Committee may be apprised of the status and outcome of the meeting of the 
Task Force constituted under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, M/o Tourism and the 
steps taken by the Ministry to address the various issues related to tourism as per the 
recommendations of the SGoS for Tourism Sectoral Plan. 
(Para 21.4) 

57 
 
 
 The Committee applauds the Ministry‟s efforts in developing wayside amenities 
under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme since India is fast evolving as a potential economic 
trigger with the development of wayside amenities along the highways and byways across 
the country, consisting of retail fuel outlets, electric re -charging, eating joints, food courts, 
public conveniences and other commuter friendly services like drive -through food pick up 
points, which will not only support small businesses, create jobs, but will also give a big 
boost to the local economy. The Committee would like to know t he percent progress 
achieved in the Wayside Amenities 2018-19 project - „Development of wayside Amenities in 
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar at Varanasi - Gaya - Kushinagar in collaboration with MoRTH,‟ 
and whether more wayside amenity projects have been taken up in remaining Indian States 
and whether any cooperative mechanisms have been created with other Ministries for the 
same. The Committee also desires to know the status of „State Perspective Plan.‟ 
(Para 22.6) 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 The Committee observes that Asian countries - specifically India, China and the 
Caribbean islands are primary hotspots in the adventure tourism industry right now, apart 
from middle-eastern Europe. India having vast amount of adventure locations and a lot of 
potential in development and ex pansion of the Adventure Tourism, taking initiatives for 
Adventure Tour Operators to enable them to operate without much hassle will go a long 
way. However, competitive market pressures may force the Adventure Tour Operators 
(ATOs) to cut corners and operate “close to the edge” in order to remain financially viable, 
which indicates the short -term perspective for the industry. The Committee therefore 
recommends the Ministry to bring out some mandatory accreditation system to ensure 
adequacy of their infrastr ucture to strengthen safety of tourists in the adventure tour 
locations, especially the high -risk adventure zones across the country.  The Committee also 
recommends formulating appropriate policies/guidelines to address issues of the adventure 
tour operators and so that this sector could have a long -term and sustainable future in the 
Indian tourism industry. 
(Para 23.4) 
 
 
 
 

58 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
IV) IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON TOURISM, TRAVEL AND  
HOSPITALITY SECTOR 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
(Para 1.2) 
XI. ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES FOR TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE  
DEVELOPMENT 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the outcome of the Tourism Task Force 
Meeting held on 23.09.2022 and the reply of the M/o Railways as regards the delay in 
operationalization of the 22 projects, for provision of enhanced amenities at 22 railway 
stations, sanctioned in FY 2011-12. 
(Para 2.2) 
XII   SAFE AND HONOURABLE TOURISM 
 The Committee would like to know the outcome of the National Conference of 
DGsP/IGsP and others of all States/UTs held on 19 th October, 2022 regarding the Tourist 
Police Scheme. 
(Para 3.2) 
* * * * 
 
  

59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
 
 
Annexure- I 
 
Project Circuit Physical 
Progress 
Financial 
Progress 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Integrated Development of Jammu -Srinagar-Pehalgam-
Bhagwati Nagar-Anantnag-Salamabad Uri-Kargil-Leh 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
93% 69% 
Integrated Development of Tourist Facilities at Jammu -
Rajouri-Shopian-Pulwama. 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
90% 69% 
Integrated Development of Tourist Facilities - 
Construction of Assets in lieu of those Destroyed in 
Floods in 2014 under PM Development Package 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
100% 71% 
Integrated Development of Tourist facilities at Mantalai 
and Sudhmahadev 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
93% 83% 
Integrated Development of Tourist facilities at Anantnag -
Kishwar-Pahalgam-Daksum-Ranjit Sagar Dam 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
88% 65% 
Development of Tourist Facilities at Gulmarg -Baramulla- 
Kupwara- Kargil - Leh 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
50% 49% 
Jharkhand 
Development of Dalma- Chandil- Getalsud- Betla national 
park- Mirchaiya- Netarhat 
Eco 
Circuit 
28% 26% 
Kerala 
Development of Malanad Malabar Cruise Tourism Project Rural 
Circuit 
22% 12% 
Maharashtra 
Development of Waki - Adasa- Dhapewada- Paradsingha- 
Chota Taj Bagh- Telankhandi- Girad 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
37% 47% 
Punjab 
Development of Anandpur Sahib – Fatehgarh Sahib – 
Chamkaur Sahib – Ferozpur – Amritsar – Khatkar Kalan – 
Kalanour - Patiala 
Heritage 
Circuit 
55% 47% 
Tripura 
Development of North East Circuit: Agartala - Sipahijala - 
Melaghar - Udaipur - Amarpur- Tirthamukh- Mandirghat– 
Dumboor- NarikelKunja- Gandachara– Ambassa 
North East 
Circuit 
80% 81% 
Development of Surma Cherra - Unakoti- Jampui Hills - 
Gunabati-Bhunaneshwari- Matabari- Neermahal- 
Boxanagar- Chottakhola- Pilak- Avangchaarra 
North 
East 
circuit 
18% 4% 
 
 
  

61 
 
 
 
Annexure- II 
 
(Amount in Cr.) 
S.No. Name of the 
State 
Name of 
Circuit & 
Year 
Project Name Amt. 
Sanctioned 
Amt. 
Released 
1. Kerala Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2016-17) 
Development of Sabarimala - Erumeli-
Pampa-Sannidhanam as a Spiritual Circuit in 
District Pathanamthitta, Kerala. 
106.42 20.00 
2. Manipur Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2016-17) 
Development of Shri Govindajee Temple, 
Shri BijoyGovindajee Temple – Shri 
Gopinath Temple – Shri Bungshibodon 
Temple – Shri Kaina Temple. 
53.80 43.04 
3. Kerala 
 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2016-17) 
Development of SreePadmanabha Temple, 
Aranmula 
78.08 73.77 
4. Bihar 
 
Spiritual 
circuit 
(2016-17) 
Integrated Development of Kanwaria Route: 
Sultanganj- Mojma- Banka. 
44.76 
 
42.52 
 
5. Uttar Pradesh Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2016-17) 
Development of Spiritual Circuit -I 
(Shahjahanpur-Allahabad-Basti- Ahar-
Aligharh-Kasgunj-Sarosi-Pratapgarh-Unnao-
Kaushambi- Mirzapur-Gorakpur- Kairana- 
Doamriyagunj- Bagpat-Barabanki- 
Azamgarh) 
71.91 68.32 
6. Uttar Pradesh Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2016-17) 
Development of Bijnor - Meerut- Kanpur- 
Kanpur Dehat- Banda- Ghazipur- Salempur- 
Ghosi- Balia- Ambedkar Nagar - Aligarh- 
Fatehpur- Deoria- Mahoba- Sonbhadra- 
Chandauli- Mishrikh- Bhadohi 
67.51 64.14 
7. Rajasthan Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2016-17) 
Development of Churu (SalasarBalaji) – 
Jaipur (Shri SamodeBalaji, GhatkeBalaji, 
BandhekeBalaji)- Alwar (Pandupole 
Hanumanji, Bharathari) - Viratnagar (Bijak, 
Jainnasiya, Ambika Temple) - Bharatpur 
(Kaman Region) - Dholpur (Muchkund) – 
MehandipurBalaji- Chittorgarh 
(Sanwaliyaji) 
89.93 68.24 
8. Puducherry Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2017-18) 
Development of Karaikal, Yanam and 
Puducherry 
34.96 30.94 
9. Bihar Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2017-18) 
Development of Mandar Hill & Ang 
Pradesh. 
44.85 40.85 

62 
 
 
10 Maharashtra Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2018-19) 
Development of Waki - Adasa- Dhapewada- 
Paradsingha- Chota Taj Bagh - Telankhandi- 
Girad 
47.53 24 
11. Uttar Pradesh Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2018-19) 
Development of Jewar -Dadri-Sikandrabad-
Noida-Khurja-Banda 
12.03 9.63 
12. Uttar Pradesh Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2018-19) 
Development of Gorakhnath Temple 
(Gorakhpur), Devipattan Temple 
(Balrampur) and Vatvashni Temple 
(Domariyaganj) 
15.76 12.61 
13. Kerala Spiritual 
Circuit 
(2018-19) 
Development Sivagiri Sree Narayana Guru 
Ashram- Arruvipuram- Kunnumpara Sree 
Subrahmania- Chembazhanthi Sree 
Narayana Gurukulam 
69.47 3.88 
Total 737.01 501.94 
  

63 
 
 
 
Annexure- III 
 
Statement indicating the Physical and Financial progress of the projects approved under 
PRASHAD scheme (as on 21.10.2022) 
 
S.No. State/UTs Project 
No.s 
Name of the 
Project 
Year of 
Sanction 
Approved 
cost 
Amount 
Released Physic
al 
Status (Cr. INR) (Cr. 
INR) 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
1. 
Development of 
Amaravati Town, 
Guntur District as a 
Tourist 
Destination** 
2015-16 27.77 27.77 100% 
2. 
Development of 
Srisailam 
Temple** 
2017-18 43.08 43.08 100% 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 3. 
Development of 
Parasuram Kund, 
Lohit Distt. 
2020-21 37.88 7.34 22% 
3 Assam 4. 
Development of 
Kamakhya Temple 
and Pilgrimage 
Destination in and 
around Guwahati** 
2015-16 29.8 29.8 100% 
4 Bihar 
5. 
Development of 
basic facilities at 
Vishnupad temple, 
Gaya, Bihar** 
2014-15 4.27 2.91 100% 
6. Development at 
Patna Sahib** 2015-16 41.54 33.23 100% 
5 Chhattisga
rh 7. 
Development of 
Maa Bamleshwari 
Devi Temple, 
Rajnandgaon, 
Dongargarh, 
Chhattisgarh 
2020-21 43.33 24.33 30% 
6 Gujarat 
8. Development of 
Dwarka** 2016-17 13.08 10.46 100% 
9. 
Pilgrimage 
Amenities at 
Somnath** 
2016-17 45.36 45.36 100% 
10. 
Development of 
Promenade at 
Somnath under 
PRASHAD 
Scheme** 
2018-19 47.12 44.76 100% 
11. 
Development of 
Pilgrim Plaza with 
Queue 
Management 
2021-22 49.97 
Adm. 
Appl 
only 
10.03.22 
0% 

64 
 
 
Complex at 
Somnath Gujarat 
12. 
Development of 
Pilgrimage 
Tourism 
Infrastructure at 
Ambaji Temple of 
Banaskantha, 
Gujarat 
2022-23 50 
Adm. 
Appl 
only 
03.08.22 
0% 
7 Haryana 13. 
Development of 
Nada Saheb 
Gurudwara and 
Mata Mansha Devi 
Temple in 
Panchkula District 
2019-20 49.52 28.77 63% 
8 Jammu & 
Kashmir 14. Development at 
Hazratbal, 2016-17 40.46 32.37 68% 
9 Jharkhand 15. 
Development of 
Baidyanathji 
Dham, Deoghar** 
2018-19 39.13 31.23 100% 
10 Kerala 16. 
Development at 
Guruvayur 
Temple** 
2016-17 45.19 45.19 100% 
11 Madhya 
Pradesh 
17. Development of 
Omkareshwar** 2017-18 44.83 35.87 100% 
18. Development of 
Amarkantak 2020-21 49.99 4.86 12% 
12 Maharasht
ra 19. Development of 
Trimbakeshwar 2017-18 52.92 27.67 66% 
13 Meghalaya 20. 
Development of 
Pilgrimage 
Facilitation in 
Meghalaya 
2020-21 29.32 17.59 30% 
14 Nagaland 21. 
Development of 
Pilgrimage 
Infrastructure in 
Nagaland 
2018-19 25.26 21.33 75% 
15 Odisha 22. 
Infrastructure 
Development at 
Puri, Shree 
Jagannath Dham – 
Ramachandi - 
Prachi River front 
at Deuli under 
Mega Circuit 
2014-15 50 10 <5% 
16 Punjab 
23. 
Development of 
KarunaSagar 
Valmiki Sthal at 
Amritsar ** 
2015-16 6.4 6.4 100% 
24. 
Development of 
Chamkaur Sahib at 
Rupar, Punjab 
under PRASHAD 
2021-22 31.57 7.26 5% 

65 
 
 
Scheme 
17 Rajasthan 25. 
Integrated 
Development of 
Pushkar/Ajmer 
2015-16 32.64 26.11 98% 
18 Sikkim 26. 
Development of 
Pilgrimage 
Facilitation at Four 
Patron Saints, 
Yuksom 
2020-21 33.32 18.5 25% 
19 Tamil 
Nadu 
27. Development of 
Kanchipuram** 2016-17 13.99 13.99 100% 
28. Development of 
Vellankani** 2016-17 4.86 4.86 100% 
20 Telangana 29. 
Development of 
Jogulamba Devi 
Temple, Alampur 
2020-21 36.73 10.27 33% 
21 Tripura 30. 
Development of 
Tripura Sundari 
Temple, Udaipur 
2020-21 37.8 21.18 37% 
22 Uttarakha
nd 
31. 
Integrated 
Development of 
Kedarnath** 
2015-16 34.77 34.77 100% 
32. 
Development of 
Infrastructure for 
Pilgrimage 
Facilitation in 
Badrinath Ji Dham 
(Uttarakhand) 
under PRASHAD 
Scheme 
2018-19 56.13 20.79 62% 
33. 
Augmentation of 
Pilgrimage 
Infrastructure 
Facilities and 
Gangotri and 
Yamunotri Dham 
in Uttarakhand 
under PRASHAD 
Scheme 
2021-22 54.36 14.06 8% 
23 Uttar 
Pradesh 
34. 
Development of 
Mathura-Vrindavan 
as Mega Tourist 
Circuit (Ph-II)** 
2014-15 10.98 10.98 100% 
35. 
Construction of 
Tourist Facilitation 
Centre at 
Vrindavan, Distt. 
Mathura** 
2014-15 9.36 9.36 100% 
36. 
Development of 
Varanasi –Phase –
I** 
2015-16 20.4 16.32 100% 
37. Cruise Tourism in 
River Ganga, 2017-18 9.02 9.02 100% 

66 
 
 
Varanasi** 
38. 
Development of 
Varanasi Under 
Prashad Scheme – 
Phase II 
2017-18 44.6 31.77 98% 
39. 
Development of 
Infrastructure 
facilities at 
Govardhan, 
Mathura, 
2018-19 39.74 30.97 85% 
24 West 
Bengal 40. Development of 
Belur 2016-17 30.03 23.39 86% 
Total 1366.52 833.92   
 
 
 
* * * * 
 

67 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
  

68 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  3:00 P.M.  on Thursday, the 22nd December, 2022 in 
Committee Room A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
10.  Shri Anto Antony 
11.  Shri Tapir Gao 
12.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
14.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
15.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
16.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
17.  Shri Prince Raj 
18.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
19.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
20.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
21.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
22.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
23.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
24.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
25. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua" 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 

69 
 
WITNESSES 
  
xxxx xxxx xxxx 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the 
draft Reports on Action Taken by the Government on  the Recommendations/Observations of 
the Committee contained in its xxxx  318th Reports; and  xxxx xxxx xxxx. 
3.         The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda of the meeting i.e., consideration 
of the two draft Action Taken Reports on the following Reports of the Committee: 
(i) xxxx  xxxx  xxx  
(ii) 318th Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Tourism.  
4.         The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted 
both the draft Action Taken Re ports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor 
modifications of typographical and factual errors.   
5.         The Committee also authorized Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P., to present the abovem entioned Reports in Rajya 
Sabha on 23 rd December, 2022 and Shri Prince Raj, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Ramdas 
Chandrabhanji Tadas, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
6.         xxxxx     xxxxx      xxxxxx . 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
xxxxxxx     xxxxxx 
17.    A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
18.     The meeting adjourned at 4:47 PM. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                        Swarabji B. 
22nd December, 2022                                                                                            Director 
  
 
______________________ 
*Relates to other matters 