 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
331
_ 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY FIRST REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations as contained in its Three Hundred Twentieth 
Report on the subject ‘Development of Tourism Infrastructure 
in the country’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY FIRST REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations as contained in its Three Hundred Twentieth Report 
on the subject ‘Development of Tourism Infrastructure in the 
country’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-18 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   19 
    6. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
20-22

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Smt. Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Thirty First Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations as contained in its Three Hundred 
Twentieth Report on the subject ‘Development of Tourism Infrastructure in the country’. 
2. The Three Hundred  Twentieth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  28th March, 
2022 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Twentieth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on 27th June, 
2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  25th 
November, 2022.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
November 25, 2022                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 4, 1944 (Saka)                              Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
8D 8 Dimensions 
AR Augmented Reality 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
BPR&D Bureau of Police Research & Development 
CBSP Capacity Building for Service Providers 
CRF Central Road Fund  
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility  
DGP Director General of Police 
DMC Destination Management Committee 
DPPH Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee  
F.Y. Financial Year 
IITTM Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management 
ITA International Tourist Arrivals  
ITDC India Tourism Development Corporation 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NGO Non-Governmental Organizations 
SD 2.0 Swadesh Darshan-2.0 
SDS Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
SGs State Governments 
PRASHAD Pilgrimage Rejuvenation & Spiritual Heritage Augmentation Drive 
UT Union Territory 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism on the 
recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred and Twentieth Report on 
„Development of Tourism Infrastructure in the country‟ which was presented to both the Houses 
of Parliament on 28th March, 2022. 
 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 27th June, 2022 in respect of 
all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report. The replies have been categorized 
as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.:  13, 16, 24, 32, 42, 51, 56 
Total: 7 
 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which t he Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies of the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 14, 15, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 31, 37, 38, 39, 44, 48, 49, 52, 53, 58, 59 
Total: 18 
 
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry h ave not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 43, 46, 50, 57 
Total: 4 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: 
 
Paragraph Nos.:  Nil. 
Total: Nil.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that infrastructure for tourism includes basic infrastructure 
components like roads, railways, airports, water, electricity, hotels etc. The Committee 
recommends that interconnectivity of roads, ports, airports, railways and waterways should be 
part of the infrastructure planning process while preparing the Detailed Appraisal Report of any 
Tourism project. Service roads and linkage of nearby places should also be included. Transport 
infrastructure plays a vital role in connecting origin and destination locations while ensuring 
safe, comfortable and efficient transportation to tourists. While evaluating travel experiences, 
transport is o ne of the main factors which has a great bearing on trip satisfaction. The 
Committee therefore recommends that multi -modal transport should be envisaged while 
preparing DPR for facilitating tourism in the country. This will not only facilitate free flowing  
traffic but also serve to make tourist destinations more attractive and accessible. 
(Para 13) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. However, it may be mentioned that the 
Ministry of Tourism under its „Swadesh Darshan Scheme‟ has sanctioned funds for development 
of last mile connectivity. The Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its „Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme‟ in the form of Swadesh Darshan 2.0. The guidelines of SD 2.0 have an illustrative list 
of components which can enhance to urism potential of the destination and the same includes 
components pertaining to connectivity, wayside amenities & parking. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee is of the opinion that in order to successfully implement tourism 
infrastructural Schemes, the state governments should carry out due diligence in consultation 
with the nodal agencies during conceptualizing the projects and ensure the completion of 
tendering process of projects in a time bound manner to enable the Ministry to release fu nds for 
such projects. The Committee recommends the Ministry to create a mechanism for proactive 
project monitoring and reviewing the same to avoid delays in implementation as per agreed 
schedules and in compliance with the approved DPRs. 
(Para 16) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The Ministry of Tourism has 
incorporated due provisions pertaining to monitoring & reviewing of sanctioned projects in the 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0 guidelines. 
 
 
 

3 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee is of the opinion that the rejuvenation of natural water bodies under the 
PRASHAD Scheme and building them as tourist hubs available on cheaper tickets will attract 
tourists searching for a tranquil beach-like affordable and less crowded environment, which will 
greatly benefit the Indian tourism industry and promote sustainable growth as well.  
(Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Ministry of Tourism under its PRASHAD scheme undertakes the work o f rejuvenation of 
water bodies. At present development of water bodies including Kunds and Ghats have been 
undertaken at 21 religious sites all across India. As tourism is a State subject, charging of tickets 
from the tourists is a decision to be taken by the State Governments. However, the Ministr y has 
noted the observation of the Committee and the State Governments will be asked to include the 
recommendations of the Committee in future project approvals under the PRASHAD Scheme. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee is pleased to note that the  Ministry is facilitating development of 
lighthouses as tourist hotspots to provide panoramic view of scenic coastline and marking 
historic importance of their times through developing museums, open -air amphitheatres, 
cafeteria, children’s parks, and gardens in or around the lighthouses. 
(Para 32) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF ICONIC TOURIST SITES  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. Tourism and hospitality industry is one of the driving forces in the global economy and 
has wider environmental and social impacts. However, no process has been initiated to prepare 
a detailed project report for Development of Iconic Tourist Sites. The Committee recommends 
the Ministry to prepare a master plan for timely im plementation of the said Scheme in order to 
increase tourist footfall by providing tourists with the richness and diversity of Iconic 
destinations across the country. 
(Para 42) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The Ministry of Tourism has formulated the scheme fo r „Development of Iconic Tourist 
Destinations‟, which has been appraised by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) however 
the same is yet to be approved. 
 
 
GENERATING REVENUE AND OVERALL TOURIST SATISFACTION  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. Proper revenue -generation in a developing country leads to innovation - in the 
production, services and pricing sectors, opens new gates of employment, resource sharing, 

4 
 
education, empowerment of general people, improvement of political relations and reforming the 
system of food and aid distribution. The Committee feels that identification and development of 
revenue-generating domestic tourist destinations in States is necessary. 
(Para 51) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 
 
PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee observes that modern tourism industry is a key driver of socioeconomic 
growth through creation of jobs, infrastructure development, and the export revenues earned 
because it has  potential to stimulate other sectors through its backward and forward linkages 
and cross -sectoral synergies with airlines, transport, basic infrastructure like hotels, guides, 
road connectivity, agriculture, handicrafts etc. The Committee notes that despi te the fact that 
India offers a diverse portfolio for travel, tourism and hospitality, the share of its International 
Tourist Arrivals (ITAs) is merely 1.59% in 2021. With the obvious that there is an increased 
competition among various countries to attract more foreign visitors, it is an imperative need for 
India to prepare a better marketing strategy by hiring marketing experts to attract foreign 
visitors. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should formulate an integrated 
marketing and promotional strategy in collaboration with a professional body to carry out 
market research to identify expectations, requirements, psychographics, demographics and many 
other aspects of a foreign tourist willing to travel to India, thereby enabling to cre ate a strategic 
plan to revive the pandemic-hit tourism sector. The Committee feels that one of the effective steps 
in this direction would be re-casting the website of the Ministry in an attractive and user-friendly 
manner. 
(Para 56) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. It may however be mentioned 
that the Ministry of Tourism promotes tourism to India in potential international markets and 
within India through various measures. Ministry of Tourism releases domestic and international 
print, electronic and online media campaigns under the „Incredible India‟ brand -line, 
participates/organizes seminars/conventions, Road Shows/travel fairs/exhibitions, tourism related 
conferences/and other promotional activities to promote various tourism destinatio ns and 
products of the country. The promotions are also undertaken through the Website 
(www.incredibleindia.org) and the Social Media platforms of the Ministry. 
 
7.2 In addition, the Ministry of Tourism through its India Tourism Offices Overseas along 
with Indian Missions abroad endeavors to position India as a preferred tourism destination in the 
tourism generating markets to promote various tourism products and destinations including 
Indian culture and to increase India‟s share in the global tourism market. On the re quest of 
Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of External Affairs has designated Tourism Officers in the 
Indian Missions of top 20 source markets in October, 2021. Country specific strategy papers 

5 
 
have been prepared by designated Tourism officers posted in In dian Missions overseas for 
promotion of Incredible India in the respective countries. 
 
7.3 Ministry of Tourism is also in the process of revamping the Incredible India Digital 
Platform. Various elements like personalization, multiple interface, multiple languages, emphasis 
on AR/8D contents, interactive map, trip planner, experiences, and Omni -channel campaigns are 
being planned for revamping Incredible India Digital Platform. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that in its earlier report, it had noted that only one of the fifteen 
thematic circuits under the ‘Swadesh Darshan Schem e’ had been completed till that time and 
had recorded its disappointment about the slow progress in the projects under the Scheme. Now, 
since all the projects under the Scheme are being reviewed, the Committee urges the Ministry to 
complete the review in a time bound manner so that the Scheme may be completed without undue 
delay. Since the projects under the Scheme are spread throughout the country and involve local 
bodies, the Committee recommends the Ministry to hear the views of all stakeholders involved  or 
ensure that the agencies implementing the Scheme do so, and take due cognizance of local 
sentiment so that once streamlined the projects under the Scheme would be able to be 
implemented without any hindrance. The Committee also recommends that the yard stick to 
review the project should only be whether it would be truly effective in increasing the tourist 
potential of the area. 
(Para 14) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 „Swadesh Darshan Scheme‟ has been revamped as Swadesh Darshan 2.0 (SD 2.0) under 
which it is envisaged that responsible and sustainable tourism destinations will be developed 
after following a destination and tourist centric approach. The Ministry of Touri sm has now 
issued the guidelines for Swadesh Darshan 2.0 Scheme.  
 
1.2 As per the guidelines for SD2.0 scheme, the State will set up a Destination Management 
Committee (DMC) at the district level under the Chairmanship of District Collector. The 
Chairperson may invite the representatives of any other Department or organization, as may be 
required as special invitee. 
 
1.3 The function of the DMC includes bringing synergy in the efforts of various departments 
and organizations towards promotion of the tourism and will have the following functions: 
(i) To review the implementation of the scheme on ground and resolve the bottlenecks in 
the implementation. 
(ii) To provide synergy with other schemes and programs of Central and State Government 
at the district level particu larly relating to infrastructure development, human capital 
development, job creation and entrepreneurship, investment promotion and marketing 
and other such programs to develop and promote tourism. 
(iii) To review Operation and Management arrangement particular ly health, hygiene, safety 
and overall quality of maintenance of the destination. 
(iv) To promote skill development and local entrepreneurship for various tourism services.  
(v) To perform all other functions of a Destination Management Organization to promote 
the destination for domestic and international tourists. 
 

7 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee also suggests that the Ministry should build a systemati c approach 
towards restoration/ conservation of historic structures under the SDS Scheme as buildings of 
very rich historic background add character, distinctiveness, and a sense of identity to the places 
they belong to. The Committee desires that the Ministry promote heritage through branding and 
use it as a potential factor in tourism development. 
(Para 15) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its „Swadesh Darshan Scheme‟  as SD 2.0 
and as per the guidelines for SD  2.0 Scheme. Restoration, conserva tion, illumination of 
monuments/heritage structures is included as Tourism Core Products in the illustrative list of 
admissible components. 
 
2.2 It may also be mentioned that Ministry of Tourism promotes India in a holistic manner 
under its „Incredible India‟ brand line. Various tourism products including heritage & culture are 
showcased as part of Incredible India Campaigns released through electronic, digital and other 
mediums. Promotions are also undertaken through the website www.incredibleindia.org and 
social media platforms of the Ministry. 
 
 
PRASHAD SCHEME 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3 The Committee observes that religious tourism is unlike leisure tourism in as much that 
in building a religious tourism product, it is essential to build in community participation at the 
given location. The participation of loca l nodal agencies along with State Governments in the 
PRASHAD Scheme is therefore of utmost importance and the Ministry should endeavour to make 
all efforts to ensure their involvement and not leave it to the responsibility of the State 
Governments alone. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Under PRASHAD scheme, the local bodies, Panchayats and the officials of State 
Governments are an essential part of the decision making for finalizing the projects and their 
involvement is inevitable. All the project proposals received in the Division are recommended by 
the State Governments in consultation with the local stakeholders which include the religious 
trusts, locally elected representatives etc. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4 The Committee is of the view religi ous tourists come from all economic strata and there 
is enormous need for hotels especially in the Budget and Economy categories. The Committee is 
also of the opinion that local families willing to provide homemade food and homestay facilities 
in their abodes to the tourists should be identified and given training by the Ministry in handling 
the process to promote local Indian cuisine among foreign tourists and at international level. 

8 
 
The Committee is sanguine that such a novel step will unlock job opportun ities for Indian 
families and generate resources for huge revenue potential in the Indian tourism sector. 
(Para 22)  
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 In order to augment supply of hotel accommodation for budget tourists, the Ministry has 
voluntary schemes for approval of Guest Houses, Incredible India Bed and Breakfast 
Establishments and Incredible India Homestay Establishments. The Voluntary scheme of the 
Ministry of Tourism for approval of hotels at project stage and classification stage stipulate that 
the hotels of 1, 2, 3 and 4 star categories availing subsidy/tax benefits/other benefits from the 
Central/State Government would be subject to a lock -in period of 8 years during which they 
would not seek upgradation to a higher category so that these hotels cont inue to serve as budget 
category hotels. The Ministry of Tourism has also requested the State Governments/UT 
Administrations to give due weightage to development of mid segment hotels which typically 
will fall in 3 star and 4 star categories while earmarking/auctioning of land for developing hotels. 
4.2 Further, the Ministry of Tourism has prepared a National Strategy for promotion of Rural 
Homestays in line with the national strategies for Rural Tourism and Sustainable Tourism which 
has been circulated to Central Ministries, State Governments & Industry Associations. The 
Strategy aims at recognizing the role of rural homestays in promoting Rural and Sustainable 
Tourism and strengthening the support system for rural homestays. 
 
4.3 The Ministry of Tourism has a Home -stay (Multi-Skilled Caretaker) training programme 
under the “Capacity Building for Service Providers” (CBSP) scheme. It is informed that training 
as part of the above programme was recently conducted at Jaipur, Shillong, B alangir, 
Dharamshala and Srinagar.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5 The Committee recommends that improvement of reception/facilitation center for tourists 
be done with the help of travel agencies and local businesses promoting their products and 
hotel-booking tickets at lowest prices. 
(Para 23) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Projects developed under PRASHAD Scheme including creation of reception/facilitation 
centers and their functioning is looked after by the respective State Governments and the 
stakeholders are decided by the SGs to promote local handicrafts/products. However, the local 
India Tourism offices located in the areas remain in touch with the State Governments to oversee 
the facilities created under the scheme. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6 The Committee desires that the Ministry should reinforce sustainable development in 
Indian tourism sector through the PRASHAD Scheme by transitioning to the use of renewable 
energy features such as photovoltaic electricity, waste water re -use and rainwater  recovery, 

9 
 
which not only will reduce the environmental impacts, but also generate benefits for local 
communities. 
(Para 25) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Ministry under its PRASHAD Scheme lays utmost importance to sustainability 
component and the Sites being  developed are encouraged to include use of solar panels for 
creation of electricity, use local eco -friendly material for renovating the sites, rain water 
harvesting etc. so as to have positive impact on the local communities and to reduce adverse 
impact on the environment by using eco-friendly components. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7 The Committee is of the view that approach to these destinations should be strengthened 
by proper roads, transport facilities, ticket booking facilities, lodging and other log istic support 
like reception centers etc. The role of states becomes very crucial in this aspect. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should play a proactive role to provide such facilities so as to 
attract tourists from every nook and corner of the world. 
(Para 26) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The admissible components of the PRASHAD Scheme inter -alia include last mile 
connectivity, tourism Information/ Interpretation Centers and eco -friendly modes of tourist 
transport for integrated development of identified pilgrimage and heritage destinations to attract 
maximum tourists for bringing the socio -economic benefits from tourism to the local 
communities. 
 
 
ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES SCHEME  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8 The holistic development of tourism infrastructure at all tourist destinations through 
Central Financial Assistance to the States/ UTs may require convergence of resources, expertise 
and experience for maintenance and management after development since many of them are 
under the juris dictions of Central Agencies like ASI, Port Trusts in India, ITDC etc. and the 
overall development of places of tourist interest under their control may not be possible through 
their own resources. In order to remove these bottlenecks, the Committee sugges ts the Ministry 
to devise mechanisms to build infrastructure with the assistance of state governments and other 
agencies to bring a world standard spot with all the amenities. 
(Para 31) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The focus under the Assistance to Central Agencies Scheme is on the improvement/up -
gradation of existing products and developing new tourism products to the world standard, under 
the control of Central Agencies. State Governments participation is also ensured at the time of 
approval of the projects. 

10 
 
 
ADOPT A HERITAGE SCHEME (in collaboration with Ministry of Culture and ASI)  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9 The Committee observes that the Ministry, with the assistance of business houses under 
the CSR, should build public amenities like public toilets, drinking water facility, ease of access 
for differently-abled citizens, standardized signage, surveillance system, night viewing facilities 
etc. in order to increase tourist footfall in the country. 
(Para 37) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Adopt a Heritage project aims to encourage companies from public sector, private sector, 
trusts, NGOs, individuals and other stakeholders to become „Monument Mitras‟ and take up the 
responsibility of developing and upgrading the basic and advanced tourist amenities at heritage/ 
natural tourist sites as per their interest and viability in terms of a sustainable investment model 
under CSR. Public toilets, drinking water facility, ease of access for differently -abled citizens, 
standardized signage, surveillance system, nig ht viewing facilities etc. are covered under basic 
and advanced amenities proposed under the project. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10 The Committee also observes that Souvenir shops selling miniatures of historical 
monuments are very popular among tourists in  foreign countries. However, these types of 
souvenir shops are very few in India and lack in marketing skills. The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that the Government ought to take initiatives to help establish genuine 
outlets for the sale of miniature replicas of historical monuments near such monuments. 
(Para 38) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Under Adopt a Heritage project, advanced amenities are planned as per the identified 
monument‟s tourist footfall and financial feasibility of proposed interventions. Provision of basic 
souvenir shop promoting local art and craftsmanship is covered under ad vanced amenities and 
may be implemented at the site upon adoption to provide a platform to local artisans/craftsmen to 
sell their product and support the local community.  
 
10.2 The Ministry of Tourism also under its „Swadesh Darshan Scheme‟ has sanctioned funds 
for development of Souvenir shops/Craft Haat etc. as per the guidelines for SD 2.0, the 
illustrative list of admissible components includes construction of craft Haats, Bazaars, souvenir 
shops, etc. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11 The Committee notes the immense contribution of arts and crafts through various fairs 
and festivals. Haats present a colourful picture where small artisans can nurture their crafts 
businesses. The Committee is of the opinion that development of haats shoul d be facilitated 
along with branding them as the go -to places on festive occasions, which will also lengthen the 

11 
 
tourist seasons, extend peak seasons or introduce a new season into a community. The 
Committee believes that such fairs and festivals not only serve to attract tourists but also 
contribute in maintaining regional/community identity. 
(Para 39) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Under Adopt a Heritage project, provision of basic souvenir shop promoting local art and 
craftsmanship is covered under advanced amenities and may be proposed at the site upon 
adoption. 
 
11.2 The Ministry of Tourism under its „Swadesh Darshan Scheme‟  has sanctioned funds for  
development of Souvenir shops/ Craft Haat etc. as per the guidelines for SD 2.0, the illustrative 
list of admissible components includes construction of craft Haats, Bazaars, souvenir shops, etc. 
 
11.3 In addition, financial assistance has also been provided to the States/UTs for organizing 
fairs/festivals & tourism related events under Domestic Promotion & Publicity includ ing 
Hospitality (DPPH) Scheme. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12 The Committee feels that the creative use of audio tours has been instrumental in 
attracting a new museum audience by breaking down language barriers and helping people 
learn without resorting to the signboards and information bulletins. The Committee would like 
the Ministry to include the audio -tour guides at historical sites and museums by identifying and 
tailoring content towards the appropriate audience, from children to history lovers; foreign  
visitors to art experts in this age of podcast. 
(Para 44) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 
12.2 The guidelines of SD2.0 scheme have a provision to fund both hard and soft interventions 
for integrated development of destinations. 
 
12.3 Under Adopt a Heritage Project, 29 MoUs have been signed for development of basic 
and advanced amenities. Audio guide is one of the interventions proposed under the MoUs for 22 
sites. 2 MoUs have been signed for development of multilingual a udio guide at 12 sites across 
India. 
 
12.4 Out of 22, 11 Audio Guides have been completed in 4 languages (2 international) and 1 
Audio Guide has been completed in 2 languages. 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
CENTRAL ROAD FUND (CRF)  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13 Connectivity of tourist destinations with roads and railways decisively influences other 
branches of a country’s economy, without which the travel and tourism industry will not reach a 
desired place of development. The Committee expresses concern over the delay in formulation of 
master plan for roads -railway-port-air connectivity across the country and desires the Ministry 
to set up a timeline to speed up the process. 
(Para 48) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The matter has been taken up with MoRT&H, MoR & MoCA. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14 The Committee feels that there is an emerging need for enhanced connectivity of tourist 
spots with road-rail-water-air, which will boost the competitiveness of India in the world tourism 
market if proper funding and development is expedited in connectivity projects. 
(Para 49) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The matter has been taken up with MoRT&H, MoR & MoCA. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15 The Committee is concerned about the privately owned culturally rich buildings, which 
are a part of Indian heritage, and therefore, recommends that an assessment and  prelisting of 
such properties/buildings be carried out and proper steps be taken towards their preservation. 
(Para 52) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 As per the guidelines of SD  2.0, improvement/investments in assets/structures owned by 
private entities are non-admissible project components. 
15.2 Under Adopt a Heritage project, the potential „Monument Mitras‟ can put forth their 
interest for adoption of any heritage site/monument which is e ither Centrally Protected, State 
Protected, World Heritage site, tourist site/natural site, promotional trek/trails for implementing 
basic/advanced amenities, technological interventions or innovative tourism projects. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16 The Comm ittee is of the view that making Tourist Information Centers accessible to 
tourists and installing signages around tourist spots will go a long way in enhancing total 
satisfaction level of the tourists, hence, it should be taken care of. 
(Para 53) 
 
 
 

13 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Construction of tourist fac ilitation center, signages etc. is included in the illustrative list 
of the admissible components of SD 2.0 Scheme guidelines. 
 
16.2 Under Adopt a Heritage project, provision of signages (Information, Directional and 
Braille Signages), Tourist Facilitation cum Interpretation Centre (Tourist Multi -Purpose Centre) 
and Digital Interactive Kiosk are covered under basic & advanced amenities and may be 
proposed at the site upon adoption. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17 The Committee finds that hearing about a place that has never been explored before 
generates a sense of awe and curiosity among foreign and domestic travelers alike, pulling them 
towards that place. Curiosity plays a crucial role in shaping attitude, motivatio n and influencing 
tourist loyalty. In order to magnify the role of curiosity and boost tourism market, the Committee 
recommends that various unexplored/lesser-known tourist spots may be added/highlighted on the 
homepage of the Ministry’s website portal to attract more tourists to such places. 
(Para 58) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 More than 200 Destinations and multiple experiences have been proposed as a part of 
revamped Incredible India Digital Platform  which will cover lesser known/ unexplored tourist 
spots also.  
 
17.2 In addition, the Ministry of Tourism is organizing a series of Webinars since 14 th April, 
2020 under the overall theme of „Dekho Apna Desh‟ with the objective of promoting various 
tourism destinations including the lesser k nown destinations of India. The Webinars include 
glimpses of the culture, heritage, handicrafts and cuisine of the destinations. Concepts of 
Responsible Tourism, Accessible Tourism, Wildlife, Trekking, Bicycling and Motor Cycle 
Tours, etc. are also been pr omoted through the Webinars. A repository of all the Webinars is 
being maintained by the Ministry and YouTube links to the Webinars are made available on the 
website of Ministry of Tourism. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18 Tourism Police: The Committee notes that Safety and security of the tourists both 
domestic and foreign are Para  mount importance for projecting the country as a safe haven for 
tourism. There are occasional reports of incidents of misbehaviour, cheating, m alpractices etc. 
at various tourist places. This gives a bad publicity for that particular tourist destination and the 
country as a whole. Therefore, it is essential that the Government should take all the available 
measures to provide a safe environment f or the tourists. The Committee therefore recommends 
that in every tourist place, there should be a provision for tourism police, as a se parate wing of 
the police force to provide safety and security to the tourists. The Committee is fully aware that 
law and order is a part of the State subject. Therefore, the Ministry of Home Affairs should issue 
an advisory to all the State Governments to create tourism police in their State to provide safety 
and security to the tourists in tourist destinations. The Minist ry of Tourism should also take up 
the matter with all the State Governments for creation of separate tourism police in their 

14 
 
respective States. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs and the Ministry of Tourism an d the feedback received from the State Governments in 
this regard. 
(Para 59) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Safety and security aspects of tourists , is one of the most important issues, which the 
tourists take into account before planning a trip to a destination. Since the matter of “Police” and 
“Public Order” are the state subject under the VII Schedule of the Constitution of India, the 
matter regarding tourist safety and security is also taken up the State Govt./UT Adm inistration. 
The Ministry of Tourism has raised this issue with MHA on several occasions. 
 
18.2 MHA has already taken up the pilot project for providing tourist police at 25 tourist sites 
identified by the Ministry of Tourism. On the suggestions of the Ministry of Tourism, some of 
the State Governments have put the tourist police system in place. However, there remains 
variation at the policy and implementation level. 
 
18.3 The Ministry had also got a study conducted by IITTM, an autonomous institute under its 
control, to understand the requirement of tourist police and sensitizing the tourist police so 
created towards their needs.  
 
18.4 The Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) has prepa red a detailed 
report of developing the Scheme for Tourist Police, which may act as a template for the States 
and Union Territories for setting up the State/UT Tourist Police. The report is very 
comprehensive in its analysis and recommendations and once im plemented at the pan - India 
level, should be able to create an enabling framework for tourist safety. The contents of the 
report covers the relevant issues such as development of Standard Operating Procedures, setting 
up of Control Room Systems, defining t he role and responsibility of Tourist Police, uniform for 
Tourist Police personnel, training program, and scheme for incentivization for „ Tourist Police,‟ 
etc. 
 
18.5 Ministry of Tourism has been seeking support of the Ministry of Home Affairs for taking 
up the matter with the State Govt. to incorporate the issue of safety and security of tourists as one 
of the agenda points for the meetings to be held with DGPs of the State Govt./UT 
Administration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee applauds the Ministry’s efforts to include more and more destinations in 
its scheme for Development of Iconic Tourist Sites to harness the vast potential of Indian tourism 
sector and enhance India’s soft power. The Committee recommends that promoting the Scheme 
and taking it further with infrastructural, technological and skill development as well as 
branding and marketing to attract private investment will encourage tourism growth in 
unexplored areas of the country. 
(Para  43) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The Ministry of Tourism has formulated the scheme for „Development  of Iconic Tourist 
Destinations,‟ which has been appraised by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) however 
the same is yet to be approved. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
1.2 The Committee desires to know whether any marketing strategy has been adopted 
by the Ministry to brand and promote the said Scheme before it is approved by t he EFC. 
The Committee finds that the Scheme for ‘Development of Iconic Tourist Destinations’ has 
not seen light of the day till now as EFC has taken such a long time to approve it. The 
Committee d oes not agree with the way the Scheme is kept in pendency due to EFC’s 
approval. The Committee would like that the Scheme is revamped and finalized at the 
earliest. 
 
 
LAND AVAILABILITY AND STATUTORY CLEARANCE  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee feels that efficient combination of sea and land accessibility is necessary - 
if not vital – to port activity and to the expansion of wider supply chain systems. Taking into 
account the land and maritime networks of the country, the Committee recommends th at the 
Ministry should focus on developing port cities for lower logistics costs, better infrastructure, 
and jobs in the Indian maritime sector. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry take 
help of the local administration and district authorities for removal of encroachments at 
coastline and port peripheries. 
(Para  46) 
 
 
 

16 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Ministry of Tourism has identified Cruise Tourism as a Niche Tourism product for 
development. To harness the potential of Cruise Tourism and consider various issues on the 
subject matter, a Task Force has been constituted with Secretary (Tourism) as the Chairman and 
Secretary (Shipping) as the Co-chairman. The 13th meeting of the Task Force on Cruise Tourism 
was held on 27.04.2022. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
2.2 The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide any 
information regarding the steps taken by it in c lose coordination  with the local 
administration and district authorities to remove encroachments at coastline and port 
peripheries. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee is also concerned about lack of funding assistance to states in capacity 
building, which is a major hurdle in elevating India in the ranking of countries with maxi mum 
tourist satisfaction. 
(Para 50) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Ministry of Tourism under the scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers 
(CBSP) provides skill training through various government/semi -government and private 
implementing agencies to tourism service providers to enhance the skill so that their 
employability in the tourism and hospitality industry gets elevated and as a result the trainees can 
even move from  informal to formal sector in the industry. This will also increase their income  
and reduce the unemployment in the country.  
 
3.2 In this endeavor Ministry of Tourism provides funds to various implementing agencies 
under Central/State/UT Government as well as private implementing agencies.  
3.3 During the last three years, i.e. 2019 -20, 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 the amount of funds 
released to various States are as under: 
(Rs. in Crores) 
F.Y. 2019-20 F.Y. 2020-21 F.Y. 2021-22 
32.56 23.30 21.22 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
3.4 The Committee is concerned to note that funding assistance for various States under 
the Scheme ‘Capacity Building for Service Providers’ (CBSP) has decreased in past three 
years from 32.56 crores in 2019-20 and 23.30 crores in 2020-21 to 21.22 crores in 2021-22. 
The Committee desires to know the reasons for  reduction in the said Scheme. The 
Committee has its reservations as to how the Ministry would be able to implement the 
Scheme under the present resource crunch. 
 
 

17 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. Since seaports are the wealth generators of a country and the beauty of landscape just 
increases during Monsoon season, the Committee is of the view that promoting Seaport tourism, 
Cruise tourism and Monsoon tourism will give a boost to the Indian tourism industry. The 
Committee also is of the opinion that there is tremendous scope for popularizing seaplane 
services especially among the more affluent travelers who may prefer to avoid crowded airport 
terminals and among adventure tourists. Seaplane services will benefit travelers by providing air 
connectivity to numerous remote,  religious places and unexplored places adjacent to water 
bodies. 
(Para 57) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Ministry of Tourism has identified Cruise Tourism as a Niche Tourism product for 
development. To harness the potential of Cruise Tourism and consider various issues on the 
subject matter, a Task Force has been constituted with Secretary (Tourism) as the Chairman and 
Secretary (Shipping) as the Co-chairman. The 13th meeting of the Task Force on Cruise Tourism 
was held on 27.04.2022. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
4.2 The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide any 
information regarding the steps taken by it to make seaplane services functional. The 
Committee may also be apprised of the outcome of the 13 th meeting of the Task Force on 
Cruise Tourism held on 27.04.2022  and whether the Task Force has decided to conduct 
further meetings regarding the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
–NIL- 
 
 
* * * * 
 
  

19 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
The Committee desires to know whether any marketing strategy has been adopted 
by the Ministry to brand and promote the said Scheme before it is approved by the EFC. 
The Committee finds that the Scheme for ‘Development of Iconic Tourist Destinations’ has 
not seen light of the day till n ow as EFC has taken such a long time to approve it. The 
Committee does not agree with the way the Scheme is kept in pendency due to EFC’s 
approval. The Committee would like that the Scheme is revamped and finalized at the 
earliest. 
(Para 1.2) 
 
LAND AVAILABILITY AND STATUTORY CLEARANCE  
The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide any 
information regarding the steps taken by it in close coordination with the local 
administration and district authorities to remove encroachment s at coastline and port 
peripheries. 
(Para 2.2) 
 
The Committee is concerned to note that funding assistance for various States under 
the Scheme ‘Capacity Building for Service Providers’ (CBSP) has decreased in past three 
years from 32.56 crores in 2019 -20 and 23.30 crores in 2020 -21 to 21.22 crores in 2021 -22. 
The Committee desires to know the reasons for reduction in the said Scheme. The 
Committee has its reservations as to how the Ministry would be able to implement the 
Scheme under the present resource crunch. 
(Para 3.4) 
 
The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not provide any 
information regarding the steps taken by it to make seaplane services functional. The 
Committee may also be apprised of the outcome of the 13 th meeting of the Task Force on 
Cruise Tourism held on 27.04.2022 and whether the Task Force has decided to conduct 
further meetings regarding the same. 
(Para 4.2) 
 
 
* * * * 
 

91 
 
_________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________ 
 
  
20

92 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25 th November, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
5. Shri A. A. Rahim 
6. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES:  xxx xxx xxx 
  
___________________ 
 xxx Relate to other matters. 
  
21

93 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the 
five draft Reports on Action Taken by the government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its various Reports; and  
(ii)  xxx xxx xxx 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda of the meeting i.e. consideration 
of the five draft Action Taken Reports on the following Reports of the Committee: 
(i)  xxx xxx xxx 
(ii)  xxx xxx xxx 
(iii)  xxx xxx xxx 
(iv)  320th Report on Development of Tourism Infrastructure in the country; and 
(v)  xxx xxx xxx 
  
4. The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted 
all the five draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor 
modifications of typographical and factual errors.  
  
5 to 35.The Committee also au thorized Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak, M.P. and in her absence, 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P., to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha on 13 th 
December, 2022 and Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Chhedi Paswan, M.P. to 
lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date.  xxx xxx xxx 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
36. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
37. The meeting adjourned at 5:04 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi,       Swarabji B. 
25th November, 2022     Director 
 
___________________ 
 xxx Relate to other matters. 
22