Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained 
in its One Hundred and Seventy Eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (2012-13)
 
REPORT NO. 
187
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

37
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in its One Hundred and Seventy Eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (2012-13)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. T ABLE OF A BBREVIATIONS ...................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—24
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 25—26
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 27—32
7. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 33—36

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shri Khagen Das
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
17. Dr. Kruparani Killi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
26. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Seventy Eighth
Report on the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (2012-13).
2. One Hundred Seventy Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 7
th May,
2012 in Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy Eighth Report were received from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,
on 31
st August, 2012.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report as its meeting held on the 18 th October 2012.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 18, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Asvina 26, 1934  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

(iv)
TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS
ARAI – Automotive Research Association of India
BOT – Build-Operate-Transfer
CMVR – Central Motor Vehicles Rules
CoS – Committee of Secretaries
CRF – Central Road Fund
DPR – Detailed Project Report
ICAT – International Centre for Automotive Technology
IDTR – Institute of Driving Training and Research
IRR – Internal Rate of Return
LWE – Left Wing Extremism
MoRT&H – Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
M&R – Maintenance and Repair
NHAI – National Highways Authority of India
NHARS – National Highways Accident Relief Scheme
NHDP – National Highways Development Programme
PWD – Public Works Department
RT&H – Road Transport and Highways
SARDP-NE – Special Accelerated Road Development Programme (North-East)
SIAM – Society of India Automobile Manufacturers
SRTC – State Road Transport Corporations

1
REPORT
1. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Seventy Eighth Report on
Demands for Grants 2012-13 of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways which was
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 7
th May, 2012.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on the 31 st August, 2012 in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report.
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the concerned Ministries. The recommendations of
the Committee contained in the One Hundred and Seventy Eighth Report, action taken thereon by
the Ministry and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has
been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
Eleventh Plan (2007-12)
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. The Committee finds that the Ministry of Road Transport was able to get Rs.78,158.00
crores at BE as against the approved Eleventh Plan outlay was Rs.71,830.00 crores. The major
component for the enhanced plan outlay was the introduction of special programme for
Development of roads in LWE affected areas in 2009 for which Rs.2,325.00 crores was
allocated. The Ministry was able to spend Rs.74,607.36 crores against the total budgetary
support of Rs.78,158.00 crores (BE) for the whole plan period. The Committee, thus, notes a
saving of around Rs. 3500.00 crores. Such savings in infrastructure projects as development and
maintenance of national highways should have been avoided. The Committee feels that the
Ministry’s performance in spending allocation for certain projects needs lot of improvement. The
Ministry was able to get Rs.400.00 crores (BE) for development of Vijayawada-Ranchi Road but
they could spend Rs.67.25 crores only for the whole plan period. Another case is the
development of Mughal road in Jammu and Kashmir for which the total plan outlay Rs.127.50
was reduced to Rs.50.00 crores (BE) for the plan period. But the Ministry was not able to spend
any money on the project for the period. The Ministry’s ability to spend allocations under non-
plan heads for the Eleventh Plan period was also not very good. Their spending on the
development of information technology, machinery equipments, R&D planning studies, training
and other charges are not very encouraging though their allocations were small only. The
Committee hopes that the Ministry will take corrective measures to improve its performance in
Twelfth Plan period.
(Recommendation at Para 6 of 178
th Report)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6. The scheme/programme -wise total outlay (BE) for Central Roads Sector, total expenditure
at current price level (provisional for 2011-12) and reasons for shortfall in expenditure during the
Eleventh Plan period are as follows:–

2
(Amount in crore )
Sl. Schemes/Programmes T otal Total Reasons for shortfall in
No. Outlay Expenditure expenditure
for at Current
Eleventh Prices (prov.
Plan (BE) for
2011-12)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1. External aided projects
(EAP)
(i) Externally aided 3,895.80 3,883.00 —
(NHAI)
(ii) Counterpart funds 20.00 0.00 Loan agreement with World
(NHAI) Bank could not be finalized.
(iii) Loan to NHAI 974.20 971.00 —
(iv) EAP under RW 180.00 0.00 Loan agreement with World
Bank could not be finalized.
EAP-NHAI 5070.00 4854.00 —
2. Other Schemes-NH(O) 16,487.03 18,177.82 —
3. Rail cum Road Bridge, 380.00 272.00 ➢ Delay in implementation
Munger, Bihar of the Project by Railways.
➢ Delay in finalization of
Revised Estimate due to
change of scope.
4. Development of roads in 2,325.00 1,515.52 ➢ Delay in project
LWE affected area preparation due to
inability to conduct field
surveys in some areas in
Chhattisgarh State owing
to security reasons;
➢ Poor response to tenders
from Contractors in
difficult areas in some
parts of States of
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand
and Odisha;
➢ Slow down in some
works due to frequent
strikes/bandhs.
5. Development of Vijawada- 400.00 67.25 ➢ Delay in approval of the
Ranchi Road Scheme.

3
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
6. Tribal Sub Pl an 375.00 374.96 —
7. Mughal Road in Jammu and 50.00 0.00 Planning Commission is
Kashmir providing fund directly for
this project under State Plan
of Jammu and Kashmir.
Accordingly, no fund was
released for the project under
the Annual Plan of the
Ministry.
8. Improvement of Duburi- 123.02 73.02 ➢ Delay in implementation
Brahmanipal- of the project due to
Harichandanpur-Naranpur law and order problems,
State Road in Orissa
(POSCO) ➢ Delay in mobilisation in
men and machinery
Initial delay in availability
of ROW free of
encumbrances i/c LA
utilities forest clearance
encroachment at habitant
area/junctions and damages
due to rain/floods, etc.
9. Works under BRDB 3,149.76 3,201.22 —
10. Travel expenses 8.00 4.97 This is based on the actual
(domestic) expenditure incurred.
11. Other charges 2.50 0.66 Due to su bmission of lesser
no. of bills raised against
publication of newspaper
advertisement.
12. Development of 23.50 6.92 Due to purchase of lesser no.
Information Technology of equipments/machineries
related to Information
Technology.
13. Strategic roads under 12.00 6.35 The roads to be developed
Roads Wing under this scheme are
decided by Ministry of
Defence as per their
operational priorities. The role
of this Ministry is to just
allocate fund to BRO for
such roads under the 5 year
plans and Annual Plans for
Central Roads Sector.

4
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
14. Strategic roads under 410.00 3 46.24 In surgency problems in
BRDB Jammu and Kashmir. Non-
materialization of supply
orders and contract for
procurement of constructional
stores and material.
15. R&D Planning studies 34.00 6.15 ➢ Slow progress of
ongoing research schemes.
➢ Poor response from
research institutes for
taking up of new
research works.
➢ The work for installation
of Automatic Traffic
Counter-cum-Classifier
(ATCC) could not be
started due re-tendering
of works.
➢ Budget for foreign travel
charged to some other
heads.
➢ Delay in completion of
C&AG audit to facilitate
release of funds.
➢ Setting up of centralized
testing facilities at CRRI
for expansion joints
could not be done.
16. Training 7.50 1.01 This is based on the actual
expenditure incurred.
17. Machinery and equipments 45.00 3.61 As per the policy decision
taken in the Ministry, no
capital procurement of
machinery and equipments
are being done at present;
hence the under utilization of
allocation.
18. Charged expenditure 31.00 13.53 This is base d on the actual
expenditure incurred.
19. NHAI (investment) 38,190.96 35,546.17 ➢ Because of restriction of
15% imposed by the
Ministry of Finance

5
funds to the tune of
Rs.2662 crores could
not be released.This has
been released in the first
quarter of 12-13.
➢ Poor performance by
some contractors and
constraints faced by
contractors
➢ Delay in Environment
and Forest clearances
➢ Tepid market response
to bids invited due to
global financial meltdown.
➢ Delay in Land Acquisition
➢ Clearance of Railways
for ROB designs
➢ Shifting of Utilities
➢ Local Law and Order
problems
20. E&I for States from CRF 1,090.66 831.67 ➢ Non-receipt of UCs/
delay in submission of
21. E&I for UTs from CRF 67.18 3.64 UCs from the State
Governments
➢ Delay in award of
works due to delay in
land acquisition/utility
shifting,
➢ poor response of
bidders,
➢ Non-availability of
sufficient nos. of
ongoing works
particularly from UTs
22. SARDP-NE 6,210.00 4,984.76 ➢ Delay in acquiring land
by State Governments.
Inordinate delay in
Forest and environmental
clearances.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)

6
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
➢ Delay in DPR
preparation by the State
PWDs and BRO
resulting in sanction of
lesser length of roads as
against targets.
➢ Arunachal PWD lacks
organizational setup and
capabilities.
➢ BRO not in
synchronization with
Ministry’s priorities.
Quantum of work with
BRO is much more
than their departmental
capabilities.
➢ Delay in clearance of
Road over Bridges
(ROB) by Railways.
➢ Law and order problems
exist in some areas.
23. NHAI (Toll Remittance) 3,715.89 4,315.89 —
T
OTAL (BS) : 78,158.00 74,607.36 —
7. Reasons for shortfall in expenditure has been explained in the table above. It can be seen
from the above that one of the major reasons for less expenditure is non-relaxation of 15% ceiling
by the Ministry of Finance during March, 2012. This issue of lesser expenditure under various
schemes/programmes during the Eleventh Plan period has been noted and due care would be taken
to ensure improvement of performance of the Ministry during the Twelfth Plan period.
Annual Plan 2011-12
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
8. The Committee finds that performance of the Ministry in spending the allocated funds under
both plan and non-plan was not satisfactory during the year 2011-12. The reasons submitted by
the Ministry for savings of fund under various heads at the end of last fiscal are of routine nature
and repetitive. The Committee finds that Rs.400.00 crores (BE), allocated as plan outlay to Road
Transport sector, was reduced to Rs.150.00 crore at RE stage, of which the Ministry was able
to spend Rs.123.41 crores only. The Committee feels that such a reduction in RE stage for a plan
outlay should have been avoided. Road transport sector consists of major programmes relating to
road safety, trauma care, human resources development, training, etc. The Ministry could have
ensured that the allocation was spent to the maximum extent. The Committee is not satisfied with
the reasons submitted by the Ministry for under utilization of funds. Savings on the allocation
shows the failure on part of the Ministry in proper planning and execution of various road projects.
(Para 14 ibid)

7
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
9. The reason for non-utilization of full amount of the Budget Estimates in 2011-12 has already
given in reply to Para 9. The Ministry has noted the comments of the Committee and efforts would
be taken not to given repetitive and routine replies. Rs.400.00 crore were allocated at BE stage for
various schemes under Road Transport Sector including Road Safety which was reduced to
Rs. 150.00 crore at RE stage. The reasons for savings under various schemes under RT Division
are as under:
• Funds for the already sanctioned nine projects of setting up of Institute of Driving
Training and Research (IDTR) could not be released due to non-receipt of requisite
documents such as Utilization Certificates, progress of work, selection of architect etc.
despite the matter being reviewed at Joint Secretary, Addl. Secretary and Financial
Adviser and Secretary level from time to time. Actual work was carried out only in
one IDTR at Chhindwara for which a token amount could be released. Another IDTR
which was sanctioned in Tamil Nadu could not be executed as the agency withdrew
from the project at the last moment. Another project in Uttar Pradesh could not be
sanctioned as the issue of transfer of land could not be finalized in time.
• Tender for road safety equipments like interceptor, breath analysers, speed radar guns
etc. could not be finalized due to non-finalization of technical specifications. The
Ministry had taken up the matter with Directorate General Supply and Disposal
(DGS&D) for inclusion of these items under their rate contract (RC) which also did
not materialise.
• Funds earmarked for supply of 70 advanced life support ambulances could not be
utilized due to non-delivery of these ambulances by the selected firm.
• Funds under Inspection and Maintenance Centre could not be utilized primarily because
of delay in implementation of projects in two States. One of the States did not provide
land for the project during 2011-12. In another State, the fund allocated for
development of land where the project is to be implemented was not sufficient.
Therefore the State was requested to confirm that they would bear the excess amount,
if any required for land development. But the State Government did not give the
confirmation in time.
• Proposal for “Improving and Strengthening of Public Transport System” in six States
viz.  Odisha, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Assam and Arunachal
Pradesh were approved during 2011-12. Since the said scheme was of first of its kind
and implemented as pilot basis, proposals were not received from many States despite
repeated reminders by this Ministry at various levels. One of the reasons for poor
response from State may be attributed to poor financial condition of SRTCs and
unwillingness of most of the States to contribute mandatory 50% of the State share
for these projects as provided under the scheme.
10. The suggestions of the Committee for proper planning and execution of road transport
project including better utilization of funds have been noted for compliance .
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
11. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry will improve
its spending pattern in the coming years and utilize funds adequately. The Committee finds that
the reasons given by the Ministry for under-utilization of funds are of routine nature. Funds
under-utilization can be minimized by proper planning and coordination with various agencies.

8
Annual Plan 2012-13
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
12. The Committee finds that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has been allocated
Rs.33,000 crores (BE) as annual plan for 2012-13 as against Rs.37,500 crores (BE) plan outlay
for the year 2011-12. It means a reduction in fund allocation for various programmes under the
Ministry. The Committee feels that substantial deduction in the outlay projected by the Ministry
under the component of NH (O) and under NHAI (Investment) will slow the pace of the
development of national highways under NHDP and non-NHDP segments. The Committee hopes
that the Ministry will improve its performance in spending the allocation under various heads. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take up the enhancement of plan outlay for NH (O)
projects with the Planning Commission to avoid diversion of funds from Cess meant for NHDP
projects, which is a disturbing trend. The Committee hopes that additional requirement of funds for
maintenance of national highways to the tune of Rs.1,000 crore will be considered by the Planning
Commission at a later stage as development of national highways without proper repair and
maintenance is a callous wastage of national resources.
(Para 25 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
13. The Demand projected by this Ministry for Annual Plan 2012-13 is Rs.38,533.37 crores
against which we have been provided Rs.32,600 crores. The Ministry has made all out efforts with
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to provide the budgetary support as projected by the
Ministry. However the Ministry has succeeded in getting an additional allocation of Rs.1000 crores
under Maintenance and Repairs only. We would pursue our demand at the Revised Estimate stage
with the Ministry of Finance to allocate additional funds to the Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
14. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry will
pursue its case with Planning Commission for getting adequate budgetary support so that
ongoing national highways and other road projects are not delayed for want of funds.
Externally Aided Projects
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee would like to be informed about the progress of all the Externally Aided
projects, the scheduled date of completion and the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of these projects.
(Para 28 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
16. Provision made in the Demands for Grants under EAP provides for expenditure against
project taken up through NHAI and proposed to be taken up through State PWDs. The loan in
respect of all the externally aided projects of NHAI has already been closed. Further these projects
were awarded on only item rate mode of delivery and completed partially. Economic IRR may
have been worked out in the relevant DPRs. The status/details of Loans are placed below at
Annexure I . As regards the works yet to be taken up through State PWD, it is at negotiation/
project appraisal stage with the World Bank. It may be premature to indicate target, date of
completion etc.

9
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
National Highways (Original) Works: NH (O)
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
18. The Committee is of the view that development of Non-NHDP national highways are as
important as of national highways covered under various programmes of NHDP. The Committee
was informed that 21% of the existing national highways network is single lane or intermediate
lane. Developments of these national highways to minimum two-lane standards need huge
investments. The Committee notes that against a projected requirement of Rs.8, 848.25 crores for
this head, the Ministry was able to get Rs.6,042.80 crores for the year 2012-13. As a result thereof
the NHAI may be forced to divert cess earmarked for NHDP to development of national highways
under NH (O). This diversion will delay the development of both NHDP and non-NHDP national
highways. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways must impress
the Planning Commission to allocate more funds for the development of non-NHDP national
highways at RE stage. The Committee feels that the development of non- NHDP national highways
will get due attention from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Planning Commission
in the coming years. The Committee may be apprised of the status of construction of rail-cum-
road Bridge at Ganga, Munger for which the construction works were started way back in 2002.
(Para 33 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
19. The Ministry had projected a sum of Rs.28,533.37 crore from the GBS against which
Rs.22,600 crore has been provided which is about 79% of what this Ministry projected. This
Ministry is aware that diversion of funds meant for development of NHs under NHDP will affect
the flagship programme of Govt. of India. At the same time it is the responsibility of the Ministry
to maintain NH not covered under NHDP in traffic worthy condition. In the above background the
Ministry has diverted Rs.2000 crores out of cess funds to NH(O). Concern of the Committee
however has been noted and action taken accordingly.
As regards construction of Munger bridge it is stated that the work of Munger rail-cum-
road bridge was started in 2002. Presently, all foundation, substructure and guide bunds are
complete. The steel superstructure is in progress and out of 31 spans, 8 spans have already been
erected. However, still there are problems of land acquisitions on its approaches, which are being
continuously pursued with State Governments. If adequate funds are made available, the bridge is
likely to be completed by September, 2014.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
20. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that development of NHDP
and non-NHDP national highways should be given equal importance by the Government. The
Committee may be apprised on the original cost of Munger rail-cum-road bridge work and
the expenditure incurred so far.
Performance of SARDP-NE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
21. The Committee notes that the Ministry has a special programme for the development of

10
national highways in North-Eastern parts of the country. The Committee hopes that the Ministry
will take up the funding of Phase ‘B’ of SARDP-NE comprising 35 roads with an aggregate
length of 3723 km. during the 12th Plan with Planning Commission aggressively. The Committee
also hopes that the Ministry will improve its performance in spending the allocated funds as also
in achieving the targets set for development of national highways in NE region in coming years
so that economic growth, trade and tourism are not affected due to non-availability of motorable
road in this part of the country. Many of the reasons for delay in execution of projects at various
places of North-East need individualized attention and local solutions. The Committee
recommends that to remove the bottlenecks, authorities and agencies concerned may be
approached and activated.
(Para 44 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
22. The draft note for Cabinet Committee on infrastructure seeking investment approval for
phase ‘B’ of SARDP-NE is under preparation. With respect to utilization of allocated funds against
SARDP-NE, it may be mentioned that against an original allocation of Rs.1600 crore the total
expenditure incurred is to the tune of Rs.1940 crore during 2011-12. Keeping in view, the Bank
of Sanction of Rs. 12,578 crore as on 01/04/12, it is expected that the allocated funds under
SARDP-NE would be fully utilised during 2012-13 also. The Ministry is in the process of setting
up Office of the level of Chief Engineers at 3 different locations in the North Eastern Region to
ensure that targets against SARDP-NE are met and also to attend to the various local issues/
bottlenecks affecting the progress of the projects in the region.
23. The bottlenecks during implementation are being taken up with State Level Committee
headed by Chief Secretary from time to time.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
24. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that national
highways in the North-Eastern Region of the country should get required funds to make
them all-weather motorable roads, where connectivity is a big problem.
Special Programme for Development of Roads in the Left Wing Extremism (Lwe) Affected
Areas
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee finds that major portion of roads developed under LWE scheme are State
roads and the development of these roads need a great deal of coordination with State
Governments. Though the project was started with a target of development of 5477 km. roads in
Districts of 8 States affected by Left Wing Extremism at an estimated cost of Rs. 7300 crore in
2009, the development work in 1335 km. length only could be completed with an expenditure of
Rs. 1891crore, till March, 2012. The Committee feels that with such speed of execution of
projects, the completion of the programme will be delayed with an increase in the cost of project
in the coming years. The Committee feels that an efficient monitoring mechanism with the
involvement of concerned states is the need of the hour to ensure proper utilization of funds and
speedy implementation of projects. The Committee is of the view that delay in the execution of
these projects may defeat the very purpose of formulating the project. These areas are badly in
need of development. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all out efforts be made to
construct the roads in those areas within the targeted period.
(Para 50 ibid)

11
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
26. The total length covered under LWE is 5477 kms. Out of which works sanctioned in
5339 km. and awarded in 4502 km. It is planned to sanction works in balance 138 km. and award
the work of balance stretches (975 km.) during this year. So far work in 1335 km. have been
completed and another 1200 km. are planned to be completed by this year end. The execution of
the works is also going at a good pace except in category III areas where the progress of the
works is slow due to security problems. In order to accelerate the pace of construction, recently
a meeting has been taken by Hon’ble Minister (RT&H) at New Delhi on 18
th July, 2012 with State
PWD officials. Also a meeting has been taken by Secretary (RT&H) at Kankey, Chhattisgarh on
27
th July, 2012 with District Administration and security agencies to discuss the matter in detail.
The Ministry will constantly interact with these agencies to keep the pace of work at satisfactory
level. However, most of the works will be completed by March, 2015 as planned earlier except in
category III areas in which little delay beyond March, 2015 may also occur due to phased
deployment of security forces in these areas by the State Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that planned and
coordinated efforts by the Ministry will ensure that the project is implemented as per its
scheduled date.
National Highways Authority of India
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee finds that NHAI is not in a position to complete any project whether it is
NHDP or non-NHDP within the scheduled period, although financing has not been an issue for
them. NHAI is adding projects after projects without achieving the targets in the older ones. The
much publicized GQ and NS and EW corridors under NHDP have not been completed till date. The
much talked about construction of 20 kms. per day has been a distant dream so far. The
Committee notes that as against 13.72 km. constructed in the year 2009-10, it has dwindled to
10.15 km. in 2011-12. Such a slide in achieving this target by NHAI shows their deficiency either
in planning of programmes or proper execution of the same.
(Para 69 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
29. Under Golden Quadrilateral out of 5846 km, 5842 km. has been completed and under
North South and East West corridor out of 7142 km 6031 km. has been completed, 691 km.
is under implementation and 420 km. is yet to be awarded. There is delay in completion of
projects under NHDP due to various reasons like delays in obtaining forest/wild/ railway
clearances, land acquisition problem, shifting of utility, poor performance of contractors, law and
order problems in some areas etc. Regarding target of 20 kms. per day, it is stated that highway
projects have a gestation period of above three years from the date of start of the work. To meet
the target of construction at an average rate of 20 km. per day i.e. almost 7,000 kms. per year,
it is essential that at any given point of time, there should be almost three times of this length
i.e. approximately 21,000 kms. of work awarded and under construction. The awards made
3-4 years back were very low and therefore the completion level is also low. NHAI has begun
the process of accelerating the pace of award of projects to achieve the target of construction
of 20 km. per day. NHAI awarded 6489 kms. in 2011-12 and construction of 2249 km. has been
completed in 2011-12.

12
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
30. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry may fix
new target in future, taking into consideration the ground realities faced by them in
construction of new highways in the country.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The premier road infrastructure provider of the country is functioning without a Chairman
for the last two years. It must be telling upon the implementation/award of our road projects.
(Para 70 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
32. Presently, Shri R.P. Singh, IAS has joined as Chairman on 12th June, 2012 though process
of selection of Chairman for NHAI was delayed as stated above. During the period when fulltime
Chairman was not available with NHAI, Secretary MORT&H was in dual charge as Chairman of
NHAI. So, implementation/award of our road projects were not hampered for the above reason.
Rather we have a record of awarding 6489 km. during 2011-12 and construction completed 2249
kms. and we have received very good response from the bidders and received around Rs. 3000
crores premium while awarding these projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
33. The Committee is not convinced with the argument that absence of the regular
Chairman has not in any way affected the proficiency of NHAI and that rather there have
been improvement in work awarded. If the Committee buys the argument of the Ministry,
then it is implied that there is no need to have a regular head of NHAI. The Committee
again recommends that Government should ensure that NHAI or similar organization should
not be without a regular head for long.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Mahatma Gandhi Sethu in Patna has outlived its utility and needs a replacement with
four-lane Bridge. The Committee notes that one of the objectives of GQ project was to connect
all the capitals of the states through which the project passes. However, Patna was not included
in the project. The Committee may be apprised on the reasons for non-inclusion of Patna in GQ
project under NHDP. The Committee finds that widening of national highways into four-lane
without widening or developing bridges on those national highways is not going to yield the desired
result.
(Para 71 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
35. The Mahatma Gandhi Sethu was constructed by the State Government before declaration
of Manjhi-Chhapra-Hazipur-Patna section of road as National Highway-19, on which the bridge is
located. The bridge has suffered distress and consequent failure of Central Hinge Bearings and
expansion joints. Ever since the distress was noticed, it has been continuous endeavor of the
Ministry to repair and rehabilitate the bridge. Till date, the Ministry has sanctioned estimates
amounting to Rs. 122.19 crores for external pre-stressing changing of CHBs, repair of CHBs.
35A. The bridge has been entrusted to NHAI on 28.9.2011. The consultant of NHAI has
suggested reconstruction of superstructure as a long term permanent solution. Measures for

13
immediate/short term repair and rehabilitation was also suggested. As per recent decision in June,
2012, State Government of Bihar is proposing to construct a new six lane bridge on river Ganga
in Patna connecting Hajipurand Patna. However, in the meeting with Hon’ble Chief Minister of
Bihar, it has been decided that State PWD will take all necessary measures for carrying out
maintenance and repair of the existing bridge and its approaches in order to keep it in a traffic
worthy condition for the next six years. Necessary funds will be provided by the Ministry for this
purpose. Thereafter, after six years or the completion date of the new bridge, whichever is earlier,
the State Government of Bihar will be responsible for the maintenance of the bridge and its
approaches at their own cost. The State Government, based on the recommendation of consultant,
has submitted an estimate amounting to Rs. 29.68 crores, which is under consideration of this
Ministry. Further, an estimate amounting to Rs. 28.15 crores for rehabilitation of span No. 44 of
Mahatma Gandhi Sethu has been received from the consultant recently, which is also under
consideration of the Ministry. It is mentioned that GQ (NHDP Phase-I) envisaged connection of
four metro cities (Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai & Chennai) by four lane National Highways. The
connection of State capital Patna was proposed with Delhi–Kolkata Section of GQ through Patna–
Gaya–Dobi section of NH-83. It is mentioned that Patna–Gaya–Dobi section is approved under
NHDP Phase-III for four laning. The PIB proposal for the same is under submission for four laning
of Patna–Gaya–Dobi section under JICA ODA loan. It is also to inform that as the existing MG
Setu is in dilapidated condition. The maintenance and repair of the existing MG Setu will be carried
out by State PWD for a period of 5 to 6 years till the new bridge is constructed.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
36. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that rehabilitation of
Mahatma Gandhi Setu gets due priority from both the Central and State Governments
taking into consideration the safety of road users.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
37. Another disturbing fact brought to the notice of the Committee is the poor connectivity with
national highways of the major ports in the country. The Committee notes that delay in providing
road connectivity to Kandla Port for a small stretch of 8 kms has done a huge loss to the Port.
The Committee recommends that the work on the development of above stretch be taken without
delay and the status of  the project may be intimated to the Committee.
(Para 72 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
38. NHAI is under taking port connectivity projects to connect the major ports to the existing
National Highways. Out of ten ports, the road connectivity to Mumbai-JNPT I and II,
Vishakhapatnam Port connectivity (Port Road) in Andhra Pradesh and Paradip Port connectivity
(NH-5A) from Chandikhole to Paradip has been completed. Besides, the Phase–I Sea Protection
Work on Chennai-Ennore Port connectivity in Tamil Nadu, 4-laning of NH-47 from km. 348.4 to
km. 358.75 for Cochin Port connectivity have also been completed. Projects for connecting
Cochin, New Mangalore, Tuticorin, Mormugao, Chennai-Ennore and Haldia major ports are in
progress. The work on Mormugao Port connectivity on NH-17-B in Goa has been held up due to
court case. Details are placed Annexure-II.
39. Executive Committee in NHAI has already approved for taking up this left out stretch of
9 km for development to 6 laning. Accordingly, Technical Consultant has been asked to prepare
feasibility report for the stretch to be awarded on BOT (Toll) basis. The current status of the
projects is mentioned in Annexure-II.

14
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is, however,
constrained to note that there is no specific plan for taking up the project of connectivity
of Kandla Port which is pending for years. The Committee may be informed of the steps
taken in this regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
41. The Committee feels that implementation of recommendations of B K Chaturvedi Report on
the revised strategy for implementation of National Highways Development Project has not resulted
in much progress in this megaproject. The Committee hopes that NHAI will chalk out a workable
solution to complete all the pending projects in time, irrespective of its size, to minimize the cost
overrun.
(Para 73 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
42. The concern of the Committee has been noted. As this is a policy matter detailed discussion
at different level are in the process. As desired, we are trying to come to a workable solution to
complete all the pending projects within expected completion period to minimize the cost overrun.
After implementation of recommendations of BK Chaturvedi Report in 2009, specifically amending
the various issues in RFQ/RFP/MCA, the pace of annual award of projects have been increasing
on an year to year basis, which can be seen from the following table:
Year Award of Projects
(in kms.)
2007-08 643
2008-09 1234
After BKC Report
2009-10 3361
2010-11 5083
2011-12 6489
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
Roads of Inter-State connectivity and Economic importance
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
44. The Committee finds that total unspent balance available for States under this scheme is
Rs.2,406.05 which is of non-lapsable nature. The Committee notes a decline in number of projects
approved under Economic Importance since 2009- 10. Only 2 projects were approved in 2011-12
as against 51 approved in 2011-12 under Inter-State Connectivity. The Committee feels that the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should impress upon the State Governments to identify
more State roads for development and enhancing their connectivity to nearby national highways.
The Committee may be apprised on the status of approved projects under both the categories. The

15
Committee hopes that development of State roads, for opening up of new areas for economic
growth should be given more priority, as availability of funds for these schemes is not a big issue.
(Para 78 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
45. The unspent balance available under EI and SC is not Rs.2406.50 crores. It is the unspent
amount available under CRF. For development of State roads, on the basis of their area and sale
of fuel an amount is earmarked. This amount is released against the utilisation certificate submitted
by the States. Fund is non-lapsable and due amount if not released will be kept as unspent balance.
46. For works of Economic Importance and Inter State Connectivity 10% of CRF amount is
earmarked and used for sanction of works which can be covered under this category. As on date
total bank of sanction for works already sanctioned under EI and SC is about Rs. 1400 crores
against the allocation of about Rs.250 crores Thus to liquidate the committed liability alone,
allocation of next five years would be utilised. As such there is no point in sanctioning fresh
works. Accordingly, the pace of sanction of works under EI and SC is slow.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
47. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and expects the Ministry to apprise
it the status of various ongoing projects under roads of inter-State connectivity and of
economic importance.
Maintenance and Repairs of National Highways
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
48. The Committee feels that maintenance and repair of national highways is not getting the
attention it deserves. The Committee notes that Rs.1998.03 crore has been allocated for
maintenance and repair of national highways but it is only 66 % of the requirement projected by
the Ministry. The Committee feels that the ceiling of allocation of 40% of the actual requirements
as per the Ministry’s stipulated norms should be revisited and recommends that it needs to be
suitably augmented as per the requirement. The annual addition to National highways network
should also be given due consideration for allocation of funds for maintenance and repair. Funds
should not be a stumbling block in carrying out the repair work. The Committee is of the view
that due importance should be given by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for
the maintenance of national highways in coming years.
(Para 81 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
49. The additional fund requirement for Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of newly declared NHs
is duly considered while projecting fund requirement for M&R of NHs both at BE and RE stage.
This Ministry regularly take up the issue of augmenting allocation of funds for M&R of NHs as
per the estimated requirement, with the Ministry of Finance as a result of which a substantial
increase in the allocation has been made this year. Ministry will take up with the Ministry of
Finance for balance requirement at RE stage.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
50. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways will get the

16
required funds at RE stage for maintenance of national highways so that these national
highways remain motorable for all the time of the year.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
51. The Committee recommends that in future plans should be prepared under which new roads
may be constructed only after ensuring the availability of fund for the maintenance and repair of
existing roads.
(Para 82 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
52. The priority of the Ministry is to develop the existing NHs as compared to declaring new
NHs. However, the Government declares new NHs from time to time depending upon the
requirement to enhance connectivity based on inter-se priority and availability of funds. However,
keeping in view the scarce available non-Plan outlay for M&R of NHs, the Ministry has taken
several initiatives towards ensuring effective use of available resources, such as:–
(i) Operate-Maintain-Toll (OMT) concessions being awarded primarily on stretches of
NHs developed under NHDP-I and II through budgetary allocations, which may not
require further augmentation/development in periods of about 4—9 years. Such
projects are also earning premiums for the Government.
(ii) NHDP-III onwards primarily to be undertaken on BOT (Toll) mode, wherein the
responsibility for maintenance of the stretches is the responsibility of the
concessionaire during the concession period.
(iii) The Ministry has awarded about 1,200 km stretches of non-NHDP NHs for their
development on BOT (Toll) basis under Viability Gap Funding (VGF) Scheme of the
Ministry of Finance, wherein their long term maintenance requirements are
responsibilities of the concessionaires for such projects. The Ministry is exploring the
possibilities to undertake more such projects on non-NHDP NHs.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
53. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the initiatives taken
by the Ministry for maintenance and repair of national highways with the available
resources would yield the desired outcome.
Central Road Fund
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
54. The Committee notes that a portion of cess earmarked for national highways under CRF
had been diverted for works under NH(O) thus defeating the objective for which the CRF was
created. The Committee feels that such diversion should be minimized and the Planning Commission
may be impressed upon to allocate more funds for development of national highways under non-
NHDP category. The Committee also feels that diversion of cess earmarked for development of
national highways will result in higher market borrowing for the ongoing projects and cost overrun
also. The Committee desires to know them mechanism available with the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways to ensure the proper utilization of funds allocated from CRF by the State
Governments.
(Para 88 ibid)

17
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
55. The circumstances which led to diversion of cess funds meant for development of NHDP
to non-NHDP works has already been explained in para 33 above. The Ministry will make efforts
to get additional allocation for NH(O) under Revised Estimate stage. Regarding the mechanism
available with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to ensure proper utilisation of funds
allocated from CRF, it may be mentioned that the provisions contained in CRF (State Road)
Rules,1997 is duly followed scrupulously while sanctioning CRF works. Funds are released based
on the Utilisation certificates received from the State Government the fund due to the State is
released accordingly. The provisions for inspection of CRF work as stipulated under the CRF Rules
are strictly adhered to.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
Road Safety
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
57. The Committee feels that the Ministry will not be in a position to satisfy itself by merely
implementing above mentioned measures for road safety unless it properly implements the Central
Motor Vehicles Rules and Act. The Committee notes that the mandatory fitment of Auto dipper
device – an essential safety device needed to be fitted on the vehicle for a safer night travel, to
enforce Rule 106 of Central Motor Vehicles Rules 1989 and Section 110(1)(j) of Central Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 has not been implemented strictly in the country so far. The Committee also
expresses its disappointment over the delay in introduction of redrafted Motor Vehicles
(Amendment) Act which consists major recommendations of the Standing Committee on measures
to strengthen road safety and related issues.
(Para 93 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
58. Proper implementation of the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Central Motor
Vehicles Rules, 1989 is the task and responsibility of the State Governments and UT Administration
since they act as enforcement agencies. Provision of Auto dipper was inserted under Rule 125 (4)
of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 with an intention to legislate on the matter. This Ministry
also published notification No. GSR 29 (E) dated January 15, 1998 mandating the fitment of auto
dipper in the vehicles after one year from the date of publication but the date of implementation
had been postponed several times due to lack of technical feasibility of the said device. Meanwhile,
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules-Technical Standing Committee (CMVR-TSC), an advisory body to
this Ministry, constituted a Core Group consisting of VRDE, Ahmednagar, CIRT, Pune, Tata
Engineering and Locomotive Co. (TELCO) and Ashok Leyland under the convenorship of ARAI,
Pune to specifically deliberate on auto dipper. The Core Group conducted number of trails and
came up with the recommendation that auto dipper in its present state of development is not in
fit state of use in the vehicles, and extensive development and testing had to be undertaken by the
testing agencies and manufacturers for safety and efficacy before mandating the fitment of auto
dipper. The report was placed before the Technical Standing Committee for further deliberation.
The Technical Standing Committee decided to conduct the test with all the vehicles fitted with auto
dipper and also in a controlled environment like VRDE tracks; all practical trials should be
conducted; and ARAI, Pune was asked to co-ordinate the trials in cooperation with AIAM, auto
dipper manufacturers and VRDE at VRDE National Centre for Automotive Tests (NCAT) tracks.

18
59. The report submitted by ARAI, Pune in November, 1997 inter alia concluded that no
electronic device could entirely replace the driver’s human judgment of the dipping-undipping
decision; the auto dipper in its present form could not be inducted into road usage since a large
areas of refinement was needed to make it useful; auto dipper as a concept could not be ruled out;
and that much more development was required in this feature before mandating its fitment in the
vehicles.
60. Society of India Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM) submitted to this Ministry for
withdrawal of the provision of mandatory fitment of Auto Dippers under Rule 125 (4) CMVR, 1989
from coming into force from December 15, 2000.
61. This Ministry considering the above report of the Technical Standing Committee felt that
provision of mandatory fitment of auto dipper was required to be withdrawn as the said device
would become safety hazard rather that safety aid. This Ministry issued a final notification No.
GSR 659 (E) dated September 12, 2001 deleting the provisions of Rule 125 (4) of CMVR, 1989.
62. However, this Ministry has drawn comments from Automotive Research Association of
India (ARAI), Pune and International Centre for Automotive Technology (iCAT), Manesar,
authorized testing agencies in this regard. ARAI, Pune has opined that in compliance to Rule 106
(c) and (d) (Deflection of beam) the headlamps fitted in the vehicles should have the provision of
deflection of beam from main beam function to dipped beam function as per the traffic situation
and today, in all vehicles, it is operated manually by driver. All electrical operation requirements are
checked as per the Installation standards AIS:008, Rev 1, which is aligned with ECE Regulation
No. 48. They have further opined that the idea of auto dipper did not work anywhere in the world
due to several technical issues. There are no national or International Standards on this product for
reference and fitment of Auto Dipper is not mandatory in any country. They have reiterated that
in the past elaborate exercise was conducted to explore the device and its practicability in road
safety. The field trials for verification of performance of the device were conducted in two phases
by the team having members from test agencies, SIAM and device manufacturer. First phase was
conducted in 1997, involving 40 different categories of vehicles. It was found that technology of
the device was yet to reach to the level so as to perform to the expected levels under actual
simulated road/traffic conditions. Based on the observation during first phase field trials, device
manufacturers modified their equipment to take care of the shortcomings. In spite of these
modifications, phase II trials conducted in the year 1999, confirmed that these devices were still
unsuitable proving them safety hazard on actual field conditions, resulting to the withdrawal of the
provision of Auto dipper in CMVR, as stated in para 2.5, above. They concluded with the opinion
that auto dipper is not a practicable solution and hence no safety standard is warranted for this
device.
63. ICAT, Manesar has reiterated the same observation as placed above.
64. Considering the above facts, the expert opinion received by this Ministry that the technology
of auto dipper is yet to reach the satisfactory level to be used under actual simulated road/traffic
conditions. The trials conducted by the testing agencies and manufacturer had found it as road
hazard rather than road safety, as brought out above. However, since the matter is subjudice before
the Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad at Lucknow Bench in W.P. 2122 (M/B) of 2004 filed by Bijay
Kumar Singh Parmar v. UOI, this Ministry would like to await the final judgment of the Hon’ble
High Court of Allahabad at Lucknow Bench. Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2007 was introduced
in Rajya Sabha on 15.05.2007. The Bill was referred to Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Transport, Tourism and Culture for examination and Report. The Committee submitted its report
on 28.04.2008. Recommendations of the committee were processed in consultation with the State
Governments/UTs and Ministries/Deptts. of Government of India concerned. The Official
amendments to the Bill were prepared in consultation with M/o Law and Justice. The official

19
amendments to the Motor Vehicles (Amendment)Bill, 2007 were approved by the Cabinet on
1st March, 2012. Thereafter, the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was passed by Rajya
Sabha on 08.05.2012. The Bill, as passed by Rajya Sabha, was introduced for consideration and
passing in Lok Sabha on 15 th May, 2012. The Bill was taken up for discussion in Lok Sabha on
16th May, 2012, but the discussion remained inconclusive. The Bill may be passed by Lok Sabha
in the Monsoon Session of Parliament, 2012.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee notes the reply.
Model Driving Training Schools
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
66. The Committee finds that Rs.120 crores was allocated for refresher training to drivers in
unorganized sector and human resource development for the year 2011-12. It was reduced to
Rs.28.50 crores at RE stage of which the Ministry was able to spend Rs.10.90 crores only. This
clearly shows a tardy implementation of the scheme by the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways. The revised scheme for setting up of Institute of Driving Training and Research Centre
(IDTRs) has not seen any progress and the establishment of such centers are delayed due to one
or other reasons. The Committee also feels that the Ministry should involve the State Governments
for establishment of more and more such training centres. The Committee feels that imparting of
training to drivers in unorganized sector is one of the major steps toward road safety in the
country, but it depends on the Ministry’s willingness and planning to materialize it.
(Para 96 ibid)
67. The Committee notes that the vehicles manufacturers have a role to play in training the
drivers, it is their duty to ensure their safety also. Every manufacturer in the country should be
asked to open training centres for drivers in areas wherever their showrooms exist. Accordingly,
the Committee recommends that the Government should make it compulsory for the vehicle
manufacturers to open driving training centres. The Committee hopes that active involvement of
major auto manufacturers in this novel programme will help the Ministry in attaining the objective
behind the setting up of Institute of Driving Training and Research Centre (IDTRs).
(Para 97 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
68. During Eleventh Plan, 9 IDTRs were sanctioned out of which two IDTRs were sanctioned
in February – March, 2012. Besides, in case of one IDTR, the private partner had withdrawn from
the project. After approving the project, certain works were required to be done by State
Government/Private Partner such formation of society, acquisition of land, etc. Therefore the
projects got delayed despite regular follow up by this Ministry and resulted in under utilization of
allocated budgetary allocation.
69. The Ministry proposes to establish 12 Institutes of Driving Training and Research (IDTRs)
on PPP mode during the financial year 2012-13. The large number of instructors and trainers
required for driving training schools may be trained at the established driving training schools
(IDTRs) in collaboration with other stakeholders like vehicle manufacturers with the ultimate
objective that training in an accredited driving training school/institute will be a prerequisite under
CMVR for submission of application for Driving Licence. It is envisaged that PPP models would
be brought into place with specific service quality and viability gap funding.

20
70. The Ministry is also in the process of organizing two days refresher training programme
to Heavy Motor Vehicle drivers in unorganized sector.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
71. The Committee hopes that the proposed 12 Institutes of Driving Training and
Research (IDTRs) during 2012-13 are established on priority so that drivers in unorganized
sector get proper training and education on road safety and related issues.
National Highway Accident Relief Scheme
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
72. The Committee notes that the Ministry was able to spend Rs.21.01 crores only out of the
allocation of Rs.31.75 crores at RE level for the year 2011-12. Now Rs.30 crores has been
allocated for the year 2012-13 for the purpose of National Highways Accident Relief Scheme. The
Committee finds that education in allocation for the current fiscal and the inability to spend the
allocated money in the last year, shows the lack of seriousness of the Ministry towards providing
medical assistance to victims of road accidents and strengthening of National Highways Patrolling
Scheme. The Ministry’s inability in purchasing ambulances during the last year citing procedural
delays will definitely put lives of users of national highways at higher risk.
(Para 102 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
73. National Highway Accident Relief Scheme (NHARSS)-The Ministry is presently reviewing
the existing arrangements for providing of emergency medical services to road accident victims in
each State including deployment of ambulances, crane and their optimal use in consultation with
Transport, Police departments of the States/UTs. it has been decided that only those States will be
provided cranes/ambulances which have publicized for information of all roads users the location
of the cranes/ambulances supplied by the Ministry and also started common toll free number such
as 102, 108 or 1073 supported by a call centre and liked it to various hospitals for providing
emergency care to road accident victims.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
74. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the funds allocated
under National Highway Accident Relief Scheme are spent judiciously by the agencies
involved in providing accident relief at national highways.
Setting up of Inspection and Certification Centres
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
75. The Committee finds that Rs.12.43 crores was spent against an allocation of Rs.84.00
crores at BE stage which was drastically reduced to Rs.14.00 crore at RE stage. Again a sum of
Rs.90.00 crores has been allocated for the current fiscal. The Committee fails to understand the
logic behind such a huge variation in allocation under this head. The Committee may be furnished
the reasons for non-utilization of funds and apprised of the status of model Inspection and
Certification centers sanctioned so far and the probable dates of commencement of functioning of
such centers.
(Para 104 ibid)

21
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
76. During 2011-12, the budgetary outlay for model Inspection and Certification centre was
Rs. 84.00 crore. The total cost for setting up one centre is around Rs. 1440 lakhs + taxes which
included the cost for supply and installation of necessary equipments for 4 lanes, construction of
building and establishment of utilities etc. Despite repeated follow up, necessary formalities (such
as allotment of land, signing of Memorandum of understanding etc.) was not completed by the
State Governments. Therefore the project was sanctioned to the States at the end 2011-12. Because
of this, the fund, slated for procurement of equipment, was not utilized which resulted the variation
in allocation and utilization of fund.
77. Nine I&C centres were sanctioned and funds have also been released for 8 centres during
2011-12. The civil construction at I&C centre, Chhindwara is going on. The work of soil testing
for I&C centre, at Rohtak (Haryana) and Delhi has been completed. At remaining most of the
centre, the work of soil testing is going on. Simultaneously, the executing agency is also in the
process of appointing the Architect and civil contractor. Besides, MoRTH is in the process of
finalization of tender for supply of the equipment of the I&C centre. Keeping in view of the
progress of work, it is expected that the proposed I&C centre will start function from April, 2013.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
78. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
Strengthening of Public Transport System
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
79. The Committee desires to know the results of improving and strengthening of public
transport system in the above mentioned states as a total of Rs.70.065 crores have been allocated
since its inception. The Committee hopes that some monitoring mechanism will be available with
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways for the proper utilization of funds allocated under
this category to promote public transport in a big way. The Committee hopes that the greater
utilization of public transport in coming days will lead to lesser traffic snarls in the road and
substantial reduction in pollution also.
(Para 108 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
80. It is provided in the sanction orders for releasing funds to the State Governments under
their scheme of Strengthening of Public Transport System that beneficiary States/UTs will provide
periodical progress report in respect of implementation of the project in accordance with the
scheme to facilitate subsequent release of funds and also that the States/UTs will provide access
to the officers of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to oversee the implementation of the
project as and when required. The sanction also provides for constitution of a Committee to
monitor the implementation of the project. Such a committee will have at least one member each
of the benefited State Transport Undertakings of the State. Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways proposes to conduct on the spot review of progress of projects sanctioned during 2010-11
through officers of this Ministry. The officers have been asked to submit report by 31.08.2012.
The measures to encourage a shift from private (two-wheelers and cars) mode of transport to
public transport in order to check the alarming increase of private vehicles has to be a joint
endeavour of the Central, State and local Governments. For popularizing the public transport, the
Central Government is emphasizing on providing quick, comfortable, reliable, safe, affordable and
quality public transport.

22
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
81. The Committee may be apprised on the review of progress of projects sanctioned
during 2010-11 under strengthening of public transport system.
National Road Safety Board
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
82. The Committee finds that the proposed National Road Safety Board is being delayed by the
Ministry due to its inability to take a major policy decision. The Committee feels that appointing
committees and task force one after other, to study the issue or sort out the shortcomings is not
going to address the issues involving road safety. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will set
up the mechanism at the earliest in consultation with the state governments to minimize road
accidents. The Committee urges the Ministry to give importance road safety as being given to
development of national highways.
(Para 110 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
83. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for consideration of the
Government. However, thrust is given on road safety issues by carrying campaign for road safety
regularly. Several safety measures have been undertaken such as segregation of local and through
traffic by constructing flyovers, underpasses, bypasses, service roads etc. Safety features like road
marketing, signages, crash barrier, raised pavement markers etc. are provided. Safety of pedestrians
are of great importance and pedestrian facilities like zebra crossings, pedestrian underpasses, foot
over bridges, pedestrian guard rails etc. are also provided.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
84. The Committee notes the reply.
General observations
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
85. The Committee after examining the demands of the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways finds that the allocation for the Ministry needs a relook at the time of RE stage. The
Ministry was not able to convince the Planning Commission in getting the required funds for
various projects mainly due to the underutilization of funds for the year 2011-12 and also reduction
of funds for various schemes at RE level during 2011-12. The Committee feels that the Ministry
should improve its record in fund utilization and advise its project executing agencies accordingly.
(Para 111 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
86. This Ministry is primarily responsible for development and maintenance of National
Highways. All the activities relating to the development and maintenance of NHs are executed at
the field sites. For performing these activities, conducive climatic conditions such as rain/
moisturefree atmosphere, dry soil, etc., are essential. During the year, the climatic condition
prevalent in our country implies that only around 65% period is the working season and the
remaining part, i.e. 35% is effectively a non-working season. This 35% non-working season falls

23
within the period from April to December of the year, depending upon the monsoon months in the
different States.
87. In the North Eastern States and some hilly states such as Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh
and Jammu and Kashmir, the working season is less than even 50% period in a year. Further, the
payment to the contractors engaged in the activity of road development and maintenance is made
on completion of the project/work or at different stages of the work as per the agreement. The
payments for all the road works executed between the months of November onwards are made
during the months of February and March of the financial year. In respect of the road works for
which reimbursement payments procedure is in force, the final booking of expenditure with CCA
after submission of the bill by the contractor takes around two and a half months. The working
in different parts of the country is affected due to weather conditions and the restriction imposed
by the Ministry of Finance creates a setback to the physical activities in the areas of construction
of highways and bridges works by the Ministry. Most of the construction works starts after the
monsoon season and thus, it is not possible to spend 67% of the budgetary allocations upto the
month ending December of the financial year. Accordingly the Ministry is also seeking exemption
from the Ministry of Finance to allow booking of expenditure in excess of 33% in the last quarter
and 15% in the last month of the financial year. In view of the above facts, the Committee is
requested to appreciate the aspect of seasonal dependency in implementation of road projects and
its consequential effect in bunching of expenditure in the last quarter/moth of the financial year and
review its recommendations in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
88. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways may pursue
with the Ministry of Finance for getting exemption to allow booking of expenditure in excess
of 33% so that reduction of funds for various schemes at RE stage are minimized.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
89. The Committee feels that the Ministry should do its homework to identify the projects under
various heads before going for Budget Estimates. During the last year Rs.400 crores was estimated
for Road Transport sector but was reduced to Rs.150 crores at RE level. Such drastic cut in funds
will not benefit the Ministry in the long run for carrying out major programmes under research and
development, road safety and other related issues concerning road transport.
(Para 112 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
90. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATION OF THE COMMITTEE
91. The Committee hopes that an effective coordination mechanism at the central level will
ensure hassle free clearances for road projects and achievement of targets within the prescribed
time. The Committee feels that the Ministry will impress the state governments to give necessary
clearances for the road projects in time so that projects are completed without cost overrun.
(Para 113 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
92. Following Steps have been taken to simplify and rationalise the procedure for obtaining
forest/environment/wild life clearances expeditiously.

24
(i) Minister (RT&H) has written letter to the Minister in charge of Ministry of
Environment and Forests on many occasions to get the clearances expeditiously.
(ii) Secretary (RT&H) has also taken up this issue with Secretary (Environment and
Forests) get the clearance expeditiously.
(iii) For simplification and rationalise of procedure in order to make the award process of
Road projects faster and ‘For Streamlining the procedure for obtaining clearances
expeditiously”, the meeting of Committee of Secretaries (CoS), under the chairmanship
of Cabinet Secretary has been scheduled on 25
th July, 2012.
93. For Co-ordination with State Government following steps have been taken:
(a) State Support Agreement has been signed with 28 State Governments.
(b) State-level Co-ordination Committee have been step-up under the Chairmanship of
respective Chief Secretaries.
(c) Delegation of powers has been made Regional Offices (ROs) of NHAI for expeditious
implementation of road projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
94. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the concerted efforts
of the Central and State Governments will result in timely completion of road projects
without cost overrun.

25
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry will
improve its spending pattern in the coming years and utilize funds adequately. The
Committee finds that the reasons given by the Ministry for under-utilization of funds are
of routine nature. Funds under-utilization can be minimized by proper planning and
coordination with various agencies. (Para 11)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry will
pursue its case with Planning Commission for getting adequate budgetary support so that
ongoing national highways and other road projects are not delayed for want of funds.
(Para 14)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 17)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that development of NHDP
and non-NHDP national highways should be given equal importance by the Government. The
Committee may be apprised on the original cost of Munger rail-cum-road bridge work and
the expenditure incurred so far. (Para 20)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and recommends that national
highways in the North-Eastern Region of the country should get required funds to make
them all-weather motorable roads, where connectivity is a big problem. (Para 24)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that planned and
coordinated efforts by the Ministry will ensure that the project is implemented as per its
scheduled date. (Para 27)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry may fix
new target in future, taking into consideration the ground realities faced by them in
construction of new highways in the country. (Para 30)
The Committee is not convinced with the argument that absence of the regular
Chairman has not in any way affected the proficiency of NHAI and that rather there have
been improvement in work awarded. If the Committee buys the argument of the Ministry,
then it is implied that there is no need to have a regular head of NHAI. The Committee
again recommends that Government should ensure that NHAI or similar organization should
not be without a regular head for long. (Para 33)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that rehabilitation of
Mahatma Gandhi Setu gets due priority from both the Central and State Governments
taking into consideration the safety of road users. (Para 36)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is, however,
constrained to note that there is no specific plan for taking up the project of connectivity
of Kandla Port which is pending for years. The Committee may be informed of the steps
taken in this regard. (Para 40)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 43)
25

26
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and expects the Ministry to apprise
it the status of various ongoing projects under roads of inter-state connectivity and of
economic importance. (Para 47)
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways will get the
required funds at RE stage for maintenance of national highways so that these national
highways remain motorable for all the time of the year. (Para 50)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the initiatives taken
by the Ministry for maintenance and repair of national highways with the available
resources would yield the desired outcome. (Para 53)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 56)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 65)
The Committee hopes that the proposed 12 Institutes of Driving Training and
Research (IDTRs) during 2012-13 are established on priority so that drivers in unorganized
sector get proper training and education on road safety and related issues. (Para 71)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the funds allocated
under National Highway Accident Relief Scheme are spent judiciously by the agencies
involved in providing accident relief at national highways. (Para 74)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 78)
The Committee may be apprised on the review of progress of projects sanctioned
during 2010-11 under strengthening of public transport system. (Para 81)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 84)
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways may pursue
with the Ministry of Finance for getting exemption to allow booking of expenditure in excess
of 33% so that reduction of funds for various schemes at RE stage are minimized.
(Para 88)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the concerted efforts
of the Central and State Governments will result in timely completion of road projects
without cost overrun. (Para 94)

27
ANNEXURE

28

29
ANNEXURE – I
(vide para no.16)
STATEMENT SHOWING THE STATUS/DETAILS OF LOANS
Agency Loan Details of Date of Effective Date of Loan Final Amount Amt. Utilized Amt. Undisbursed
No. Project Agreement date of Closing sanctioned of loan till date Utilized Amount
Loan t ill date
in %
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
ADB 1747- Surat-Manor 5.10.2000 8.11.2000 30.9.2005 USD USD USD 100.00 0.00
IND Tollway Project Closed 16,50,00,000 14,97,40,000 14,97,40,000
1274- ADB III, Total 12.9.1996 29.6.2002 USD USD USD 100.00 0.00
IND 5 Road Works Closed 24,50,00,000 23,19,00,000 23,19,00,000
1839- Western 14.12.2001 4.2.2002 30.06.2008 USD USD USD 100.00 0.00
IND Transport Closed 24,00,00,000 14,56,02,000 14,56,02,000
Corridor Project
1944- East-West 25.8.2003 19.11.2003 30.6.2008 USD USD USD 99.94 181000
IND corridor Project extended 32,00,00,000 32,00,00,000 31,98,19,000
upto
30.6.2009
2029- National 27.10.2004 24.1.2005 30.6.2008 USD USD USD 99.90 398000
IND Highways extended 40,00,00,000 40,00,00,000 39,96,02,000
Corridor Sector-I upto
Projects 31.12.2009
2527- National Highway Corridor (Sector) 1 Project USD USD USD 100.00 0
IND (Supplementary) 10,00,00,000 10,00,00,000 10,00,00,000
2154- National 15.12.2005 20.02.2006 31.12.2008 USD USD USD 95.03 19880000
IND Highways extended 40,00,00,000 40,00,00,000 38,01,20,000
Corridor Sector II upto
Projects 31.12.2009
TOTAL : USD USD USD 98.83 USD
1,87,00,00,000 1,74,72,42,000 1,72,67,83,000 2,04,59,000

30
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
WB 4764- Lucknow 18.11.2005 28.12.2005 30.6.2010 USD USD USD 97.08 12554791.74
IN Muzaffarpur 62,00,00,000 62,00,00,000 60,74,45,208
National
Highway
Project
(LMNHP)
4719- Allahabad 16.12.2003 15.3.2004 30.6.2009 USD USD USD 100.00 0.00
IN Bypass Project 24,00,00,000 21,56,83,148 21,56,83,148
(ABP)
4622- Grand Trunk 27.7.2001 21.11.2001 30.6.2008 USD USD USD 100.00 0.00
IN Road Improvement Closed 58,90,00,000 41,34,50,486 41,34,50,486
Project (GTRIP)
4559- Third National 11.8.2000 2.10.2000 31.12.2007 USD USD USD 100.00 0.00
IN Highways Project Closed 51,60,00,000 31,14,46,333 31,14,46,333
(TNHP)
4764- Lucknow, 18.11.2005 28.12.2005 30.6.2010 USD USD USD 97.98 12554791.74
IN Muzaffarpur 62,00,00,000 62,00,00,000 60,74,45,208
National Highway
Project (LMNHP)
T
OTAL: USD USD USD 99.20 USD
1,96,50,00,000 1,56,05,79,967 1,54,80,25,175 1,25,54,792
JBIC IDP- Construction of 24.1.1994 24.1.1994 3.11.2005 10037 7514.97 74.87
91 bridge over Closed Million Yen Million Yen
Yamuna at
Allahabad/Naini
with Approach
road in U.P.
IDP- Chilakaluripet- 24.1.1994 24.1.1994 6.11.2003 11360 6748.52 59.41
92 Vijayawada section - Closed Million Yen Million Yen
Widening to four
lane including

31
strengthing of
existing two lane
of km. 355 to
km. 434 on
NH-5 in AP
IDP- Jagatpur- 28.5.1995 28.5.1995 12.1.2005 5836 3541.24 60.68
100 Chandikhol section- Closed Million Yen Million Yen
Widening to four
lane including
strengthing on
NH-5 in AP
IDP- Ghaziabad-Hapur 28.2.1995 28.2.1995 12.2.2004 4827 2795.29 57.91
101 section including Closed Million Yen Million Yen
construction of
Hapur Bypass in
UP - Widening
and strengthing
of NH-24
IDP- Construction of 24.1.1994 24.1.1994 3.11.2005 10037 7514.97 74.87
91 bridge over Closed Million Yen Million Yen
Yamuna at
Allahabad/Naini
with Approach
road in U.P.
T
OTAL : 32060.00 20600.92 64.25
Million Yen Million Yen

32
Statement showing current status of the projects
32
1. West Bengal 52.2 December, 2012
Haldia Port Connectivity (NH-41) from Kolaghat to (NH 41)
Haldia in West Bengal 6.125 HPL
Link Rd
2. Odisha
Paradip Port Connectivity (NH-5A) from Chandikhole 77 Completed
to Paradip in Orissa
3. Andhra Pradesh
Visakhapatnam Port Connectivity (Port Road) in 12.5 Completed
Andhra Pradesh
4. Tamil Nadu Phase-I : Sea Completed
Chennai-Ennore Port Connectivity in Tamil Nadu Protection Work
Phase-II : 9km. (TPP Road) 9
Phase-III-15km. 15
(MoRR + IRR + 1.6 km EE + 3 groynes) June, 2013
Phase-IV : 6 km. 6
Balance EE
5. Elevated Road from Gate No. 10 to Maduravoyal on 19 September, 2013
NH-4 under NHDP Phase VII on BOT
6. Tuticorin Port Connectivity Project on NH 7A in 47.2 September, 2012
Tamil Nadu
7. Kerala 17.2 May, 2014
Cochin Port Connectivity to ICTT, Vallarpadam, Cochin
4-laning of NH-47 from km. 348.4 to km. 358.75 Cochin. 10.40 Completed
8. Karnataka 37.5 December, 2012
New Mangalore Port Connectivity Project on NH 17, 13
and 48 in Karnataka
9. Goa 18.3 W ork held
Mormugao Port Connectivity on NH 17 B in Goa up due to
court case
10. Maharashtra 30 Completed
JNPT Package-I: Four laning of NH 4B and NH 4
JNPT Package-II : Four laning of SH 54 and Aamra 14.4 Completed
Marg including Panvel Creek Bridge)

33
MINUTES

34

35
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18 th October, 2012 in Room No. 074,
Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
6. Dr. Kruparani Killi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shrimati Ranee Narah
9. Shri Prabodh Panda
10. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered and adopted the draft reports on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its (i) One Hundred Sixty Eighth
Report on the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and Challenges; (ii) One
Hundred Sixty Ninth Report on the Helicopter Operations in India; (iii) One Hundred Seventy
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) – Ministry of Civil Aviation;  and (iv) One
Hundred Seventy Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) – Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways, with minor modifications.
35
*** Relate to other matters.

36
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.20 
P.M.
*** Relate with other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.