 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
336
_ 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY SIXTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty Second Report on the subject ‘Issues related to Security 
in Civil Aviation Sector’ 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY SIXTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty Second Report on the subject ‘Issues related to Security 
in Civil Aviation Sector’ 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii 
4. REPORT                                1-15 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   16 
6. ANNEXURE         17-34 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
35-37


i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Smt. Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Thirty Sixth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Twenty Second Report on the subject  ‘Issues related to Security in Civil Aviation 
Sector’. 
2. The Three Hundred Twenty Second Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  31st March, 
2022 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Twenty Second Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
28th June, 2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  15th 
December, 2022.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 15, 2022                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 25, 1944 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AEP Aerodrome Entry Permit  
APAC Asia-Pacific 
ASG Aviation Security Group  
ASTI Aviation Security Training Institute  
ATRS Automated Tray Retrieval System  
AvSec Aviation Secutrity 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security  
BDDS Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad 
CACS Centralized Access Control System  
CISF Central Industrial Security Force  
DFMD Door Frame Metal Detector  
DG Director General 
DRDO Defence Research and Development Organisation 
ECIL Electronics Corporation of India Limited 
FBS Full Body Scanner  
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
HHMD Hand Held Metal Detector  
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 
LWE Left-Wing Extremism  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs  
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoU Memrandum of Understanding 
NCASP National Civil Aviation Security Programme  
NSG National Security Guard  
NTRO National Technical Research Organisation 
PIDS Perimeter Intrusion Detection System  
QR Quick Response 
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RDE Radiological Detection Equipment  
SITC Supply, Installing, Training and Commencing  
SOP Standard Operating Procedure  
SPG Special Protection Group 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as contained in its T hree Hundred Twenty 
Second Report on ‘Issues related to Security in Civil Aviation Sector’ which was presented to 
both the Houses of Parliament on 31st March, 2022.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 28th June, 2022 in respect 
of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies hav e been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  13, 14, 54 and 64  
Total: 4 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 15, 19, 22, 46, 52, 53 and 56  
Total: 8 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 31, 60 and 63  
Total: 3 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil  
Total: Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
 
Initiatives by BCAS in Civil Aviation Security  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes the various initiatives taken by the BCAS, which is the main 
regulator for governing security in the Civil Aviation Sector in the country. It also notes the 
responsibilities and initiatives taken by various Aviation Security Groups (ASGs) like CISF, 
Airport Security Units/State Police, besides the role played by the various airlines and airport 
operators in maintaining security at Airports. The Committee also n otes the significance, the 
Government attributes to the Civil Aviation Sector, which is brought out in the policy document 
titled ‘Strategy for New India @75’, which has envisaged to expand airport capacity by more 
than five times the present capacity to h andle one billion trips a year. The Committee feels that 
this fast tracked and unprecedented growth in the Civil Aviation Sector would require parallel 
enhancement of security infrastructure in this sector as well. 
 (Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The observation of the Committee is noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The exponential growth in the sector would be a challenge for the agencies involved in 
providing security, since trained security personnel, security infrastructure and related security 
protocols, needs to keep pace with growth.   A need for close cooperation and coordination with 
all the agencies, namely Government, State Police and Private agencies and other stakeholders 
involved in providing security, would also be required.  Hence, the Committee recommends that 
the world’s best security practices should be followed to cater to the increased security 
requirements.   
 (Para 14) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 

3 
 
State-of-the-Art Technological Solutions for Security at Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee is also of the opinion that the Ministry should explore the feasibility of 
Biometric screening of passengers at airports, using tools such as facial recognition, fingerprint 
and retinal scans which is presently being used at many airports worldwide. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of retinal scans for frisking passengers, as 
the retinal scan data of most of the domestic passengers are available in the A adhaar database. 
It would also like to point out that biometric security is non -intrusive and faster than 
conventional screening, which leads to faster screening of passengers and leads to less crowding 
at airports and is therefore being introduced in many airports abroad. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the global best practices for biometric scanning and screening of passengers 
should be introduced in the country. 
 (Para 54) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 In order to provide seamless and hassle free passengers journey experience on domestic 
sector, a Digi -Yatra project is underway. It is based on facial recognition technology. This is 
based on mobile wallet based identity management platform. In first phase, Digiyatra at seven 
Airports namely Varanasi, Vijayawada, Kolkata and Pune, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Delhi are 
being implemented. 
 
Miscellaneous  
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee also feels that the Ministry should consider a policy to provide a small 
complimentary water bottle to the passengers in the aircraft, keeping in view the tradition of the 
country to give highest regard to guests and offer water on arrival. 
 (Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 
 
 

4 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Role of Various Agencies in Aviation Security  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that presently, there is a multiplicity of agencies involved in 
providing security at airports viz., the CISF, Airlines Operators, Airport Operators, State Police 
and NSG. The Committee also notes that all the aforesaid individual agencies are looking after 
the airport security functions in additio n to their other roles and responsibilities. For example, 
CISF which plays a prime role in airport security presently provides security cover to 353 
critical infrastructure facilities like nuclear installations, space establishments, seaports, power 
plants, important Government buildings, iconic heritage monuments, Delhi metro, besides 
security cover to some private corporate establishments also. The other entities such as airlines 
operators, airport operators, State police and NSG are engaged in their role  of airport security 
in addition to their main responsibilities, which is completely different from their role as airport 
security providers. The Committee recommends that the airport operators/ management should 
take the opinion of Ministry of Home Affair s, before purchasing security equipment at airports 
and also ensure that they should conform to the best standards of security worldwide.    
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The security functions associated with 
various agencies at airports are in conformity with Aircraft (Security) Rules 2011. Technical 
specifications/QRs of all the security equipment deployed/installed/to be deployed at the airport 
are issued by DG, BCAS under the Aircraft (Secur ity) Rules 2011 and National Civil Aviation 
Security Programme (NCASP). Further, these technical specifications/QRs are finalised by a 
Technical Committee of BCAS in consultation  with Central Security Agencies;  Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA);  Defence Resea rch and Development Organisation ( DRDO); National 
Technical Research Organisation ( NTRO); Special Protection Group ( SPG) etc. which is in 
conformity to the best standards of security. Airport Operators procures the security equipment, 
as per the minimum standard/QRs decided by BCAS. 

5 
 
Initiatives by BCAS in Civil Aviation Security 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should set up dedicated Institutions 
across the country to cater to needs for increased manpower in all  the security aspects of the 
aviation sector.  
 (Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The recommendations of the Committee noted. There is a training division in BCAS 
which administers and coordinates all tr aining requirements of increase d manpower. Trainings 
are imparted by dedicated 30 Aviation Security Training Institutes (ASTIs) across the countries. 
Further, a survey/resurvey Committee under BCAS considers augmentation proposal for CISF 
manpower requirements across airports. 
 
Categorization of airports in India  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that out of 118 operational airports, only 64 airports are under 
CISF cover, while 54 airports have no such cover. Further, out of the 28 hyper -sensitive 
airports, 21 have CISF cover; while for the 62 sensitive airports, only 39 have been given CISF 
cover. The Committee recommends that the Government should strive to bring all the 
operational airports under the ambit of CISF security cover.   
 (Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 CISF is deployed at 65 Airports out of which 21 are hypersenstive airports. The rest 
seven hyper sensitive airports are Hindustan Aeronautics Limited ( HAL) (Bengaluru), Kargil, 
Pathankot, Begumpet (Hyderabad), Juhu (Mumbai), Safdarjung (Delhi) and Thoise(J&K). Kargil 
and Thosie are mostly used to carry armed forces. HAL (Bangaluru), Begumpet (Hyderab ad), 
Juhu (Mumbai) and Safadarju ng (Delhi) have no passenger flights. Other non -CISF deployed 
airports are under security cover of State police etc. Moreover, t he CISF cover to an airport is 
decided in consultation with MHA. However, the recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 

6 
 
Vacancy position of CISF at airports  
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that though the vacancy position of CISF at airports, as compared 
to the total sanctioned strength is satisfactory, yet there is a vacancy of 1166 security personnel. 
The Committee is of the opinion that in view of the high -tech methods of intrusion used by the 
subversive elements at airports, at le ast the full sanctioned strength of CISF should be provided 
at airports in the country. The Committee also recommends that periodic surveys should be 
carried out to assess the changing threat perception at all airports in the country and 
accordingly, trained security personnel should be provided at airports in a time -bound manner. 
Continuous monitoring should also be done as regards the implementation of various security 
rules and regulations and surprise checks should be carried out to test professional ef ficiency 
and alertness of the security staff and the operational preparedness of various agencies. 
 (Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The recommendations of the Committee are noted. On the recommendation of manpower 
surveys/re-survey committee under BCAS, MHA releases the sanction for CISF manpower for 
an airport. Based on sanctioned strength, CISF deploys the manpower. Any gap between 
deployed strength and sanctioned strength  is a dynamic matter and CISF endeavours to reduce 
the gap. 
 
4.2 In order to have periodic survey to assess the changing threat perception at all airports in 
India, there is a Committee for Assessing Security and Risk Vulnerability Assessment of 
Airports in India under MHA and BCAS is its member convener.  
 
4.3 Further, there is well laid down system for regular audit, inspection, surprise 
check/dummy test as per the annual quality control function calendar issued by DG, BCAS and  
it’s a continuous and ongo ing process to test the professional efficiency  and alertness of the 
security staff  and operational  preparedness of various agencies.  
 

7 
 
Measures to Improve Airport Security by CISF  
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee notes the various roles of CISF and the various initiatives taken by CISF 
to ensure security at airports in coordination with BCAS. The Committee notes that in addition 
to imparting training on various aspects of its core duty of security at airports, the CISF also 
imparts training for soft skills to improve upon the conduct of CISF personnel involved in 
various security functions viz., appropriate behaviour patterns, language & accent, body 
language, service orientation, presentability and dressing sense etc. The Committee during th e 
course of its deliberations with the Ministry, have repeatedly pointed out the quality of the 
security staff at airports and is of the view that the security personnel are the first point of 
contact for any airline passenger after embarking from an aircr aft, be it domestic or 
international passenger. As such, the security personnel sets the first impression on the 
passenger, about the city or the country. It is especially important in case of a foreign traveller 
and leaves a lasting impression on the mind  of the tourist about the country or the behavioural 
aspects of its people. Hence, imparting training in soft skills to the passenger frisking security 
personnel, assumes great significance, especially their behaviour, proper and presentable 
uniform or body language towards the passenger. The Committee strongly recommends that the 
Ministry in coordination with the MHA should ensure that CISF and other security staff at 
airports may be sensitized adequately in soft skills, so that they perform their security  duties 
efficiently without diluting the security activities/responsibilities. The Committee notes that SOP 
for persons with special needs or ‘Divyaangjan’ has been drafted by BCAS and same will be 
finalized after receipt of comments of general public/ sta keholders. The Committee is of the 
opinion that special care should be taken to deal with passengers with special needs or 
‘Divyaangjan’ and therefore, recommends that the SOP may be expeditiously finalized.    
(Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The observation of the Committee is noted.  Considering soft skills as an integral 
component of functioning of CISF personnel deployed at airport, CISF imparts necessary soft 
skill trainings to its personnel.   
 

8 
 
5.2 So far as SOP for persons with special needs or ‘Divyaangjan’ is concerned, BCAS has 
issued a detailed and exhaustive guideline/SOP for screening of persons with special needs 
and/or individual with reduced mobility vide Avsec Circular 01/2022 dated: 03.02.2022 (copy of 
SOP at Annexure A). 
 
State-of-the-Art Technological Solutions for Security at Airports   
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee during its deliberations with the Ministry has often pointed out that at few 
of the airports, there are long passenger queues during peak hours. In view of the Government 
guidelines for avoiding public gatherings in the context of the prevalence of Covid -19 pandemic, 
more steps may be taken to resolve the issue. The Committee also notes that the Ministry 
proposes to increase the number of flights. The Comm ittee observes that at most of the airports 
in the country, Door Frame Metal Detectors (DFMDs), Hand Held Metal Detectors (HHMDs) 
and physical frisking is done on random basis. The Committee is of the opinion that the present 
system of DFMD/HHMD, besides b eing obsolete technology, is intrusive on the privacy of 
passengers. In this context, the Committee recommends that in addition to steps taken to ease 
queues, the Ministry may also expedite its proposal for installation of Full Body Scanners at 
airports, w hich would enhance the technology of frisking of passengers and lead to faster 
clearance of queues at frisking points. Besides, the number of frisking counters may also be 
increased at airports and adequate trained personnel should be posted to man these c ounters 
effectively. 
 (Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Sincere efforts are being made to ease congestion at airports in consultation with all 
stakeholders. The matter is deliberated at high level and all possible options have been evaluated. 
Accordingly, necessary directions on space re -alignment, manpower increase, technological 
intervention etc. have been issued to all concerned. 
6.2 BCAS has issued an AvSec Circular no 05/2019 elaborating technical specifications of 
Full Body Scanner (FBS). The setting up of FBS at al l Hyper sensitive airports are closely being 
monitored by the Ministry. Its testing at various airports is at advance stage and it is likely that 
the same will start to be set up shortly in phased manner.  

9 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry, wherein it has been stated that FBS shall 
be installed at all airports at pre -embarkation security checks in a phased manner and the 
airport operators have also been directed to install FBS replacing t he DFMD. The Committee 
notes that airport operators are obliged to procure and provide only those security equipment 
that meet BCAS specifications. The Committee is of the opinion that such an important issue, 
which has security implications, should not be left to the airport operators only as BCAS is more 
competent in technical matters regarding security as compared to airport operators. Hence, the 
BCAS should not only specify the security equipment to be installed at airports, but also engage 
itself proactively with the airport operators to train personnel to use it and also maintain them.  
 (Para 53) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The recommendations of the Committee noted.  There is a technical specifications 
Committee headed by BCAS and comprising M embers from all stakeholders which considers 
world-wide new technology in view of the Airports functions and recommends the best 
minimum technical standards. On the basis of r ecommendation of the technical C ommittee, 
airport operators procure and install the secu rity equipments by following minimum standards at 
airports. BCAS also provides training to personnel to operate security equipment and interpret 
the results. 
 
Radiological Detection Equipment (RDE)  
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes the pro gress of installation and operationalization of RDE projects 
and recommends that the work may be completed as per the set deadline. The Committee may 
also be informed whether RDE projects would be implemented at remaining airports, besides the 
24 airports in Phase 1 and 2. 
 (Para 56) 
 
 
 

10 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The RDE project was envisaged for 24 Airports in which 14 Airports were covered under 
RDE project Phase -I and 10 airports under RDE project Phase II. This is as per the minutes of 
the meeting of Group of Officers held in Cabinet Secretariat on 25.03.2014.  
8.2 The MoU was signed between BCAS & ECIL on 26 thMarch 2014 and the work of 
Supply, Installing, Training and Commencing (SITC) at 14 Airports has been completed on 31 st 
March 2020. The names of 14 Airports where Phase-I is completed, are given below:   
Amritsar, Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Calicut, Chennai, Cochin, Delhi, Guwahati, Goa, 
Hyderabad, Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, Trivandrum. 
8.3 The MoU for RDE phase-II at remaining following 10 airports is under finalisation:  
Mangalore, Jaipur, Coimbatore, Pune, Tiruchirappalli, Varanasi, Bagdogra, Madurai, 
Bhubaneswar, Gaya. 
8.4 At present there is no plan/Budget provision for exte nsion of this project at other airports 
apart from these 24 Airports. 

11 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS) 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that presently BDDS is operationalised at 20 airports and non -
operationalised at 44 remaining airports and assistance of local police/ NSG is being sought for 
attending to such threats. The Committee notes that only 20 airports have BDDS cover till date. 
It is also observed that at some places where CISF does not have BDDS support, support of local 
police is being sought. The Committee is of the opini on that local police may not have the 
technical competence or the desired high -tech equipment to dispose of bomb threats. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that BDDS should be engaged at the earliest at all the 
remaining 44 airports as well to counter b omb threats in consultation and coordination with the 
MHA. The Committee also recommends that the BDDS squad should have the best international 
pedigree dogs which can be engaged for security at airports.  
(Para 31) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 There are regulatory provisions prescribed by BCAS for having BDDS at all airports 
manned by CISF. In all fresh augmentation proposals, the provision for BDDS has been 
included. Airports are also gradually extending support for BDDS. However, the 
recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation and  expresses its concern over the 
fact that BDDS is non-operationalised at 44 airports in the country which can prove to be a 
major security hazard as absence of BDDS a s even one airport can act as a weak link for 
the entire Indian airspace. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take up this issue 
with CISF at the earliest and ensure operationalization of BDDS at all the remaining 
airports.    
 

12 
 
State-of-the-Art Technological Solutions for Security at Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee, during the course of its deliberations with the Ministry, had stressed 
upon the need for installation of sophisticated and State -of-the-Art security equipment and best 
security practices used globally, at all the Indian airports, to ensure fool proof security. The 
Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the BCAS to install the latest security gadgets at 
airports viz., Centralized Access Control System (CACS); Full Body Scanners; Radiological 
Detection Equipment (RDE); Perimeter Intrusion Detection System (PIDS; and Automated Tray 
Retrieval System (ATRS). The Committee notes that  installation of most of the aforesaid security 
systems have been recently initiated or at planning stage only and that too, only at the major 
airports only. The Committee notes that there are a total of 118 operational airports out of 
which 28 are hyper -sensitive; 62 are sensitive; and 28 normal airports. The Committee notes 
that out of these 118 airports, a miniscule number of airports are proposed to have the security 
cover of aforesaid advanced security apparatus or gadgets. The Committee stresses upon the 
need for fool proof security cover at all the Indian airports and at least at all the 28 hyper -
sensitive and 62 sensitive airports in the near future, especially in North-Eastern Region; Jammu 
& Kashmir; and Left -Wing Extremism (LWE) Regions, keeping i n view the increase in security 
threats due to use of high -tech gadgets even by the terrorists/ extremists, to evade the security 
apparatus at the airports and create terror at airports/ airplanes and disrupt peace and progress 
of the country. In the above  context, the Committee desires to know the details of the plans for 
installation of the aforesaid security apparatus at airports and the number of airports included, 
the stages of implementation and percentage of ground work completed so far, the timeline  
which has been prescribed for the various airports, airport -wise and whether the Ministry has 
been successful in achieving the said timelines. The Committee may also be apprised of the 
deadlines, if any, by which all the airports in the country would get the aforesaid security 
apparatus.  
(Para 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Centralized Access Control System (CACS): Centralized Access Control System is being 
implemented at 48 Airports in the country – 23 Hyper Sensitive Airports and 25 Sensitive 
airports. At these airports Biometric AEP are being issue d. M/s ECIL provided support for 

13 
 
Hardware reader’s integration. The CACS project implementation phase will be completed on 30 
June 2022 at 48 Airports. 
 
2.2 Full Body Scanner (FBS) : BCAS mandate is to imple ment FBS initially at all Hyper -
sensitive airports and then at all sensitive airports. The installation of FBS will be in phased 
manner. The procurement process for FBS by  major Hyper Sensitive airports i.e. Delhi, 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, and AAI has started.   
 
2.3 Radiological Detection Equipment (RDE) :  RDE is to be installed at 24 airports. Under 
Phase-I, it has been installed at 14 Airports and under Phase II, it is envi saged at remaining 10 
airports. MoU is at final stage. RDE phase- I project has been completed on 31 March 2020.  
 
2.4 Perimeter Intrusion Detection System (PIDS): BCAS has mandated to install PIDS at all 
hyper sensitive airports. Further, non-RCS Greenfield airport is to plan for installation of PIDS at 
design stage itself for the purpose of obtaining clearance of design stage security vetting from 
BCAS. PIDS has been installed at Delhi, Bengaluru (partially 4.3 Km) and Hyderabad. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.5 The Committee would like to again emphasize on the need of State -of-the-Art 
Technological Solutions for security at all the Indian airports which rapidly keep changing 
with advancement to technology and ensure a full proof security system. The Committee 
notes the steps being taken by the Mi nistry for installation of CACS, FBS, RDE  and PIDS 
at various airports  and urges the Ministry to expedite and complete the process at all the 
airports. The Committee al so would like to know the status of installation of Automated 
Tray Retrieval System (ATRS) at airports which is in process.  
 
ICAO Aviation Security (AvSec) Rating Procedure  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee appreciates the high security rating of India vis -à-vis Global/ APAC 
Standards. It is of the opinion that BCAS should make it a constant endeavour to make the 
security architecture and procedures dynamic by incorporating new technological advancements 

14 
 
and best practices from across the globe.   It is further recommended that all the Aviation 
Security processes should be streamlined in consultation with the stakeholders. 
 (Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.2 The Committee desires to know the specific steps  taken by the Ministry or the plans 
thereof to make the security structure foolproof by incorporating the best and latest 
technological advancements used at airports worldwide. The Committee also desires to 
know whether there are plans to incorporate the suggestions of all stakeholders in the 
process.  
  

15 
 
  
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil - 
 
***** 

16 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS) 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation and  expresses its concern over the fact that 
BDDS is non -operationalised at 44 airports in the country which can prove to be a major 
security hazard as absence of BDDS a s even one airport can act as a weak link for the 
entire Indian airspace. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take up this issue with 
CISF at the earliest and ensure operationalization of BDDS at all the remaining airports.    
(Para 1.2) 
State-of-the-Art Technological Solutions for Security at Airports  
The Committee would like to again emphasize on the need of State -of-the-Art 
Technological Solutions for security at all the Indian airports which rapidly keep changing 
with advancement to technology and ensu re a full proof security system. The Committee 
notes the steps being taken by the Ministry for installation of CACS, FBS, RDE and PIDS 
at various airports and urges the Ministry to expedite and complete the process at all the 
airports. The Committee also w ould like to know the status of installation of Automated 
Tray Retrieval System (ATRS) at airports which is in process.  
(Para 2.5) 
ICAO Aviation Security (AvSec) Rating Procedure  
The Committee desires to know the specific steps taken by the Ministry or the plans thereof 
to make the security structure foolproof by incorporating the best and latest technological 
advancements used at airports worldwide. The Committee also desires to k now whether 
there are plans to incorporate the suggestions of all stakeholders in the process.  
(Para 3.2) 
 
***** 

17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 

18
Annexure - A

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

1 
 
 
_________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________ 
 
  
35

2 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15 th December, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V.Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A.Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
12. Shri Tapir Gao 
13. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
14. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
15. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
17. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
18. Shri Prince Raj 
19. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
20. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
21. Shri Dushyant Singh 
22. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
23. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
24.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
25. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
36

3 
 
  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members  of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e.,  
 
(i) to consider and adopt the various Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its following Reports;  
a) xxx xxx xxx  
b) xx xxx xxx 
c) xxx xxx xxx 
d) 322nd Report on 'Issues related to Security in Civil Aviation Sector'. 
 
(ii)   xxx xxx xxx 
  
2. The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted the 
draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor modifications of 
typographical and factual errors. 
 
3. The Committee also authorized Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
A.A. Rahim, M.P., to present the abovementioned Reports in Rajya Sabha on 20 th December, 
2022. Shri Ram Margani Bharat, M.P., and in his absence, Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua" 
M.P. were authorized to lay the abovementioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20 th 
December, 2022.  
(After the four draft Reports have been considered and adopted) 
 
Witnesses: - 
   xxx xxx xxx 
4. xxx xxx xxx 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The meeting adjourned at 5:12 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                              Swarabji B.  
15th December, 2022                                                                                                   Director 
 
_______________ 
xxx  Relate to other matters. 
37