 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
307
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Ninety Sixth Report on the subject ‘Role of Highways in 
Nation Building’ 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTH REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Ninety Sixth Report on the subject ‘Role of Highways in Nation 
Building’ 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-vi 
 4. REPORT                                 1-96 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   
6.  
    ANNEXURES          
 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
7. 
97-104
MINUTES
107-136
105-106

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Ninety Sixth Report on the subject ‘Role of Highways in Nation Building’. 
2. The Two Hundred and Ninety Sixth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  28th July, 2021 
to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Ninety Sixth Report were received from the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways on 29th December, 2021. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  31st 
January, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
January 31, 2022                                                     Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
ABS Anti-Lock Braking System 
AE Authority Engineer 
AIS Automotive Industry Standards 
AISC Automotive Industry Standards Certification 
APRAD Asia Pacific Road Accident Database 
APUIAML Andhra Pradesh Urban Infrastructure Asset Management 
Limited 
ASM Agency for Specialized Monitoring 
ATM Automated Teller Machine 
ATN Action Taken Note 
BE Budgetary Estimate 
BNVSAP Bharat New Vehicle Safety Assessment Program 
BOT Build Operate Transfer 
BS Bharat Stage 
CA Chartered Accountant 
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CARE Credit Analysis & Research Ltd 
CBS Combi Brake System 
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
CDA Central Dearness Allowance 
CES Central Engineering Services 
CGM Chief General Manager 
CMV Central Motor Vehicle 
COD Commercial Operation Date 
COS Change of Scope 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CRF Central Road Fund 
CRIF Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
CRISIL Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility  
CVC Chief Vigilance Commission 
DFS Department of Financial Services 
DGM Deputy General Manager 
DL Driving Licence 
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DPR Detailed Project Reports 
DR Direct Recruitment 
DRB Disputes Resolution Board 
DTC Driving Training Centers 
EBP Electronic Bidding Platform 
EI&ISC Economic Importance and Inter State Connectivity Scheme 
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment  
EOT Extension of Time 

iv 
 
EPC Engineering, Procurement, Construction 
EPFO Employees' Provident Fund Organisation 
ETC Electronic Toll Collection 
F&A Finance and Adminsitration 
FY Financial Year 
GAD General Arrangement Drawing 
GoI Government of India 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GSR General Statutory Rules 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HAM Hybrid Annuity Model 
HFL High Flood Level 
HPC High Powered Committee  
HQ Headquarter 
IA Intervention Application 
IAHE Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 
ICEMA Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers' Association 
ICWA Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of India 
IDA Industrial Dearness Allowance 
IDBI Industrial Development Bank of India 
IDTR Institute of Driving and Traffic Research 
IE Independent Engineer  
IFCI Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
IHMCL Indian Highways Management Company Limited 
IIFCL India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
IISSM International Institute of Security and Safety Management 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology  
IL&FS Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services 
ING-IABSE Indian National Group of the International Association for 
Bridge and Structural Engineering 
InvIT Infrastructure Investment Trust 
IPO Initial Public Offering 
IRC Indian Road Congress 
IRQP Improvement of Riding Quality Programme 
IT Information Technology 
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
JOIN Japan Overseas Infrastructure Investment Corporation for 
Transport & Urban Development 
LA Land Acquisition 
LIC Life Insurance Corporation 
LTL Low Tide Level 
LWE Left Wing Extremism 
LWL Low Water Level 
MA Miscellaneous Application 
MCA Model Concession Agreement 
MIS Management Information System 

v 
 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment and Forest and Climate Change 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MSRDC Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation 
NABET National Accreditation Board for Education and Training 
NBFC Non-Banking Financial Company 
NCT National Capital Territory 
NE North-Eastern 
NGO Non Governmental Organization 
NGT National Green Tribunal 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHIT National Highways Infrastructure Trust 
NIIF National Investment and Infrastructure Fund 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NPA Non Performing Assets  
NPCI National Payments Corporation of India 
NSV National Survey Vehicle 
NSWS National Single Window System 
NTA National Testing Agency 
OFC Optical Fibre Cable 
OM Office Memorandum  
OMT Operate, Maintenance and Transfer 
PCU Passenger Car Unit 
PE Private Equity 
PIU Project Implementation Unit 
PMIS Project Monitoring Information System 
PNB Punjab National Bank 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PUC Pollution Under Control 
PUCC Pollution Under Control Certificate 
PWD Public Works Department  
QCI Quality Council of India  
RAMS Road Asset Management System 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RDTC Regional Driving Training Centers  
RFCTLARR Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RIS Reduction in Scope 
RO Regional Office 
ROB Road Over Bridge 
RoW Right of Way  
RSCE Road Safety Engineering Cell 
RTH/RT&H Road Transport and Highways 
RTO Regional Transport Office 
RUB Road Under Bridge 

vi 
 
RVSF Registered Vehicle Scrapping Facility 
SARDP Special Accelerated Road Development Programme 
SARDP-NE Special Accelerated Road Development Programme for 
North-Eastern Region 
SBI State Bank of India 
SEBI Securities and Exchange Board of India 
SLAU Special Land Acquisition Unit 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
SWB Static Weigh Bridge 
TA&FS Technical Approval and Financial Sanction 
TOT Toll, Operate and Transfer 
TRW Transport Research Wing 
UNESCAP United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia 
and the Pacific 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UT Union Territory  
VCF Value Capture Finance 
VVMP Voluntary Vehicle Modernisation Program 
WHO World Health Organization 
WIM Wegh-in-Motion 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT  
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Two 
Hundred Ninety Sixth Report on the subject ‘Role of Highways in Nation Building’ was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 28th July, 2021.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 29 th December, 2021 
in respect of all the observations/ r ecommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:-  
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.: 21, 22, 25, 28, 29, 43, 60, 63, 65, 71, 72, 74, 75, 82, 85, 94, 98, 
130, 139, 147, 190, 292, 294, 297, 299, 304, 307, 308, 312, 313, 332, 336, 337, 339, 
346, 348, 350, 352, 354, 363, 369 and 376.  
Total: 42 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 15, 19, 26, 38, 41, 58, 59, 61, 68, 77, 90, 92, 103, 112, 119, 122, 
123, 135, 137, 142, 145, 153, 154, 156, 158, 163, 165, 166, 170, 177, 179, 180, 183, 
184, 216, 219, 221, 232, 233, 240, 247, 261, 262, 265, 268, 270, 272, 27 4, 276, 277, 
287, 289, 295, 296, 322, 326, 329, 343, 355 and 357. 
Total: 61 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 12, 16, 32, 34, 35, 35A, 35B, 35C, 3 5D, 68B, 84, 120, 125, 126, 
167, 189, 192, 228, 229, 241, 243A, 245, 246, 251, 255, 273, 274B, 279, 280A, 282, 
299A, 316, 317, 318, 324, 370, 372 and 374. 
Total: 38 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Min istry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: 45, 64, 80, 87, 96, 106, 113, 114, 133, 143, 144, 146, 150, 155, 157, 
161, 164, 168, 175, 185, 193, 196, 203, 217, 218, 220, 285, 301, 342, 359 and 360. 
Total: 31 
 
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those 
recommendations/observations which have been categorized as interim replies by the 
Committee should be furnished at the earliest. 

2 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee notes that Highway Safety has been given 35% weightage in NHAI’s 
parameters for assessment and ranking of National Highways. Number of accidents and 
deaths happening on the particular National Highway must be taken into account while 
calculating such scores. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. As per the highway rating criteria for evaluation of Highway Safety scores, 4 marks 
have been allocated to Accidents per km per annum and 4 marks have been allocated to 
Accident Severity Index (fatalities per 100 accidents). 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take steps to assign scores to all 
the National Highways projects, including the ones executed by State Government PWDs, 
after assessing their quality of construction. A central database may store the scores obtained 
by the different road projects of each concessionaire/contractor, which may be analyzed to 
ascertain the quality of work executed by all the concessionaires. Th e Committee 
recommends that the quality of previous works carried out by the concessionaires should also 
be a factor, besides the bid amount, during the awarding process of a road project tender. 
This would ensure that concessionaires that produce quality roads are not left out of having 
the opportunity to work on a project because of minor differences in bidding amounts. 
(Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. Ministry has issued a letter no. RW/NH-33044/15/2021-S&R (P&P) dated 16.04.2021 
regarding Highways Rating Criteria and SOP for undivided carriageway upto 2 -Lane with 
paved shoulders on National Highways. Similarly, NHAI has prepared Highways Rating 
Criteria and SOP for undivided carriageways (four lanes and above) vide its letter 
NHAI/HO/Highways rating/2020 dated 07.07.2020. The rating shall be used to prioritize the 

3 
 
allocation of funds for improving/widening/strengthening different sections of NH on 
different elements of efficiency, safety and user services. The r ating shall also help in 
performance appraisal of deployed contractor/concessionaire/maintaining agency. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider breaking down big road 
projects into smaller chunks so as to attract the interest of the small contractors themselves. 
The Committee feels that provisions should be in place to ensure that there is a well -defined 
lower limit, below which bids for a road project would not be accepted. The Committee 
agrees with the ap prehension raised by the Member of the Committee regarding a likely hit 
on the quality of work that can be carried out by a contractor who bids substantially lower 
than the approved project cost. The Committee believes that such bids are made with the sole  
intent of winning the bid and more often than not, it would not be possible for such bidders to 
do quality work with such low bids. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
may lay even greater focus on arriving at accurate estimates for the  project cost for a given 
road project and specify an upper and lower limits within which bids can be placed. 
(Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. The Ministry has been able to reduce the overall cost of development of highways 
through increasing competition by right -sizing of construction packages to ensure optimum 
competition during the bidding stage and refinement of eligibility criteria to promot e 
competition. For example, flagship corridors like Delhi Mumbai Expressway and Delhi 
Amritsar Katra Expressway have been segmented into packages of INR ~ 1,000 Cr which has 
made it accessible for upcoming firms. Combined with improvements to the model 
concession agreements the competitiveness of the overall sector has been improved 
significantly.  
3.2. The reduction in average project package sizes (~55 km before FY 17 to ~ 30 km 
currently) led to higher competition - average no. of bids from 5 – 7 in FY 2 0 to 15+ in Q4 
FY 21. This has led to higher discounts competition and increased average discount on EPC 
projects from 7% in FY 20 to 10% in FY 21. 
3.3. The Ministry adheres to the procurement guidelines set by the Ministry of Finance for 
procurement, bidd ing and awarding contracts. The authority is cognizant about such 
aggressive bidding practices by some contractors and has installed checks and balances to 
ensure that project completion is not hindered due to lack of financial resources required for 
the project. One such step is the mandating of the contractors and concessionaires to provide 
additional performance security in cases where significant discounted prices are quoted. 
Recommendation/Observation  

4 
 
4. The Committee recommends that thorough quality checks may be performed before 
the issuance of completion certificate for any NH project, with special focus on rigorous 
testing of quality of the construction material used. The frequency of quality checks 
performed during the construction stage of a proj ect may be increased suitably and 
independent third party audits may be conducted more often in order to deter the connivance 
of the Authority’s Engineer with the road contractors. The Committee further desires that 
extensive quality checks may be performe d when the defect liability period of a project is 
nearing its end, so as to ensure that the issues arising near the end of the defect liability 
period are addressed by the contractor before their liability for the same is over. 
(Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. The quality checks before issue of completion certificate for any NH projects are 
being carried out as specified under Schedule -K of EPC contract and Schedule -I of BOT 
contract. 
 Random quality inspection by engaging retired Senior Govt. officials  are being 
carried out in order to deter the connivance of the Authority’s Engineer with the road 
contractors. 
 During Defect Liability Period, the equipment based monitoring at specified interval 
is being carried out. 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should look into the authenticity 
of the quality checks cleared by road projects, which later performed poorly and/or 
deteriorated at a quick pace, since the same alludes to either the insufficiency of the qualit y 
checks in place, or the connivance of the officials/engineers in charge of conducting the 
quality checks. A suitable mechanism may be put in place to ensure that the IRC guidelines 
are followed in the execution of road works without fail. 
(Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. To ensure that the requisite quality standards are followed during the execution of the 
project and work is carried out as per specifications and standards, the frequency of test 
checks has been prescribed. 
5.2. NHAI also conducts ran dom Quality Inspection of the projects by involving retired 
senior government officials, as Independent Team Leaders.   Accordingly, quality checks are 
being carried out on various projects under implementation from time to time. 

5 
 
5.3. Standard Operating Pro cedure for action against the Consultant/Contractor has been 
notified by MoRTH vide letter No. RW/NH -33044/76/2021-S&R(P&B) dated 06.10.2021 
and 07.10.2021. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6.  The Committee feels that Infrastructure Finance Companies such as IIFCL play an 
important role in meeting the huge financial requirements of the road infrastructure sector in 
India. The Committee therefore desires to know the reasons for not permitting IFCs to lend to 
InvITs and desires that NHAI may grant such permission to IFCs with suitable limits, if need 
be, so as to ensure InvITs attract the amount of targeted funds. 
              (Para 43) 
  
 Reply of Ministry 
 
6.1    It is understood that IIFCL has been recently permitted by RBI to invest and lend 
funds to Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InvITs). We are in discussion with IIFCL for 
investment in units of NHIT in current round and for providing debt in future rounds. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made at para 43 of this Report and 
desires that suitable steps may be taken to permit IIFCL to play a bigger role in long -term 
lending to the road infrastructure sector, by way of subscribing to corporate bonds , investing 
in InvITs, and by allowing IIFCL to lend directly to NHAI and State Departments concerned 
to finance long-term road projects. 
(Para 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. NHAI sets up its bonds issues (private placement) through EBP platform of the stock 
exchanges and always invite all the investors (Corporate, QIBs, Bank and NBFC) without 
any restriction on any category/investor. This is in line with the guidelines issued by SEBI 
and negotiation for investment on bilateral basis is not permitted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the current mechanism in 
place to deter the connivance of the Authority’s Engineers with contractors/concessionaires. 

6 
 
Cases where roads deteriorate shortly after their completion should be looked into a nd the 
basis on which completion certificate for the project had been issued, should be scrutinized. 
Accountability may be fixed in cases wherein guidelines have been blatantly ignored during 
execution of road projects. 
(Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. Random quality inspection by engaging retired Senior Govt. officials are being 
carried out in order to deter the connivance of the Authority’s Engineer with the road 
contractors. 
 Equipment based monitoring at specified intervals has been made mandatory in all the 
projects of NHAI. 
 Directions for suitable action against contractors/consultants in cases of default has 
been specified. 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee recommends that it should be made compulsory to submit video 
recordings of the specifications of the completed works, wherever possible, confirming that 
all works have been carried out by the concessionaire/contractors, before the grant of 
completion certificate of the road project to any concessionaire/contractor. This would 
ensure that ancillary specifications such as road signs, markings, shoulders etc. are duly 
completed as per the provisions of the contract. 
(Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 As regard to compulsory submission of video recording to ensure specification of 
completed work before grant of completion certificate of the road project, Ministry vide 
circular No. RW/NH/33044/32/2019. -S&R (P&B) dated 13.11.2019 made it mandatory to 
carry out detailed condition survey of road by the AE/I/DPR consultant using network survey 
Vehicle (NSV). The NSV survey must record: 
Inventory of road such as GPS coordinates, pavement type, pavement width, terrain, 
land uses, shoulder type and width drain type and width, Median type and width, 
wayside amenities, crash barriers, road sig nage etc. Besides condition of road such 
as roughness, rutting, distress (cracking potholes, bleeding, surface failure etc.)  
The time intervals for carrying out NSV survey are as under: 
i. Before start of work. 
ii. Before issue of provisional/final completion certificate 

7 
 
iii. Every six months after completion. 
These data of condition survey shall be uploaded on PMIS Portal. 
Accordingly, videography of completed work is invariably prepared and furnished as 
an authentic documentary evidence of completion of works, without which completion 
certificate is not issued.   
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee observes that land acquisition issues are at the core of delays faced in 
road projects. The Committee takes note of the guidelines issued by the Ministry to 
streamline acquisition of land for NH projects in the country and recommends that the 
Ministry may ensure that these guidelines may be re viewed from time to time, incorporating 
suitable modifications to simplify the process of land acquisition and ironing out the various 
constraints faced in land acquisition. 
(Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The observation of the Committee has been not ed and it has been decided to review 
the LA guidelines/manual. In the first instance, this Ministry has requested all concerned 
agencies to suggest necessary modification that needs to be incorporated in the proposed 
revised guidelines.   
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take immediate steps to ensure that 
adequate manpower is present with the land acquisition units at the field level across the 
country. The alignment given for any given project  should be finalized only after taking in 
inputs from all stakeholders and the local population, with due consideration to the future 
traffic projections, environmental concerns etc. Changing the alignment at a later stage of 
the project can be a costly af fair and should be avoided at all costs, through application of 
foresight. 
(Para 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The Ministry has authorised regional officer (s) to engage the services of retired 
revenue officials as Consultant (LA) for avoiding delay in Land Acquisition. Further, RO’s 
have been authorised to provide certain facilities such as furniture, office equipment’s, 
manpower etc., to CALAs for the purpose of acquiring land for NH Projects, from project 
contingencies. 
11.2 Also, of late, the Ministr y has requested all State Govt. for setting up of special Land 
Acquisition Unit (SLAU) for the work of Land Acquisition for National Highways across the 

8 
 
State. This will save considerable time in getting recommendations in individual cases and 
fast-track the process of Land Acquisition.  
Recommendation/Observation  
12.  The Committee desires to be apprised of the present status of the implementation of 
the Land Value Capture Mechanism. This mechanism may help the Ministry in managing the 
huge increase in road project costs on account of a significant jump in land acquisition costs 
in the past several years. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider making 
1the upfront contribution of State Governments flexible, fixing it on the basis of the f inancial 
ability of the State Government. 
(Para 74) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The revised policy on Value Capture Finance issued vide circular dated 18.03.2021 
envisages developing a mechanism to implement Value Capture Finance jointly by the States 
and NHAI, to part finance the cost of highway construction. This policy has no such 
condition for deposition of 50% cost of land acquisition by the State Government upfront. 
However, as per this policy circular, if the State Govt. provides at least 25% of the land 
acquisition cost for Ring Road/Bypasses, that project would be taken on priority. 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee feels that the Ministry may modify the land value capture mechanism 
in a way that the value captured by the State Government is, in part, be shared with the 
previous owners of the land. A major reason for the hesitation of land -owners to part with 
their land is that the land is often their only source of livelihood. A mechanism may be 
worked out where an upfront payment is made to the land -owner and they are guaranteed a 
payment in the form of annuity f or the long-term, financing the same through the land value 
captured by the State Government. The Committee believes that such a system would lower 
the frequency of land acquisition matters ending up in litigation, which cause huge delays to 
the projects, besides causing cost overruns. 
(Para 75) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Compensation is paid to the Land owners whose land is being acquired for 
development of National Highways. The determination of compensation is made in 
accordance with Section 26 &  First Schedule, rehabilitation and resettlement in accordance 
with the Second Schedule and infrastructure amenities in accordance with the Third Schedule 
of Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement ( RFCTLARR) Act, 2013. The land compensation includes Solatium @100% 
plus multiplication factor, additional market values and the compensation for trees and other 
assets. The compensation paid is substantially enhanced after implementation of RFCTLARR 
Act, 2013. 

9 
 
13.2 Generally, the acquisition of land for the National Highway, causes minimal 
displacement and dislocation of the affected persons. It would be more of an exception if the 
entire land-holding of a person/ family gets acquired in the process.  
13.3 The VCF policy basically envisages recovering the cost of highway development and 
also to part fund the other non -viable projects. It may not be possible to offer annuity out of 
this to landowners as it is not the profit earned but recovery of cost. 
Recommendation/Observation  
14.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may sort out the issues faced by road 
contractors because of encumbrance on the land, once made available to them after 
acquisition. Further, the Ministry may urge upon the State Governments to carry out 
exercises to update their revenue maps periodically, in order to permit the Ministry to 
prepare more informed acquisition plans for its road projects. The Ministry may urge upon 
the State Governments to carry out exercises to updat e their revenue maps periodically, in 
order to permit the Ministry to prepare well-informed acquisition plans for its road projects. 
(Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The Ministry has requested all the State Governments/UTs to carry out exercises to 
update their revenue maps periodically, in order to permit the Ministry to prepare well -
informed acquisition plans for its road projects. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. With regard to upfront deposition of 50% cost of land acquisition by the State 
Government, the Committee reiterates its recommendation made at para 75 of this Report 
and recommends that the Ministry may frame a policy to accommodate State Governments 
that might not be financially able to deposit such large amounts upfront. 
(Para 85)  
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 The revised policy on Value Capture Finance issued vide circular dated 18.03.2021 
envisages for developing a mechanism to implement Value Capture Finance jointly by the 
States and NHAI, to part finance the cost of highway construction. This policy has no s uch 
condition for deposition of 50% cost of land acquisition by the State Government upfront. 
However, as per this policy circular, if the State Govt provides at least 25% of the land 
acquisition cost for Ring Road/Bypasses, that project would be taken on priority. 
Recommendation/Observation  

10 
 
16. The Committee takes note of the discrepancies pointed out by the Punjab PWD in the 
value of land determined at present based on registered sale deed/ collector rates and the 
actual market rate of the land. The Comm ittee feels that such discrepancy, if present, would 
invariably cause dissatisfaction among the land owners and the ensuing delays on account of 
arbitration and legal procedures cost the public exchequer a lot of money due to project cost 
overruns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may review the accuracy 
of the provisions existing at present in determining the amount of compensation to be paid to 
land-owners, as compared to the actual market value of the land. If substantial difference s 
are noticed in the compensation value and the market value in many instances, the Ministry 
may come up with a suitable mechanism for determination of a more fair value for the land to 
be acquired. 
(Para 94) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 The compensation for the Land acquired for NH is determined in accordance with the 
First scheduled of the RFCTLARR ACT, 2013 with effect from 01.01.2015. As per Section 
26 of the RFCTLARR ACT, 2013, the market value of the land is determined as (a) the 
market value, if any specified in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 for the registration of sale deed 
or agreement to sale, as the case may be, in the area where the land is situated; or (b) the 
average sale price for similar type of land situated in the nearest vil lage or nearest vicinity 
area. The average sale price refer to in clause (b) is determined by taken into account the sale 
deeds of the agreement to sale registered for similar type of area in the near village or near 
vicinity during the year immediately pr eceding the issue of notification under Section 3A of 
the NH Act, 1956. The higher rate arrived from (a) and (b) above is adopted for 
determination for compensation of land acquisition in NH Projects  
16.2 Hence, the value of land which is more beneficial to the land owner is paid to him/her. 
It is a matter of fact that the Circle rate of land is notified by concerned State Governments 
and this Ministry has no role in this regard. 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the application process 
for obtaining the necessary environment and forest clearances is initiated as soon as the 
alignment of the project is finalized, in order to avoid any undue delays in obtaining the 
permission. 
(Para 98) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Observation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  

11 
 
18. The Committee takes note of the various initiatives taken by the Ministry to boost 
investment and lending in road sector. 
(Para 130) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1. No action is required. 
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Committee takes note of the various measures taken by PNB to finance the 
concessionaires in road infrastructure sector. 
(Para 139) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 No action is required. 
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee recommends that in case where arbitration is awarded in favour of 
concessionaire, the Ministry/NHAI may assess the soundness of its claims and whether it is 
felt that these claims have reasonable chances for be ing considered to be valid by court. The 
Ministry/NHAI should not make it an unwritten rule of challenge arbitration decisions in 
courts when these are not awarded in its favour, and the possible resultant delays in the 
project on account of court proceedi ngs may be duly considered before reaching upon a 
decision regarding whether to appeal the award in courts. 
(Para 147) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 In this regard, NHAI has framed a Policy in terms of MoRTH letter No. 
35014/39/2019-H dated 14.02.2020 (copy attached) and OM No. 14070/14/2016 -PPPAU 
dated 28.11.2019 of NITI Aayog (Copy attached). NHAI, vide the abovementioned Policy 
guidelines, only challenges the awards in favour of Concessionaire/Contractor, after receiving 
the opinion of Law Officers -Attorney General/Solicitor General/Addl. Solicitor General of 
India in consultation with Department of Legal Affairs (DoLA), with respect to the same. 
Recommendation/Observation  
21. The Committee observes that many banks and financial institutions raised several 
issues regarding the present provisions for termination payment. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that NHAI may review its current provisions for termination payments in 
consultation with the concessionaires and the lenders, and work out a mechanism to assess a 
fair value to be paid in case of termination of a road project. Doing so would help reduce the 

12 
 
number of cases that go to arbitration and litigation, thereby resulti ng in minimization of 
delays on account of disputes arising out of termination payments. 
(Para 190) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 NHAI had taken a detailed initiative last year to streamline the Termination Payment 
calculation process in consultation with various stakeholders including NITI Aayog  and 
IIFCL. Accordingly, a set of Guidelines were issued after approval from NHAI Board. 
Currently termination payments are being calculated based on these approved guidelines. The 
guidelines are available on public  domain, and any suggestions on improving the same are 
welcome. 
Recommendation/Observation  
22. The Committee agrees with the various suggestions put forth by the Transport 
Department, Assam and recommends that the Ministry may work to ensure that all the 
highways projects are in conformation with the guidelines of IRC and the Ministry itself. The 
Ministry may make concerted efforts to curb the menace of overloading and overspeeding on 
National Highways, since both pose a significant risk to the safety of the commuters. 
(Para 292) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 As regards overloading, Static Weigh Bridges  and Weigh in Motion Bridges have 
been installed at the toll plaza locations and adequate penal provisions for the same have been 
enforced. As regards curb on over speeding, it is pertinent to mention that the provision for 
issuance of challans is under th e jurisdiction of state police authorities with no role of NHAI. 
However, directions have been issued to field offices of NHAI to ensure all possible support 
to the state policing authorities in enforcement of the traffic regulations. 
22.2 However with respect to curbing of overloading at NH, following has been done 
through amendments in NH Fee Rules  from time to time: 
i. Rule 10 of NH Fee Rules , 2008  stipulates that a mechanical vehicle which is loaded 
in excess of permissible maximum gross vehicle weigh t in respect of such vehicles, 
shall not be permitted to use the National Highway or crossing the fee plaza until the 
excess load has been removed from such mechanical vehicle . 
ii. Rule 10 of NH Fee Rules 2008 prescribes rate of fee for overloading whereby 
overloaded vehicle are liable to pay applicable fees    of next higher category of 
vehicle. 
iii. The fee for overload has been amended   byMoRTH vide Gazette GSR 778(E) dated 
16.12.2013 of MoRTH whereby the ‘rate of fee for overloading’ was enhanced to 10 
times the applicable fee.  

13 
 
iv. MoRTH vide OM dated 13.03.2014 & Gazette GSR 02(E) dated 29.12.2014 made the 
above provision on overloading applicable on all toll plazas.  
v. NHAI vide Policy Circular dated 11.09.2014 issued timelines for installation of WIM 
(Weigh-in-Motion) and the same is installed at most of the fee plazas. 
vi. The above rule was again amended by MoRTH vide GSR 920(E) dated 25.09.2018 
having provision for a provision of graded penalty for overloaded vehicles as under:   
Percentage of excess load over 
Maximum permissible gross 
vehicular weight 
Multiplying 
factor to base 
rate of fees 
Fees 
(1) (2) (3) 
0% to 20% Two [(Fees applicable for such category of 
mechanical vehicle under sub-rule (2) 
of rule 4) x (multiplying factor)] >20% to 40% Four 
>40% to 60% Six 
>60% to 80% Eight 
>80% and above Ten 
Recommendation/Observation  
23. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government of Gujarat and the 
Ministry, in order to bring down the number of road accidents by 39% in the year 2019 as 
compared to the data of the year 2012. The Committee hopes that the reduction seen in the 
deaths caused due to road accidents in the State is commensurate with the reduction in the 
number of accidents. 
(Para 294) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 The view of the Committee is being shared with the Transport Department of Gujarat. 
23.2 Further, for reduction of fatalities on National Highways, NHAI has taken various 
measures for road safety which include rectification of blackspots, construction of grade 
separated intersections, Foot over Bridges, Speed/Traffic calming measures etc. The possible 
reason for more fatal accidents is increase in speed of vehicles over the years. 
Recommendation/Observation  
24. The Committee desires that the Ministry may ensure that road safety audits are 
conducted across the entire National Highways stretch in the country, for projects 
executed by both the Ministry itself, as well as the State Government PWDs. The 

14 
 
findings arrived upon by conducting such audits must be carefully analyzed and acted 
upon urgently. 
(Para 297) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 The contract agreements of all the projects with NHAI have the provisions for Road 
Safety Audit. NHAI has also empanelled 53 teams of Road Safety Consultants for carrying 
out 3rd party road safety audit. Further empanelment of more safety consultants is also in 
process. Apart from this, the road safety expert of Authority’s Engineer/ Independent 
Engineer also conducts road safety insp ections on regular basis. The Audits/Inspection 
conducted by the safety experts are complied by Concessionaire/ Contractor. 
Recommendation/Observation  
25. The Committee notes the findings of the 2018 MoRTH Report shared by the 
Government of Goa and observes that the findings are direct evidence of the devastating 
effect road accidents have on lakhs of families in the country, often causing the death of the 
sole earning member of the family, very likely impacting the financial health of the family, 
besides the emotional trauma. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
enhance its focus on maintenance of the NHs in a good condition and implement road safety 
measures across the entire network, on a war footing. The Committee desires tha t the 
Ministry may form designated road safety wing at State level and RO level for immediate 
redressal of road safety related issues, as suggested by the Government of Goa. 
(Para 299) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 For monitoring of road safety, NHAI has developed various datalake modules for 
road safety audit, blackspots, traffic calming measures etc. 
25.2 NHAI has designated Road Safety Officers in each Regional Officer for coordination 
and monitoring of works related to Road Safety. 
Recommendation/Observation  
26. The Committee takes note of the various steps taken by the Transport Department, 
Government of Tripura to reduce the number of road accidents in the State. 
(Para 304) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 Noted for compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation  

15 
 
27. The Committee notes that the Mizoram PWD is facing issues in attracting bids for 
carrying out independent road safety audits in the State audit for suggesting rectification 
measures for black spots identified by the Ministry. The Committee strongly feels that 
rectification of black spots cannot be delayed because of lack of interest in bidding for this 
purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may step up to help 
Mizoram PWD through its expertise in rectification of black spots on the NHs. If the reason 
for the lack of interest in bidding for the projects is ascertained to be the small scale of the 
overall project, the Ministry may invite bids to conduct such an audit in multiple North -
Eastern States together. 
(Para 307) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 The Ministry has empanelled consultants for road safety audits. Audit works are given 
to the empanelled consultants. However, the issue of Mizoram PWD will be taken up with 
the PWD officers for resolving the issue. 
Recommendation/Observation  
28.  The Committee agrees with the suggestion of PWD, Government of Mizoram 
regarding making specific budgetary provisions for conducting road safety audits in the 
project cost itself. Any new NH project implemented by the Ministry/State PWDs should be 
duly audited in terms of road safety before opening it to the public and time -bound plan must 
be made for conducting road safety audits to cover the existing NH network as well. 
(Para 308) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 Road safety Audits are carried out at all NHAI projects before opening to the public. 
Further, road safety audits are also being carried out during design, construction and 
operation stages including new NH projects. 
Recommendation/Observation  
29. The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by Department of Transport, 
Government of Punjab to enhance road safety on the road network in the State and hopes 
that it makes optimal utilization of the Road Safety Fund available with it, for resolution of 
road safety related issues. 
(Para 312) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 The view of the Committee is being shared with the Transport Department, Punjab. 
Recommendation/Observation  

16 
 
30. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the fund crunch faced by 
State Departments in execution of road safety related projects and to consider developing an 
incentive based funding scheme wherein a part of the funds spent by the State Government on 
road safety projects and activities for State roads, may be reimbursed by the Ministry. 
(Para 313) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 The Ministry provides funds to all the Districts across the Country along with the 
Transport Departments of all the States/UTs for conducting Road Safety  related activities in 
their Districts/States/UTs. 
30.2. Further, recently this Ministry has also launched a scheme to award good Samaritans 
which is an initiative to motivate general public to save life on road with the ultimate object 
of reducing number of deaths on road. 
Recommendation/Observation  
31. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider Kerala PWD’s suggestion 
to permit State PWDs to grant extension of time for delays in completion of project in case of 
delay due to reasons other than from Contractor, if it is felt that delegating such a power 
would allow road projects executed by State PWDs to be executed more smoothly with lower 
delays due to paperwork. 
(Para 332)  
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1 Ministry has already delegated powers at various level such   as Regional Officer 
(Posted in the State) and Additional Director General etc. for granting Extension of Time 
(EOT) for delayed NH Projects executed through the State PWDs vide letter dated 
13.02.2020  (Annexure -VI). 
Recommendation/Observation  
32. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that clearances, release of 
funds and award of contract work for NH projects in NE regions are mindful of the short 
working season in the region. Procedural delays should not hamper the timely completion of 
projects in North-Eastern region. 
(Para 336) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1 Ministry is fully aware of short working season in the North -Eastern Region. 
Accordingly, construction period of work is decided. 
Recommendation/Observation  

17 
 
33. The Committee desires that the Ministry may look into the observations made by 
Mizoram PWD regarding unwillingness of the Ministry to invest large amounts in projects in 
the North East  and having limited understanding of the problems faced in the actual work. 
Coordination mechanism with the State Government of Mizoram may be strengthened so as 
to resolve the issues being faced by it in execution of road projects in the State. 
(Para 337) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 Annual Plans for National Highways in the State are prepared and finalized in 
consultation of State PWD.   Works under Annual Plan are finalized based on availability of 
funds, technical feasibility of the NHs stretch for improve ment, traffic, inter -se priority etc. 
Further, two ROs of MoRT&H for NE Region and one ED level officer in the each State of 
NER  have been established in NE Region to resolve the projects related issues and to 
coordinate with State Government so that exec ution of works/projects is done without time 
and cost over-run. 
Recommendation/Observation  
34. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into possibilities for 
upgradation of NHs in Delhi that may help the region to tackle the issues of traffic and 
pollution.  
(Para 339) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 The following NHs are being upgraded/developed in Delhi/ NCR: 
 
  
Project Name NHs No. Length (Km.) 
UER-II 344M, 344N, 344P 75.71 
DL/UP Border - EPE 
Crossing 
709B 31.20 
Delhi - Faridabad - 
Sohna 
148NA 59.06 
Gurgaon - Pataudi - 
Rewari 
352W 46.11 
Dwarka Expressway 248BB 27.66 

18 
 
Delhi-Meerut 
Expressway (Pkg-V) 
Green Field 14.60 
Recommendation/Observation  
35. The Committee takes stock of the ongoing road projects in the State of Maharashtra. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may take effective steps in close coordination with 
PWD and MSRDC, to resolve the issues causing delay in the execution of road projects in 
Maharashtra. 
(Para 346) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 To fast-track execution of National Highways Projects in Maharashtra, various steps 
such as streamlining of Land Acquisition and Environment clearances, clause coordination 
with other Ministries, revamping of dispute resolution mechanism, frequent review meetings 
with project developers, State Govt. and contractors at various levels in the Ministry and field 
offices have been taken up. 
Recommendation/Observation  
36. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may reconsider its provisions regarding 
first payment being made to contrac tors only after 25% completion of a project, in case of 
large size projects. 
(Para 348) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 Noted by the Ministry. Further deliberation is required to be in this regard keeping in 
view the cash flow requirement of the project. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
37. The Committee notes the status of the ongoing projects in the UT of J&K and Ladakh. 
The Committee may recommends that the Ministry may lay special focus on road safety 
aspects of projects in the region, giving due significance to minimizing the ecological impact 
caused by the NH projects in the ecologically sensitive region. 
(Para 350) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1 Out of 44 No’s MoRTH identified blackspots on Jammu -Srinagar NH-44, long term 
rectification of 30 No’s blackspots and Short Term Rectification on remaining 14 No’s 

19 
 
blackspots have been completed. Long Term rectification of these remaining blackspots is 
also in progress and are likely to be completed by December, 2023. 
37.2 Furthermore, safety furniture’s such as crash barrier, rumble strips, blinkers, cat eyes, 
signages showing speed limits are installed on NH as per IRC requirements. Apart from this, 
eye check-up camps and road safety awareness programmes and informing drivers regarding 
importance of safe d riving practices including obeying speed limits etc. are being conducted 
by NHAI regularly. 
37.3 For safety of road users, Incident Management System including ambulances, cranes, 
petrol vehicle etc. as per NHAI Policy Guidelines are deployed on NH. Furthe r various apps 
like Sukhad Yatra, etc have been launched by NHAI to receive feedback apart from Central 
Helpline No. 1033 for grievances of the general public and other related issues on highways. 
37.4 NHAI through construction of tunnels, slope protection  measures and other related 
measures ensures to minimize the impact of NH projects in ecologically sensitive region. 
Recommendation/Observation  
38. The Committee strongly feels that overloaded vehicles not only cause severe damage 
to the roads, but also pose a significant safety risk to other vehicles plying on the road. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may take immediate measures t o install 
weigh-in motion system at all its toll plazas across the country to detect vehicles which are 
carrying more weight than their prescribed limits. Hefty fines should be charged on vehicles 
not abiding by the limits. The usage of weigh -in motion sys tem to issue automated challans/ 
penalty would eliminate the possible collusion of corrupt officials with the heavy vehicle 
owners. The Ministry further recommends that the Ministry may consider charging toll on the 
basis of tonnage of the vehicles. 
(Para 352) 
39 The Committee takes note of the various issues faced by heavy vehicle owners/ 
transporters. The Committee feels that the installation of weigh -in motion systems at toll 
plazas on National Highways across the country would be very helpful in saving the truck 
drivers from harassment and illicit demands from corrupt officials. 
(Para 354) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1 Rule 10 of NH Fee Rules 2008 prescribes rate of fee for overloading whereby 
overloaded vehicle are liable to pay applicable fees for overload along with offloading of 
excess load before proceeding further. The fee for overload has been amended time to time  
by MoRTH vide Gazette GSR 778(E) dated 16.12.2013 of MoRTH whereby the ‘rate of fee 
for overloading’ was enhanced to 10 times the applicable fee. This rule was again amended 
by MoRTH vide GSR 920(E) dated 25.09.2018 having provision for a provision of gra ded 
penalty for overloaded vehicles.   As per NH Fee Rules, the overload fee is to be collected 
from highway user. NHAI vide letter dated 23.08.2017 has also issued instructions whereby 

20 
 
fee collected over and above as provisioned in the concession agreement  is to be remitted to 
NHAI and the same has been reiterated by MoRTH vide letter dated 29.12.2020. 
Percentage of excess load over 
Maximum permissible gross 
vehicular weight 
Multiplying 
factor to base 
rate of fees 
Fees 
(1) (2) (3) 
0% to 20% Two [(Fees applicable for such category of 
mechanical vehicle under sub -rule (2) 
of rule 4) x (multiplying factor)] 
>20% to 40% Four   
>40% to 60% Six   
>60% to 80% Eight   
>80% and above Ten   
39.2 NHAI vide Policy Circular dated 11.09.2014 issued timelines for installation of WIM 
(Weigh-in-Motion) and the same is installed at most of the fee plaza. 
39.3 For automated penalty for overload, it is submitted that current ETC system has been 
designed for electron ic collection of user fee based on vehicle class as provisioned in the 
notifications. There is no provision to deduct the excess fee challan amount from the FASTag 
account wallet then and there at the fee Plaza. 
39.4 The technical feasibility and operational requirement for integration of Weigh -in-
Motion (WIM) system and Static Weigh Bridge (SWB) system with ETC system (FASTag) 
has been deliberated in NHAI in presence of selected representatives from Acquirer Banks, 
System Integrators, NPCI and IHMCL and following challenges have been highlighted:  
i. Both WIM and SWB system can be integrated with ETC system. However, due to 
possibility of inconsistent accuracy of WIM system deployed across NH fee plazas, 
calculation of appropriate penalty amount shall  be a challenge and may be subject to 
various grievances/complaints from various road users. Therefore, it has been 
deliberated that the penalty amount should be collected based on input from SWB 
system. 
ii. Accordingly, necessary infrastructure will be requir ed for collection of overload 
penalty in the vicinity of SWB system, such as installation of like RFID reader, 
Overload Penalty display system, etc. 
iii. In order to implement the same, there is a requirement to release a Technical & 
Functional document for nec essary development at System Integrator and Acquirer 
Bank end. This document shall be jointly prepared by NPCI/IHMCL in consultation 

21 
 
with all stakeholders. Based on this requirement document, a Proof -of-Concept shall 
be carried out at an identified toll pl azas. Based on the PoC outcome, further needful 
action w.r.t policy matters can be initiated. 
39.5 Due to possibility of inconsistent accuracy of WIM system deployed across NH fee 
plazas, calculation of appropriate user fee based on tonnage will be a chall enge and may be 
subject to various grievances/complaints from various road users. Therefore, it is not 
desirable to collect user fee on tonnage basis. 
Recommendation/Observation  
40. The Committee appreciates the initiatives being taken by the Ministry with regard to 
the introduction GPS based tolling in the country, which will remove the need for physical 
tolling infrastructure on ground. The Committee hopes that implementing this cou ntry-wide 
would eliminate the delays faced by people at toll booths and thus would shorten the journey 
times on National Highways, while saving fuel as well. The Committee recommends that the 
fee collection system may be designed in such a way so as to lin k the fee deduction with the 
bank account of the vehicle owner, so as to remove the need for frequent recharge of 
FASTags. This would be of great help to people who are not well versed with technology to 
recharge their FASTags online themselves. 
(Para 363) 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1. NHAI is in the process of identifying consultant who would prepare the roadmap for 
implementation of Satellite based tolling whereby the recommendation as enumerated in para 
363 would also be considered to benefit the highway user. 
Recommendation/Observation  
41. The Committee takes note of the mechanism in place to facilitate the rehabilitation of 
people who have to let go of their land for the development of road projects. The Committee 
observes that the land is the only source of income for many people in India and acquisition 
of the same directly and desires that the Ministry may come up with solutions to provide 
sustained source of income to the people who were solely dependent on their land for their 
livelihood. Land v alue capture mechanism may be employed to capture value from the land 
nearby National Highways and a part of the same may be shared with the previous 
landowners. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may look into the 
feasibility of employing the project-affected people to operate/provide roadside facilities such 
as rest house/rooms, eateries, etc. 
(Para 369) 
Reply of the Ministry 
41.1 Compensation is paid to the Land owners whose land is being acquired for 
development of National Highways. The determination of compensation is made in 

22 
 
accordance with Section 26 & First Schedule, rehabilitation and resettlement in accordance 
with the Second Schedule and infrastructure amenities in accordance with the Third Schedule 
of Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement (RFCTLARR) Act, 2013. The land compensation includes Solatium @100% 
plus multiplication factor, additional market values and the compensation for trees and other 
assets. The compensation paid is substantially enhanced after implementation of RFCTLARR 
Act, 2013. 
41.2 Generally, the acquisition of land for the National Highway, cause s minimal 
displacement and dislocation of the affected persons. It would be more of an exception if the 
entire land-holding of a person/ family gets acquired in the process. 
41.3 The VCF policy basically envisages recovering the cost of highway development  and 
also to part fund the other non -viable projects. It may not be possible to offer annuity out of 
this to landowners as it is not the profit earned but recovery of cost. 
Recommendation/Observation  
42. The Committee is of the view that the existing mechanism of bank of sanctions is 
causing a visible lack of clarity between the State Government Departments concerned and 
the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, regarding the amount that the State is yet to be 
awarded. The Committee recommends that th e Ministry may look into the issue and come up 
with suitable guidelines to ensure that there is no confusion among the State Government 
Departments and the Ministry, regarding the share of funds to be received by the State, in 
any particular year, after factoring in the Bank of Sanctions. 
(Para 376) 
Reply of the Ministry 
42.1 The Ministry allocates fund for State Governments/ Union Territories (UTs) for 
development and maintenance of State Roads under the Central Road & Infrastructure Fund 
(CRIF) Scheme as per the provisions of CRIF Act, 2000 amended by the Finance Act, 2019. 
42.2 The Ministry finalized the criteria for allocation of funds for development and 
maintenance of State Roads [for CRIF and EI&ISC Schemes] under the CRIF Act, 2000 
amended by the Fin ance Act, 2019 in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and 
circulated the same to all State Governments and Union Territories (UTs) in January, 2020.  
42.3 This criteria inter-alia provides for providing allocation of funds to States / UTs based 
on 30  percentage weightage to fuel consumption and 70 percentage weightage to 
geographical area of the State/ UT. This is irrespective of Bank of Sanctioned projects (which 
is equal to sum total of estimated cost of all sanctioned projects less the total fund r eleased) 
with States / UTs at any point of the time.  
42.4 Further, total cost of the schemes to be approved to be limited to the bank of sanctions 
of generally three times of the annual accrual/ allocation, except for hill States and North -

23 
 
East States (wh ere working season is limited) for which this is to be generally four times of 
the annual accrual/ allocation for the year for the State/ UT. 
 
 
 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the Model Concessionaire 
Agreements (MCAs) for the different modes of implementation of road projects from time to 
time, with inputs from both the concessionaires as well as the lenders, since both play a 
crucial road in the implementation of projects, especially the once executed under the PPP 
model. 
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. Review of Model Concession Agreement (MCA) documents of various modes of road 
construction under PPP is a continuous exercise and changes are made to address the 
concerns of the stakeholders, as and when required. The inputs are generally based on the key 
challenges faced by the concessionaire/contractors in the current MCAs and reform relating 
to latest policies announced by the Government of India from time to time to fulfil the larger 
objective of creating a quality infrastructure in the country while taking into account the 
interests of all stakeholders. 
1.2. The necessary amendments are done in the MCA after discussion in the Inter -
Ministerial Committee comprising MoRTH, Department of Financial Services, Department 
of Economic Affairs, NITI Aayog and Department of Legal Affairs. Based on the above 
explained framework, Ministry has recently done amendments in MCAs of Bot (Toll), TOT, 
HAM and EPC mode of contract  
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee takes note of the various stages involved in the execution of a National 
Highways Project. The Committee f eels that the Ministry must undertake a holistic review of 
the DPR preparation stage of road projects. Preparation of DPR should be aided by the 
latest technology available for the purpose and the inputs of the stakeholders and public 
representatives, incl uding the local M.P., and the demands and concerns of the local 
populace should be taken into account during the process of preparation of the DPR. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry may come up with Rules/ necessary statutory provisions 
to fix the ac countability of the officials/ organization responsible for drafting the DPR till a 
stipulated period of time after the completion of the project, for any negligence on their part, 
that results in construction of poor quality roads. Forethought may be give n at this stage to 
ensure ample provisions for road safety; mandatory service lanes; avoidance of traffic 
bottlenecks; and minimization of adverse environmental and heritage impact caused by the 
project. The Committee further recommends that traffic projections for the long-term must be 

25 
 
taken into account while preparing DPR for any road project and where feasible, additional 
land may be acquired adjacent to the alignment planned at present, so as to enable widening 
of the highways, when the widening of road is needed at a future date. 
(Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The Ministry adopts technologies like LiDAR, Satellite imaging, automated traffic 
counting system while preparing the detailed project report of a project. These technologies 
enable the Ministry to optimize road alignment and minimize the environmental impact of the 
project. The Ministry is committed to using state of the art technologies for the preparation of 
DPRs. 
2.2 The Ministry is considering a check and balance mechanism to hold th e concerned 
parties accountable for any negligence on their part across any stage in the execution of the 
project.  
2.3 Road safety and passenger comfort are of paramount importance to the Ministry. 
Wayside amenities and service lanes are planned on key ro ad stretches while ensuring road 
safety measures across all its projects. In addition, advanced traffic management system is 
being mandated across National Highways to ensure superior safety standards and real time 
incident response.  
2.4 The Ministry take s into account the projected vehicular traffic during the 
conceptualization of any new project and for flagship greenfield corridors, acquisition of 
ROWs are planned keeping into account any future road widening/expansion. 
2.5 Starting from the conceptuali zation of a project, the Ministry ensures that the 
alignment is reviewed at the highest level to analyse the overall impact of the project – 
including the impact of land acquisition in displacement of population, the economic growth 
plans of the regions th at the alignment of the projects. Once the alignment is finalized by the 
Ministry, state level consultation is held with the respective state governments to ensure 
synergizing of highway network and other infrastructure network projects planned in the 
region. 
2.6 After the discussions are finalized with the state governments, an initial Land 
Acquisition Committee review of the alignment is conducted internally by the Ministry and 
approval is provided for initiating on -ground land acquisition process. Post t his, review of 
alignment and progress development is conducted across different levels during the internal 
project appraisal by Member of NHAI and senior officials of the Ministry. During the final 
approval of the project with the competent authority, inpu ts from external stakeholders like 
NITI Ayog are also sought to finalize the alignment and project features.  
2.7 In addition, the Project Directors and Regional Officers in NHAI have been 
empowered to suggest changes to alignment at the grass root level w ith inputs from local 
representatives and public. Beyond this, discussions with public are also held directly while 
obtaining environmental clearance wherein the details of the project are explained to the 

26 
 
public, representation from different sections of the society are solicited in the presence of the 
state and district administration officers.  
2.8 Hence, reviews are conducted at multiple levels to ensure that public representation 
and inputs are incorporated in the finalization of the project alignment,  well before the 
initiation of land acquisition process with continuous inputs received through the project 
implementation units and regional offices across the country 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee recommends that DPRs of National Highways road projects should 
have provisions for right of way and service roads. The DPRs should be prepared after 
public consultation and inputs from Members of Parliament of the area. The Committee 
further recommends that provisions for public amenities such as dhabas, washroom facilities 
etc. should be included at the DPR stage of NH projects. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Public consultations with Communities located along the road, NGOs working in t he 
area, other stake -holders and relevant Government departments at different stages of 
assignment are held by the DPR consultant. 
3.2 The provision for wayside amenities has also been provided under Terms of 
Reference in the RFP document for DPR 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to carefully analyze the 
shortcomings of the existing mechanism for awarding road projects to the lowest bidder, 
since doing so includes little thought for ensuring quality of the  work. The Committee 
believes that there should be consideration for other importance factors besides the bidding 
amount, while awarding a project to a concessionaire. A qualitative approach must be 
formulated for awarding road projects. The Committee reco mmends that the Ministry may 
take up with the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), the shortcomings of the existing 
system of awarding a project to the lowest bidder, presenting its arguments for modification 
of the CVC guidelines for awarding of tender in a suitable way to permit an element of 
qualitative approach in the tender awarding process for road projects. The Committee feels 
that a criterion may be developed where certain weightage is given to objective parameters 
such as the awards presently being executed by the contractor, their financial record, and 
most importantly, the past performance of a contractor, in terms of quality of work and timely 
execution. The database recommended by the Committee in para 22 of this Report may be 
useful for such purposes.  
(Para 26) 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Recommendation of Committee has been noted. The recommendations need 
deliberation & detailed examination. 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee takes note of the various innovative financing models being employed 
by the Ministry/NHAI to monetize its existing assets, to fund the development and 
maintenance of the NH network across the country. The Committee is of the considered view 
that the ongoing coronavirus pandemic has impacted the traffic volumes across the country 
since March, 2020 and might continue to do so in the near future. This is likely to affect the 
asset monetization plans made by NHAI for the short -term future, since i t would lower the 
interest of private players in BOT projects as well as in TOT mode. The Committee 
recommends that NHAI should factor in the effect of the pandemic on its financial plans for 
the near future. NHAI may take appropriate steps to allay the tr affic volume related concerns 
of the stakeholders by holding constructive dialogue with them, take steps to share the risk 
caused by the uncertainty of traffic volume, due to such unforeseeable events, among the 
different parties involved and, if need be, make suitable modifications to this effect, in its 
Model Concession Agreement (MCAs) and Request for Proposal (RFPs) for the short term. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Asset Monetization and infrastructure creation will form a virtuous cycle which will 
involve unlocking of potential of existing assets, utilization of the proceeds created from the 
monetization of the assets (operating National Highways through one of the innovative 
financing model i.e. TOT) and funding creation of new infrastructure.   In order to mitigate 
the impact of traffic volumes on account of COVID, NHAI has already extended the relief 
measures, including appropriate compensation for reduction in col lection of user fee, as per 
the provisions in Concession Agreement, as approved by MoRT&H vide its Correspondence 
No. COVID-19/RoadMap/JS9H)/2020 dated 26th August, 2021.   These reliefs were given to 
all the stakeholders including BOT/TOT Concessionaires.  In addition, the Webinars/ 
meetings were convened by NHAI with various stakeholders in road sector viz. 
concessionaires, bankers, funds houses and prospective investors including foreign and 
domestic pension funds, sovereign wealth funds and large PE inve stors, as to monetize the 
NHs though InvIT. 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee recommends that NHAI may consider lowering the minimum 
investment amount in InvIT  IPO to a suitable amount so as to attract participation from a 
larger number of participants. 
(Para 41) 
 

28 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. NHAI is monetizing road projects through private placement of units in National 
Highways Infra Trust (NHIT) in accordance w ith Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(Infrastructure Investment Trusts) Regulations, 2014, as amended. Under the said regulations, 
specifically, clause 14(2)(c), minimum initial investment in privately placed InvIT is Rs.25 
Crore. Further, the regulations specify a trading lot size of Rs.2 Crore. 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee takes note of the various innovative measures that have been 
suggested by the different financial organizations and banks in order to tackle the issue of 
huge debt servicing costs of NHAI. The Committee feels that NHAI should tap into the funds 
available with insurance companies and pension funds, both Indian and foreign. 
Securitization of NHAI’s existing assets may be suitable to attract the interest of pension 
funds since the return targeted by pension funds is on the lower side. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may look into any changes in the existing provisions that may 
be needed to allow insurance companies and pension funds to participate in funding road 
infrastructure sector in the country. Multilateral agencies, Japan Overseas Infrastructure 
Investment Corporation for Transport & Urban Development (JOIN), foreign pension funds 
and sovereign wealth funds may also be approached by NHAI, with suitable 
assurances/comforts from Government of India. 
(Para 58) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. NHAI’s funding requirement is for long term duration. Hence, NHAI’s endeavour is 
to get funds from institutions like EPFO & LIC. Major portion of the funds invested in NHAI 
taxable bonds during the last few years were raised through bids invited on BSE/NSE 
electronic platform. The anchor investors had been EPFO, LIC and other insurance 
companies.  Further, NHAI has tapped into the foreign patient capital market through its TOT 
program with TOT Bundles 1 and 3 attracting investment from Macquarie and Cube 
Highways and has raised approx. Rs. 14,600 Cr through this initiative. Modifications in 
NHAI’s project regulations are underw ay to allow these entities to invest in the Indian roads 
sector. NHAI InvIT is also expected to witness participation from Indian and foreign 
insurance and pension funds. Proceedings from NHAI InvIT has been approved for utilizing 
for NHAI’s Debt Servicing requirements. 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee notes that land acquisition costs form a significant portion of the total 
road project costs and hopes that NHAI, in coordination with State Governments, take 
suitable steps to capture the value g enerated by the implementation of road projects so as to 
finance the rising land acquisition costs in road sector. 
(Para 59) 

29 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Revised Policy on Value Capture Finance has been issued vide NHAI circular dated 
18.03.2021 for developing a mechanism to implement Value Capture Finance jointly by the 
States and NHAI, to part finance the cost of highway construction. 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee notes that India’s foreign exchange reserves, as per RBI (Annexure -
B), have risen substantially in the recent past. The Committee recommends that RBI, with due 
consideration to the sufficiency of the foreign reserves, may consider the possibility of 
utilization of surplus funds to finance long -term road infrastructure project s in the country. 
RBI may also look into the feasibility of utilization of the surplus reserves for the creation of 
a sovereign wealth fund to finance long-term infrastructural assets. 
(Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. Once the Sovereign wealth fund is created by the Govt., we may request the Ministry 
to take up the matter with Ministry of Finance/RBI to consider the possibility of utilization of 
surplus funds to finance long-term road infrastructure projects and look into the feasibility of 
utilization of the surplus reserves to invest in sovereign wealth fund. 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee feels that the information furnished by the Ministry regarding road 
projects delayed for more than 5 years, makes it evident that delays in road projects is one of 
the most substantial issues being faced by the road sector in India at present . Though the 
Committee commends the efforts made by the Ministry in increasing the pace of construction 
of highways in the last several years, the large number of projects that are delayed for a 
significant period of more than 5 years, is a cause of concer n. Such delays are accompanied 
by significant cost overruns and in case of brownfield projects, cause a lot of discomfort and 
added traffic times to the existing traffic. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
establish a dedicated mechanism to keep projects on track as far as possible, notice delays at 
the earliest and take necessary action to proactively tackle factors causing delays in any 
given project. 
(Para 68) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1. To ensure expeditious development of highway projects a nd to avoid undue delays, 
various steps are being taken by the Ministry such as: 
i. Regular review meetings with project developers / concessionaires/ contractors and 
State Governments are held by high level officers in the Ministry. 

30 
 
ii. To fast track land acquis ition and to remove bottlenecks causing delay in land 
acquisition, IT based system such as "Bhoomirashi" for land acquisition has been 
developed and its use has been mandated.  
iii. To capture real time project progress and resolution of pending issues causing delay, 
IT based portals such as PMIS and Data lake have been developed and widely used 
for efficient project monitoring and decision making.  
iv. For speedy land acquisition and shifting of utilities, regular review meetings of the 
High Power Committee at the State level under Chairmanship of Chief 
Secretary/Additional Secretary of the State Government/ concerned department have 
been mandated.  
v. To resolve Railways issues, regular coordination meetings with M/o Railways are 
held for obtaining clearance for construction of ROBs/ RUBs. 
vi. As regards, environment and forest issues, the pending matters that could not be 
resolved at officer levels are escalated and resolved in the Group of Infrastructure 
(GOI) meeting between the Hon'ble Minister (RT&H) and Hon'ble Minister 
(EF&CC). Similarly, unresolved issues with M/o Railways, M/o Defence are also 
taken up with the Hon'ble Minister of respective Ministries in the GOI meeting and 
are resolved.      
Recommendation/Observation  
11.  The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Ministry to resolve land acquisition 
issues in coordination with State Governments. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may analyze the historical data from the PMIS, Pragati Portal and BhoomiRashi portal to 
figure out the presence of any bottlenecks or bureaucratic delays that might be slowing down 
the land acquisition process. Steps may then be taken to further streamline the land 
acquisition process, which, in turn, would help keep the NH projects on track. 
(Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Steps are being taken from time to time to streamline the process of land acquisition 
to avoid delays. 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review its guideline which 
stipulates that the project implementation agencies shall undertake additional land 
acquisition on one side of an existing road to the extent feasible for expansion of existing 
roads to next level of configurations, in light of the difficulties faced in such implementation 
in hilly areas. 
(Para 90) 

31 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. Decisions are taken on case to case basis in such cases including additional LA on one 
side, if feasible. 
Recommendation/Observation  
13.  The Committee agrees with the suggestion made by the Transport Department, 
Government of NCT of Delhi and recommends that the Ministry should assign a fixed time -
frame for the different processes involved in land acquisition for a project. The Committee 
feels that doing so would help minimize bureaucratic delays and a ny delays happening in the 
process would be spotted quite early. 
(Para 92) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1. The land acquisition process involves various agencies including State Govt agencies 
and are dependent on many factors such as availability of land records etc. It is, therefore, not 
feasible to fix a time-frame for the different processed involved in land acquisition. However, 
steps are being taken to complete land acquisition process in the shortest possible time. 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee desires that the Ministry may analyze the suggestions given by 
Mizoram PWD and if feasible, extend the implementation of the same to other States with 
high forest coverage. The Committee further recommends that delays faced in obtaining final 
forest clearance as well as tree cutting permissions may be looked into and resolved on a 
priority basis, to avoid delays in execution of road projects. 
(Para 103)  
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1. Projects are sanctioned based on the Detailed Project Report (DPR) prepared by the 
Consultant/State PWD and recommended by the executing agency (PWD). Re -alignment of 
existing roads or alignment of green field highways are examined and approved based on 
technical r equirements, techno -economic viability, minimum land acquisition, least 
disturbance of ecology, least cutting of trees etc.   Process of land acquisition and forest 
clearances etc. is performed by the State Government. Works are awarded after obtaining 
minimum 80% of required land   and required clearances so that works are completed within 
stipulated time period. However, it has been observed that executing agencies do not pursue 
for obtaining final forest clearances in many projects. Now, instructions have been issued to 
obtain final forest clearance at the earliest for which first stage of forest clearance have been 
obtained.  
 

32 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee recommends the Ministry to work upon the different suggestions put 
forth by the finan cial institutions/banks for avoiding delays in road projects on account of 
delays in terms of financing. 
(Para 112) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1. NHAI has recently come out with revised internal procedures that allow for financial 
closure of PPP projects within a day of receipt of such request from the Concessionaire. As a 
result, there is minimal delay observed on the Authority’s behalf in declarin g Financial 
Closure.  
15.2. Further, a master circular that streamlines the process for refinancing PPP projects has 
also been issued. 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee takes note of the mechanism existing at present for arbitration and 
resolution of disputes. Disputes between the concessionaire and the authority is one of the 
core reasons behind delays in road projects and having effective mechanisms in place to 
minimize the delay resolution time is crucial. The Committee desires the Min istry to 
thoroughly examine the efficacy of the current arbitration and disputes resolution mechanism 
in setting disputes between the involved parties, helping avoid litigation processes to the 
maximum possible extent. Effective efforts may be made to addr ess any bottlenecks causing 
delays in such arbitrations. 
(Para 119) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Considering the core reasons behind delays in road projects and further to minimize 
the delay and to resolve the disputes arising between Concessionaire and Auth ority, NHAI 
has recently introduced dispute resolution mechanism in form of Disputes Resolution Board 
(DRB) in all ongoing and upcoming projects for effective resolution of Disputes arising 
between the parties vide NHAI/Policy Guidelines/Dispute Regulation  & Legal Matter/2020 
No. 2.1.43 dated 4th September, 2020.  This mechanism for dispute resolution has been 
incorporated in the Model Concession Agreement (MCA). 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee feels that maintenance of the existing road network is an area which is 
not given enough attention to, by the Ministry. Maintenance of the existing NHs is essential 
not only from economic aspects, but also to reduce the number of road acciden ts that take 
place due to potholes, poor quality of roads, damaged roads due to floods, etc. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry make extensive use of network survey 

33 
 
vehicles and latest technological innovations such as drones to regularly assess the quality of 
the existing NH network in the country and to figure out the stretches that need to be worked 
upon. The maintenance requirements thus analyzed should be prioritized on the basis of 
potential safety hazards posed by the poor quality, the traffic volume on the stretch, and other 
relevant factors. The Committee believes that carrying out a task of such scale on the vast 
NH network in the country requires significant funds and recommends that the Ministry may 
request funds for the same in the coming financial years. 
(Para 122) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1. The provision to conduct NSV (Network Survey Vehicle) survey twice an year and 
uploading of NSV report on Data Lake portal has already been incorporated. 
17.2. Online Road Asset management system (RAMS) was developed and it is being 
upgraded now; the system will enable capturing of road condition using the Network Survey 
Vehicle (NSV) Data for both ongoing projects, completed projects and sections where works 
are not being taken up. 
17.3. The Ministry has also taken initiatives for improvement of Quality Monitoring.   The 
Ministry has established a Quality Control Cell to monitor the quality of the NH works being 
executed. The Cell shall be strengthened to develop Institutionalized System for Quality 
Control.  
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee observes that special focus must be laid on high quality maintenance 
of roads in flood -prone regions. Specialized techniques may be used to ensure that the 
maintenance work carried out in such regions is long lasting and that sufficient provisions 
for drainage are included in the project. 
(Para 123) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1. During DPR preparation, Hydraulic and Hydrological Investigations are carried out as 
per IRC specifications for collection of   information on high flood level (HFL), low water 
levels (LWL), high tide level (HTL), low tide level (LTL) where applicable, discharge 
velocity etc. from available past records, local inquiries and visible signs, if an y, on the 
structural components and embankments. Local inquiries are also made with regard to the 
road sections getting overtopped during heavy rains and are taken care in deciding the 
formation for the Highway. 
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Committee agrees with the apprehensions raised by Canara Bank regarding 
impact of Coronavirus pandemic on investments in State roads and rural roads on account of 

34 
 
fund diversion to the health and social sectors. State roads and rural roads provide last -mile 
connectivity to crores of people in the country, besides being of great economic importance 
to countless industries requiring raw materials to be transported from small towns and 
villages. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may co nsider extending a 
one-time financial assistance to State Governments to help ensure that State roads and rural 
roads are maintained in motorable conditions. 
(Para 135) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1. The Ministry is primarily responsible for development and maintenance of National 
Highways (NHs).  
19.2. Apart from this, the Ministry also allocates fund for State Governments/ Union 
Territories (UTs) for development and maintenance of State Roads under t he Central Road & 
Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) and Economic Importance & Interstate Connectivity (EI&ISC) 
Schemes as per the provisions of CRIF Act, 2000 amended by the Finance Act, 2019. 
19.3. The Ministry finalized the criteria for allocation of funds for development and 
maintenance of State Roads [for CRIF and EI&ISC Schemes] under the CRIF Act, 2000 
amended by the Finance Act, 2019 in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and 
circulated the same to all State Governments and Union Territories (UTs) in January, 2020. 
This criteria inter-alia provides for:  
i. Allocation of funds based on 30 percentage weightage to fuel consumption and 
70 percentage weightage to geographical area of the State/ UT. 
ii. Total cost of the schemes to be approved to be limited to the bank of sanctions 
which shall generally be three times of the annual accrual/ allocation, except for 
hill States and North -East States (where working season is limited) for which 
this is to be generally four times of the annual accrual/ allocation for the year for 
the State/ UT. 
iii. Finalization of list of projects by the Ministry in consultation with State 
Governments/ UTs.  
iv. Administrative Approval of projects (included under finalized lists) by 
concerned State Governments/ UTs. 
v. Technical Approv al and Financial Sanction (TA&FS) of projects 
administratively approved by State/ UT Public Works Departments (PWDs), 
Road Construction Departments/ Corporations, etc. 
vi. Maintaining a revolving balance of one third of accrual/ allocation for the 
States/ UT for the year with State/ UT while releasing funds.      

35 
 
vii. Release of funds to States/ UTs in Quarterly instalments linked to submission of 
Utilization Certificates (UCs).  
viii. Further release of funds by State Governments/ UTs to concerned executive 
agencies (e.g. PWDs, Road Construction Department/ Corporation, etc.) within 
7 days of release of funds by the Ministry. 
19.4. During 2021-22, the Ministry has finalized State road projects costing about Rs. 5,351 
crore for approval by various State Governments/ UTs. 
19.5. As per the CRIF Act, 2000 amended through Finance Act, 2019, the Central 
Government is no longer responsible for monitoring of State road projects under these 
schemes and expenditure incurred thereon. 
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee desires that the Ministry may take remedial measures to address the 
apprehensions raised by the rating agency CRISIL regarding the debt of under -construction 
HAM projects being at risk because of delays in execution. 
(Para 137) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 MoRTH and NHAI has introduced various incentives to improve the financial 
condition of Concessionaires and to ensure timely project completion. The number of 
payment milestones for Construction Support has been doubled, and NHAI is making direct 
payments t o approved sub -contractors. Further, NHAI has waived Bid Security and also 
reduced Performance Security as part of COVID relief.   As a result, Credit profile of road 
developers improved in FY 21 despite COVID 19 (CARE Ratings). 
Recommendation/Observation  
21. The Committee takes note of the information furnished by SBI with regard to the 
various challenges faced by lenders in road sector, alongwith its proposed solutions to the 
same. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure transparency regardi ng the 
status of land acquisition for a given project, starting from its tendering stage, for public 
scrutiny as well as to help bidders and lenders be more aware of the progress being made in 
the same. The Committee agrees with SBI’s suggestion to make pr ovisions for automatically 
de-scoping the portion of land which is not handed over by the Ministry/NHAI to the 
concessionaire within a defined period of time. 
(Para 142) 
Reply of the Ministry 

36 
 
21.1 Relevant changes to the Model Concession Agreement framewor k have already been 
introduced which allow the Authority to de -scope the portion of land which is not handed 
over by the Ministry/NHAI to the concessionaire. 
Recommendation/Observation  
22. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may develop a suitable mechanism for 
providing single window clearance for all approvals required for executing a project, with 
time line being fixed for taking decisions regarding such approvals, where possible, so as to 
minimise delay on account of obtaining necessary approvals. 
(Para 145) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 It has been decided to integrate in -scope approvals/licenses pertaining to MoRTH 
with National Single Window System (NSWS) through the Single Sign On integration option 
(Integration Option 3) for 
i. Specific permissions for access to highways  
ii. Licenses for access to Highways. 
22.2 In addition to the above, MoRTH has recently launched the Voluntary Vehicle 
Modernisation Program (VVMP) or the Vehicle Scrapping Policy. This policy provides for 
the creati on of Registered Vehicle Scrapping Facility (RVSF) and Automated Testing 
Stations for the vehicle. This policy also envisages the provision of a Single Window 
Clearance System for Initial Registration and the renewal of registration of such 
establishments/facilities. These rules also contain the various forms for Registration and the 
renewal of registration for such establishments. 
22.3 In this regard, MoRTH is undertaking the following activities to facilitate the 
development of required IT system through Invest India on the Madhyam portal created by 
the DPIIT. 
 Digitisation of required application forms 
 Integration of existing State single window system with NSWS 
 Payment of application processing fee 
Recommendation/Observation  
23. The Committee takes note of the apprehensions raised by the IDBI Bank regarding a 
lot of gap in the original project cost and actual cost. A reasonable assessment of the 
estimated project cost should be made by the authority. Provisions should be made to m ake 
necessary re -assessment of the project cost approved by the authority, in case substantial 
delays occur on account of reasons other than the concessionaire, factoring in present raw 
material costs, effect of inflation etc.. The Committee agrees with th e IDBI Bank’s suggestion 

37 
 
that the bank funding should be availed based on the cost approved by the authority and the 
difference, if any, should be funded by the promoter through equity upfront. 
(Para 153) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 It has been observed that the difference between Authorities’s assessed project cost 
and actual project cost approved by the lenders during Financial Closure has gone down 
significantly over the last few years. NHAI has mandate the use of various technolog ical 
measures to accurately estimate costs involved in road projects. DPRs for each project are 
uploaded along with the RFP for the lenders to review and provide their comments. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
24. The Committee notes the observation of IDBI Bank regarding there being a lot of 
mismatch in the financial progress and actual progress of road projects. The Committee 
recommends that a mechanism may be put in place to ensure that the progress made in a 
project is assessed periodically and where poss ible, proof of the progress achieved so far 
may be recorded through drone shots or other technology. The information regarding the 
physical progress of the project may be uploaded on a public platform, so as to allow public 
scrutiny of the progress achieve d, as well as to permit banks to release further funds based 
on the actual progress made in the project on ground. 
(Para 154) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 NHAI has taken number of steps to assess the comparability of physical and financial 
progress with the help of technology like (i) drone video at regular interval; (ii) site visits by 
field officers and HQ officers; and (iii) National Quality Monitors and Supervision 
Consultants. 
24.2 All agencies are required to use the technology like video of work progre ss as per 
contract and same is being enforced. 
24.3 Access to the available data is permitted with bankers also to cross -check assessment 
made by their lenders Engineer vis-a-vis actual physical progress of the work. 
Recommendation/Observation  
25. The Committee notes the very valid observations of IDBI Bank that in case of default 
by the Borrower, there is no fallback for the Banks, as there is no tangible security other than 
project cashflows, causing a high level risk of losing the amount Banks le nd to Borrowers. 
Banks face this inherent problem of lack of tangible security while lending to road projects. 
The Committee recommends that an in -depth study may be made by the Ministry with regard 

38 
 
to the possible solutions to the same. Having some sort of security to fall back on would solve 
a major pain-point faced by banks and financial institutions while lending to the road sector, 
and allow them to make more credit available to fund the road infrastructure projects. 
(Para 156) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1. The current MCA framework allows for the Lenders to terminate a road project in 
case of default by the Borrower. In such a scenario, the Authority covers 90% of the Debt 
Due extended by the Lenders for the project. 
Recommendation/Observation  
26. The Committee desires the Ministry to look into the creation of a dedicated dispute 
resolution body comprising of retired judges/technical experts/ bankers exclusively to settle 
disputes pertaining to road infrastructures projects. 
(Para 158) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 An effective Mechanism has been adopted in NHAI vide Policy Circular Dated 
02.06.2017 to establish a Conciliation &  Settlement Mechanism for Contractual under 
Contract agreement through a Panel of Independent Experts. This mechanism includes the 
conciliation of the disputes through Conciliation Committee of Independent Experts 
comprising retired Judges, senior experts from public administration, finance and from 
private sector. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27.  The Committee feels that lenders play a critical role in successful execution of PPP 
projects in the road sector. The Committee notes the apprehension of IIFCL regarding the 
lack of a tripartite agreement between the Concessioning Authority, the Concession aire and 
the Lenders. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI should frame Tripartite 
Agreements for its PPP projects, so as to provide some protection to the lenders, clearly 
listing the rights and remedies available to all the parties involved in the agreement.  
(Para 163) 
Reply of Ministry 
27.1  The roads sector model PPP framework already includes two tripartite agreements 
between the Concessioning Authority, the Concessionaire and the Lenders, namely the 
Escrow Agreement and Substitution Agreement. These agreements clearly list down the roles 
and responsibilities of all three parties. Further inputs for improving these agreements are 
welcome, as are inputs regarding specific requirements of new tripartite agreements. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  

39 
 
28.  The Committee desires that the Ministry may put in place provisions to ensure that 
all necessary approvals and clearances for a given road project are obtained before the 
declaration of its Appointed Date, so as to eradicate the delays faced by conce ssionaires on 
account of delays in obtaining such approvals. 
(Para 165) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 Desired provisions are available at Article 4.1.2 of Model Concession Agreement of 
HAM circulated vide MoRTH OM No. NH -24028/14/2014-H (Vol. II) dated 10.11.2020, 
which stipulates as under: 
“ The Conditions Precedent required to be satisfied by the Authority shall be deemed to have 
been fulfilled when the Authority shall have: 
a. procured for the Concessionaire the Right of Way to the Site in accordance wit h the 
provisions of Clauses 10.3.1 and 10.3.2; 
b. procured all Applicable Permits relating to environmental protection, and. 
conservation in respect land forming part of the Right of Way under Clause 10.3.1 
and 10.3.2; 
c. procured forest clearance for and in res pect land forming part of the Right of Way 
under Clause 10.3.1 and 10.3.2, save and except permission for cutting trees; and 
d. procured approval of the General Arrangement Drawings for the road over 
bridges/under bridges at level crossings on the Project  
28.2. Provided that the Authority shall be entitled to an additional period, not exceeding 
90(ninety) days beyond the period of 150 days without being liable for payment of any 
damages, for fulfilment of the Conditions Precedent set forth in this Clause.” 
Recommendation/Observation  
29. The Committee recommends that NHAI may issue clarification regarding the fate of 
annuities in cases where Extension of Time (EOT) is issued in HAM projects facing delays.  
(Para 166) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 Provisions are available at Article 23.6.2 of Model Concession agreement of HAM, 
which stipulates as under: 
‘The Completion Cost of remaining to be paid in pursuance of the provisions of clause 23.6.1 
shall be due and payable in biannual installments over a period of [15 (fifteen)] years 
commencing from COD, (the "Annuity Payments"). The 1st (first) installment of Annuity 
Payments shall be due and payable within 15 (fifteen) days of the 1801h(one hundred and 

40 
 
eightieth) day of COD and the remaining installments shall be due  and payable within 15 
(fifteen) days of completion of each of the successive six months ("the Annuity Payment 
Date"). For the avoidance of doubt, the last Annuity Payment Date would be adjusted to in 
such a way that it falls at the end of the Operations Period.’ 
Recommendation/Observation  
30. The Committee takes note of the important role played by IIFCL in financing road 
infrastructure sector projects and recommends that the Ministry may consider granting 
permission to IIFCL to invest in InvITs and proje ct bonds and to assist NHAI and State 
Authorities in financing road projects. 
(Para 170) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 NHAI is monetizing road projects through private placement of units in National 
Highways Infra Trust (NHIT) in accordance with Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(Infrastructure Investment Trusts) Regulations, 2014, as amended. 
30.2 NHAI sets up its bonds issues (private placement) through EBP platform of the stock 
exchanges and always invite all the investors (Corporate, QIBs, Bank and NBFC) without 
any restriction on any category/investor. This is in line with the guidelines issued by SEBI 
and negotiation for investment on bilateral basis is not permitted. 
30.3 It is understood that IIFCL has been recently permitted by RBI to invest and  lend 
funds to Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InvITs). We are in discussion with IIFCL for 
investment in units of NHIT in current round and for providing debt in future rounds. 
Recommendation/Observation  
31. The Committee reiterates the recommendation it made in para 153 of this Report and 
desires that steps may be taken to ensure that project cost is revised to factor in inflation as 
well as changed raw material costs, in case of project delays which are caused by reasons 
other than the concessionaire’s sub-optimal performance. 
(Para 177)  
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1 Article 19.10 of standard EPC Agreement provides steps for adjustment of the 
Contract Price for increase or decrease in rates and price of labour, cement, steel, plant, 
machinery and spares, bitumen, fuel and lubricants, and other material inputs. 
Recommendation/Observation  
32. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take appropriate steps to ensure 
training facilities to tackle the shortage of skilled manpower in road projects. Assessment 

41 
 
may be made regarding the present shortfall in terms of human resources in road 
infrastructure sector and a detailed plan may be made to address the same. 
(Para 179) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1 In order to assess the training needs of the organization, a Training Need Analysis has 
been carried out and the areas an d skills that employees require Training have been 
identified. For capacity building of the officers/staff of NHAI, employees were deputed to 
prestigious training institutes for various training programmes. Some of training activities 
undertaken/planned in NHAI are as under: - 
a. 05 Programmes attended by 145 officers in FY 20-21  
b. 371 officers nominated for 32 programmes through IAHE, PARI, IRC, ING -IABSE 
& IISSM (from April – Sep, 21) 
c. 30 Programmes till March, 2022 for technical officers rolled-out  
d. 16 weeks Induction Training for  94 newly recruited Dy. Managers (Tech.) in 04 
batches is underway.  
e. 201 Finance Personnel are nominated for 05 days Training Module conducted through 
ICWAI across 08 locations.  
f. Rolled out Bridge Engineering Training for 100 professionals of 
Contractors/Consultants/IEs.  
g. 15 Days Training Programme on Quality Aspects for Sub -professionals of 
Contractors/Consultants through IAHE initiated 
h. Tailor Made Programmes for Technical Officers under finalization  
i. Refresher Training Programmes for Technical Officers under finalization 
Recommendation/Observation  
33. The Committee desires the Ministry to look into the issue of delay in approval and 
release of funds in case of Change of Scope/ utility shifting, as well as in delay caused in 
road projects due to delays in decision making at various levels. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may prescribe reasonable but fixed timelines for decision -making by the 
Concessioning Authority at different levels. 
(Para 180) 
Reply of the Ministry 

42 
 
33.1 In this regard it may be mentioned that Para 2 of NHAI Policy Guidelines  No. 
9.2.24/2019 dated 29.04.2019 stipulates as under: 
 “……….the Executive Committee has directed to discourage Change of Scope in awarded 
works. Change of Scope/ Reduction in Scope in case of awarded project shall be finalized 
during the project design development stage and incorporated in the project with the approval 
of Competent Authority of NHAI within six months of Appointed Date. In exceptional cases, 
change in scope may be taken up after six months of Appointed Date duly recording the 
reasons/ jus tifications for delays in identifying COS. For under implementation projects, 
where Appointed dates have occurred prior to six months from the date of these guidelines, 
pending COS/RIS proposals shall be decided within 30 days of these guidelines. Reduction in 
scope, if any, due to non -availability of land or any other valid reasons shall be decided as 
soon as noticed and shall not be left open………….” 
33.2 In continuation of aforesaid guidelines, NHAI policy guidelines no. 9.2.27/2019 dated 
23.09.2019 and NHAI policy guideline no. 8.3.41/2021 dated 24.08.2021 has been issued. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
34. The Committee takes note of the issue faced by Union Bank wherein it has to rely on 
the data submitted by the company alone, at the time of assessment of credit limits. The 
Committee strongly recommends the creation of a well -maintained central database ke eping 
track of the projects executed by different concessionaires across the country. The database 
may have important details like the present status of the current projects being executed by a 
concessionaire, the quality of their past works, financial lia bilities (if any) of the 
Concessionaire as per the Concessioning Authorities. The Committee feels that having such a 
database would not only help bankers make more informed decisions while lending in the 
road sector, but it would also help Concessioning Au thorities to take a more nuanced 
approach while considering bids submitted by the concessionaire for any given road project. 
(Para 183) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 It is assumed that all lending institutions take due diligence regarding performance of 
the agency and their credit worthiness while sanctioning the project loans. 
34.2 Ministry and its agencies provide all necessary data including quality of the work to 
the bank as requested by them from time to time. 
Recommendation/Observation  
35. The Committee desires the Ministry to look into the delays being faced in achieving 
financial closure in HAM projects and make suitable amendments to the MCA for the HAM 
projects, if necessary. The Committee further feels that the Ministry should review it s current 
tender awarding methodologies and include safeguards to ensure that the number and size of 

43 
 
projects awarded to concessionaires are reasonable enough with their financial capabilities, 
present annual revenue etc. 
(Para 184) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 It is mentioned that bids are invited on the basis of standard Request for Proposal 
documents. In case of EPC Projects, the Bidder whose bid is adjudged as responsive against 
the test of Responsiveness mentioned in the RFP documents and who quotes lowe st price 
(after getting qualified if the available bid capacity is more than the Total Bid Value) is 
declared as the selected bidder. Similarly, the bid is adjudged as responsive in case of HAM 
and BOT Projects as per the provisions given in the RFP. 
Recommendation/Observation  
36. The Committee is happy to note that Covid -19 pandemic has not had any worsening 
impact on the NPAs in road sector. This points to the efficacy of the Covid-19 relief measures 
initiated by RBI as well as the Ministry. Despite  the minimal effect of COVID -19 on 
worsening the road infrastructure sector loan assets of the banks, however, the Committee 
notes that most public sector banks have been carrying a substantial percentage of NPA 
assets in the road sector since before the onset of the pandemic. The Committee feels that this 
is a cause of grave concern and would act as a deterrent to the banking sector from lending 
more funds to the road sector going forward. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may take ser ious notice of the issues and challenges faced by the financial 
institutions and take effective steps to address them to the extent possible, aiming for a 
desirable level of sharing of risks between the Ministry, the concessionaire and the lending 
institution. 
(Para 216) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 NHAI has already initiated a process of holding regular meetings with lenders and 
addressing their concerns. The Model Concession Agreement framework has been modified 
to make the projects more bankable. Further, MoRTH and NHAI have introduced multiple 
guidelines to resolve stuck projects, streamline the calculation of termination payments, and 
provide greater comfort to the lenders. Suggestions from banks and lending institutions are 
invited on regulatory changes which can make the roads sector more attractive for lending. 
Recommendation/Observation  
37. It has come to the notice of the Committee that in certain cases, the loan sought by the 
concessionaire is against a substantially higher project cost, as compared  to the Total 
Project Cost approved by NHAI for the project which already includes provisions for 
contractor’s/concessionaire’s margin and the financing cost for raising the amount needed to 
execute the project as well. The Committee recommends that the banks should treat proposals 
with such higher estimated project cost with great caution and make its own in -depth study 

44 
 
into the estimated project cost, or hire an independent third party consultant for this purpose. 
The Ministry/NHAI should communicate with  the banks the procedure followed by them to 
arrive at the Total Project Cost for any given project. While sanctioning any loans for a 
project while considering estimated cost to be substantially higher than the Ministry/NHAI's 
approved TPC, the banks may record its reasons in writing regarding why they feel that the 
higher project cost, against which the loan is being sanctioned, is justified. 
(Para 219) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1 MoRTH/NHAI follows a standard process for working out estimated costs of projects 
executed by them. The Detailed Project Reports for each project are uploaded along with 
tender documents for reference of Lenders. It may be noted that this trend of funding 
substantially higher project cost has reduced drastically over the last 4 -5 years and NHAI has 
come out with circulars benchmarking costs which can be financed against each project 
towards financial closure. 
Recommendation/Observation  
38. The Committee feels that the banks should give due importance to a concessionaire's 
performance in similar projects in the past. In this regard, the Committee recommends that 
the Ministry, in coordination with State PWDs, may maintain a database of all road 
contractors and concessionaires with details regarding their performance in past p rojects, 
the quality of work etc. Such a database may be made public so as to make it easy for the 
financial institutions and banks to analyse the past performance of their prospective 
borrowers. The Committee believes that doing so would help prevent the banks from lending 
to poorly performing contractors/ concessionaires. 
(Para 221) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1 It is assumed that all lending institutions take due diligence regarding performance of 
the agency and their credit worthiness while sanctioning the project loans. 
38.2 Ministry and its agencies provide all necessary data including quality of the work to 
the bank as requested by them from time to time. 
Recommendation/Observation  
39. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should break down big road projects 
into smaller stretches, making it optional for interested parties to choose the number of 
stretches for which they are willing to bid upon. This would encourage smaller contractors to 
participate in the bidding process, while also not dissuad ing big players from bidding for the 
entire project. 
(Para 232) 

45 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1 The Ministry breaks down its key corridors into smaller projects before bidding. The 
average length of a project has been reduced over the last year to encourage increased 
participation of players in the bidding process. 
39.2 Moreover, relaxation in bid security and performance security have led to increased 
competition in the bidding process and ultimately lower awarded costs.  
39.3 These measures have led to an increase in average number of bids per project from 5 
to 15 in FY 21. The ministry will look for more ways to encourage higher participation in the 
bidding of its projects.  
Recommendation/Observation  
40. The Committee further desires that the Ministry may incorporate provisions for more 
frequent quality checks in road projects that are sub -let by the main contractor, since the 
earning margin available with the sub -contractors in such cases is much thinner, making 
these projects more prone to lapses in quality of materials used as well as failure to follow 
established guidelines for construction. 
(Para 233) 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1 NHAI has taken following step to ensure quality of its roads: 
 Retired senior officers from Govt. departments have been engaged as Team Leaders 
for quality inspection of NH projects. The projects are selected randomly with special 
emphasis on low quoted bids. 
Recommendation/Observation  
41. The Committee notes that significantly higher cost of land acquisition has been listed 
as the main reason by the Ministry for the huge cost overruns in BharatmalaPariyojana 
Phase-I. While the exact cost of land acquisition cannot be precisely estimated esp ecially in 
such long-term projects, the Committee feels that the Ministry should factor in the average 
rate of growth of land prices in its estimates, alongwith the effect of inflation to arrive at 
more accurate project estimates, which, in turn, would all ow the Ministry to be proactive in 
terms of managing its finances. 
(Para 240) 
Reply of the Ministry 
41.1 The Ministry estimates land acquisition and compensation related costs for land 
acquired for road construction projects in accordance with the Right to Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 
2013 and brought into effect from 2015.  

46 
 
41.2 The Ministry takes into account prevailing circle rates, average historical land prices 
of the regions where acquisition is planned, number of structures, plantation area and related 
land assets in the land being acquired to arrive at the total land acquisition cost estimate for a 
project.  
41.3 In the recent cost estimation process for BharatmalaPariyojana (Phase I and Phase II-
A), land acquisition costs of awarded projects have been considered for estimating a more 
accurate land acquisition rate at a state and lane status level.  
41.4 Going forward, the ministry will also factor in the actual land acquisition cost 
incurred across projects till date to arrive at a more accurate estimate instead of using 
normative land acquisition costs.  
Recommendation/Observation  
42. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may allocate funds to carry out 
research for best construction techniques in the North -East regions, with focus on the hilly 
nature of the region as well as the frequent rains and floods. The Committee desires that 
NHIDCL may lay special focus on ensuring sufficient provisions for road safety in the 
projects carried out in the region. 
(Para 247) 
Reply of the Ministry 
42.1 Noted for compliance. However, Indian Roads Congress (IRC) has specific codes for 
hill roads. There are adequate provisions for road safety during planning, construction and 
operation of the works. 
Recommendation/Observation  
43. The Committee takes note of the Extensive Role played by Indian Roads Congress in 
development of S tandards, specification, code of practices, guidelines, research based State 
of Art Reports, etc. on various aspects of Road and Bridges. The Committee is distressed to 
note the fund crunch being faced by Indian Road Congress despite playing such an  important 
role in research-led development in the road sector in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may urgently look into the Budgetary requirement of this 
Important organisation so as to fuel research in important subjects pert aining to the Road 
Sector and to permit the framing of a single code for Highways, and for bridges across the 
Nation.  
(Para 261) 
Reply of the Ministry 
43.1. Indian Roads Congress (IRC) is a registered society. Ministry has been supporting 
IRC from time to time in various ways as one -time assistance like construction of IRC 
building, development of software etc., besides providing assistance for organizing semi nars 

47 
 
and membership fee on regular basis. The Ministry has been providing possible financial 
supports to IRC from time to time. 
43.2 All codes related to Highways and bridges, published by IRC, is being adopted by all 
the agencies of Central Government and State Government uniformly across the country.  
Recommendation/Observation  
44. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may setup capacity building and skill 
development programmes for State Road Departments, Consultants, Contractors, 
Constructions Workers and equipment operators. This would ensure that guidelines framed 
by IRC are duly followed during construction of Roads. 
(Para 262) 
Reply of the Ministry 
44.1 IAHE imparts training to Highways Engineer and Professional of Central and State 
Govt., PSUs, Contractors, Consultants etc. in the country on entire range of subjects through 
32 training programmes dealing with the Planning, Design, Construction, Operation , 
Maintenance and Management of Highways including Bridges, Tunnels as well as 
Management Development Programme. IAHE also imparts training to Highways 
Professionals from abroad under various plans/schemes of Govt. of India/International 
Organisations. IAH E is not mandated to provide the training programmes for construction 
workers and equipment operators for which there are private institute for necessary training. 
Moreover, the skill development for construction workforce and equipment operator etc. are 
also undertaken by Ministry of Skill Development as parts of its own initiative to improve 
overall skill capacity of employable workforce.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
45. The Committee desires to be apprised as to whether the IRC’s documents are being 
followed by the Ministry in the flood -prone regions of the country. The frequent damage 
caused by floods to NHs in such regions means that either the existing 
recommendations/guidelines in this regard are not being implemented, or the documentation 
in question needs to be updated to develop more effective norms. The committee recommends 
that the Ministry may take necessary action to work out this issue at the earliest, since 
connectivity is of utmost important in flood-hit regions. 
(Para 265)  
Reply of the Ministry 
45.1 Highways including bridges and cross drainage structures thereon are designs   and 
constructed as all-weather Roads in all geographical location including flood affected areas as 
per the standards and guidelines prepared by Indian Roads Congress (IRC) such as IRC-34; 

48 
 
“recommendation for Road construction in areas affected by water login, flooding and/or 
Salts Infestation (First Revision)” and IRC-113; “Guidelines on Flood Disaster Mitigation for 
Highways Engineer” and guidelines issued by this Ministry from time to time. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
46. The Committee appreciate the Training Programmes conducted by IAHE for Officers 
of the Ministry/NHAI/BROs various States PWD Departments as well as contractors and 
consultants. The Committee hopes that curricu lum of the Training programmes is refreshed 
periodically to reflect the latest developments in the road infrastructure sector. 
(Para 268) 
Reply of the Ministry 
46.1 IAHE organises various kinds of training programmes to Highways professionals so 
as to meet  the specific needs. Codes contents of the different programmes are refreshed 
periodically in consultation with domain experts so as to precisely convert the specific 
requirements and latest developments & innovation in survey; material technology 
construction methodology etc 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
47. The Committee agrees with the suggestion made by IAHE and recommends that the 
Ministry may make it mandatory for all highway professionals in the country to attend 
relevant training programme at IAHE. 
(Para 270) 
Reply of the Ministry 
47.1 A 15 (Fifteen) days Certificate course for Training Programme for Quality 
Control/Assistant Quality Control Engineer (Sub -professionals) of Contractors/consultant on 
material testing process has been developed and are being conducted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
48. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry by means of identification and 
rectification of black spots on NHs across the country. The Committee appreciates the work 
done so far in this regard but feels that a large number of black spots still rem ain 
unidentified, given the extremely high number of road accidents that take place in India each 
year. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may conduct an extensive study to 
identify as many bottlenecks as it can, and rectify the same at the earlies t. Latest technology 

49 
 
and data science tools may be employed in this process, in order to utilize the data gathered 
by the Ministry regarding road accidents, in order to identify black spots across the country. 
Topmost priority should be given to rectificat ion of black spots, once identified. Preventive 
measures must be immediately taken at such black spots, till the time the rectification process 
can be completed. 
(Para 272) 
Reply of the Ministry 
48.1 Ministry has taken Road safety on top priority. In order  to take precautionary 
measures for road safety. Ministry has issued guidelines for frequent safety Audits at all 
stages (Design, construction, and operation). After Construction of Road there may be change 
in scenarios like Ribbon development, Urbanizatio n, Mixed Traffic & Increase in traffic 
volume leading to creation of accidents/Blackspot. apart from this Accidents happens due to 
multiple causes such as over speeding, use of Mobile phone, drunken driving/consumption of 
alcohol / drug, overloaded Vehicle , vehicular condition, poor light condition, jumping red 
light, overtaking, neglect of civic bodies, weather condition, fault of driver, driving on wrong 
side, defect in road condition, defect in condition of motor vehicle, fault of cyclist, fault of 
pedestrian etc. However, no separate data/record is maintained for accident occurring due to 
road engineering. 
48.2 Ministry, vide letter No. RW/NH -29011/01/2021-S&R (P&B) RSCE dated 8 th Sept 
2021, has also issued guidelines for taking advance action for remova l of accident spots on 
NHs as per police reports without waiting for converting them into black spots after 
accidents/fatalities. Transport Research Wing (TRW) of MoRTH is assigned the 
responsibility of collecting/receiving road accident/fatality data from  different state police 
departments/agencies, analyse, and filter the locations to be defined as black spot. 
48.3 Further, Ministry has developed a Blackspot MIS portal where details of all 
blackspots, ids, photographs, rectification status and post rectif ication feedback are collected 
and monitored. 
Recommendation/Observation  
49. The Committee recommends that the black spot identification and rectification 
process may be streamlined so as to remove delays in the decision -making process, by 
implementing provisions for delegation of powers to carry out rectification measures with 
due urgency. 
(Para 274) 
Reply of the Ministry 
49.1 To overcome delays in decision making process, NHAI has already issued 
comprehensive guidelines for rectification of blackspots  vide policy circular dated 
19.12.2019 (copy enclosed Annexure -V). Vide circular, Regional Officers have been 

50 
 
delegated powers uptoRs. 50 Crore (including land acquisition) for faster approval and 
execution of rectification works. 
Recommendation/Observation  
50. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the codal provisions 
prescribed to enhance road safety on highways should be periodically updated from time to 
time, to reflect international best practices in this regard. 
(Para 276) 
Reply of the Ministry 
50.1 Road safety Audit is an integral part of DPR/ Feasibility study as per IRC Code “IRC-
SP-88” and action is being taken by ministry accordingly in all projects. Ministry has issued 
several guidelines / circulars for rectification of bla ck spots so that the road accidents could 
be minimized and precious life of the road users are saved. 
50.2 To ensure safety on highways ministry takes following steps: 
i. To carry out all stage (Design, construction, and operation) road safety audits for all 
National Highways as per IRC Code “IRC -SP-88 and rectification of accident/black 
spots accordingly. 
ii. Provision of Rumble strips or bar markings at the approaches of junctions on NHs as 
per IRC:99 
iii. Provision of Speed Limit signs at desired locations of NHs network. 
iv. As per IRC-67 -2012 Sign Boards are provided in regional/local language and English 
to alert the drivers 
v. Provision of amber beacons for traffic approaching a junction as per IRC. 
50.3 Also, regular review meetings are done by senior officers of Ministry with 
Regional/field officers of Ministry, NHAI and NHIDCL to formulate action plans for 
identification and rectification of Black Spots with a targeted Timeline 
Recommendation/Observation  
51. The Committee feels that the Ministry should lay much more emphasis on its road 
safety awareness initiatives. Social media may be utilized for this purpose. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry may, in coordination with Ministry of Education, introduce 
information pertaining to road safety, basic road etiq uettes, action to be taken in case of an 
accident, etc. in school curriculum across the country. 
(Para 277) 
Reply of the Ministry 

51 
 
51.1 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has one Road Safety advocacy scheme 
namely “Financial Assistance for Administering for Road Safety Advocacy and awards for 
the outstanding work done in field of Road Safety” through which various NGOs and other 
organisation including States/UTS conduct Road Safety related awareness programmes 
across the country. 
51.2 The Mi nistry has also spread awareness on Road Safety through Media on various 
Social Media Platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram etc. PIB’s help is also taken in 
this regard. Ministry has also started sending various Road Safety related massages to th e DL 
holders thought mobile.  
51.3 The Ministry has taken up the matter with the M/o Education/CBSE for inclusion of 
the subject “Road Safety” in the CBSE Curriculum for the student. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
52. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may implement the various suggestions 
made by Indian Roads Congress to make the NHs safer for people. 
(Para 287) 
Reply of the Ministry 
52.1 All the relevant IRC codes are being followed for design, construction and operation 
& maintenance of National Highways. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
53. The Committee feels that the State-wise data available with the Ministry can be put to 
great use by analyzing the trend of road accidents and death caused thereby, in the past few 
years. The Committee recommends that in case of such well -performing States, the Ministry 
may analyze the measures taken by the departments concerned of such States and to see how 
these compare with the States that are showing a consistent increase in the number of road 
accidents taking place each year. 
(Para 289) 
Reply of the Ministry 
53.1. Transport Research Wing (TRW) under the Ministry of Road Transport and highways 
collects Accidents Data from the State Police Departments in Standardised  formats as 
provided by the UNESCAP under the Asia Pacific Road Accident Dat abase (APRAD) 
project. This formats were revisited by the Committee of experts on Road Safety in 2017 
comprising of experts from IIT Delhi, IIT Kharagpur, DGPs of Police of Tamil N adu and 

52 
 
Tripura, representatives of WHO, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Secretary, 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and TRW. 
Recommendation/Observation  
54. The Committee takes note of the reasons furnished by the Ports & Transport 
Department, Government of Gujarat, behind the road accidents. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may work in coordination with the State 
Governments to encourage stricter implementation of traffic laws, while working in tandem 
to improve the quality of roads, both in terms of construction and design, in order to bring 
the number of accidents significantly down. 
(Para 295) 
Reply of the Ministry 
54.1. Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019, has inserted following sections in the 
principal Motor vehicles Act, 1988:- 
i. Section 198A - Failure to comply with standards for road design, construction 
and maintenance. 
1. Any designated authority, contractor, consultant or concessionaire responsible for the 
design or construction or maintenance of the safety standards of the road shall follow 
such design, construction and maintenance standards, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government from time to time. 
2. Where failure on the part of the designated authority, contractor, consultant or 
concessionaire responsible under sub -section (1) to comply with standards for road 
design, construction and maintenance, results in death or disability, such authority or 
contractor or concessionaire shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees and the same shall be paid to the Fund constituted under section 164B. 
ii. Section 136A- Electronic monitoring and enforcement of road safety. 
1. The State Government shall ensure electronic monitoring and enforcement of road 
safety in the manner provided un der sub -section (2) on national highways, state 
highways, roads or in any urban city within a State which has a population up to such 
limits as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
2. The Central Government shall make rules for the electronic monitori ng and 
enforcement of road safety including speed cameras, closed -circuit television 
cameras, speed guns, body wearable cameras and such other technology 
54.2 Further, MoRTH has notified GSR 575(E) dated 11th August, 2021 regarding 
Electronic Monitoring and enforcement of Road Safety. 
Recommendation/Observation  

53 
 
55. The Committee strongly recommends that special attention may be given to the design 
and implementation of approach roads and entry & exit ramps on highways, since poor 
design and construction of these stretches inevitably leads to road accidents. 
(Para 296) 
Reply of the Ministry 
55.1 The design of junctions with approach road is done as per relevant IRC standards. 
NHAI has further issued guidelines for providing grade separated structures at intersections 
vide policy circular no. 12.22 dated 23.09.2020. Further, NHAI has also issued instructions to 
all field units for review and monitoring of design of junctions under construction. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
56. The Committee appreciates the various steps taken by the Ministry to help the road 
construction industry cope with the adverse impact of the Coronavirus pandemic. The 
Committee is happy to note that despite the pandemic and the ensuing lockdown in the 
Financial Year 2020-21, the Ministry managed to achieve an impressive pace of construction 
of 37 kilometers highways per day. The Committee hopes that the Ministry takes necessary 
action to keep up this pace of construction and minimizes delays in its road pro jects in the 
coming years to ensure optimal utilization of allocated funds. 
(Para 322) 
Reply of the Ministry 
56.1. Views of the Committee have been noted for needful action. 
Recommendation/Observation  
57. The Committee observes that State Highways and local roads play a significant role 
in the economic growth of our country and thus, need allocation of sufficient funds for their 
maintenance. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may seriously consider IRC’s 
suggestion to provide financial assistanc e to State Governments for the maintenance of 
Highways and roads under their control, from the CRF fund. 
(Para 326) 
Reply of the Ministry 
57.1. The Ministry allocates fund for State Governments/ Union Territories (UTs) for both 
development and maintenance of State Roads under the Central Road & Infrastructure Fund 
(CRIF) and Economic Importance & Interstate Connectivity (EI&ISC) Schemes as per the 
provisions of CRIF Act, 2000 amended by the Finance Act, 2019. 

54 
 
57.2 The Ministry finalizes list of projects to be taken up under these schemes in 
consultation with State Governments/ UTs. Administrative Approval of projects (included 
under finalized lists) are given by concerned State Governments/ UTs. Technical Approval 
and Financial Sanction (TA&FS) of projects a dministratively approved are to be given by 
Public Works Departments (PWDs), Road Construction Departments/ Corporations, etc. A 
revolving balance of one third of accrual/ allocation for the States/ UT are maintained in a 
financial year while releasing funds. Release of funds to States/ UTs in Quarterly instalments 
re linked to submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs). Further release of funds by State 
Governments/ UTs are to be made to concerned executive agencies (e.g. PWDs, Road 
Construction Departme nt/ Corporation, etc.) within 7 days of release of funds by the 
Ministry. 
57.3 During 2021-22, Rs. 4549.34 crore has been released to various States / UTs under 
CRF / CRIF Scheme out of total BE outlay of Rs. 6935 crore upto November, 2021. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
58. The Committee agrees with the suggestions put forth regarding the need for the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to have a coordination mechanism with the 
Tourism Departments of State Governments. Tourism can give impetus to economic growth 
of any region. Excellent road connectivity to existing tourist attractions as well as potential 
tourist sites is a prerequisite for the same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may hold periodic meetings with the Ministr y of Tourism as well as State Tourism 
Departments, and devise a time -bound Master Plan to enhance road connectivity to tourist 
places across the country, in order to bolster both domestic and foreign tourism. 
(Para 329) 
Reply of the Ministry 
58.1 Multiple consultations have been held with multiple ministries like Ministry of 
Railways, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Civil Aviation and state governments and agencies. 
Inputs have been collected on enhancing the Highway network connectivity to major to urist 
destinations, aspirational districts and districts affected by Left Wing Extremism.  
58.2 The Ministry has taken inputs on boosting the logistical and multi modal connectivity 
to the key tourist destinations across the country through the development  of 35 Multimodal 
Logistics Parks in key strategic locations. MoRTH will keep holding consultations with all 
concerned ministries including Ministry of Tourism and State Tourism Departments to 
bolster domestic as well as international tourism across the nation. 
Recommendation/Observation  
59. The Committee recommends that NHAI may ensure that urgent necessary action is 
taken to reduce the accidents taking place on the Rajahmundry Bypass. NHAI may also 

55 
 
assess the need for addition of another lane on the flyover constructed at Benz Circle, 
Vijayawada. 
(Para 343) 
Reply of the Ministry 
59.1 NH-216A passes through the Rajamundry town. In order to ease out traffic congestion 
in Rajamundry town, NHAI has already taken up the project for “Four laning of 
Gundugolanu-Devarapalli-Kovuuru section of NH -16 on Hybrid Annuity Mode” which 
bypassed the Rajamundry town and the project is nearing completion. 
59.2 Further, Detailed Project Report for Rajamundry Bypass on NH -216A from 
Dewancheruvu to Vemagiri  is under progress. 
59.3 Also, the proposal for construction of Flyover at Gammon junction &Morampadu 
junction and five grade separated junctions at black spot junction locations of Kadiyapulanka, 
Jonnada, Undrajavaram, Tetali and Kaikaram on NH-216A are also under consideration. 
59.4 Construction of 3 lane Benz Circle Flyover on eastern side has already been 
completed as part of 4-laning project of Vijayawada – Machilipatnam Section of NH-65. 
59.5 Further, the work for construction of 3 lane Benz Circle flyover on  western side has 
also started on 05.11.2020 and the work is in progress. 
Recommendation/Observation  
60. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work on development of eateries, 
toilets, rest house etc. on National Highways, to allow truck drivers more comfort while 
travelling long distances. This would also help them be more concentrated while driving and 
would thus lead to lesser road accidents. 
(Para 355) 
Reply of the Ministry 
60.1 NHAI will develop world class ‘Wayside Amenities’ at more than 60 0 locations 
across 22 states along the National Highways in the next five years, out of which 100 is 
targeted for Award in 2021-22. As per plan, wayside amenities will be developed every 30-50 
km of current and upcoming Highways and Expressways. The amenit ies will include 
numerous facilities for passengers such as Fuel Station, Electric Charging Facilities, Food 
Court, Retail Shops, Bank ATM, and Toilets with shower facility, Children Play Area, 
Medical Clinic, Village Hatt for local handicrafts etc. 
60.2 NHAI is developing Wayside Amenities on lease basis as NHAI policy guidelines 
dated 20.08.2021 and MoRT&H guidelines dated 11.02.2021. 
60.3 39 Wayside Amenities Sites Awarded in year 2021 till October.  

56 
 
60.4 NHAI is already operating 14 wayside amenities on lease basis across the country 
60.5 NHIDCL has taken up construction of toilets as part of the Swachhta Action Plan. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
61. The Committee believes that the usage of modern machinery for construction can lead 
to improved road quality, while saving time as well. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may look into the feasibility of the suggestion made by ICEMA to specify the details 
of mechanization to be used in the execution of a road project, in the road construction 
contract. A decision may be taken in this regard with due consideration to the benefits of 
prescribing such a mandate and the financial ability of the road contractors in India to 
purchase/rent such machinery. 
(Para 357) 
Reply of the Ministry 
61.1 This Ministry encourages contractor/concessionaire to use modern machinery in Road 
construction. The quality issues are related to the machinery are checked by Authority 
Engineer/Independent Engineer deployed by the Project.  
  

57 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the concessionaire is responsible for the Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M) of the road projects for the entire Concession Period (BOT (Toll) and 
BOT (Annuity) projects) or 15 years (HAM projects) in PPP projects, but in case of Public 
funded projects, the contractor is responsible for rectification of defects/ maintenance only 
during the defects/maintenance-cum-defects liability period which varies between one to four 
years. Since a large number of road projects are Public funded projects, especially the ones 
that are deemed not to be financially viable for private sector participation, the o nus of their 
maintenance falls on the Ministry/NHAI/State PWDs. In this regard, the Committee feels that 
the amount of funds allocated for the maintenance of National Highways every year is 
minuscule given the vast lengths of the National Highways across t he country. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the maintenance of the existing network of National 
Highways should be given topmost priority and the same should be reflected in the budgetary 
allocation made for the same. 
(Para 12)   
 Reply of Ministry 
1.1  Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of National Highways (NHs) is carried out for the 
stretches not covered under any programme or completed stretches where there are no 
liabilities of contractors to maintain such stretches. For the NH stretches developed on  EPC 
mode (Engineering, Procurement, Construction), the contractor is responsible for rectification 
of the defects and concurrent maintenance of project highway during the defect liability 
period after completion of the work. For the NH stretches developed  on BOT mode/ HAM, 
the Concessionaire is responsible for the maintenance of the project highway during the 
concession period. For some of the developed NH stretches through public funding, 
maintenance contracts have been taken up for a definite time period  (4 to 9 years) on 
Operation, Maintenance and Transfer (OMT) basis. Maintenance of the project highway 
under OMT contracts is the responsibility of the Concessionaire. 
1.2 For the remaining NH length, not covered under any programme, the Ministry 
allocates funds under for their M&R. Since inception of Bharatmala Pariyojana, Ministry is 
taking up more and more stretches under development and after development of these 
stretches, maintenance & operation is being done through contract, e.g. OMT, TOT etc. InvIT 
is also being initiated. Further, to overcome the shortfall in allocation under M&R head, the 
scheme of Periodical Repair/IRQP from Revenue Section (M&R) has been shifted to Capital 
Section (NH -O) w.e.f. 2021 -22. Hence, more fund is available for keeping the National 
Highways traffic worthy and no shortage of funds is anticipated at this stage.  
  

58 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
1.3 The Committee feels that a large number of National Highways across the 
country are marred by dangerous potholes and need s to be maintained in a better state. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may allocate some part of the 
maintenance budget to thoroughly monitor the vast network of National Highways 
across the country to be able to carry out the repair works of potholes within no times, 
which will enable to prevent any possible accidents due to poor state of NHs.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
2.      The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in para 184 of its 287 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2 021-22) of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, which is 
reproduced below verbatim. 
The Committee is of the view that roads across the country require frequent trenching 
for the purpose of laying of fiber lines, gas pipelines, and other similar amenities. The 
patchwork done thereafter is often delayed and rarely meets the desired construction 
quality, thus thwarting the speed of vehicles on the road and acting as a safety 
hazard. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider the inclusion of a 
provision for dedicated underground utility corridors in its upcoming National 
Highways projects to prevent frequent trenching. The provision for construction of 
dedicated underground utility corridor should be included at the DPR stage itself. The 
extra cost incurred for building the underground utility corridors may be replenished 
by monetizing the constructed utility corridors by charging the Departments and 
Companies which will benefit from avoid ance of frequent trenching of roads. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may create a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) 
for the purpose of monetization of the utility corridors. 
 (Para 16) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
2.1    The Ministry agrees that the developme nt of essential utility corridors to lay down 
water pipelines, OFC cable, power line, drainage/sewerage network, gas pipelines etc. along 
with highway development shall be definitely time and cost saver as well as it will enhance 
economic viability and environment sustainability.  
2.2    This is to inform that the existing National Highway Right of Way (ROW) varies 
from 12 -60 m and depending upon the availability of space in ROW, permissions to lay 
utilities in a width of 2 m on extreme edges of ROW are bei ng given. As the different 
agencies approach this Ministry for such permissions at different timelines, the utility space is 
utilized mostly in an unorganized manner. While developing the National Highways of 
standards to serve projected future traffic, th e additional ROW is being acquired to make a 
consistent ROW of 30 -60 m. For a 4 -lane divided carriageway development, 45 -60 m ROW 

59 
 
is maintained through acquisition while for a 2 -lane paved shoulder development ROW upto 
30 m is maintained. Further the Natio nal Highways passes through rural and urban areas and 
in some cases, ROWs are compromised in urban areas.  
2.3    The need of utility corridors may also be divided into two parts i.e.   long distance 
utilities viz. OFC, gas/oil pipelines etc. passing through rural areas and short distance utilities 
viz. power lines, drainage/ sewerage, water pipelines etc. needing urban space. There are also 
security/safety & operational issues related to par allel and close running of power & OFC 
lines, power & gas/oil pipelines etc. 
Another area of concerns is: - 
i. The economical viability - whether such ducts are compulsorily to be built 
along highways without actual assessment of need in the area, or to be bu ilt 
on the basis of need after getting requirements from various agencies and 
ii. Cost of such ducts - cost sharing of construction of ducts and required land to 
be acquired specifically for such utility corridor, investments & tariff, 
operation & maintenance cost etc. 
2.4    In order to get all the above issues examined and to have a draft Policy Note/SOP, it has 
been decided by Ministry to take consultancy services of Andhra Pradesh Urban 
Infrastructure Asset Management Limited (APUIAML). Necessary instructio ns have been 
given to NHAI on 25th September 2020 to engage APUIAML. The draft policy so prepared 
shall be shared with all stake holders before its finalization. Based on the finalized policy, the 
decision on creation of a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for  the purpose of monetization of 
the utility corridors may be taken. 
2.5  In this connection, APUIAML has recently submitted an interim feasibility report for 
laying of integrated utility corridors along greenfield NHs.   
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
2.6  The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made by the Ministry 
with regard to preparation of draft Policy Note/ SOP on the viability of having 
provisions for utility corridors and the decision regarding creation of a Special Purpose 
Vehicle for the purpose of monetization of the utility corridors, based on the finalized 
policy. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3.  The Committee notes that carrying out research activities in relation to the development, 
maintenance and management of highwa ys is one of the functions entrusted to NHAI under 
the NHAI Act, 1988. Research activities are crucial for NHAI to figure out the best 
methodologies for construction and maintenance of National Highways across the 
significantly diverse geography present in India. The Committee desires to be apprised of the 
amount of funds spent by NHAI on carrying out this mandate and recommends that it may lay 
a much greater focus on its research activities and ensure good budgetary allocation under 
this head.  

60 
 
 (Para 32) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
3. 1   NHAI has created a Research Fund of Rs.50.00 Crore for activities related to research 
and development. 
3.2   A total of 27 Research Schemes have been awarded to various IITs, NITs and Research 
institutions at an estimated cost of Rs.23.626 Crores. 
3.3  Total of Rs.8.30 Crores has so far been released by NHAI to these IITs/NITs and 
Research Institutions for R&D schemes. 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
3.4 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may allocate Research Funds not  
only regarding road construction techniques and materials utilized etc., but also to 
study and develop better mechanisms to monitor the quality of roads across the vast NH 
network in the country. Specific budget may be allocated for carrying out research 
activities to evolve a master plan to drastically improve the worrisome state of road 
safety in the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.    The Committee reiterates the recommendation that it made in para 67 of its 287th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, which is 
reproduced below verbatim: 
“The Committee is distressed to note that a large number of vacancies are 
existing in NHAI, which is implementing a large number of Nati onal Highways 
projects in the country. With this shortfall in manpower, the Committee wonders 
how the NHAI can work effectively and efficiently. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should take urgent action to fill up the vacant 
positions in NHAI at the earliest. The details of NHAI staff posted on deputation 
basis and how many of them are working on permanent basis may also be shared 
with the Committee”. 
(Para 34) 
 
5.    The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may look into th e reasons for the 
existence of such a large number of NHAI vacancies. The Committee desires to be apprised 
of the same, along -with reasons for why the same cannot be filled up on time, since in most 
cases, the retirement timelines of employees are known we ll in advance. The Committee fails 
to understand how NHAI can ensure that its road projects are not delayed and are executed 
with the best possible quality, when almost one third of its staff requirements is not filled up. 
The budget granted to NHAI has si gnificantly grown over the last few years. Similarly, the 
quantity of road projects being taken by NHAI has also witnessed a consistent increase. Only 
a fully-staffed organization can ensure that the huge amount of funds available with NHAI 

61 
 
are optimized o ptimally in order to push the NH infrastructure in India to greater heights. 
NHAI may also carry out an extensive study into its present staff requirements, keeping in 
mind the increased workload being taken by NHAI each year. The Committee recommends 
that an effective, time-bound plan may be devised to fill these vacancies at the earliest. 
(Para 35) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1   With regard to the observation of Committee about a large number of vacancies in 
NHAI, it is stated that over the past few years, sincere efforts have been made and continuous 
recruitments have been undertaken to fill up the vacancies. As a result of these recruitments, 
most of the posts under DR and promotion modes have been filled up and the unfilled 
vacancies are mainly under depu tation quota. The major impediments in filling -up the 
deputation vacancies are as under: - 
● Skill gap between certain State Govt. Officers/ PSUs vis -à-vis eligibility criteria in 
NHAI Regulations. 
● Unwillingness of Central/ State Govts/PSUs to spare officers on deputation 
● Parent departments do not issue NOC after specific period for deputationist. 
● Major chunk of vacancies in the Technical cadre (20% of sanctioned posts) reserved 
under MoRTH quota remain unfilled. 
5.2   In order to overcome the hindrance in fi lling-up the vacancies, the following remedial 
measures have been taken: 
● Review of the recruitment rules for technical cadre has been carried out. 
● To retain the deputationists for maximum period, the deputation period has been 
extended from 7 to 10 years in the RRs. 
● The RRs of finance cadre has also been revised and fresh recruitment based on 
revised RRs has been undertaken 
● Assessment of post-wise quota earmarked for CES (Roads) officers is being done on 
half-yearly basis and Ministry is trying to nominate its officers to fill the shortfall 
under its quota. 
● After analysing the reasons for non -filling up of the vacancies, a comprehensive 
review of existing RRs of NHAI has been undertaken and the same are expected to be 
finalized shortly. 
5.3  Further, as desi red, the details of manpower working on deputation and on regular 
strength of NHAI as on 30.08.2021 is submitted as under: 
Total sanctioned strength                    :           1882 
No. of Regular Officers                      :           885 
No. of Officers on deputation             :           304 
  
5.4  As regards action plan for filling -up the vacancies, all the vacant posts in the 
Authority are identified and the recruitments are undertaken from time to time by drawing 
detailed time-lines for fil ling-up the each post. In order to speed -up the recruitment process, 
measures like inviting applications through online mode and reducing time lines for 
completion of the processes has been implemented. To ensure filling -up vacant posts in the 

62 
 
Technical Ca dre, a new concept of rolling advertisement for inviting the applications for 
various posts available in the organisation throughout the year is under consideration.   The 
sanctioned strength, incumbent status and vacancy position in each grade in NHAI is 
enclosed as Annexure-I. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
5.5 The Committee takes note of the various hindrances being faced in the filling up 
of vacancies in NHAI and appreciates the remedial actions being taken to overcome the 
same. The Committee, however, is anguished to note that the total manpower working 
in NHAI, including both regular officials and those on deputation, as on 30.08.2021 is 
just 1189 out of the total sanctioned strength of 1882. The Committee reiterates its 
observations made in p ara 10.4 of Chapter III of its 301 st Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in 
its 287 th Report on the Demands for Grants (2021 - 22) of the Ministry that given the 
huge financial allocation made to NHAI each year, it is pertinent to ensure that 
sufficient manpower is in place so as to make optimal utilization of the available funds. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ongoing comprehensive review of 
existing Recruitment Rules of NHA I may be finalized at the earliest and sincere efforts 
may be made to ensure that the vacancies presently lying unfilled in NHAI are filled up 
at the earliest. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.  The Committee recognizes the fact that even though the Highways sector is one of the 
highest funded sectors in the country, with the amount of funds earmarked for the same 
increasing every year, crucial senior level posts in NHAI in the Finance cadre from Deputy 
Manager up to CGM level are lying vacant. It is a matter of grave concern that majority of 
posts up to DGM level are vacant since many years, even though several attempts have been 
made to fill them on deputation. The Committee could understand that such a situation arose 
due to non-availability of eligible candidates because of different accounting pattern in NHAI 
& Government (Double entry & single entry accounting), pay scale disparity between NHAI 
& PSUs at mid-level (CDA and IDA) and court cases by internal candidates for promotion. 
(Para 35A) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
 
6.1   The sanctioned strength, existing incumbent position and vacancy status in each grade 
in Finance Cadre is as under:  
 
Post Sanctioned 
strength 
In 
position  
Vacancy   
Remarks 
CGM (F&A) 02 01 01 Recruitment under process for 1 post 

63 
 
GM (F&A) 05 03 02 Recruitment under process for 2 posts 
DGM (F&A) 16 10 06 Recruitment under process for 6 posts 
Mgr (F&A) 35 04 31 Recruitment under process for 24 posts 
Dy. Mgr 
(F&A) 
70 05 65 Advt. issued for 12 posts on deputation and 
advt. for recruitment to 17 posts on DR mode 
through NTA would be issued shortly. 
AM (F&A) 100 98 02 0 
Accountant 88 84 04   
  
6.2  The recruitment action for filling-up all the vacant posts has already been initiated and 
the recruitment processes are at advanced stage of completion. An effort has been made to 
address the difficulties experienced during the previous recruitments in filling up the 
vacancies and after analysing the reasons, the RRs of finance cadre have been revised and 
fresh recruitment based on revised RRs has been undertaken. With this measure, it is 
expected that most of the vacant posts in the Finance Cadre would be filled-up. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
6.3 The Committee notes that a significant percentage of vacancies still exist at the 
GM, DGM, Manager and Deputy Manager level, the vacancies at Manager and Deputy 
Manager level hovering around 90 percent of the sanctioned strength. The Committee 
fails to understand how NHAI can be expected to carry out its mandate effectively when 
such a large number of senior posts are lying vacant  that too for a long time . The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take a serious look on this matter and 
resolve the underlying issues that are causing such a grave situation in NHAI , at the 
earliest. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
7.  The Committee takes note that the existing Recruitment Rules equate graduates/ B.com 
with candidates having professional qualifications such as CA/ICWA/MBA (Finance) and 
that in the past, recruitment at lower level were done under the existing Rules, resul ting in 
the promotion of persons, who are merely graduates, holding such senior posts. The 
Committee feels that it is paramount that in a vital organization such as NHAI, only persons 
who possess required educational qualifications occupy higher posts in specialised cadre like 
Finance.  
(Para 35B)  
Reply of Ministry 
 
7.1  Though the qualification of B. Com cannot be equated with professional 
qualifications such as CA/ICWA/MBA, keeping in view the difficulties experienced during 
the past recruitments in gett ing officers having both professional qualifications as well as 

64 
 
experience and by extending priority to experience over qualifications, such qualifications in 
the revised RRs were prescribed. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
7.2 The Committee recommends that NHAI may consider coming up with some sort 
of incentive scheme for its personnel having good experience to encourage them to gain 
professional qualifications. NHAI should aim to strike a balance between experience 
and professional qualifications while recruiting officers at high -level positions and the 
balance should be reflected in the Recruitment Rules for such posts. The Committee 
further recommends that NHAI should assess the anticipated vacancies well in advance 
since doin g so would allow NHAI more time to find the right candidates with good 
experience as well as professional qualifications.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.  Taking into account the above mentioned issues, the Committee suggests that apart 
from promotion and deputation, NHAI may amend the existing Recruitment Rules for the 
Finance cadre, by including reasonable percentage of posts on direct recruitment basis for 
candidates having qualification of CA/ICWA/MBA (Finance) etc. and that at least 30% of 
posts of sen ior level, such as Deputy Manager, Manager, DGM etc. may be taken through 
direct recruitment, which will foster merit and selection of qualified candidates. 
(Para 35C) 
9.  The Committee feels that such a modification in the recruitment process will enable 
NHAI to not only fill up the long pending vacancies, but also improve its operational 
efficiency. The Committee hopes that a mix mode of recruitment viz., direct recruitment, 
promotion and deputation for crucial and specialised cadre such as Finance, will provide 
NHAI with candidates having knowledge and expertise of new taxation laws such as GST, 
resource mobilisation and InvIT. 
(Para 35D) 
  
Reply of Ministry 
 
9.1     Like in any service, direct recruitment has been kept at the entry level to the post of 
Accountant (Level – 5, GP Rs.2800/ -) (100% by DR) and entry level to Group ‘A’ post of 
Deputy Manager (F&A) (Level – 10 GP Rs.5400) (30% by DR. The rationale behind thi s is 
to have fresh talent at entry level for day to day operations and the entry level of Group A for 
supervision and future management.  
9.2  As large number of regular officers are already in position at Accountant & Assistant 
Manager (F&A) level, having  direct recruitment at other levels will adversely affect the 
promotion avenues of the existing officers and the officers to be recruited on DR basis as 
sanctioned posts at higher level are lesser than the feeder level. Posts like Manager (F&A), 
where there are very few officers available in the feeder cadre as on date are being filled up 
on deputation basis and these will be filled up as and when the regular officers are eligible / 
available for promotion. Filling up of these posts of Manager (F&A) on DR b asis will 

65 
 
permanently block the promotional avenues of the officers in the feeder cadre. Further, apart 
from filling up the vacancies on deputation basis, Direct recruitment at Deputy Manager 
Level has already been taken up and National Testing Agency unde r the M/o HRD is already 
in advance stage to advertise 17 posts of Deputy Manager on DR basis. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
9.3 The Committee feels that it might not be reasonable to assign heavy 
responsibilities to the existing officers with lesser qualifications only to permit good 
promotional avenues to them. Only officers with enough experience and sufficient 
expertise should b e granted the responsibility of high -level posts after carrying out the 
required assessment. Grant of timely financial upgradation may be considered for other 
officers. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in para 7.2 of  Chapter III 
of this Report. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.   The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may assess the reasons behind 
all such delayed road projects across the country and time -bound remedial measures may be 
initiated at the earliest so as to avoid further delays in the completion of already delayed 
projects. 
(Para 68B) 
  
Reply of Ministry 
10.1   Projects are delayed due to site/local/project specific factors attributable to either 
Authority or Contractor/Concessionaire or both or Force Majeure reaso ns. Delays in land 
acquisition, pre-construction activities, law and order issues, Contractors’ / Concessionaires’ 
cash flow problems, poor performance of Contractors / Concessionaires, etc. are common 
reasons for project delays and time overrun. 
             
10.2  Ministry has taken many initiatives to avoid or reduce project delays, including 
streamlining of land acquisition & environment clearances, online approval of GAD of 
Railways  ROB/RUB, frequent review meetings at various levels with State Governm ents, 
Contractors/ Concessionaires/ Project Developers, close coordination with other Ministries, 
revamping of  dispute resolution mechanism, premium re-scheduling, one-time fund infusion, 
etc. Ministry has also provided several relief measures to Contract ors/ Concessionaires/ 
Consultants under Atmanirbhar Bharat to mitigate delays and expedite the construction of 
National Highways during the COVID-19 pandemic period. 
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
10.3  The Committee notes the various reasons behind the delays in completion of 
various road projects across the country. The Committee recommends that excepting 
the negative impact of the Coronavirus pandemic restrictions on the execution of 
projects, the Mini stry should take serious view of road projects being delayed on 
account of below -par performance by road contractors/ concessionaires. A mechanism 
may be put in place to award the road contract to a different concessionaire once a 

66 
 
delay in execution has oc curred because of the existing concessionaire. The previous 
performance of concessionaires may be taken into  consideration for award of future 
road project contracts. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.   The Committee takes serious note of the lack of provis ion for de -notification of any 
land that might get identified and acquired for a road project but does not get utilized. While 
the Committee feels that such instances should be minimized, one cannot deny that there is 
still possibility for such occurrences  because of oversight or change in alignment. The 
Ministry may make the necessary changes in the legal provisions for land acquisition to 
rectify such mistakes. Provision for compensation amount for the period that the land was 
acquired may be incorporated so as to prevent any undue losses to the landowner for no fault 
of theirs. 
  (Para 84) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1   The observation of the Committee has been noted and it has been decided to examine 
the issue in consultation with all concerned agencies in light of the fact that once a land is 
vested in Central Government in terms of Section 3D(2) of the NH Act, there is  no enabling 
provision in the NH Act to abandon the proceedings and recovery the Land to the erstwhile 
land owner. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
11.2 The Committee desires to be apprised of the progress made by the Ministry in 
this regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.   The Committee notes that despite the best efforts at arbitration, many disputes between 
concessionaires and NHAI still end up in courts, which sometimes takes years to finally settle 
the dispute. In light of this, the Committee re commends that amicable resolution should be 
the priority of the Ministry to the extent possible and the cost of taking the matter to courts 
should be considered both in terms of delays as well as cost overruns. The Committee desires 
that the Ministry may request fast-track hearing of its cases in courts, since delays in delivery 
of verdict in such cases directly takes a toll on the public exchequer. Further, the Ministry 
may request the Government and the judiciary to empower a panel of retired judges havin g 
expertise in infrastructural litigations in order to enable quicker judgments in case of 
disputes with concessionaires, thereby helping minimize delays in execution of road projects. 
(Para 120) 
Reply of Ministry 
 

67 
 
12.1   Considering the delay in achieveme nt of the finality in any dispute, NHAI has made 
an effort to settle the disputes between the Parties, through an effective mechanism which has 
been adopted in NHAI vide Policy Circular Dated 02.06.2017 to establish a Conciliation & 
Settlement Mechanism fo r Contractual under Contract agreement through a Panel of 
Independent Experts. 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
 
12.2 The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry to 
request formation of a panel of retired judges having expertise in infrastructural 
litigations in order to enable quicker judgements in case of disputes with 
concessionaires. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
13.  The Committee is distressed to note the poor feedback received by the Sukhad Yatra 
application on the  Play Store for Android devices, where it is rated 2.7 stars out of a 
maximum possible 5 star user rating. Similarly, the app has received poor ratings on the App 
Store for iOS devices. The Committee feels that this depicts that the Sukhad Yatra app, 
although brilliant in concept and its scope of use, is failing to achieve its intended goal of 
allowing users to enter road quality related information and to report accidents and potholes 
on the highways. The Committee recommends that NHAI may work out an intu itive user 
interface for the app. The poor feedback received by the application from its users should be 
seriously looked into and addressed at the earliest. Further, once the application is improved 
and well-received by its users, NHAI should promote the usage of the application through 
social media as well as signages on the NHs. 
(Para 125) 
  
Reply of Ministry 
 
13.1  NHAI has taken several steps to revamp & revive the functioning of Sukhad Yatra 
Mobile App. Now both Android & iOS versions of the app are currently working seamlessly. 
Rating of the App has improved slightly from 2.75 stars to 2.9 (on Android) in the past few 
months since May 2021. Internal monitoring & escalation process is also being proposed so 
that the complaints  received via Mobile App are duly addressed and closed in a time -bound 
manner by the concerned Division of NHAI. 
  
13.2    Recommendation of the Committee has been noted and NHAI has initiated necessary 
actions in this direction. 
  
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
13.3 The Committee recommends that NHAI may give due importance to improving 
the Sukhad Yatra mobile application since the data submitted by the app users can help 
NHAI a lot in monitoring the state of National Highways across t he country. User 
feedback received on the various application distribution platforms such as Google Play 
Store and Apple App Store, may be duly factored in future updates of the application 
and the data received from the users. 

68 
 
 
 Recommendation/Observation 
 
14.  The Committee may be briefed about the highlights of the data received by NHAI 
through the submission of information by the users of the Sukhad Yatra app, alongwith 
details regarding the number of road quality/pothole related issues raised by the ap p users 
and the time taken by NHAI to address the same.  
(Para 126) 
 
 Reply of Ministry 
 
  
14.1    A Highway user can register on  Sukhad Yatra mobile App by submitting the  basic 
details such as  Name, Mobile Number, email id etc. and report/lodge a complai nt relating to 
issues on National Highways. The complaints received via Sukhad Yatra are forwarded to 
concerned PIUs of NHAI for resolution. The broad complaint types are as follows: 
i. Potholes and other maintenance issues. 
ii. Complain against Toll Plaza management 
iii. Poor Workmanship of Construction 
iv. Complain against FASTag facility/Lane 
v. Safety hazard during construction 
14.2  Maximum Complaint types are related to potholes, maintenance issues and toll plaza 
management. Total 263 issues related to road quality/pothole have been reported as on 
31.10.2021. Average time taken by NHAI to address these issues is approx 7 days for last 3 
months. 
  
  
  Further Recommendation/Observation: 
14.3 The Committee feels that the number of complaints received by NHAI th rough 
the app are minuscule, given the vast network of NHs across the country. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry and NHAI may promote the Sukhad Yatra 
app through social media and other means, so as to gain crucial information about 
requirement of maintenance of National Highways, which will also help in preventing 
the occurrence of road accidents due to poor state of Highways.  
 
  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
15.  The Committee takes strong note of the observation made by IIFCL regarding large 
number of projects being awarded to a single developer with limited resources. The 
Committee feels that such carelessness on account of NHAI/ Concessioning Authority while 
awarding road projects would inevitably lead to road projects getting delayed on account of 

69 
 
the concessionaire’s inability to make simultaneous progress on multiple projects with 
limited resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a Central Database may be 
maintained by the Ministry to keep track of the various awards presently being carried out by 
a bidder. Alternatively, submission of such information may be made mandatory for the 
bidder. The database thus created by the Ministry may be updated as s oon as a bid is 
awarded, so that the other bids made by the bidder reflect that they are already working on 
that project and an informed decision can be made regarding whether the bidder would be 
capable of working on another project. Clear limits may be d efined for concessionaires 
regarding the number/size of projects that can be awarded to a concessionaire, based on the 
resources viz. labor, machinery, financial strength etc. available with them. 
(Para 167) 
  
Reply of Ministry 
15.1  The bids are awarded in transparent manner through open bidding. There are pre -
qualifying criteria to determine the technical and financial capacity of a bidder. If any bidder 
has already been awarded projects and his remaining technical and financial capa city permits 
it to meet the qualifying award then only it can qualify for new projects.  
  
15.2  It is submitted that the mechanism is already in place. However, suggestion for 
creating database is noted. 
  
  Further Recommendation/Observation: 
15.3 The Co mmittee feels that without the existence of a central database, it would 
not be possible for the Ministry/NHAI to keep track of the road projects across the 
country that have been awarded to a concessionaire. The Committee, therefore, may be 
updated about the action taken by NHAI to create and maintain a central database of 
road projects awarded to various concessionaires so as to permit NHAI to factor in the 
contract award history and performance history of a given concessionaire before 
awarding them a new road project. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16.  The Committee takes note of the plethora of challenges faced by Banks/ Financial 
Institutions in the road sectors, as shared by the Banks/FIs and DFS. The Committee is of the 
considered view that lenders play  an integral role in allowing PPP projects in road sector. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may hold periodic meetings with the 
lenders to learn about the issues they are facing and address the same to the extent possible 
by making su itable amendments to the existing provisions. In this regard, an effective 
coordination mechanism may be established with the lenders, the concessionaires, RBI as 
well as the Ministry of Finance. 
(Para 189) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
16.1  NHAI has already initiated a process of holding regular meetings with lenders. 

70 
 
   
  Further Recommendation/Observation: 
 
16.2 The Committee recommends that the knowledge gained from such regular 
meetings with the lenders may be utilized to periodically update and revise the Model 
Concession Agreement so as to encourage lenders to finance a higher number of 
National Highway projects.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17.   The Committee notes the exposure of SBI to the road sector and applauds the recent 
increase made by SBI in  its internal exposure ceiling for road sector by Rs. 24,500 crores. 
The data shared by SBI, however, points to the dwindling lending figures of the Banking 
Sector as a whole, wherein if one were to exclude SBI, the banking sector’s exposure to road 
sector has declined from Rs. 1,45,326 crores in June, 2018 to Rs. 1,38,980 crores in June, 
2020. The Committee feels that lending institutions play an indispensable role in financing 
the road infrastructure sector in the country and desires that the Ministry may  take strong 
note of this. The Ministry may address the issues faced by lenders in the road sector, many of 
which have been shared by them with the Committee, to ensure their support in funding the 
future growth of the road sector in the country. 
(Para 192) 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1   NHAI has already initiated a process of holding regular meetings with lenders and 
addressing their concerns. The Model Concession Agreement framework has been modified 
to make the projects more bankable. Further, MoRTH and NHAI h ave introduced multiple 
guidelines to resolve stuck projects, streamline the calculation of termination payments, and 
provide greater comfort to the lenders. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
17.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in par a 16.2 of  Chapter III 
of this Report. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
18.   The Committee feels that the construction of roads parallel to an existing road stretch 
with toll plazas, points to lack of foresight and coordination between the Ministry and the 
State Governments. Construction of such parallel roads causes a loss of reve nue to the 
concessionaire without any fault of their own. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should come up with guidelines that may be enforced across the country to avoid such 
construction to the maximum extent possible. In the event where construction of such parallel 
road is not avoidable, efforts may be taken to ensure that the concessionaire does not face 
losses on account of decrease in traffic volume for no fault of their own. This would act as a 

71 
 
confidence building measure and would help at tract higher bids for the Ministry/NHAI’s 
future plans for monetization of the existing road assets. 
(Para 228) 
 
19.  The Committee feels that the suggestion furnished by Indian Bank, regarding making 
the agency responsible for the construction of parallel  road pay for the losses faced in 
revenue of the existing road, seems to be a feasible solution to this problem. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may implement this with introduction of appropriate 
rules/laws in order to deter constru ction of parallel roads, and in cases such thing is 
unavoidable, paying compensation to the concessionaire. 
 (Para 229) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
19.1   Recommendations of the Committee n oted.  However, to safeguard the interest of the 
concessionaire there is provision of restriction on development of parallel/competing facility 
in the concession agreement. This provision is agreed by States also in the State Support 
Agreement. 
  
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
19.2  The Committee had been informed by vari ous financial institutions  that the 
construction of parallel roads is a major issue faced by them causing loss of revenue on 
tolled projects. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its original recommend ation that 
the Ministry may introduce appropriate rules/laws to ensure that construction of 
parallel roads by State or other agencies may be avoided at all costs and some sort of 
provision for payment of compensation to the concessionaire may be considered  by the 
Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20.  The Committee believes that the significant delays in the execution of Phase -I is also 
one of the main reasons behind the cost overruns. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry/NHAI may proactively monitor all road projects and any deviation from the targeted 
timeline for each project should be dealt with on an urgent basis in order to minimize the 
delays, and thus, the cost overruns. 
(Para  241) 
Reply of Ministry 
20.1  The Ministry firmly believes that real time monitoring of issues for all projects is 
important to identify and resolve issues at an early stage. Thus, the Ministry has taken steps 
to ensure that fortnightly/monthly review of projects are conducted as per the stage of the 
project and issues flag ged by all stakeholders so that they can be resolved through early 
interventions. 
  
20.2  This has also been supported through robust digital platforms and tools like Data Lake 
which supports dynamic and intelligent tracking of all processes, including lan d acquisition, 
clearances and approvals. 

72 
 
  
20.3  With the expanding project portfolio, all existing Project Implementation Units (PIU) 
have been overburdened with workload which leads to diluted concentration on multiple 
projects. The Ministry and MoRTH ar e working towards assessing the growing workload of 
PIUs and setting up new PIUs at strategic locations to increase the network of PIUs as well as 
coverage projects optimally through increased presence on the field. A few new PIUs have 
already been created for expediting implementation of strategic projects such as the Delhi 
Mumbai Expressway. 
  
20.4 Further to avoid delays on projects in initial stages, DPRs have been initiated in 
advance and with more robust monitoring mechanisms to ensure that the reports are 
developed accurately. This will minimize re -work of alignment, ap provals and estimates in 
the later stages of the project lifecycle. 
  
   
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
20.5 The Committee recommends that the task of creating new PIUs may be 
completed at the earliest so as to share the workload of the overburdened PIUs. The 
Committee further recommends that action may be taken at the earliest indications of a 
project running off -schedule and the performance of the concessionaires in terms of 
progress of work completed may be monitored closely for all road projects a cross the 
country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
21.  The Committee observes that in view of the strategic location of Arunachal Pradesh, 
good road connectivity is of crucial importance for the smooth movement of Forces guarding 
the border, on account of Na tional Security. The Committee, therefore, desires that the 
Ministry may explore the possibility of taking up the SARDP -NE Phase -B, along with 
SARDP-NE Phase-A. 
(Para 243A) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
21.1  Several new road projects in the State of Arunachal Pradesh have been taken up to 
provide good road connectivity to the local residents and to the movement of Armed Forces 
as well. The Government of India has sanctioned projects under Arunachal Pradesh package 
of roads of about 2319 Km. length (1991 Km. actual length as per DPR).   Projects for total 
length of 1991 Km have been awarded, out of which 1150 Km length has been completed. As 
on date 35 no. of works amounting to Rs 14,032 crores are in progress in the St ate of 
Arunachal Pradesh. The Government has approved SARDP -NE Phase “B” for 3723 km 
length for preparation of DPR only.   Execution of Phase “B” is to be taken up after 
completion of Phase “A”. 
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 

73 
 
21.2  The Committee notes  that the reply of the Ministry does not furnish any 
information regarding why the SARDP -NE Phase -B cannot be taken up along with 
SARDP-NE Phase A, since implementing both Phases in parallel might help complete 
the SARDP-NE programme at a quicker pace. The  Committee, therefore, desires to be 
apprised of the reasons for not considering parallel execution of both Phases of SARDP -
NE. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22.  The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons furnished by the Ministry behind the 
huge delays in the completion of the road projects under SARDP -NE Phase A and Arunachal 
Pradesh package. The Committee feels that most of the reasons behind the delays in the 
execution of the projects could have been preempted and proactive measures should have 
been taken to minimize the delays caused due to them. The Committee hopes that the present 
timeline for completion of the projects have been made realistically and is met without any 
further delays. 
 (Para 245) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
22.1   Noted for compliance. All efforts like award of projects after completion of 80% of LA 
and obtaining clearances, coordination with State Govt. and other agencies, review meeting at 
RT&H Head Quarter and field level, close monitoring of progress of projects etc. have been 
made to ensure timely completion of projects. 
  
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
 
22.2 The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry for timely execution of 
projects under SARDP -NE but given the huge delays that are currently faced in the 
programme, t he Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake a holistic 
review of the reasons for which the remedial efforts of the Ministry are not effective in 
resolving the delays being faced in SARDP-NE. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee feels  that construction of roads in difficult terrains such as North -East 
regions requires skilled contractors with prior experience of road construction in hilly 
regions. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that due care is taken not 
to award the road projects to contractors who have a history of construction of below -par 
quality of roads.  
(Para 246) 
Reply of Ministry  
23.1   The projects are awarded to the L1 bidder out of the all technically responsive bidders. 
Technically responsiveness and qualifications are evaluated as per the well -defined eligibility 

74 
 
and qualification criteria. Black listed/non -performer contractors are not considered for the 
award of works. 
  
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
23.2 The C ommittee feels that awarding road projects, especially in the North -East 
region, to the lowest bidder might be leading to below -par quality of roads being 
constructed, besides incapable concessionaires causing delays in road projects because 
of their financial and technical incapacities. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation made in Para 26 of its 296 th Report, which is reproduced below 
verbatim: 
“The Committee further recommends the Ministry to carefully analyze the 
shortcomings of the existing mechanism for awarding road projects to the lowest 
bidder, since doing so includes little thought for ensuring quality of the work. The 
Committee believes that there should be consideration for other importance factors 
besides the bidding amount, while awarding a project to a concessionaire. A 
qualitative approach must be formulated for awarding road projects. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take u p with the Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC), the shortcomings of the existing system of awarding a project 
to the lowest bidder, presenting its arguments for modification of the CVC 
guidelines for awarding of tender in a suitable way to permit an element  of 
qualitative approach in the tender awarding process for road projects. The 
Committee feels that a criterion may be developed where certain weightage is given 
to objective parameters such as the awards presently being executed by the 
contractor, their f inancial record, and most importantly, the past performance of a 
contractor, in terms of quality of work and timely execution. The database 
recommended by the Committee in para 22 of this Report may be useful for such 
purposes.” 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24.   The Committee takes note of the progress made in the various Roads projects in the 
LWE affected areas. The Committee believes that these road projects would have a highly 
positive effect on the developmental avenues of the LWE affected areas and hopes that the 
Ministry is able to complete the remaining length of these projects at the earliest. 
(Para 251) 
Reply of Ministry  
24.1  Noted for compliance.  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
24.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may lay speci al focus on timely 
completion of road projects in LWE affected areas in close coordination with local law 
enforcement and other concerned departments. 
 

75 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
25.  The Committee is disappointed to note that despite having a dedicated N HAI division 
with an extensive mandate for carrying out research activities, no specific budget allocation 
has been made to the division during the last five years. The Committee feels that this points 
to the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry towards carrying out research activities in the 
road sector. The geographical diversity of the country, the often poorly -informed drivers and 
the large number of road accidents that take place on the National Highways are all crucially 
important matters that can b e resolved by carrying out serious R&D activities regarding the 
same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may ensure that sufficient 
funds are available with the SRD&Q Division of NHAI. 
(Para 255) 
  
Reply of Ministry  
25.1    NHAI has created research fund for allocation of Rs 50 crores towards R&D and 14 
Nos. of R&D Schemes have been assigned to IITs, NITs and Research Institutes etc. 
  
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
 
 25.2  The Committee may be apprised of the details of the various research activities 
that are being carried out by the SRD&Q Division of NHAI. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may consider increasing the budget for research 
purposes in the upc oming years so as to allow research for improving construction 
quality in hilly and flood -prone regions, improving road safety across the country and 
developing a mechanism to effectively monitor the pliability of National Highways 
across the country so as  to proactively prevent accidents from happening because of 
shoddy quality of roads. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
26.  The Committee desires to be apprised of the number of black spots identified on NHs 
across the country in the last five years, along wit h details regarding the number of black 
spots rectified each year. The Committee recommends that findings from the black spot 
identification and rectification process may be looked into as a whole, to gain insights into 
how to avoid the black spots in the future road projects of the Ministry. The Committee 
further desires that all the NH projects should be minutely examined right from the DPR 
stage to their completion, eliminating geometrical design errors that compromise the safety 
of the road users. 
 
(Para 273) 
 Reply of Ministry  
 

76 
 
26.1   During last 5 years, MoRTH has identified 5803 blackspots in 30 States/UTs in 2019 
and 2020 based on accident data of 2016 -2018. Out of these, 3996 blackspots have been 
identified on NHs currently entrusted to NHAI. N HAI has completed short term measures at 
all identified blackspots. The summary of blackspots identified and rectified on NH stretches 
with NHAI is as follows: 
  
Year 2011-14 2015-18 
Identified Rectified Identified Rectified 
Identified in 2015 503* 249 0 0 
2019-20 0 52 3996** 729 
2020-21 0 37 0 1103 
2021-22 (up to August) 0 22 0 576 
Total 503 360 3996 2408 
*out of total 789 identified on all NH. **out of total 5803 identified on all NHs. 
26.2   As per NHAI policy guidelines dated 22.07.2020 (enclosed as Annexure –II), there is 
provision of peer review of DPRs by experienced retired engineers. NHAI has also issued 
guidelines for preparation of DPRs vide policy circular dated 12.06.2017 (enclosed as 
Annexure –III) which highlights safety requirements and safety audit. NHAI has also issued 
guidelines dated 03.11.2020 (enclosed as Annexure -IV) for Mandatory association of the 
Engineering/ Technical Institut es who adopted NH stretches under MoU with NHAI in 
preparation of DPR/Feasibility Report. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
26.3 The Committee notes the various steps being taken by the Ministry and the 
policy guidelines brought out by NHAI to improve road safety across the country but 
feels that given the ever-increasing number of deaths occurring due to road accidents in 
the country, a lot more needs to be done urgently in order to minimize the same. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may  review the safety audit process 
itself and ensure that the same is carried out in a transparent and honest manner. The 
Committee further recommends that the identified black spots may be rectified at the 
earliest and the definition for identification of b lack spots may be tightened so as to 
identify and rectify more accident-prone spots across the NH network in the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
27. The Committee is anguished to note that even after passing of 7 -10 years after 
identification of blac k spots during the period 2011 -14, long -term rectification measures 
have been carried out only on 247 out of the 503 identified black spots i.e. less than even 
50%. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may make it mandatory for both 
NHAI and  State Departments concerned, to rectify black spots within a fixed time -frame. 
Delays in the rectification of black spots directly leads to more lethal road accidents 
continuing to happen at such spots, which cannot be permitted at any cost. The Committee  
also desires to know the status of the black spots identified by the Ministry/NHAI since 2018 
and reasons for not updating the status of the same on the website. 

77 
 
(Para 274B) 
  
Reply of Ministry  
 
27.1   It may be noted that blackspots  identified based on accidents and fatalities data of 
2011-14 were notified in year 2015. Further, rectification of some of them delayed as these 
were part of projects which have been delayed/terminated due to various reasons attributed to 
concessionaire/ forest/encroachment clearance and delay in availability of land. Owing to the 
above, many of these blackspots are now being taken up for rectification on standalone basis. 
As on 31 -08-2021, 360 blackspots have been rectified and more than 50 blackspots are  
expected to be completed by December, 2021. 
  
27.2 The status of MoRTH identified blackspots during 2019 -2020 based on accident data 
of 2015-2018 is updated regularly on NHAI website (https://www.nhai.gov.in/#/black -spots) 
and furnished to the Ministry. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
27.3  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may speed up the process of 
rectification of black spots that have already been identified since these spots are very 
likely to cause more accidents if left unrectified. The status of all black spots may be 
kept regularly updated on the NHAI website and any delay in the rectification of black 
spots may be looked into urgently. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
28.   The Committee feels that the number of ambulances, patrol vehicles, tow-away cranes 
available with the Ministry are not commensurate with the extensive size of the National 
Highway network in India. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may steadily 
increase this number to ensure that help is made available withi n a short and reasonable 
time of any accident taking place on the NHs. 
(Para 279) 
Reply of Ministry  
28.1   Provision of ambulances, tow-away crane and patrol vehicles have been made a part of 
the civil contracts and have also been included in the IRC SP codes. Further, policy for 
deployment of ambulances at toll plazas has already been issued by NHAI. Tender f or 
Computer Aided Dispatch system for on -road units for incident management is being 
finalised which will assist in timely dispatch of the on -road units and will also record the 
response time & ensure proper monitoring of such activities. 
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
28.2 The Committee recommends that the tender for Computer Aided Dispatch 
System may be finalized at the earliest since providing timely emergency care during 
the golden hour can help save countless lives involved in road accidents acro ss the 
country. The Committee desires to be kept apprised in this regard.   

78 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29.  The Committee feels that the knowledge that such a helpline number exists and should 
be called in case of an accident, is very limited among peopl e and awareness drives must be 
carried out in the form of signages and billboards on National Highways, and through the 
usage of social media, to ensure that NH users are aware of this emergency number. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry ma y work on tying up this emergency 
number with the number 112, i.e. the Emergency Response Support System, since people 
cannot be expected to remember too many numbers, especially in high -panic situations such 
as road accidents. 
(Para 280A) 
Reply of Ministry  
29.1   The 1033 helpline number of NHAI is functional since March, 2017 and is used for 
assisting the road users in emergency as well as non -emergency matters. Further, Signboards 
of 1033 helpline number have been installed along the highways, and the high call volume on 
this helpline indicates its awareness amongst road users. However, the observations of the 
Committee have been noted and efforts for further popularising 1033 will be made through 
social media as well. Also, the integration of 112 helpline number with 1033 will be explored 
during the development of the Computer Aided Dispatch System of NHAI. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
29.2 The Committee recommends that dedicated efforts may be made to promote the 
tollfree helpline number 1033 amongst highway users. The Committee may be apprised 
of the action taken by the Ministry to promote the usage of the number 1033 through 
social media and other means. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
30.  The Committee observes that driving habits in India need to be improved upon 
drastically and the most effective way to do so is by  way of training people to drive better. 
Therefore, IDTRs and RDTCs should be present in every district of the country. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may chalk out a plan to create such training 
infrastructure across the country and thereafter, make it mandatory to attend a driving 
training course of a sufficient duration in order to obtain a driving licence. 
(Para 282) 
 
Reply of Ministry  
30.1  The Ministry of Road Transport & Highways has been implementing a nation -wide 
scheme of setting of Driving Training Institutes (DTIs) since FY 2002 -03. The scheme was 
renamed as Institute of Driving Training & Research (IDTR) in 12 th FY Plan period (2012 -
17) with central financial assistance of Rs.17.00 crore and land requirement of 10 acre. A 
new component as Regional Driving Training Centre (RDTCs) with less capacity with 
financial assistance of Rs.5.00 crore and land require ment (3 acre) as Tier II in the 12th  Five 

79 
 
Year plan period was added.   The financial implication of IDTR was revised from 17.00 
crore to 18.50 crore during the 14th  Financial cycle. During 14th Finance Commission Cycle 
another new component i.e. setting up  of Driving Training Centres at District level was 
added. However, due to stay on the scheme of setting up of Driving Training Centre, no 
proposal was sanctioned during the 14 th Finance Commission Cycle period. 
  
30.2 The basic objective of the scheme is to set up a full -fledged training institute with 
driving test track to provide quality training to vehicle drivers, improve road and environment 
safety and strengthen overall mobility on roads. 
             
30.3 So far 31 IDTRs and 6 RDTCs have already bee n sanctioned by the Ministry to 
different States/UTs. Continuation of the scheme during the 15 th Finance Commission Cycle 
i.e. FY 2021-22 to FY 2025 -26 has been approved by the Competent Authority. The scheme 
is a national-wide scheme covering all States/U Ts and more centres under the scheme would 
be sanctioned under the scheme based on the proposals from the State Governments/UT 
administration as per provisions under the scheme guidelines. 
  
30.4 In addition,  the Ministry has also notified rules for  accredited Drivers Training 
Centers to make the driving training scientific and systematic, vest the accredited Driving 
Training Center with certain functions like testing of aspirants for issue of driving license and 
to make accredited driving Training Center a  commercially viable business 
proposition, notification G.S.R 394(E) dated 7 th June, 2021 effect from 01 st July, 2021. The 
requirements to be fulfilled by accredited driver training centres have been mandated in these 
rules. The relevant provisions contain ed in Rules 12 to Rules 31A of the Center Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1989 . This will help in imparting proper training and knowledge to 
candidates who enrol at such centres. The salient features of Accredited Driver Training 
Centers are as under: 
 
● The centre sh all be equipped with simulators and dedicated driving test track to 
provide high quality training to candidates.  
● Remedial and refresher courses, as per the requirement of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, 
can be availed at these centres.  
● The candidates who successfully pass the test at these centers will be exempted from 
the driving test requirement at the time of applying for driving license, which is 
currently being taken at the RTO. This will  help in getting the driving license after 
completing  training from such accredited driving training centres. 
● These centres are allowed to provide industry- specific specialized training as well." 
● The States/UTs are responsible for establish a system to grant accreditation, promote, 
monitor, audit etc. of such centre. 
● These Institutes would not only impart scientific and systematic Training to driving 
aspirants but also inculcate good behaviour among road users and road safety. 
● Any legal entity such as Companies, Associations, Firms, NGOs, Private 
establishment etc. are also eligible to apply for accreditation of DTC. 
 
30.5 These rules would promote  private sector to set up well equipped driving training 
centres fulfilling the  prescribed criteria in terms of land, premises, manpower etc., in the 
country. 

80 
 
  
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
30.6  The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry to rope in the private 
sector by vesting Driving Training Centres with functions such as testing of aspirants 
for issuance of driving licence, which will  hopefully make such centres a successful 
business proposition. Having well -trained drivers on the Indian roads would go a long 
way in improving road safety and aiming to have Driving Training Centres in all 
districts of the country would be the first step  towards that. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may consider providing some aid to the interested 
parties in terms of lending for setting up such Driving Training Centres, in 
collaboration with financial institutions. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
31.  The Committee desires to know the present status of the Bharat New Vehicle Safety 
Assessment Programme (BNVSAP) for testing the safety performance of new Vehicle of 
India, which was expected to be implement several years ago. The Committee also may be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry for introduction of Safety standards and 
technologies in two-wheelers manufactured in the Country, since a large number of the Road 
accidents on Indian Roads involved two-wheelers. 
(Para 299A)   
 Reply of Ministry  
31.1  Ministry had set up a committee   in 2015 to work on Bharat New Vehicle Safety 
Assessment Program (BNVSAP). Thereafter, regulations on Crash norms were finalised. 
Their details with the timelines are as under. 
  
This Ministry, vide notifications S.O. 1139 (E) dated 28 th April 2015 and S.O. 2412(E) 
dated 3rd September 2015, mandated: 
i. AIS 098/2008 for protection of occupants in the event of an Offset Frontal Collision 
for the new models from 1st October, 2017 and f or all models from 1st October, 
2019; 
ii. AIS 096/2008 for requirements for behavior of steering mechanism of the vehicle in 
a Head-on collision for the new models from 1st October, 2017 and for all models 
from 1st October, 2019; 
iii. AIS 099/2008 for Approval of vehicles with regard to Protection of Occupants in 
the event of Lateral Collision for the new models from 1st October, 2017 and for all 
models with effect from 1st  October, 2019; and 
iv. AIS100/2010 for approval of vehicles with regard to protection of pedest rian and 
other vulnerable road users in the event of a collision with a motor vehicle for the 
new models from 1st October, 2018 and for all models with effect from 1st October, 
2020. 
31.2 Now, with the development/ revisions of these standards globally, th ese Standards 
require amendments to align with global standards. AISC panel is working on these 
Standards. After the Standards are finalised, the implementation mechanism will be worked 
out by this Ministry. 

81 
 
31.3 In respect of two wheeler following is submitted: 
i. ABS or CBS mandated for L2 category vehicles (Engine Capacity ≤ 125 cc; 
max continuous rated or net power ≤   11 kW; and power to weight ratio ≤   0.1 
kW/kg.) and ABS for all other L2 category vehicles [Standard: IS: 14664: 
2010] New Models – 1st April 2018; Existing Models – 1st April 2019 
ii. To improve visibility of 2 W “Automatic Headlamp On” feature was mandated 
by the Government. This allows for better visibility of 2 W by 4 W users 
specially big vehicles (even during day time). 
iii. AIS 146 (Stands)  : Key features - Stability Requirement, Durability, Automatic 
Retraction while vehicle moving or disable vehicle propulsion if side stand is 
on. 
iv. AIS 147 (External Projections) 
v. AIS 148 (Foot Rest): Strength Requirement. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
31.4  The Committee recommends that latest safety standards adopted for vehicles 
globally, may be suitably incorporated in the Indian vehicle safety standards from time 
to time, so as to minimize the number of deaths occurring on Indian roads due to road 
accidents. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32.  The Committee feels that the Char Dham Pariyoja na is of immense importance 
because of the pilgrimage tourism aspects of the region. Completing this project at the 
earliest should thus be accorded high priority by the Ministry. 
(Para 316) 
Reply of Ministry  
 
32.1  The projects under Chardham Program have been delayed due to litigation in Hon’ble 
NGT and thereafter in Hon’ble Supreme Court. Out of the 646 km length of awarded 
projects, work has been completed in 530 km (82% length of awarded works). Targeted date 
for completion of ongoing projects is December, 2024. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
32.2   The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be able to complete the remaining 
projects under the Char dham Pariyojana within the targeted date of completion of 
December, 2024. The Committee recommends that all possible measures may be taken 
from the planning stage itself to ensure that the road projects of the Ministry cause 
minimal impact on the environment, especially in eco-sensitive hilly regions. This would 
help lower the delays faced on account of Court litigations and petitions in the NGT.  

82 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
33.  The Committee notes the delays caused in the project on account of the petitions f iled 
by NGOs in the NGT and Supreme Court. The Committee desires to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard. 
(Para 317)      
 Reply of Ministry  
33.1  As per order dated 08.09.2020 of Hon'ble Supreme Court in MA No 1449 of 2020 in 
CA No. 10930 of 2018, MoRTH has been directed to adopt carriageway width in accordance 
with its Circular dated 23.03.2018 of the Ministry for carriageway width of roads under 
Chardham program. Ministry’s Circular dated 23.03.2018 specifies that for traffic volumes 
from 3,000 Passenger Car Units (PCUs) / day to 8,000 PCUs/ day, the carriageway width 
shall be intermediate lane i.e. 5.5m width (18 ft) with two- lane structures (23 ft.). 
  
33.2 Ministry of Defence had filed an Intervention Application (IA) in the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court with a prayer to modify the order dated 08.09.2020 and to allow the widening 
to 2 -lane configuration on Rishikesh -Mana, Tanakpur to Pithoragarh and Ris hikesh to 
Gangotri Highways. Hon’ble Supreme Court has heard the matter and has delivered the 
judgment on 14.12.2021 allowing the 'application' of Ministry of Defence in accordance with 
their needs. 
  
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
 
33.3  The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 32.2 of  Chapter III 
of this Report. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
34.  The Committee further recommends that the region being highly sensitive in 
ecological terms, the Ministry must undertake every possible measure to minimize the 
environmental impact caused by its projects in such regions. If need be, consultants 
specializing in the same may be hired for the purpose of minimizing the adverse impacts of 
the projects on environment. This would help address the issues raised by the NGOs 
regarding such projects as well.  
(Para 318)    
  Reply of Ministry  
34.1  As suggested by th e High Power Committee (HPC) appointed by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, Rapid Environmental Impact Assessment (although there is no requirement 
for Environmental Clearance as per EIA notification) was carried out by MoRTH through a 
NABET / QCI accredited EIA Consultant under Category ‘A’ in sector no. 34 i.e. highways. 
Draft Rapid EIA Reports of 37 ongoing works have also been submitted to HPC vide letter 
dated 16.09.2020 for comments/suggestions but no further communication has been received 
from the HPC. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 

83 
 
34.2  The Committee notes the reply. The Committee further recommends that in 
future, such Rapid Environmental Impact Assessment may be proactively carried out 
by the Ministry for all of its major National Highways proje cts in ecologically sensitive 
regions. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
35.  The Committee takes note of the training programmes conducted by IAHE for 
officers from State Governments. The Committee recommends that the NHAI may 
proactively extend its technical e xpertise with the State Government departments, to help 
them utilize their funds in a better way, while ensuring a better state of construction and 
maintenance for the State Highways, as well as the National Highways network maintained 
by State PWDs. 
(Para 324) 
  
Reply of Ministry  
 
35.1  Noted for action. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
35.2  The Committee may be apprised about the action taken by the Ministry in this 
regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
36.  The Committee takes note of Media reports p ointing to falsification of emission data 
at emission testing centres for issuance of Pollution -Under-Control Certificates to vehicles. 
This poses a serious threat to the environment and air, those having a direct detrimental 
effect on public health. The C ommittee recommends that the Ministry may device ways to 
prevent such cases. Feasibility of making video recordings of the emission test mandatory for 
issuance for PUC Certificates may be evaluated. The Ministry may implement provisions to 
ensure that the emission testing equipment’s used by the testing centres are evaluated from 
time to time to check their accuracy of emission date.  
(Para 370) 
Reply of Ministry  
 
36.1  As per Rule 115(7), “After the expiry of a period of one year from the date on which 
the Motor Vehicle was first registered, every such vehicle shall carry a ‘valid Pollution under 
Control’ certificate issued by an agency authorized for this purpose by the  State Government. 
The validity of the Certificate shall be for six months and the certificate shall always be 
carried in the vehicle and produced on demand by the Officers referred to in sub -rule (1) of 
rule 116. Provided that the validity of the certific ate shall be 12 months for the vehicle 
manufactured as per Bharat Stage IV or BS VI norms”.  
  

84 
 
36.3 MORTH has issued an advisory to State Gov ernments for proper functioning of PUC 
centres, as under: 
i. The State Transport Department all over the country will mandate a PUC centre at 
fuel station in their State.   
ii. The Calibration of PUC machine should be done at regular periodicity by third party 
agencies duly authorised by the Transport Department of the State. Further, the 
Transport Departments are also advise d to carry random checks of the PUC centres 
and also to carry enforcement drive for PUC compliance by Motor Vehicle Owners.  
iii. Mandate pre-payment of PUC fee before the Test are conducted. 
iv. Introduce well equipped mobile test centres and a programme to check visibly 
polluting vehicle. 
v. Enforce stringent penalty for PUC centres for non -compliance and malpractices and 
to cancel the authorization of non-compliant PUC centres. 
36.4 This Ministry has notified GSR 527(E) dated 06.06.2018 regarding linkage of PUC 
data with Vahan DataBase. 
 
36.5 This Ministry vide notification GSR 410(E) dated 14.06.2021 has standardized the 
PUCC form for a common format of PUC certificate to be issued across the country under 
CMV Rules, 1989. 
36.6 Further, the Ministry has issued GSR n otification 652(E) dated 23.09.2021 which 
provides rules for recognition, regulation and control of Automated Testing Stations. 
Automated Testing Stations will help in effective enforcement of Fitness Regulations. 
36.7 Implementation of the provisions of t he Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 and Central Motors 
Vehicles Rules, 1989 comes under the purview of the respective State Govt. and Union 
Territories.    
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
36.8 The Committee notes the advisories put in place at present by the Ministry with 
regard to PUC centres. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may  consider 
incorporation of stricter guidelines in its advisory  in order to curb malpractices that 
allow polluting vehicles to pass the pollution test, by way of video record ing when 
pollution tests are conducted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
37.  The Committee strongly recommends that it must be ensured that the saplings planted 
by NHAI are looked after in their formative years and that the land be regularly watered and 
looked after. Suitable provisions may be introduced to ensure that the trees pl anted are of a 
suitable specific height and are looked after well, once planted. The Committee desires to 
know the existing mechanism in this regard, alongwith the reasons the same is failing at 
present. 
(Para 372) 
Reply of Ministry  
 

85 
 
37.1   MoRTH has noti fied Green Highways (Plantation, Transplantation, Beautification & 
Maintenance) Policy – 2015 for green corridor development on highways across the country. 
To implement the policy mandate NHAI follows IRC guidelines for landscaping, plantations 
& maintenance on avenue and median land along National Highways. 
  
37.2 There are prescriptions for Maintenance of Roadside plantations, which includes the 
activity schedule which prescribes all the activities including watering requirements in 
formative years of plantations. 
  
37.3 Also, there are prescription for planting healthy plants in IRC guidelines as follows: 
1. Ornamental plants of small and medium size tree species in 1st & 2nd row 
roadside avenue plantation - 1.5 to 2 meters and 90% survival. 
2. Shade plants of large size tree species in last row of roadside avenue plantation 
– more than 2 meters and 80% survival. 
37.4 NHAI has introduced from August 2020, a mobile app monitoring system to monitor 
survival and growth of plants during plantation and maintenance project provided up to 5 
years.  
  
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
37.5 The Committee recommends that NHAI may  include the option to report 
requirement of maintenance of roadside plantations on National Highways, so that 
highway users can bring such requirement to the notice of NHAI for timely action. 
Besides, NHAI may ensure that such maintenance activities are c arried out periodically 
without fail, since overgrown trees and bushes can lead to visibility issues, which in turn 
can lead to lethal accidents. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
38. The Committee feels that the development of waterways across the country will bring 
significant benefits to the Tourism sector as well as the Shipping sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that strict guidelines may be framed and implemented by the Ministry 
across the country to ensure suitable clearance for boats and/or ship s, keeping in mind the 
present as well as future scope for waterways – both National waterways and other inland 
waterways, while building road bridges over water bodies. In this regard, the Ministry 
should work in close coordination with the Ministry of Po rts, Shipping & Waterways and the 
concerned Department of the State Government. 
 (Para 374) 
Reply of Ministry  
38.1   Ministry vide circular number RW/NH -334050/1/2015-S&R(B) dated 30.11.2016 
has issued guidelines regarding construction of bridge structures on National Highways 
passing over declared National Waterways. Ministry vide OM No. RW/NH -34066/04/2018-
S&R(B) dated 24.01.2018 has circulated OM No. IWAI/NW -5/64/NAV cle arance/2017 
dated 08.12.2017 of Island Waterways Authority of India, Ministry of Shipping to the 
executive agencies of NH, regarding clearances for structures to be constructed across 
National Highways.   

86 
 
  
 Further Recommendation/Observation: 
 
38.2 The Co mmittee recommends that guidelines similar to those that have been 
issued regarding construction of bridge structures passing over declared National 
Waterways, may be issued for construction of such bridge structures over other inland 
waterways as well. Th e guidelines in this regard may be framed in close coordination 
with the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways and other concerned departments. 
The Committee feels that doing it is necessary to ensure the development of road 
infrastructure may not cause hindrance in usage of inland waterways as a means of 
transportation. 
  

87 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee is concerned to note the huge debt servicing liability of NHAI in the 
coming years. For the ongoing Financial Year 2021 -22, NHAI’s debt servicing liability is 
equivalent to 33% of the overall budgetary allocation of Rs.1,18,101 crores of the Ministry at 
the B udgetary Estimates stage of the FY 2021 -22. The Committee reiterates the 
recommendation made in para 72 of its 287th Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of 
the Ministry and recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may undertake earnest measures to 
ensure that its stuck projects are completed at the earliest and delay is minimized in the 
ongoing projects, since delays are one of the core reasons behind cost overruns. 
(Para 45) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1   Under examination. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee believes that the level of security and integrity of information provided  by 
decentralized networks such as block chain can be  helpful in a fixing accountability in case 
of sub-standard projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that NHAI may employ th e 
use of block chain technology to store data about implementation of Road projects -including 
data about the test performed to ascertain the quality of material used in the construction, the 
guidelines followed in the execution of the projects, the observa tions made by the authority’s 
Engineer at the time of grant of completion certificate for any given project, etc. Doing so 
will make such information immutable and remove any possibilities of fudging of records by 
any corrupt individuals.  
 (Para 64) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1  Under examination. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into reasons behind delays in 
sanction of L.A. estimates and address the same. 
(Para 80) 
Reply of Ministry 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED

88 
 
3.1  Under examination. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may evaluate the feasibility of 
construction of elevated highways in areas with high population density where acquisition of 
land would possibly be a long and tough task. 
(Para 87) 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1  Under examination 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change may make the online process for obtaining environmental and forest clearances for 
road projects, more user friendly. 
(Para 96) 
 Reply of Ministry 
  
5.1 This recommendation  pertains to MOEFCC. They have been requested for 
comments/ATNs which are awaited from them. 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6. The Committee feels that the MoEF&CC may coordinate with the various State 
Governments and ensure that the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority is formed 
in the different States so as to permit MoEF&CC to focus on assessing the environmental 
impact of bigger projects. This would help increase the pace at which road projects across 
the country are assessed in terms of their environmental impact. 
(Para 106) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 This recommendation pertains to MOEFCC. They have been requested for 
comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.  The Committee feels that given the immense role played by good road connectivity in 
the economic growth of the country, the Ministry should request RBI to grant the Priority 
Sector tag to the road infrastructure sector in order to encourage financial insti tutions and 

89 
 
banks to lend higher amounts to supplement the maintenance and growth of the NH network 
in the country. 
(Para 113) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
7.1   This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
 
  
 Recommendation/Observation 
 
8.  The Committee recommends that in order to avoid delays in financing of road 
projects in case a consortium of banks is considering the grant of loans for a given project, 
RBI may look into defining a reasonable time limit for the consortium to make its decisions 
regarding the financing of the road projects. 
(Para 114) 
  
Reply of Ministry 
 
8.1  This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.  The Committee agrees with the observation made by Canara Bank regarding the 
necessary skill sets for appraising credit proposal of infrastructural proj ect being distinctly 
different from credit appraisal of other types of loans. The Committee recommends that the 
public sector banks must ensure that only qualified people with experience in appraising 
infrastructural proposals should be allowed to make decisions in this regard. 
(Para 133) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
9.1   This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.  The Committee recommends that NHAI may timely settle the amount it claims to be 
due, to the lenders, in case the project goes to arbitration and disputes resolution, and not 
wait till the settlement process is over. Any additional amount that may be needed  to be paid, 
can be settled after the settlement process. This would help free up lenders capital for 
financing other road projects, while lowering the adverse impact of long -drawn 
arbitration/settlement processes on the lenders. 
(Para 143) 

90 
 
Reply of Ministry 
 
10.1   Under examination 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
11.  The Committee believes that infrastructure lending poses a unique challenge to banks 
in terms of the heavy amounts that need to be sanctioned for a long duration of time, with the 
investment being subject to several risks that might hamper the successful execution of a 
given road project. Innovative financing methods such as take -out financing can permit 
increased participation of banks since the duration of time for which the funds lent b y the 
bank are locked up decreases significantly, thereby also reducing the risk faced by the banks 
in their investments made to the road infrastructure sector. The Committee agrees with SBI’s 
suggestion and recommends that the Government may consider mand ating institutions like 
NIIF and the upcoming Development Finance Institution announced in Budget Session, 2021 
by the Hon’ble Finance Minister, to establish a fund for facilitating take -out financing for 
operational projects so as to create additional hea droom for Banks to fund fresh projects. 
The Committee recommends that the necessary framework for take -out financing may be put 
in place. The Ministry may also look into the creation of a special Stressed Asset Fund for 
road sector to fund the completion of stuck road projects, which might otherwise have limited 
takers. 
(Para 144) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1   This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee desires that RBI may look into the feasibility of SBI’s suggestion to 
provide an additional 5% to 10% window to the existing group exposure limit of 25% of the 
Banks’ Total Capital Funds under its Large Exposure  Framework limits. In this regard, RBI 
may consider placing slightly increased exposure limits in case of business groups which are 
considerably large and are in financially sound condition, since the existing limits might be 
too low, especially for smalle r banks, which might not have enough funds to diversify their 
long-term infrastructure investments beyond a certain point. 
(Para 146) 
  Reply of Ministry 
 
12.1   This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13.The Committee notes the issue pointed out by Central Bank regarding project delays on 
account of delay in obtaining commitment from lenders for financing a given road  project. In 

91 
 
this regard, the Committee recommends that provisions may be included in bidding 
requirements to ensure that only serious bidders who can raise the amount necessary for 
execution of the project, should it be awarded to them, are allowed to pla ce a bid. This may 
be implemented by way of requirement of a certificate from an institution stating that they’d 
be willing to finance the concessionaire/contractor in case the project is awarded to them. 
The Committee feels that doing so would help eradic ate delays caused by financially inept 
bidders from winning bids and causing delays later on when they are unable to get lenders to 
finance them to execute the project. 
(Para 150) 
 Reply of Ministry 
13.1   Under examination. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may coordinate with State Governments to 
help establish well -defined procedures for arbitration and settlement for the projects 
awarded by State Government Departments, Undertakings etc. 
(Para 155) 
 Reply of Ministry 
14.1   Under examination 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
15. The Committee notes the issue mentioned by IDBI Bank regarding the challenges faced in 
monitoring utilization of Working Capital limits through Agency for Specialized Monitoring 
(ASM). The Committee recommends that the Indian Banks’ Association may make it 
mandatory for ASMs to have experienced Engineers on -board, besides Chartered 
Accountants, so that the ASM has knowledge regarding technical issues of road projects as 
well, which will subs tantially aid it in monitoring the utilization of working capital limits in 
road sector lending. 
(Para 157) 
 Reply of Ministry 
15.1   This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee desires that the Ministry may look into solutions proposed by IFCI for 
resolving the funding constraints in the road infrastructure sector. 
  
 (Para 161) 
Reply of Ministry 

92 
 
 
16.1 Under examination in consultation with IFCI. 
  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work on resolving the issues causing 
delays in remittance of termination payment. In case of disputes, the minimum amount agreed 
upon by both the Concessioning Authority and the Concessionaire may be released 
immediately, so as to minimize the impact caused by delays in arbitration processes on the 
lenders and the concessionaire. 
(Para 164) 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1   Under examination 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee recommends that the reports furnished to the Ministry by Independent 
Engineer (IE) should be made available online to the lenders involved in the project. This 
information would be crucial for the lender to make decision regarding the further release of 
funds for the road project. 
(Para 168)  
 Reply of Ministry 
 
18.1 Under examination 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 
19.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may thoroughly examine the issues 
mentioned by Indian Overseas Bank and take effective steps to addressed the same. 
 (Para 175) 
Reply of Ministry 
19.1  Under examination in consultation with Indian Overseas Bank. 
  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may setup Infrastructure Debt Funds and 
consider providing some special tax benefits to attract investment from the General public in 
the Road Sector. 
(Para 185) 

93 
 
 Reply of Ministry 
20.1   This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
21.  The Committee notes that SBI’s stressed assets in road sector are about Rs. 4,077 
crores as on 30th June, 2020, which is about 7% of the bank’s overall outstanding credit to 
the road sector. This is the best figure in terms of NPAs in road sector, as compared to the 
data regarding NPAs furnished to the Committ ee by the other banks/ financial institutions. 
The Committee recommends that other banks/ financial institutions should look into the 
methodologies followed by State Bank of India while extending loans to concessionaires in 
road infrastructure sector, and apply the same in their own institution in order to bring their 
respective NPA levels down. 
(Para 193) 
Reply of Ministry 
21.1  This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22.  The Committee is alarmed by the high level of NPA in Central Bank of India’s road 
sector exposure, which has been at such highs even before the start of the COVID -19 
pandemic. The Committee feels that this might point to grant of loans without high quality in -
depth analysis of the inherent risk in extending the loans, and should be looked into on 
priority basis by the bank so as to prevent this from snowballing into a bigger problem in the 
future. 
(Para 196) 
Reply of Ministry 
22.1   This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
23.  The Committee is concerned to note that  61% of the outstanding exposure of IFCI is 
NPA. The Committee is not convinced by IFCI’s justification that the figure looks inflated 
due to exposure to IL&FS road projects. The Committee recommends that RBI may look into 
the matter and consider issuing g uidelines limiting the extent to which a financial 
institution/bank can lend the funds to a particular infrastructure company. 
     (Para 203) 
 
Reply of Ministry 

94 
 
 
23.1  This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24.  The Committee sought to know from the various financial institutions and Public 
Sector Banks regarding how the NPA figures in the road sector for their instit ution compare 
with that of their peers and in case their institution fared poorly in this regard, the Committee 
desired to know the reasons for the same. In the written replies received regarding this query, 
the Committee was informed that the Banks did no t have the sector -wise NPA details of the 
other Banks are not available in the public domain. The Committee feels that sector -wise 
exposure information, at least in respect of public sector banks, should be made available in 
the public domain to permit mor e transparency and public scrutiny. The Committee 
recommends that RBI must analyze the reasons behind substantial variations in the 
percentage of sub -standard assets of NPAs in different Public Sector financial 
institutions/banks and come up with stricter rules and regulations that must be followed while 
sanctioning long-term loans to the infrastructure sector. 
(Para 217) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
24.1  This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
25.  The Committee further recommends that the financial institutions/banks with more 
than acceptable level of NPAs in the road sector should also undertake a study into the 
possible inefficacy of their existing mechanism to analyse the financial soundness as well as 
project execution capabilities of the concessionaire. The Committee strongly recommends 
that the financial institutions/banks should revisit their policies in this regard, whil e also 
having strong checks in place to ensure that there is no connivance between the bank's 
officials responsible for assessing the loan proposals received from the concessionaire, and 
the concessionaire themselves. 
(Para 218) 
Reply of Ministry 
25.1  This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
26.  The Committee notes the submission made by PNB that non -servicing of instalments 
within 90 days renders the account NPA, which attracts additional provisioning on such sub -

95 
 
standard assets. The Committee recommends that RBI may look into the possibility of setting 
a higher limit for long -term infrastructure projects, since u nfortunately as for now, delays of 
several months is not too uncommon in infrastructure projects in India, often for no fault of 
the concessionaire.  
(Para 220) 
  
Reply of Ministry 
 
26.1 This recommendation pertains to Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). They have been requested for comments/ATNs which are awaited.. 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
27.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may reach out to the private sector with 
proposals to invest their CSR funds into road safety initiatives such as training of drivers, 
road safety awareness drives, developing infrastructure for quickly reaching out to road 
accident victims etc., which will undoubtedly save many lives each year, across the country. 
(Para 285) 
Reply of Ministry 
27.1   Under examination 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
28.  The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Government of Karnataka to reduce 
the number of road accidents in the State and hopes that the black spots identified by 
Karnataka PWD are rectified as soon as possible.  
 (Para 301) 
Reply of Ministry 
28.1   Under examination 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
 29.  The Committee takes note of the status of the ongoing road projects in Andhra 
Pradesh and desires that the Ministry may analyze the need of upgradation of suitable State 
Highways in Andhra Pradesh into National Highways. 
 (Para 342) 
Reply of Ministry 
 
29.1   Under examination 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
30.   The Committee notes from the Annual report (2020 -2021) of the Ministry that the 
total number of registers vehicles in India is 29.57 crores, according to the provisional data 

96 
 
for the year 2019, with a CAGR of 9.91 percent for the years 2009 to 2019. The percentage of 
electric vehicles in the country this comes out to somewhere around 0.17 percent of the total 
vehicles plying in the country. The Committee is disappointed to note the very slow adoption 
of electric vehicles in India, with several countries acr oss the world already having share of 
electric cars in double digits. The Committee desires that concrete measures are taken by the 
Ministry to enact policies to aid much faster growth of adoption of electric vehicles in the 
country. The Committee recommen ds that the Ministry, in coordination with Ministry of 
Power and automobile manufacturers may come up with a time-bound plan to create a robust 
vehicle charging infrastructure is critical to give a boost to the adoption of electric vehicles 
in the country, which would lead to considerable environmental benefits and help resolve the 
issue of pollution to some extent. 
(Para 359) 
Reply of Ministry 
30.1  Recommendation is under examination in consultation with  Ministry of Power and 
Heavy Industries. 
   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
31.  Further, the Committee Strongly  recommends that the Ministry may exempt electric 
vehicles from registration charges and toll tax. Financial incentives are necessary to create a 
spurt in the adoption of electric vehicles in the country, which, in turn, will increase the pace 
at which inf rastructure is being created for the shift to such vehicles. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may undertake an in depth analysis of the policies adopted by 
countries across the world which have succeeded in   enabling mass adoption of the electric  
vehicles in the country, and come with an effective time -bound plan with well-defined targets 
for electric vehicle adoption in India. 
(Para 360) 
 
 Reply of Ministry 
 
31.1  Under examination in consultation with Ministry of Power and Heavy Industries. 
***** 

97 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee feels that a large number of National Highways across the 
country are marred by dangerous potholes and need s to be maintained in a better state. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may allocate some part of the 
maintenance budget to thor oughly monitor the vast network of National Highways 
across the country to be able to carry out the repair works of potholes within no times, 
which will enable to prevent any possible accidents due to poor state of NHs.  
(Para 1.3) 
 
 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made by the Ministry 
with regard to preparation of draft Policy Note/ SOP on the viability of having 
provisions for utility corridors and the decision regarding creation of a Special Purpose 
Vehicle for the purpose of mo netization of the utility corridors, based on the finalized 
policy.  
(Para 2.6) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may allocate Research Funds not 
only regarding road construction techniques and materials utilized etc., but also to 
study and develop better mechanisms to monitor the quality of roads across the vast NH 
network in the country. Specific budget may be allocated for carrying out research 
activities to evolve a master plan to drastically improve the worrisome state of road 
safety in the country.  
(Para 3.4) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the various hindrances being faced in the filling up 
of vacancies in NHAI and appreciates the remedial actions being taken to overcome the 
same. The Committee, however, is anguished to note that the total manpower working 
in NHAI, including both regular officials and those on deputation, as on 30.08.2021 is 
just 1189 out of the total sanctioned strength of 1882. The Committee reiterates its 
observations made in para 10.4 of Chapter III of its 301 st Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in 
its 287 th Report on the Demands for Grants (2021 - 22) of the Ministry that given the 
huge financial allocation made to NHAI each year, it is pertinent to en sure that 
sufficient manpower is in place so as to make optimal utilization of the available funds. 

98 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ongoing comprehensive review of 
existing Recruitment Rules of NHAI may be finalized at the earliest and sincer e efforts 
may be made to ensure that the vacancies presently lying unfilled in NHAI are filled up 
at the earliest.  
(Para 5.5) 
 
 The Committee notes that a significant percentage of vacancies still exist at the 
GM, DGM, Manager and Deputy Manager level, th e vacancies at Manager and Deputy 
Manager level hovering around 90 percent of the sanctioned strength. The Committee 
fails to understand how NHAI can be expected to carry out its mandate effectively when 
such a large number of senior posts are lying vacant  that too for a long time . The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take a serious look on this matter and 
resolve the underlying issues that are causing such a grave situation in NHAI , at the 
earliest.  
(Para 6.3) 
 
 The Committee recommends that NHAI may consider coming up with some sort 
of incentive scheme for its personnel having good experience to encourage them to gain 
professional qualifications. NHAI should aim to strike a balance between experience 
and professional qualifications while recruiting officers at high -level positions and the 
balance should be reflected in the Recruitment Rules for such posts. The Committee 
further recommends that NHAI should assess the anticipated vacancies well in advance 
since doin g so would allow NHAI more time to find the right candidates with good 
experience as well as professional qualifications.  
(Para 7.2) 
 
 The Committee feels that it might not be reasonable to assign heavy 
responsibilities to the existing officers with lesse r qualifications only to permit good 
promotional avenues to them. Only officers with enough experience and sufficient 
expertise should be granted the responsibility of high -level posts after carrying out the 
required assessment. Grant of timely financial upgradation may be considered for other 
officers. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in para 7.2 of  Chapter III 
of this Report.  
(Para 9.3) 
 
 The Committee notes the various reasons behind the delays in completion of 
various road projects across the country. The Committee recommends that excepting 
the negative impact of the Coronavirus pandemic restrictions on the execution of 
projects, the Mini stry should take serious view of road projects being delayed on 
account of below -par performance by road contractors/ concessionaires. A mechanism 
may be put in place to award the road contract to a different concessionaire once a 
delay in execution has oc curred because of the existing concessionaire. The previous 

99 
 
performance of concessionaires may be taken into  consideration for award of future 
road project contracts.  
(Para 10.3) 
 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the progress made by the Ministry in 
this regard.  
(Para 11.2) 
 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry to 
request formation of a panel of retired judges having expertise in infrastructural 
litigations in order to enable quicker judgements in case of disputes with 
concessionaires.  
(Para 12.2) 
 
 The Committee recommends that NHAI may give due importance to improving 
the Sukhad Yatra mobile application since the data submitted by the app users can help 
NHAI a lot in monitoring the state of National High ways across the country. User 
feedback received on the various application distribution platforms such as Google Play 
Store and Apple App Store, may be duly factored in future updates of the application 
and the data received from the users.  
(Para 13.3) 
 
 The Committee feels that the number of complaints received by NHAI through 
the app are minuscule, given the vast network of NHs across the country. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry and NHAI may promote the Sukhad Yatra 
app through social media an d other means, so as to gain crucial information about 
requirement of maintenance of National Highways, which will also help in preventing 
the occurrence of road accidents due to poor state of Highways.  
(Para 14.3) 
  
 The Committee feels that without the existence of a central database, it would 
not be possible for the Ministry/NHAI to keep track of the road projects across the 
country that have been awarded to a concessionaire. The Committee, therefore, may be 
updated about the action taken by NHAI to cre ate and maintain a central database of 
road projects awarded to various concessionaires so as to permit NHAI to factor in the 
contract award history and performance history of a given concessionaire before 
awarding them a new road project.  
(Para 15.3) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the knowledge gained from such regular 
meetings with the lenders may be utilized to periodically update and revise the Model 

100 
 
Concession Agreement so as to encourage lenders to finance a higher number of 
National Highway projects.  
(Para 16.2) 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 16.2 of  Chapter III 
of this Report.  
(Para 17.2) 
 
 The Committee had been informed by various financial institutions  that the 
construction of parallel roads is a major issue faced by them causing loss of revenue on 
tolled projects. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its original recommend ation that 
the Ministry may introduce appropriate rules/laws to ensure that const ruction of 
parallel roads by State or other agencies may be avoided at all costs and some sort of 
provision for payment of compensation to the concessionaire may be considered  by the 
Ministry.  
(Para 19.2) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the task of creating new PIUs may be 
completed at the earliest so as to share the workload of the overburdened PIUs. The 
Committee further recommends that action may be taken at the earliest indications of a 
project running of f-schedule and the performance of the concessionaires in terms of 
progress of work completed may be monitored closely for all road projects across the 
country.  
(Para 20.5 
 
 The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry does not furnish any 
information regarding why the SARDP -NE Phase -B cannot be taken up along with 
SARDP-NE Phase A, since implementing both Phases in parallel might help complete 
the SARDP-NE programme at a quicker pace. The Committee, therefore, desires to be 
apprised of the reasons for not considering parallel execution of both Phases of SARDP-
NE.  
(Para 21.2) 
 
 The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry for timely execution of 
projects under SARDP -NE but given the huge delays that are currently faced in the 
programme, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake a holistic 
review of the reasons for which the remedial efforts of the Ministry are not effective in 
resolving the delays being faced in SARDP-NE.  
(Para 22.2) 
  
 

101 
 
 The C ommittee feels that awarding road projects, especially in the North -East 
region, to the lowest bidder might be leading to below -par quality of roads being 
constructed, besides incapable concessionaires causing delays in road projects because 
of their financial and technical incapacities. T he Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation made in Para 26 of its 296 th Report, which is reproduced below 
verbatim: 
“The Committee further recommends the Ministry to carefully analyze the 
shortcomings of the existing mechanism for awarding road  projects to the lowest 
bidder, since doing so includes little thought for ensuring quality of the work. The 
Committee believes that there should be consideration for other importance factors 
besides the bidding amount, while awarding a project to a conces sionaire. A 
qualitative approach must be formulated for awarding road projects. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take up with the Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC), the shortcomings of the existing system of awarding a project 
to the lowest bidder, presenting its arguments for modification of the CVC 
guidelines for awarding of tender in a suitable way to permit an element of 
qualitative approach in the tender awarding process for road projects. The 
Committee feels that a criterion may be deve loped where certain weightage is given 
to objective parameters such as the awards presently being executed by the 
contractor, their financial record, and most importantly, the past performance of a 
contractor, in terms of quality of work and timely executi on. The database 
recommended by the Committee in para 22 of this Report may be useful for such 
purposes.” 
(Para 23.2) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may lay special focus on timely 
completion of road projects in LWE affected areas in close co ordination with local law 
enforcement and other concerned departments.  
(Para 24.2) 
 
 The Committee may be apprised of the details of the various research activities 
that are being carried out by the SRD& Q Division of NHAI. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may consider increasing the budget for research 
purposes in the upcoming years so as to allow research for improving construction 
quality in hilly and flood -prone regions, improving roa d safety across the country and 
developing a mechanism to effectively monitor the pliability of National Highways 
across the country so as to proactively prevent accidents from happening because of 
shoddy quality of roads.  
(Para 25.2) 
 
 The Committee notes the various steps being taken by the Ministry and the 
policy guidelines brought out by NHAI to improve road safety across the country but 
feels that given the ever-increasing number of deaths occurring due to road accidents in 
the country, a lot more  needs to be done urgently in order to minimize the same. The 

102 
 
Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may review the safety audit process 
itself and ensure that the same is carried out in a transparent and honest manner. The 
Committee further recommend s that the identified black spots may be rectified at the 
earliest and the definition for identification of black spots may be tightened so as to 
identify and rectify more accident-prone spots across the NH network in the country.  
(Para 26.3) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may speed up the process of 
rectification of black spots that have already been identified since these spots are very 
likely to cause more accidents if left unrectified. The status of all black spots may be 
kept regularly updated on the NHAI website and any delay in the rectification of black 
spots may be looked into urgently.  
(Para 27.3) 
 
 The Committee recommends that the tender for Computer Aided Dispatch 
System may be finalized at the earliest since providing timely emergency care during 
the golden hour can help save countless lives involved in road accidents across the 
country. The Committee desires to be kept apprised in this regard.   
(Para 28.2) 
 
 The Committee recommends that dedicated efforts may be made to promote the 
tollfree helpline number 1033 amongst highway users. The Committee may be apprised 
of the action taken by the Ministry to promote the usage of the number 1033 through 
social media and other means.  
(Para 29.2) 
 
 The Committee appreciates the  efforts of the Ministry to rope in the private 
sector by vesting Driving Training Centres with functions such as testing of aspirants 
for issuance of driving licence, which will hopefully make such centres a successful 
business proposition. Having well -trained drivers on the Indian roads would go a long 
way in improving road safety and aiming to have Driving Training Centres in all 
districts of the country would be the first step towards that. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may cons ider providing some aid to the interested 
parties in terms of lending for setting up such Driving Training Centres, in 
collaboration with financial institutions.  
(Para 30.6) 
 
 The Committee recommends that latest safety standards adopted for vehicles 
globally, may be suitably incorporated in the Indian vehicle safety standards from time 
to time, so as to minimize the number of deaths occurring on Indian roads due to road 
accidents.  

103 
 
(Para 31.4) 
 
 The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be able to complete the remaining 
projects under the Char dham Pariyojana within the targeted date of completion of 
December, 2024. The Committee recommends that all possible measures may be taken 
from the planning stage itself to ensure that the road projects of the M inistry cause 
minimal impact on the environment, especially in eco -sensitive hilly regions. This would 
help lower the delays faced on account of Court litigations and petitions in the NGT.  
(Para 32.2) 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in para 32.2 of  Chapter III 
of this Report.  
(Para 33.3) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee further recommends that in 
future, such Rapid Environmental Impact Assessment may be proactively carried out 
by the Ministry for all of its major National Highways projects in ecologically sensitive 
regions.  
(Para 34.2) 
 
 The Committee may be apprised about the action taken by the Ministry in this 
regard.  
(Para 35.2) 
 
 The Committee notes the advisories put in place at present by the Ministry with 
regard to PUC centres. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may  consider 
incorporation of stricter guidelines in its advisory  in order to curb malpractices that 
allow polluting vehicles to pass the pollution test, by way of video recording when 
pollution tests are conducted.  
(Para 36.8) 
 
 The Committee recommends that NHAI may include the option to report 
requirement of maintenance of roadside plantations on National Highways, so that 
highway users can bring such requirement to the notice of NHAI for timely  action. 
Besides, NHAI may ensure that such maintenance activities are carried out periodically 
without fail, since overgrown trees and bushes can lead to visibility issues, which in turn 
can lead to lethal accidents.  
(Para 37.5) 
 

104 
 
 The Committee recommend s that guidelines similar to those that have been 
issued regarding construction of bridge structures passing over declared National 
Waterways, may be issued for construction of such bridge structures over other inland 
waterways as well. The guidelines in t his regard may be framed in close coordination 
with the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways and other concerned departments. 
The Committee feels that doing it is necessary to ensure the development of road 
infrastructure may not cause hindrance in us age of inland waterways as a means of 
transportation.  
(Para 38.2) 
***** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

 
  
 
 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st January, 2022 in Committee Room 
- '4', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Dr. Sonal Man Singh 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
10. Shri Margani Bharat 
11. Shri Tapir Gao 
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Shri Prince Raj 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following Reports:- 
 
A.        Draft Action Taken Report on - 
105

 
(i) *   *   *   * 
 
(ii) *   *   *   * 
(iii) *   *   *   * 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
as contained in its Two Hundred Ninety Sixth Report on the subject ‘Role of 
Highways in Nation Building’. 
(v) *   *   *   * 
(vi) *   *   *   * 
B.        *   *   *   * 
(i)         *   *   *   * 
(ii)        *   *   *   * 
(iii)       *   *   *   * 
(iv)       *i   *   *   * 
 
 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
  
 
 
 
                                                           
* Relates to other matters 
106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136