 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA               160 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE  
 
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH REPORT 
ON 
THE NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY AND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
BOARD BILL, 2010 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST  JULY, 
2010) 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 21 ST  JULY, 2010) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH  JULY, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 TH  JULY, 2010) 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
JULY, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA)                                     
  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
                                                E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH REPORT 
ON 
THE NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY AND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
BOARD BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 21 
ST  JULY, 
2010) 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON'BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 21 ST  JULY, 2010) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH  JULY, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 TH  JULY, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI  
                                       JULY, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 

CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3. R EPORT ........................................................................................................................... 1-11 
4. O BSERVATIONS /C ONCLUSIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS ––  AT A GLANCE 
............................................ 
12-15 
5. M INUTES ........................................................................................................................ 17-25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2009-2010)  
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury   ----------      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 
@5. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7. Shri Thomas Sangma 
 
#8. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma 
 *9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10. Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 15. Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 16. Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 22. Shri S.D. Shariq 
 23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25. Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28. Shri K. Sugumar 
 29. Shri Kabir Suman 
 30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 

  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9th April, 2010 and re-nominated on 29th April, 2010. 
#  Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  5th July, 2010. 
• Nominated on 12th September, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION  
  I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism 
and Culture, having been authorized by the Committe e to present on its behalf, do hereby present this  
One Hundred and Sixtieth Report on “The National Ro ad Safety and Traffic Management Board Bill, 
2010”. 
2.   The Committee, at its meetings held on the 4th  June and 8th July, 2010, considered the Bill and 
heard the Secretary and other officials of the Mini stry of Road Transport & Highways and 
experts/stakeholders/organizations/individuals respectively. 
3.   The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways and experts/stakeholders/organizations/ind ividuals for placing before the Committee the 
material and information desired in connection with the Bill and for clarifying the points raised by t he 
Members. 
4.   The Committee considered and adopted the Repor t at its meeting held on the 14th July, 2010. 
 
 
 
  SITARAM  YECHURY 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
14 
th 
 July , 2010 Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Asadha 23 , 1932 (Saka)  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
  The National Road Safety and Traffic Management B oard Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok 
Sabha on the 4th May, 2010. The Bill was referred t o the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture for exa mination and report. Under the mandate, the 
Committee has examined the Bill and finalized the R eport after hearing the views of the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways and experts/stakeholders. 
2.   The Bill seeks to provide for the establishmen t of the National Road Safety and Traffic 
Management Board for the purpose of orderly develop ment, regulation, promotion and optimization 
of modern and effective road safety and traffic man agement system and practices in relation to the 
national highways and improved safety standards in highway design, construction, operation and 
regulate high standards in production and maintenan ce of mechanically propelled vehicles and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
3.   The reasons for and objectives behind bringing  out this Bill, as informed by the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways have been enumerated in succeeding paragraphs: 
3.1   Road transport is the most convenient and pop ular mode of transport and at the same time, it is 
also the most complex and unsafe mode of transporta tion resulting in higher number of road crashes 
as compared to other sectors of transportation. The  world report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention 
(2004) of the World Bank and World Health Organizat ion has observed that the road traffic injuries 
are a major but neglected health problem. The repor t forecasts that in the absence of increased effort  
and new initiatives, the total number of road traff ic injuries and deaths would rise by sixty-five per  
cent between 2000-2020 across the world. In India, the number of deaths reported has increased to 
1,14,444 in 2007 from 84,674 deaths in 2002. A stud y conducted in 2002 by the Planning 
Commission estimated the social cost of road accide nts in India at about three per cent of GDP 
annually, which at 2000 prices is estimated at Rs. 55,000 crore. In case of developed countries, the 
cost of road crashes rise between one to two per cent of their GDP. 
3.2  Besides, the number of vehicles in India has b een increasing at an average growth rate of ten per 
cent per annum since last few years. India has also  taken up an ambitious project of 
upgrading/broadening its National Highways and cons truction of Expressways. This has resulted in 
both volume and speed in traffic flow. At the same time, it also raises serious concerns about road 
safety. 
3.3   In most of the developed countries, focused a nd scientific research is carried out on road safet y 
and road crash injury prevention. These countries h ave specialized bodies to manoeuver adequate 
resources and supervise the activities required to improve road safety. However, there is no such 
dedicated agency in India to deal with the road saf ety issues. Though Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways is the administrative Ministry responsible  for road safety efforts in the country, it does no t 
have enforcement machinery of its own and other tec hnical resources required to ensure better road 
safety activities. There are other bodies concerned  for road safety issues which are Transport 
Department of the State Governments, automobile tes ting agencies, highway construction and 
maintenance agencies, etc. There is also a need to look into the issues as to whether the design, 
construction and maintenance standards of highways are being scrupulously followed both by the 

Government and concessionaires. It is, therefore, felt that an integrated and dedicated statutory body is 
necessary to provide for continuity, expertise and credibility to combat the rising menace of road 
accidents and fatalities in the country. 
3.4  In order to look into the issue of creating a dedicated agency for road safety and traffic 
management, a Committee under the Chairmanship of S hri S. Sundar, former Secretary in the 
erstwhile Ministry of Surface Transport was constit uted in the year 2005. The said Committee 
recommended creation of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board through an Act of 
Parliament which would be responsible to oversee road safety activities in the country. 
3.5  Based on the recommendations as well as a mode l Bill prepared by Sundar Committee, the 
National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board B ill, 2010 has been prepared. The salient 
features of the Bill, inter alia , are as under:– 
(a)  the National Road Safety and Traffic Managemen t Board shall consist of a Chairperson 
and five Members. The Chairperson would be a person  of “eminence with ability, 
integrity and outstanding calibre who has adequate knowledge and professional 
experience in administration and road transport”. T he five members are to be chosen, one 
each from amongst persons having experience in the fields of (i) road design, engineering 
or construction; (ii) automobile engineering or tec hnology; (iii) data collection and 
analysis, accident investigation, research, finance  or administration; (iv) traffic 
management, road user behaviour strategies or road safety education; (v) and trauma care 
and rehabilitation; 
(b)  the Board shall, inter-alia , perform the following functions, namely:– 
(i)  in relation to the national highways, recommen d minimum design, construction, 
operation and maintenance standards; recommend mini mum standards for 
establishing and operating trauma facilities and pa ra-medical facilities on the 
national highways; conduct safety audits to monitor  compliance with the standards 
notified by the Central Government; make recommenda tions or issue guidelines 
relating to design, construction, operation and mai ntenance standards for the 
national highways; 
(ii)  in relation to mechanically propelled vehicle s, recommend minimum safety 
requirements and standards for the design and manuf acture of mechanically 
propelled vehicles; recommend minimum conditions for safe usage of such vehicles 
including specifying the maximum load bearing and c apacity limits; conduct or 
cause to be conducted safety audits to monitor comp liance with the standards 
notified by the Central Government; recommend stand ards for vehicular traffic on 
the national highways including the schemes for seg regation of various classes of 
vehicles in separate speed lanes and their right of way; 
(iii)  without prejudice to aforesaid, in relation to the national highways and 
mechanically propelled vehicles, establish procedur es and centers for 
multidisciplinary crash investigation; make recomme ndations or issue guidelines 
relating to safety features for vehicles other than  mechanically propelled vehicles 
and for safe operating conditions for such vehicles; undertake road safety and traffic 

education programs to create awareness amongst all sections of road users; involve 
NGOs working in the area of road safety and traffic management; advise the Central 
Government in matters relating to or arising out of  traffic management on the 
national highways and the mechanically propelled ve hicles for the purposes of 
ensuring road safety; advise the Central Government  on administration of the 
provisions relating to safety as contained in Chapters II, IV, V, VII, VIII and XIII of 
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and the rules made thereunder. 
 However, the Board cannot exercise the power and j urisdiction in respect of matters 
relating to public order, roads (other than Nationa l Highways) and vehicles (other 
than mechanically propelled vehicles) and the matte rs which have been specifically 
provided under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 or the National Highways Act, 1956; 
(c)  the Central Government, in consultation with t he National Highways Authority of 
India, would notify the standards relating to the N ational Highways and 
mechanically propelled vehicles as recommended by the Board; 
(d)  creation of the National Road Safety and Traff ic Management Fund for meeting the 
expenses of the Board wherein the one per cent of t he revenue from the cess on 
diesel and gasoline allocated under section 10 of t he Central Road Fund Act, 2000 
for National Highways and rail and road over bridges shall be credited; 
(e)  the provision for penalty of ten lakh rupees f or failing to maintain the standards 
referred to in sub-paragraph (c) above. 
4.   The Committee in its meeting held on the 8th J une, 2010 heard the views of the Secretary and 
other officials of the Ministry of Road Transport a nd sought replies to the queries on the subject. Th e 
Committee also heard the views of various experts r elating to road development and safety and other 
organizations/stakeholders on the Bill on the 8th July, 2010. 
5.   To a specific query on the necessity for estab lishing a National Road Safety and Traffic 
Management Board, the Secretary while deposing befo re the Committee almost reiterated what had 
been given in the ‘Statement of Objects and Reasons ’ of the Bill The Committee then invited the 
attention of the Secretary to Section 215 of the Mo tor Vehicles Act which provided for the 
constitution of Road Safety Councils both by the Ce ntre and the State Governments. The Committee 
wanted to know what if these Councils were strength ened/empowered both financially and legally, 
and a Directorate of Road Safety was set up at the Centre with the powers, more or less, similar to the 
Board instead of establishing another agency. The S ecretary replied that the Road Safety Councils as 
provided in the Motor Vehicles Act confined to Moto r Vehicles only and that they did not cover all 
the aspects of road safety. These were purely advisory bodies and they were are not expert bodies. He 
further added that since these councils were headed  by the Ministers, they were considered as part of 
the Government. 
6.   Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Co mmittee expressed their reservations/concerns 
on various provisions of the Bill. For example, qualification and age of the Chairman of the Board was 
not found as per the broader scheme of the Bill; it  appeared that there is an attempt to accommodate 
retired persons on the Board. They also felt that t he composition of the Selection Committee must 
have been given in the Bill. They further noted that the Bill related only to the National Highways and 

other roads in urban and rural areas were left out. The Committee also noted that the Bill did not bring 
States into the proposed safety net, although the Sundar Committee had recommended about this. The 
existing mechanisms and institutional set up need t o be strengthened first before constituting the 
present Board. It was also felt that Section 215 of the Motor Vehicle Act provided for National Safety 
Councils at the Central and State levels and by pro viding adequate powers to these Council, many of 
the safety issues could be achieved. The Committee’ s recommendations on the Motor Vehicles 
Amendment Bill in 2008 were also raised. The Commit tee gave important suggestions for controlling 
the incident like drunken driving, rash and neglige nt driving, use of Mobile phones while driving etc.  
would have been taken care of in the Motor Vehicles  Act. But the Government has not come forward 
with amended Bill till today. 
7.   In response to these observations made by the members of the Committee, the Secretary assured 
to furnish a detailed note addressing all the conce rns raised. The Ministry vide  their note dated 21st 
June 2010 submitted their comments on the major iss ue raised by the Committee. As regards the 
justification for creation of the National Road Saf ety and Traffic Management Board through a 
separate legislation rather than amending the Motor  Vehicles Act, 1988 which empowers the 
Government to set up National Road Safety Council, the Government contended: 
/circle6 The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 has been framed in te rms of Entry 35 of the Concurrent list 
of Constitution of India which relates to the mecha nically propelled vehicles. Thus the 
ambit of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 would be restrict ed to matters relating to motor 
vehicles.  
/circle6 Section 215 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 provide s for setting up of National Road 
Safety Council. The Government has already constitu ted National Road Safety Council 
comprising State Transport Ministers, DG/IG (Police ) of States/UTs and non-official 
members. The mandate of the council is limited to t he policy issues involving road safety 
aspects of motor vehicles only. Moreover, the Counc il cannot take up matters on day to 
day basis and cannot provide technical/advisory sup port to the Government on critical 
issues concerning all parameters of road safety. 
/circle6 Road safety is a multi-sectoral and multi-dimension al issue involving road infrastructure, 
motor vehicle aspects, enforcement of Motor Vehicle s Act and other Acts relevant for 
road safety, Traffic planning and management, provi sion of health and hospital services 
land use planning etc. Road infrastructure, traffic  planning, land use planning etc. cannot 
be governed under Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The req uirement is to have a 
comprehensive coordinated approach amongst all thes e sectors besides having a 
synchronised legal framework in each sector to address road safety concerns. 
/circle6 The Bill also provides for creation of National Roa d Safety Fund for carrying out road 
safety activities so that it did not have to depend on the Government for dedicatedly by the 
Board without thriving on budgetary support. The Mo tor Vehicles Act, 1988 cannot be 
amended for creation of such a fund since it does n ot have the requisite constitutional 
mandate. Since the Bill has been framed deriving co nstitutional powers from Union List 
i.e. , regarding National Highways and also the motor ve hicle, it has a wider legal 
perspective and hence wider applicability. 

/circle6 The Board would have powers to institute legal proceedings for penalizing violation of the 
standards regarding highways construction/maintenan ce as well as road safety standards 
of motor vehicles. Had it been proposed to be created through Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 it 
would not enjoy the power to institute penalties for violation of highways standards. 
/circle6 The Sundar Committee has also examined internationa l experience in administering road 
safety and studied in detail the models of road saf ety institutions in USA, Sweden, 
Australia and UK. The Committee has accordingly sug gested a model relevant for the 
country. 
8.   Regarding the recommendatory nature of the Boa rd, the Ministry clarified that the Board would 
recommend the safety standards for motor vehicles a nd standards for design, construction and 
maintenance of highways. The Government in any way has to consider these recommendations 
mandatorily. The only power left in respect to thes e aspects is to notify these standards as it is 
authorized under relevant Acts. 
9.   In addition, the Board would have powers to co nduct crash investigations, establish the 
procedure and methodology for data collection, tran smission and analysis of road accident related 
data, issue guidelines relating to safety features for vehicles other than mechanically propelled 
vehicles, establish procedures and centers for mult i-disciplinary crash investigation, to provide 
technically advisory support to the Government on a dministration of the provisions relating to road 
safety, issue guidelines in consultation with Minis try of Health regarding Trauma care management. 
Moreover, the Board would have powers to institute penalties for violation of conforming to the 
standards relating to design, construction and maintenance of National Highways, safety standards for 
motor vehicles, and non-submission of information d esired by the Board etc. Thus, the Board would 
not be merely a recommendatory body. but would have  sufficient advisory, coordinating and 
regulatory powers to deal with the road safety situation in an effective manner. 
10.   As regards the status of recommendations of t he Committee on the Motor Vehicle (Amendment) 
Bill, 2007, the Ministry stated that it had taken i nto account all the suggestions of the Committee an d 
was in the process of approaching the Cabinet with a revised Bill. While considering the proposal, 
Hon’ble Minister (RT&H) desired to have a re-look i nto the proposed amendments to examine 
whether these provisions meet the new requirements,  keeping in view the fact that the process to 
initiate amendments in the Act was started long bac k in the year 2001. It was also felt that many 
representations/suggestions received form various q uarters during the intervening period would also 
need to be examined and accommodated in the proposa l, if found appropriate. Besides, a comparison 
with the contemporary Act in the neighbouring count ries such as China, Japan, Malaysia and 
Indonesia etc. would also be required so that best practices suitable for our country could be adopted . 
The Law Commission, in its 234th Report on “Legal R eforms to Combat Road Accidents” also made 
a number of recommendations to bring out legislativ e changes in the relevant Acts to ensure road 
safety and traffic discipline. It was felt that the se recommendations would also need to be adequately  
addressed. This Ministry had constituted a Committee in October, 2009, with the approval of Minister 
(RT&H), under the Chairmanship of Shri S. Sundar, d istinguished fellow, The Energy and Resources 
Institute (TERI) and former Secretary in this Minis try to review the Act in a Comprehensive manner. 
The Committee, in its various meetings heard all th e stakeholders as well as individuals who had 
requested for a hearing by the Committee. Consultat ion process is almost over. The Committee is in 

the process of finalizing its recommendations. In a ll probability, the new Motor Vehicle Amendment 
Bill may be introduced in the Parliamentary in the Winter Session this year. 
11.   The Committee after hearing the Ministry deci ded to know the views of other stakeholders, 
institutional as well as individuals on the road sa fety. As such, following appeared before the 
Committee on 8th July 2010. 
12.   The Indian Roads Congress one of the oldest a nd important technical body concerning roads 
recommends standards, specifications, guidelines et c. for roads and suggests improved methods of 
administration, planning, construction, operation, maintenance, policy issues and use of roads. It 
provides a national forum for expression of collective opinion of its members on all matters relating to 
the design, construction, operation and maintenance  of roads and bridges including technology, 
equipment, materials, research, planning, finance a nd taxation, etc. The representative of the Indian 
Roads Congress submitted before the Committee that the formulation of Design Standards, Codes, 
Guidelines etc. of promoting road safety need to remain with Indian Road Congress, as it has adequate 
technical support to frame these documents. Indian Roads Congress promotes research activities in 
highways engineering including road safety and traf fic management. Therefore, promoting research 
activities on the subject has also to be kept in vi ew while finalizing this Bill. They further added t hat 
functions of the proposed Board will be duplicate a nd repetitive as IRC was already performing these 
roles efficiently. 
13.   The representative of the Automotive Research  Association of India (ARAI) expressed his 
reservations on the Boards activities relating to t esting, research, audits, and investigations, as th ese 
functions were quite technical in nature and involv ed expenses. He also expressed apprehension over 
the budget allocation for such activities in the proposed Board. 
14.   As regards the roles of the proposed Board re lating to establishing standards for motor vehicles, 
representative of ARAI stated that there was a well -established mechanism, viz. , Central Motor 
Vehicles Rule (CMVR)-Technical Standing committee w orking under Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways. Additionally, under the National Automoti ve Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project 
(NATRIP), National Automotive Authority was being s et up. This will bring under one umbrella all 
these significant interventions for the automotive sector as well as all the necessary automotive testing 
and homologation infrastructure which includes road  safety related infrastructure like accident dates 
analysis center, passive safety labs at 3 centers including different types of crash labs, etc. 
15.   ARAI further submitted that several national efforts are already made by organization like 
‘National Safety Council’, ‘National Road Safety Co uncil’ ‘Indian Road Congress’ etc. Synergy may 
be established between them. Their scope needs to b e clearly defined as otherwise there would be 
unnecessary duplication. 
16.   The Indian Road Foundation of Transport Resea rch and Training (IFTRT) submitted before the 
Committee that Section 21 of the National Road Safe ty and Traffic Management Board Bill 2010, 
mentions various penalties in case of poor standard s of design OF construction or operation of 
National Highways. It also talks about the responsi bility for maintaining the standards for design or 
manufacture or operation of mechanically propelled vehicles, which fail to comply with standards for 
design or manufacture of motor vehicles in the coun try. It also prescribed fixed cash penalties for no n 
compliance of the official standards by any Governm ent Agency under the relevant law. The IFTRT 

suggests that with regard to fixation of or prescri bing cash penalties for non-compliance of highway 
standards and / or of motor vehicle performance sta ndards by the concerned agency / organization/ 
body, the cash penalty is not a sufficient punishme nt for supply of defective vehicles / tyres or 
construction of sub-standard roads / bridges in the  country in the interest of road safety. In fact, t his 
Bill or any other legislation or the Motor Vehicle Act or Rules provide for ‘Product Recall’ - to 
“recall” the defective tyre / batch! model/size of motor vehicles / automotive types that have proved to 
be dangerous to the safety of road users. The ‘prod uct recall’ mechanism exists in United States of 
America, Europe, Japan, South Korea etc. In the event of warranty failure for vehicles like cars, multi-
utility vehicles (MUVs), trucks, buses, etc. and th eir tyres, the vehicle and tyre manufacturers shoul d 
be duty bound to report warranty failure to the des ignated agency on monthly basis and in case the 
warranty claims of a particular product exceeds 5% of total production of a batch of vehicles / tyres,  
then the manufacturer should be given an option to voluntarily recall the use or in stock vehicles and / 
or tyres with them. In USA, Europe, Japan or Korea,  the vehicle failure or tyre failure is subject to 
stringent product liability law in event of these p roduct failures result in road fatalities or injuri es to 
the road user. In recent past, the recall of the pa ssenger vehicles by World’s largest car maker – M/s . 
Toyota Motors Ltd.- is the latest example of product recall and subsequent legal liability across the six 
continents. He stated that putting up some cash pen alty cannot achieve the bigger goal of road safety 
on Indian Road and Highways. 
17.   Clause 4(1) of the draft Bill indicates that “The Chairperson shall be a person who has adequate 
knowledge and professional experience in administra tion and road transport.” In this connection, the 
Officers Association of Central Engineering Service s (Roads) submitted that in days to come, the 
professionals with long experience in the Highway S ector would be given important roles in decision 
making and providing leadership to the concerned in stitutions, that are currently being managed by 
generalists, who do not have the requisite practica l experience and knowledge to decide the technical 
matters. In this context, the Delhi Metro’s perform ance, headed by a technocrat, was mentioned as an 
example to follow. 
18.   It was argued that the administration should not become the core/top function in the Board as it  
tends to focus on ‘maintaining status quo’ and’ goi ng by precedents only. Such persons at decision-
making levels (of Chairman/ Member) should not be given a role in shaping safety policies. 
19.   They said that only four Es viz. , Engineering, Education, Enforcement and Emergency Medical 
Services alone can ensure comprehensive highway saf ety. Hence the Engineering / Education / 
Enforcement / Emergency Medical Services Experts (f rom Government / private Sectors) alone 
should be the Members; and the Chairperson should b e from the particular Infrastructure Sector itself 
viz. , Highway Engineering subject to his being visionar y and innovator with minimum 28 years 
experience holding the post of Chief Engineer or above. In this connection it is to be kept in view th at 
the CES(R) is the sole Central Government Cadre for  the Highway Infrastructure Development, who 
put their heart and soul and career for improving t he Sector; and not the Generalists who never 
identify themselves with any particular Sector during their long career but identify with their ‘batch ’ / 
‘State’ / ‘Cadre’ only, and who are more focused on  improving their career prospects than the 
improvement of any particular Sector; but for the r etirement age being 65, they will be aspiring for 
greener pastures only. 

20.   They further argued that to weed out the post  retirement aspirants, the retirement age of the 
members and the Chairman of the Board should be kep t as 60 only. This will ensure that only the 
persons who are willing to dedicate the prime perio d of their career to Highway Safety will come to 
the Board. Eminent innovative retired personnel can  still contribute to the efforts of the Highway 
Safety Board as Advisers / Consultants. 
21.   Clause 5 of the Draft Bill should elaborate o n the composition of the Selection Committee 
otherwise the influential administrators will be able to have their favored ones on the Board. 
22.   During the deliberations, one of the stakehol ders submitted that the qualifications suggested by  
Sundar Committee for the Chairman and members of th e proposed Board were very specific such as 
special knowledge and professional qualifications in the fields of road safety, etc whereas in Clause 4 
of the Bill, it has been made vague. 
23.   One of the stakeholders while appearing befor e the Committee informed that the minimum 
qualifications mentioned for the post of members an d chairperson of the Board do not match the 
demand of this sector. The retirement age of member s and chairperson fixed at sixty five definitely 
exposes the Government’s intention in filling such posts. They further added that appointment of 
generalist chairperson or members will make the boa rd a hub for servicing/retired government 
officials. They stated that the board should have hard core professionals particularly those extensively 
experienced in the Highway sector as members and chairperson as they have to play important roles in 
both decision making and providing adequate leaders hip to the concerned institutions, which are 
currently being managed by generalists. 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
24.   After detailed deliberations with the Secretary and  other officers of the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways and the representatives of various stakeholders and individual experts 
from the field of road and vehicular safety, and af ter going through the notes and material 
supplied to it, the Committee is constrained to obs erve that the legislative proposal to create the 
proposed Board for road safety and traffic manageme nt need to be made comprehensive and 
complete, as it leaves out so many important and integral aspects of road safety.  
25.  The Committee finds that currently, almost all the issues relating to the road safety are 
being taken care of in the existing framework at th e Central and State levels, supported by 
academic institutions, private sector, industry and NGOs. For example, there is a National Road 
Safety Council working as advisory body in which al l the State Governments and Union 
Territories have their representatives. Then, we ha ve a Transport Development Council of the 
Centre an Inter-ministerial body for laying down common policies for road transport. Then, we 
have Transport Division in the Ministry of Road Tra nsport and Highways, headed by a Joint 
Secretary to look after motor vehicles legislations , transport related matters and the 
administration of road safety schemes. There is an engineering wing in the Ministry, the Roads 
Wings, (headed by the Director-General, two ADGs and 16 Chief Engineers) that sets standards 
for road designs, construction and operation of national highways. It works in consultation with 
the Indian Road Congress. We have the National High ways Authority of India for construction 
and development and maintenance of national highway s; the road safety aspects are built into 
its mandate. It also provides ambulances and trauma  centres on the highways and does the 

highway patrolling. As regards testing and validati on of the vehicles, we have a number of 
institutions–Automotive Testing and Research Institutions, Central Institute of Road Transport 
(CIRT), Automotive Research Association of India (A RAI), Vehicle Research and Development 
Establishment (VRDE). Besides, Indian Institute of Technology, School of Planning and 
Architecture and some NGOs are also providing the h elp and assistance in meeting out the 
safety standards for vehicles and roads. Under the NATRIP of Government of India, various 
centres are being set up all over the country that will undertake automotive testing and set up 
validation facilities, accident data analysis facilities and specialized driving centres.  
26.   It is evident that almost all the aspects of road s afety that have been proposed to be vested 
in the Board, are being taken care of in the existing framework.  
27.   The Committee notes that the problems in the existi ng framework, also identified by 
Sundar Committee, are existence of a large number o f agencies at the Centre and States and 
lack of coordination amongst them, lack of skilled professionals and adequate funding, research 
issues are not being identified, crash investigatio ns not being carried out by using modern 
techniques/methodology, data/statistics on road acc idents, etc. are not being collected and 
analysed properly.  
28.  The Sundar Committee in para 5.12 page 14 of the Report delineates, very rightly, various 
aspects of road safety to be the responsibility of different authorities from the Central to the 
local levels - such as municipal authorities, police, transport department, stakeholders including 
automobile and insurance industry, members of civil  society, etc. It describes this system as a 
highly “fragmented and diffused”.  
29.   The Committee finds that the proposed Bill is not going to do away with any of the existing 
agencies; all the existing bodies will continue to be there given after the Board has been created. 
The Committee also finds that the proposed Board wo uld mainly aid and advise the Ministry in 
matters relating to road safety.  
30.   The Committee is of the view that in the name of ha ving an integrated mechanism, it is, in 
fact, creating yet another institution adding to th e existing ones, instead of reducing their 
numbers. To this extent, this approach appears to b e contradictory. The Committee is also, no 
doubt, aware of the weaknesses in the existing fram ework, which is why, it had itself suggested 
in its 135th and 144th Reports to put a coordinatin g agency in place. The proposed Board, 
however, does not appear to have a holistic perspective and is hence incomplete.  
31.   The need, in fact, is to bring about a synergy and better coordination between these 
units/organizations by strengthening the existing m echanism and making it effective, rather 
than creating another one. The Committee is surpris ed to see that the proposed Board, the 
stated objective of which is to effect coordination  amongst the existing bodies/institutions, has 
not been empowered to do so, by the present Bill.  
32.   The Committee finds that the Board shall have power  to make recommendations 
pertaining to road safety and traffic management, o nly in relation to national highways. This 
will limit the mandate of the Board as more than 70 % of the accidents in the country take place 
on the roads other than the national highways. The National Highway network is just 2% of the 
total road network in the country.  

33.   The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007, was consi dered by the Committee and a 
number of important recommendations relating to roa d safety were made in its 139th Report 
that was sent to the Government for incorporating i n the Bill. The Committee is at a loss to see 
that the Government has not brought the Bill to the  Parliament again. The Committee is of the 
view that had the Government taken action on the re commendation of the Committee, it would 
have certainly improved the road safety scenario in  the country. The Committee was informed 
that the recommendations of the Committee are being  looked into by an Expert Group 
constituted by the Government and the final view in  this regard was yet to be taken. The 
Committee was surprised to know that the process of  amending Motor Vehicle Act that was 
taken up long back in 2001, is still pending. While  amendment to Motor Vehicle Act is still 
under consideration of the Government, another Bill relating to road safety has been brought to 
the Parliament. The Committee does not approve the idea of bringing legislative proposals 
piecemeal before the Parliament, which is hard pressed for time.  
34.   It is a matter of great concern that the Government has not come up with a National Road 
Safety Policy till today. It is learnt that such a policy is under consideration. Policy representing 
Government’s commitment as it does, should take precedence over any other measures, legal or 
executive. The Committee calls upon the Government to expedite the formulation of the 
National Road Safety Policy. ‘Political commitment’ , lack of which the Sundar Committee has 
talked about, will be visible only if there were su ch a policy aimed at curbing mortality and 
morbidity on the roads.  
35.   The Committee was informed that the idea of a Board  has been suggested after studying 
the road safety framework existing in USA, U.K., Sw eden and Australia.. The Committee is 
surprised to find that while the National Highway T raffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) in 
USA and Swedish National Road Administration (SNRA) in Sweden have been identified as the 
best examples, the existence of Road and Vehicles S afety Directorate in U.K. and ATSB in 
Australia that work under the Department of Transpo rt have been conveniently overlooked. 
The Committee also notes that even USA and Sweden, cited as two most successful models, also 
have multiple agencies looking after different aspects of road safety. Lastly, experiences of USA, 
UK, and Sweden in road safety cannot be relevant to  our country, as the dimension and nature 
of our problems are totally different. Perhaps the examples of countries like Brazil, China, etc. 
would have been of greater relevance to us.  
36.   The Committee is surprised to note that while the M embers of the Board will be having 
requisite experience in the fields of road design, engineering or construction, automobile 
engineering or technology, data collection and anal ysis, accident investigation, research, finance 
or administration, traffic management, road user be havior strategies or road safety education, 
trauma care and rehabilitation, the Chairperson of the Board will be simply having adequate 
knowledge and professional experience in administration and road transport. The Committee is 
constrained to note that the qualification for appointment of Chairperson of the Board has been 
diluted from what has been suggested by the Sundar Committee.  
37.   Most of the representatives and experts of the road  safety who appeared before the 
Committee indicated about the existence of corrupti on in different areas of road safety and 
traffic management right from the design, construct ion, maintenance and operation of national 

highways and other roads upto traffic management at  the local level. The Committee had 
expressed its concern about the existence of this malaise in this sector in its 155th Report. It feels 
that any measure/mechanism for improving the road s afety and traffic management will not be 
of much impact, unless the menace of corruption in this area is taken care.  
38.   The Committee also notes that the Cabinet Committee  on Infrastructure (CoI) headed by 
the Prime Minister had asked the M/o RT&H “ to present a note for the creation of Directorate of 
Road Safety and Traffic Management ”. As per this direction, the said note was to be c onsidered 
by an Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECS). Whe ther the said note was prepared and 
considered:, by the Empowered Committee of Secretar ies and the opinion of the ECS was 
brought to the notice of the CoI, is not known to t he Committee. The Committee is surprised to 
note that instead, a Sundar Committee was appointed that recommended creation of this Board. 
For example, while the first para of the Office Memorandum issued by the Ministry constituting 
the Sundar Committee talks about Prime Ministet’s a pproval about creating a Directorate of 
Road Safety, the second para provides for the constitution of the Sundar Committee. 
CONCLUSION  
39.   In view of the apprehensions and concerns expressed  on various provisions of the Bill, the 
Committee is of the considered opinion that (i) the  present Bill addresses road safety issues 
relating to national highways only; road safety is a common problem to the national as well as 
State and other roads; therefore, there has to be a  common solution for the common problem; 
(ii) the present Bill does nowhere provide the Boar d expressed power of effecting coordination 
amongst the different agencies; (iii) the powers of the proposed Board will be mainly advisory in 
nature, which would render it ineffective; (iv) the  powers and functions of the proposed Board 
would certainly lead to unnecessary duplication add ing to the confusion in all the aspects, 
particularly in regard to the specifications, standards to be laid down for the national highways, 
which will be different for the State and other roads.  
40.   The Committee also shares the concern about rising accidents/fatalities at our roads and 
strongly feels that there should be no compromise i n our efforts to achieve highest standards of 
road safety comparable to anywhere in the world. Th e Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the present Bill may be withdrawn and the Governmen t should come out with a comprehensive 
legislation with holistic perspective that addresses the entire gamut of road safety.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS – AT A GLANCE  
  After detailed deliberations with the Secretary and  other officers of the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways and the representatives of various stakeholders and individual experts 
from the field of road and vehicular safety, and af ter going through the notes and material 
supplied to it, the Committee is constrained to obs erve that the legislative proposal to create the 
proposed Board for road safety and traffic manageme nt need to be made comprehensive and 
complete, as it leaves out so many important and integral aspects of road safety.            (Para: 24)  
  The Committee finds that currently, almost all th e issues relating to the road safety are 
being taken care of in the existing framework at th e Central and State levels, supported by 
academic institutions, private sector, industry and NGOs. For example, there is a National Road 
Safety Council working as advisory body in which al l the State Governments and Union 
territories have their representatives. Then, we ha ve a Transport Development Council at the 
Centre –– an Inter-ministerial body for laying down  common policies for road transport. Then, 
we have Transport Division in the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, headed by a Joint 
Secretary to look after motor vehicles legislations , transport related matters and the 
administration of road safety schemes. There is an engineering wing in the Ministry, the Roads 
Wings, (headed by the Director-General, two ADGs and 16 Chief Engineers) that sets standards 
for road designs, construction and operation of national highways. It works in consultation with 
the Indian Road Congress. We have the National High ways Authority of India for construction 
and development and maintenance of national highway s; the road safety aspects are built into 
its mandate. It also provides ambulances and trauma  centres on the highways and does the 
highway patrolling. As regards testing and validati on of the vehicles, we have a number of 
institutions Automotive Testing and Research Instit utions  ––  Central Institute of Road 
Transport (CIRT), Automotive Research Association o f India (ARAI), Vehicle Research and 
Development Establishment (VRDE). Besides, Indian I nstitute of Technology, School of 
Planning and Architecture and some NGOs are also pr oviding the help and assistance in 
meeting out the safety standards for vehicles and r oads. Under the NATRIP of Government of 
India, various centres are being set up all over th e country that will undertake automotive 
testing and set up validation facilities, accident data analysis facilities and specialized driving 
centres. (Para: 25)  
  It is evident that almost all the aspects of road  safety that have been proposed to be vested 
in the Board, are being taken care of in the existing framework.                                       (Para: 26)  
  The Committee notes that the problems in the exis ting framework, also identified by 
Sundar Committee, are: existence of a large number of agencies at the Centre and States and 
lack of coordination amongst them, lack of skilled professionals and adequate funding, research 
issues are not being identified, crash investigatio ns not being carried out by using modern 
techniques/methodology, data/statistics on road acc idents, etc. are not being collected and 
analysed properly.   (Para: 27)  
  The Sundar Committee in Para 5.12 page 14 of the Report delineates, very rightly, various 
aspects of road safety to be the responsibility of different authorities from the Central to the 
local levels –– such as municipal authorities, poli ce, transport department, stakeholders 

including automobile and insurance industry, member s of civil society, etc. It describes this 
system as a highly “fragmented and diffused”.    
  The Committee finds that the proposed Bill is not  going to do away with any of the existing 
agencies; all the existing bodies will continue to be there even after the Board has been created. 
The Committee also finds that the proposed Board wo uld mainly aid and advise the Ministry in 
matters relating to road safety.                                                                                               (Para: 29)  
  The Committee is of the view that in the name of having an integrated mechanism, it is, in 
fact, creating yet another institution adding to th e existing ones, instead of reducing their 
numbers. To this extent, this approach appears to b e contradictory. The Committee is also, no 
doubt, aware of the weaknesses in the existing fram ework, which is why, it had itself suggested 
in its 135th and 144th Reports to put a coordinatin g agency in place. The proposed Board, 
however, does not appear to have a holistic perspective and is hence incomplete.           (Para: 30)  
  The need, in fact, is to bring about a synergy an d better coordination between these 
units/organizations by strengthening the existing m echanism and making it effective, rather 
than creating another one. The Committee is surpris ed to see that the proposed Board, the 
stated objective of which is to effect coordination  amongst the existing bodies/institutions, has 
not been empowered to do so, by the present Bill.                                                                (Para: 31)  
  The Committee finds that the Board shall have pow er to make recommendations 
pertaining to road safety and traffic management, o nly in relation to national highways. This 
will limit the mandate of the Board as more than 70 % of the accidents in the country take place 
on the roads other than the national highways. The National Highway network is just 2% of the 
total road network in the country.    
  The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007, was con sidered by the Committee and a 
number of important recommendations relating to roa d safety were made in its 139th Report 
that was sent to the Government for incorporating i n the Bill. The Committee is at a loss to see 
that the Government has not brought the Bill to the  Parliament again. The Committee is of the 
view that had the Government taken action on the re commendation of the Committee, it would 
have certainly improved the road safety scenario in  the country. The Committee was informed 
that the recommendations of the Committee are being  looked into by an Expert Group 
constituted by the Government and the final view in  this regard was yet to be taken. The 
Committee was surprised to know that the process of  amending Motor Vehicle Act that was 
taken up long back in 2001, is still pending. While  amendment to Motor Vehicle Act is still 
under consideration of the Government, another Bill relating to road safety has been brought to 
the Parliament. The Committee does not approve the idea of bringing legislative proposals 
piecemeal before the Parliament, which is hard pressed for time.                                     (Para: 33)  
  It is a matter of great concern that the Governme nt has not come up with a National Road 
Safety Policy till today. It is learnt that such a policy is under consideration. Policy representing 
Government’s commitment as it does, should take precedence over any other measures, legal or 
executive. The Committee calls upon the Government to expedite the formulation of the 
National Road Safety Policy. ‘Political commitment’ , lack of which the Sundar Committee has 

talked about, will be visible only if there were su ch a policy aimed at curbing mortality and 
morbidity on the roads.     
  The Committee was informed that the idea of a Boa rd has been suggested after studying 
the road safety framework existing in USA, U.K., Sw eden and Australia. The Committee is 
surprised to find that while the National Highway T raffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) in 
USA and Swedish National Road Administration (SNRA) in Sweden have been identified as the 
best examples, the existence of Road and Vehicles S afety Directorate in U.K. and ATSB in 
Australia that work under the Department of Transpo rt have been conveniently overlooked. 
The Committee also notes that even USA and Sweden, cited as two most successful models, also 
have multiple agencies looking after different aspects of road safety. Lastly, experiences of USA, 
UK, and Sweden in road safety cannot be relevant to  our country, as the dimension and nature 
of our problems are totally different. Perhaps the examples of countries like Brazil, China, etc. 
would have been of greater relevance to us.    
  The Committee is surprised to note that while the  Members of the Board will be having 
requisite experience in the fields of road design, engineering or construction, automobile 
engineering or technology, data collection and anal ysis, accident investigation, research, finance 
or administration, traffic management, road user be havior strategies or road safety education, 
trauma care and rehabilitation, the Chairperson of the Board will be simply having adequate 
knowledge and professional experience in administration and road transport. The Committee is 
constrained to note that the qualification for appointment of Chairperson. of the Board has been 
diluted from what has been suggested by the Sundar Committee.  (Para: 36)  
  Most of the representatives and experts of the ro ad safety who appeared before the 
Committee indicated about the existence of corrupti on in different areas of road safety and 
traffic management right from the design, construct ion, maintenance and operation of national 
highways and other roads upto traffic management at  the local level. The Committee had 
expressed its concern about the existence of this malaise in this sector in its 155th Report. It feels 
that any measure/mechanism for improving the road s afety and traffic management will not be 
of much impact, unless the menace of corruption in this area is taken care. (Para: 37)  
  The Committee also notes that the Cabinet Committ ee on Infrastructure (CoI) headed by 
the Prime Minister had asked the M/o RT &H “ to present a note for the creation of Directorate of 
Road Safety and Traffic Management ”. As per this direction, the said note was to be c onsidered 
by an Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECS). Whe ther the said note was prepared and 
considered by the Empowered Committee of Secretarie s and the opinion of the ECS was 
brought to the notice of the CoI, is not known to t he Committee. The Committee is surprised to 
note that instead, a Sundar Committee was appointed that recommended creation of this Board. 
For example, while the first para of the Office Memorandum issued by the Ministry constituting 
the Sundar Committee talks about Prime Minister’s a pproval about creating a Directorate of 
Road Safety, the second para provides for the constitution of the Sundar Committee. (Para: 38)  
CONCLUSION 
  In view of the apprehensions and concerns express ed on various provisions of the Bill, the 
Committee is of the considered opinion that (i) the  present Bill addresses road safety issues 

relating to. national highways only; road safety is  a common problem to the national as well as 
State and other roads; therefore, there has to be a  common solution for the common problem; 
(ii) the present Bill does nowhere provide the Boar d expressed power of effecting coordination 
amongst the different agencies; (iii) the powers of the proposed Board will be mainly advisory in 
nature, which would render it ineffective; (iv) the  powers and functions of the proposed Board 
would certainly lead to unnecessary duplication add ing to the confusion in all the aspects, 
particularly in regard to the specifications, standards to be laid down for the national highways, 
which will be different for the State and other roads. (Para: 39)  
  The Committee also shares the concern about risin g accidents/fatalities at our roads 
and strongly feels that there should be no compromise in our efforts to achieve highest 
standards of road safety comparable to anywhere in the world. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the present Bill may be withdrawn and the Government should come out 
with a comprehensive legislation with holistic perspective that addresses the entire gamut 
of road safety. (Para: 40) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING  
  The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Friday the 4th June, 2010 in Committee Room 'D', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury   -------       Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2.  Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 4.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 5.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
 6.  Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
 8.  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
  LOK SABHA  
 9.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil  
 10.  Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 11.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 12.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 13.  Shri S.D. Shariq 
 14.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 15.  Shri Jitendra Singh 
 16.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 17.  Shri K. Sugumar 
 18.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
  SECRETARIAT  
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
  MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS  
 1.  Shri Brahm Dutt, Secretary 
 2.  Shri A.V. Sinha, DG (RD) & SS  
 3.  Shri Arvind Kumar, Adviser (TR)  
 4.  Shri Anand Prakash, Director (RT) 

2.  The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Commit tee and also the officials of the Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways. The Chairman inform ed about the reference of the National Road 
Safety and Traffic Management Board Bill, 2010 to t he Committee for examination and report within 
2 months. 
3.   Thereafter, the Committee took up for consider ation the National Road Safety and Traffic 
Management Board Bill, 2010. The Secretary, Ministr y of Road Transport and Highways informed 
the Committee about the constitution, purpose etc. of the proposed National Road Safety and Traffic 
Management Board. He stated that wide ranging consultations were held with various government and 
non-government organizations before finalizing the Bill. Regarding the origin of the Bill, the 
Secretary stated that the Committee on Infrastructure headed by the Prime Minister noted the absence 
of any Central level agency to monitor and handle v arious aspects of roads safety and accordingly the 
Sundar Committee was appointed by the Ministry of R oad Transport and Highways to recommend 
appropriate mechanism to deal with the issue. The Secretary clarified that the Bill was drafted keeping 
in view of the Sundar Committee recommendations. 
4.  The Secretary further clarified that there were  plethora of agencies that handled and regulated 
various issues concerning the road safety. In the M inistry of Road Transport and Highways, a small 
Cell was looking after the road safety, which did n ot have enough statutory powers to deal with the 
various aspects of road safety. Mainly, the road sa fety issues were being dealt by the State 
Governments and their agencies. With the massive gr owth in Road transport and the national 
highways the number of road accidents had also gone  up alarmingly. Therefore, the need for a central 
agency to regulate and control various agencies involved in the road safety was felt and the Bill sought 
to achieve that objective. The Secretary clarified that the proposed Board under the Bill would have 
jurisdiction only with respect to National Highways . The Committee also noted that the powers and 
functions of the Board are mainly recommendatory in nature. The Secretary also explained about other 
aspects of the Bill. 
5.   Thereafter, the Chairman pointed out that Sect ion 215 of Motor Vehicle Act empowered the 
Government to create Safety Councils at the Centre and at the State levels. The Committee felt that 
most of the objectives of the present Bill could be  achieved by amending the Motor Vehicle Act and 
other existing laws. It was also felt that by an ef fective implementation of the existing laws, most o f 
the road safety aspects can be taken care of. Accor dingly, the Committee felt that the proposed 
National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board Bill, 2010 in the present form may not serve the 
purpose. The Committee was also of the view that th e Board might prove to be just an addition to the 
existing agencies leading the duplicity as well as avoidable expenditure. The Committee, therefore, 
felt unanimously that the need for such a Board may  be reviewed. The Secretary while further 
clarifying assured the Committee that the concern expressed by the Committee will be considered and 
a fresh note would be submitted. 
6.  Members raised several queries to which the rep resentatives replied. To some of the queries 
raised by the Members, the Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish the replies at the earliest. 
7. * *
 * 
8.  A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 

9.  The meeting adjourned at 12:40 P.M. to meet again on 29th June, 2010. 
 
***Relates to other matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING  
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 8th July, 2010 in Committee Room  ‘A’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury   -------       Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal  
 3. Shri Naresh Gujral  
 4. Shri Thomas Sangma  
 5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz  
 6. Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA  
 7. Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 8. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 9. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 10. Shri Bal Kumar Patel  
 11. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao  
 12. Shri S.D. Shariq 
 13. Shri Jitendra Singh 
 14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha  
 15. Shri K. Sugumar 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director  
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF CENTRAL ENGINEERING SERVICES G ROUP ‘A’ 
OFFICERS’  
  ASSOCIATION, DELHI  
 1.  Shri Arun Kumar Sharma, Chief Engineer & Presi dent (CES) 
 2.  Shri C. Kandasamy, Chief Engineer 
 3.  Shri S.K. Marwa, Chief Engineer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN FOUNDATION OF TRANSPORT RESEARCH AND 
TRAINING, DELHI  
 1.  Shri S.P. Singh, Senior Fellow and Coordinator  
 2.  Shri Rakesh Sethi 

REPRESENTATIVES OF AUTOMOTIVE RESEARCH ASSOCIATION OF INDIA, 
PUNE  
 1.  Shri Shrikant R. Marathe, Director 
 2.  Smt. Rashmi Urdhwareshe, Deputy Director 
  REPRESENTATIVE OF INSTITUTE OF ROAD TRAFFIC EDUCATION, DELHI  
  Shri Rohit Baluja, President 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN ROADS CONGRESS, DELHI  
 1.  Shri R.P. Indoria, Secretary-General 
 2.  Shri S.B. Basu, Director (Tech.) 
 3.  Shri Sharad Varshney, Additional Director (Tec h.) 
  Dr. Sanjay Kulshreshtha, Senior Pediatric Surgeon  
2.   The Chairman welcomed the members and the repr esentatives of Central Engineering Services 
Group ‘A’ Officers Association, Indian Foundation o f Transport Research and Training, Automotive 
Research Association of India, Institute of Road Tr affic Education, Indian Roads Congress and Dr. 
Sanjay Kulshreshtha and briefed them about the purpose of the meeting –– to discuss the provisions of 
the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Boa rd Bill, 2010. He informed them that the 
Committee had discussed this Bill with the Secretar y, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways on 
the 4th June, 2010. 
3.  The Chairman requested the witnesses to present  their views on the various provisions of the 
Bill and also to offer their suggestions regarding making the National Road Safety and Traffic 
Management Board more effective. Representatives of  Central Engineering Services Group ‘A’ 
Officers Association presented their views on the q ualifications of the Chairperson and Members of 
the proposed Board and they emphasized the need for  appointment of specialist professionals as 
Chairperson and Members. They were also of the view  that the Board should be established for road 
safety aspect only and the traffic management and vehicle design should be kept at lower level. 
4.  Representatives of Indian Foundation of Transpo rt Research and Training broadly presented 
their views on Chapter 4 of the Bill which dealt wi th penalties. They insisted on introduction of the 
product recall mechanism which is very popular in w estern countries as an important component of 
road safety. They informed the Committee about the structural deficiencies of roads as also about 
flaws in dimensions of carriers in the country.  
5.  Representatives of Indian Roads Congress before  presenting their views on the Bill informed the 
Committee about the origin, composition and functio ns of their agency in the road sector. They were 
of the view that many of the functions of the propo sed Board were being looked after by them and 
stressed that setting of standards; monitoring of r esearch and coordinating research activities in the  
road sector should remain with the Indian Roads Con gress since they were doing it for the last so 
many decades.  
6.  Representative of Institute of Road Traffic Edu cation presented their views before the 
Committee on the qualifications of Members and Chai rperson of the Board, absence of systemized 

traffic enforcement in the country, lack of scientific investigation into road accidents and setting up of 
boards at state level. 
7.  Representatives of Automotive Research Associat ion of India while welcoming the 
establishment of national safety board emphasized t he need for coordinating various research 
institutes in road sector under the Board. They also expressed their apprehensions over the structure of 
the board and its members. 
8.   Dr. Sanjay Kulshreshtha presented his views on  the reduction of deaths on roads and also on the 
alarming rise in number of vehicles in the country. He informed the Committee about the necessity for 
introduction of traffic safety subject at school le vel and redesigning of roads and vehicles for 
reduction of road fatalities. 
9.   A verbatim record of proceedings of the meetin g was kept. 
10.  The Committee adjourned at 1.05 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING  
  The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 14th July, 2010 in Committee Ro om ‘A’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury   -------       Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
 3. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 4. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 5. Shri Thomas Sangma 
 6. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 7. Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA  
 8. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil  
 9. Shri P. Karunakaran 
 10. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 11. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 12. Shri S.D. Shariq 
 13. Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 14. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 16. Shri K. Sugumar 
 17. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur  
 18. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT  
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s of the Committee. Thereafter, the 
Committee considered the draft 160th Report on the National Road Safety and Traffic Management 
Board Bill, 2010. The Committee discussed the Repor t in detail and was of the view that present Bill 
may be withdrawn and the Government should come out  with a comprehensive legislation with 
holistic perspective that addresses the entire gamu t of road safety. The Committee then adopted the 
Report without any changes. 
3.   The Committee authorized the Chairman to prese nt the report to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha before the commencement of the Session. 

4. * *
 * 
5. * *
 * 
6.  The Committee adjourned at 4.30 
P.M. 
 
***Relate to other matters.  