107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED
 IN ITS NINETY-FIRST REPORT ON FUNCTIONING OF THE
 ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON    22.5.2006)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON    22.5.2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2006/VAISAKHA, 1927(SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
1.                  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                               
2.                  INTRODUCTION                                   
3.                  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.                  OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                       
5.                  ANNEXURE                                                                                            
6.                  MINUTES                                                                                                                                                
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2005-2006)
 
1.         *Shri Sitaram Yechury           - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
Smt. Hema Malini
Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
Shri Shatrughan Sinha
^Vacant
#Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas  Athawale
Shri Raj Babbar
Shri Anil Basu
Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
Shri Adhir Chowdhury

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
Dr. K. Dhanaraju
Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
Shri Dip Gogoi
Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
Shri Samik Lahiri 
Shri Sudam Marandi
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
Shri Manabendra Shah
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Madan Lal Sharma
Shri Chengara Surendran
Shri Umakant Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 13.4.2006 vice Shri Nilotpal Basu
^ Vacancy caused w.e.f. 2.4.2006 due to retirement of Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy from the membership of
 Rajya Sabha.
# Nominated w.e.f. 8.3.2006  vice Smt. Ambika Soni 
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
 having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and seventh
 Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
 Committee contained in its Ninety-first Report on “Functioning of the Archaeological Survey of India”.
 
2.       The Ninety-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture was presented to the Parliament on the  25
th November 2005. 
 
3.       The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Ninety-first Report were
 received from the Department of Culture on 30th March 2006.
 
4.       The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 19
th  May 2006.
 
NEW DELHI ;
May 19 , 2006
 Vaisakha 29 , 1927 (Saka)
SITARAM YECHURY
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
R E P O R T
 
            The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
 observations/recommendations as contained in its Ninety-first Report on ‘Functioning of the Archaeological Survey of
 India’, which was presented to the Parliament on 25
th November 2005. 
 
th

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
2.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 30  March 2006 in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows:-
 
Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 9,  38, 53, 58, 64 and 68                             Total –  6
 
Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies:
Para Nos.  - Nil                                                                        Total –  0
 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
 Committee:
Para Nos. 16 and 32                                                    Total –  2
 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 24, 46                                                                     Total –  2
 
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
 
4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of the action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Ninety-first
 Report, action taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of
 action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
MONUMMENTS/SITES UNDER PROTECTION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
(Recommendation at Para 9)
 
5.         The Committee notes that the ASI has drawn long-term programme to protect all 3663 monuments/sites of
 national importance out of which 3537 monuments/sites are unticketed.  These monuments have also been classified
 into three categories viz. Group A, B and C for convenience.    The Committee is however aware that there are many
 sites/monuments under the protection/maintenance of Archaeological Survey of India which are located in interior
 areas of various States but are lying unattended. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry of Culture should
 equally treat the revenue earning and not-earning sites and efforts should be made for integrated infrastructure
 development and conservation/ preservation of all monuments/sites with encompassing facilities for tourists, so as to
 give a major fillip to cultural tourism in the country as well as attracting overseas visitors.             
                                   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
6.         Every year provision is made for conservation/preservation of ticketed as well as non- ticketed monuments
 depending upon the urgency and priority of repair work required at different sites and availability of budget provisions.
 Similarly provision is made for providing public amenities, drinking water, easy access etc. to the non- revenue earning
 monuments also. Necessary directions have been issued to field offices for compliance.  It is reiterated that the ASI
 does not distinguish the monuments for conservation on the basis of their revenue earning capacity.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
7.         The Committee notes the reply.
 
ORGANISATIONAL SET UP AND THE POST OF DIRECTOR GENERAL OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
 SURVEY OF INDIA
(Recommendation at Para 16)
 
8.         The Committee is not in agreement with the argument put- forth by the Ministry of Culture that the appointment
 of generalist administrator as Director General will not hamper the development of Archaeological Survey of India as a

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
 scientific organisation.  The Committee is shocked to note that even after the Gazette Notification of May 2002, the
 Government has not been able to fill up the post of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India as per the
 requirements of the notification and has been merely filling up the post from Indian Administrative Service on
 deputation basis.  The Committee is constrained to observe that the Government preferred to fill up the highest post of
 an apex institution requiring very high standards of technical qualification with a generalist administrator.  The
 Committee is of the view that a person who has no basic qualification or knowledge of archaeology cannot handle the
 apex responsibility of a Scientific Institution like Archaeological Survey of India.  Unless the leader of the
 Archaeological Survey of India is having the professional expertise, it is very difficult to give a lead.  This has also
 dampened the spirits of the senior officers in the feeder grade of the organization who may never get the opportunities
 to serve as senior most officer of their parent organization.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that steps should be
 taken to fill up the post of Director General, Archaeological Survey of India as per the requirements of the Notification
 of May 2002, at the earliest.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
9.         At present, there is no post of Additional Director General (Archaeology) in the ASI which constitutes the feeder
 channel for promotion to the post of Director General, ASI as per the existing recruitment rules.  The Ministry of
 Finance did not agree to the proposal for revival/creation of the post of ADG(Archaeology) in the ASI.  At the moment,
 the Departmental officers can get promotion upto the level of Joint Director General.  In the absence of the post of
 ADG(Archaeology), they do not have any chance to be considered for promotion as Director General in the
 Archaeological Survey of India.  The proposal for the revival/creation of the post of Additional Director General
 (Archaeology) has again been sent to the Ministry of Finance through  D.O. letter dated 17.2.2006 addressed by the
 Minister of Tourism & Culture to Minister of Finance.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
10.       The Committee observes that the decision to fill-up the post of Director-General, Archaeological Survey of India
 was taken long back vide Government Notification of May 2002.  But still the Ministry did not make any effort to
 implement it and it is abundantly clear from the fact that no suitable change was made in the recruitment rules and also
 no justification has been given for not reviving the post of Additional Director-General which constitutes the feeder
 channel for promotion to the post of Director General.   In view of this the Committee reiterates it recommendation that
 a person who has no basic qualification or knowledge of archaeology cannot handle the apex responsibility of a
 Scientific Institution like Archaeological Survey of India. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the post of
 Director General, Archaeological Survey of India should be filled up as per the requirements of the Notification of May
 2002 without any further loss of time.
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA AS A SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DEPARTMENT
(Recommendation at Para 24)
 
11.       The Committee is constrained to note that even after a lapse of fifteen years from the date of issue of the
 notification in this regard no concrete action was taken by Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India for
 developing Archaeological Survey of India as a Scientific and Technical Department, which amply indicates the
 administrative apathy towards the whole issue.  The Committee regrets that no internal exercise was undertaken by
 Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India during the last fifteen years for availing the benefits and
 privileges which could be extended to the Archaeological Survey of India as a Science and Technology department. 
 The Committee observes that there has been deviation in the working of Archaeological Survey of India and that it has
 failed in terms of developing Archaeological Survey of India not merely as an administrative body but also as a
 spearhead for consolidating the scientific discipline of archaeology in the country.  The Committee is of the view that
 the Archaeological Survey of India needs to reinvent itself, not merely as an administrative wing of the Government,
 but as an agency for protecting and safeguarding our national heritage, which involves a lot of scientific and technical
 work.  Unless the Archaeological Survey of India converts itself fully into a scientific and technical organization, the
 basic role and function of the organisation will be defeated.   The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture
 and Archaeological Survey of India should, without any further loss of time, take necessary follow-up action on the
 recommendations of the Committee chaired by Director General, Archaeological Survey of India so as to avail the

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
 benefits which accrue to a Science and Technology department.  The Committee also recommends that, if required, the
 Ministry of Culture should also take necessary legislative action to make Archaeological Survey of India Science and
 Technology department in the true sense.                                           
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
12.       Necessary follow-up action has already been initiated on the recommendations of the Committee constituted for
 availing the benefits of Science & Technological Department to ASI.  A proposal for the delegation of enhanced
 financial powers to DG, ASI is already under examination of the Ministry of Culture.  A proposal for the introduction
 of Flexible Complementing Scheme (FCS) to Group ‘A’ technical posts in the ASI has also been sent to the Ministry of
 Culture for taking up with the Department of Personnel.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
13.       The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Ministry will expedite the matter sincerely and inform the
 Committee about the progress regarding extension of benefits of a Scientific and Technical Department to the
 Archaeological Survey of India.
 
SARASVATI PROJECT
(Recommendation at Para 32)
 
14.       After going through the replies furnished by the Ministry of Culture, the Committee is of the firm view that
 Sarasvati Heritage Project did not conform to the criterion fixed for excavation of archaeological sites since no
 academic body or university had recommended the project.  The Committee also notes that there is an element of
 contradiction in the replies submitted to the Committee by the Department of Culture.  On the one hand, the Ministry of
 Culture has stated that the former Minister of Tourism and Culture was not the Chairman of the Sarasvati Heritage
 Project, while, on the other hand, the Ministry has stated that prior to the preparation of the project report, the
 Government had constituted an Advisory Committee with the then Minister of Tourism and Culture as Chairman and
 that this Committee had recommended the Saraswati Heritage Project.  The Committee further notes that the Ministry is
 not clear as to which research agency/scientific survey actually pointed out that the dry beds of River Ghaggar and
 River Chautang (River Drisadvati) are the bed of River Sarasvati.  The Committee understands that existence of River
 Sarasvati is purely a mythological one and a scientific institution like Archaeological Survey of India has not correctly
 proceeded in the matter.   The Committee regrets to note that a major project to the tune of Rs.36.02 crores was
 prepared which was, however, subsequently reduced to Rs.4.98 crores just to excavate a mythological river whereas,
 several other monuments/heritage sites of national importance are languishing in neglect due to acute shortage of funds.
 The Committee recommends that Archaeological Survey of India should strictly adhere to the criterion fixed for
 selection of excavation of sites.  Further, decisions for excavations should be made on the basis of proper scientific and
 technical appraisal and no extraneous factors should go into the decision making.  The Committee also recommends
 that before selecting a site for excavation, the Archaeological Survey of India should very carefully examine the
 potential of the site so that funds earmarked for the same do not go waste. The Committee would like to advise the
 Archaeological Survey of India that it should prevent itself from taking up exercises without a scientific basis which
 have all potentiality for subjective interpretation of historical facts thereby, leading to controversies.                      
                                                
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT
 
15.       The criteria for selection of ancient sites for archaeological excavation generally include (a) the site should hold
 promise of revealing an unknown culture or aspects of a lesser known culture, (b) the site needs to be cleared to
 facilitate conservation/preservation/area development in case of centrally protected site, and (c) the site is under threat
 of submergence owing to construction of dams, etc. The decision of excavation of site is made on the basis of site
 survey for surface studies, exploration around the site, topographical details, study of site location maps, sampling of
 surface finds, trial-trenching, and so on. It is according to the scope of work that the funds for excavation of the site are
 earmarked, and at times even augmented if required. For more scientific basis, the ASI has now been increasingly
 resorting to new scientific techniques like Ground Penetrating Radar, Satellite Imageries, Computer-Aided Survey by

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
 Total Station, which are added to existing scientific methods of analysis such as radiocarbon (C 14) dating,
 thermoluminescence dating, archaeo-botany, archaeo-zoology etc. for obtaining objective inputs.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
16.       The Committee is surprised to note that its recommendations made in the context of Sarasvati Heritage Project
 the Department of Culture in its reply has not mentioned a single word about the Sarasvati Project or the irregularities
 pointed out by the Committee about the preparation of that project.  Our country has a rich and composite cultural
 heritage.  The Archaeological Survey of India is the custodian of that rich cultural heritage and as such its role to
 safeguard the cultural fabric of the country is of crucial national importance.  Therefore, the Committee reiterates that
 before undertaking any excavation of any such mythological projects like, Sarasvati Heritage Project, Archaeological
 Survey of India should made proper Scientific and technical appraisal and no extraneous factors should go into the
 decision making. 
 
VACANCIES AND STAFF STRENGTH IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
(Recommendation at Para 38)
 
17.       The Committee notes with concern that there are large-scale vacancies in various categories in the ASI, which
 has been hampering smooth and effective functioning of the Archaeological Survey of India.  The Committee also
 notes that the Government had been rather lax and inactive in completing the formalities for filling up many of the
 vacancies, as can be seen from the status furnished by the Archaeological Survey of India in respect of these vacancies. 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should take immediate steps to fill up the vacancies in the
 Archaeological Survey of India so that the works being undertaken by the Archaeological Survey of India do not
 suffer.  The Committee also notes that there is an acute shortage of manpower for technical posts for which the
 Archaeological Survey of India had made proposals to create additional posts.  The Committee recommends that the
 Government should favourably consider the proposals submitted by the Archaeological Survey of India for creation of
 technical posts so that the Archaeological Survey of India is efficiently and smoothly able to carry out the voluminous
 work entrusted to it. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT
 
18.       Continuous efforts are being made to fill up the vacant post in the ASI through convening the DPC meetings and
 also through the Union Public Service Commission and the Staff Selection Commission.  Additional requirement of
 technical manpower for the ASI is being worked out separately.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
19.       The Committee notes the reply.   The Committee however, would like to be apprised of the progress from
 time to time made in this matter.
 
NON-WRITING/PUBLICATION OF EXCAVATION REPORTS
(Recommendation at Para 46)
 
20.       The Committee is of the view that if excavation reports are not written, then all the taxpayers’ money spent on
 them goes waste.  Also, in absence of timely publication of excavation reports, the achievements of Archaeological
 Survey of India largely remain unnoticed by the public.  The Committee is extremely dissatisfied to observe that
 despite its repeated recommendations, the position in respect of writing of excavation reports has not improved much. 
 However, the Committee is hopeful that the steps now initiated by Archaeological Survey of India for clearing the
 backlog in respect of writing excavation reports would yield some positive results.  The Committee recommends that
 the Archaeological Survey of India should enforce a fixed time frame for writing excavation reports after the
 excavation work has been completed, so that the public at large is not deprived of the vital right to information.  The
 Committee also recommends that the ASI should ensure that officials engaged in a particular excavation work are not
 transferred till such time that they complete the excavations and submit their reports.
 

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
21.       There are 56 pending excavation reports with the Archaeological Survey of India.  Out of these 56 reports, 17
 belong to large scale and 39 to small scale excavations.  However, for all the excavations brief reports have been
 published in the annual publication Indian Archaeology-A Review. 
 
22.       During the recent meeting of the Central Advisory Board of Archaeology (CABA), it has been decided that all
 the pending reports will be completed in a time frame of two years commencing from September 2, 2005.  The logistic
 support for the retired officers is being provided for the completion of reports of 11 excavations.  The remaining report
 writing work of 45 excavations has been assigned to the in-service officers.  Out of these, four reports, namely, Udaigiri
 excavation, Mahabalipuram, Thakurani Tila and Shyam Sundar Tila have been submitted.
 
23.       All the in service officers who have been assigned the duty of report writing are retained in their present place of
 posting to enable them to complete their reports.  The necessary facilities are also extended to the in service officers for
 completing the reports.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
24.       The Committee notes the reply and desires that final reports pertaining to all 56 excavations, which are still
 pending, would be completed by September 2, 2007, positively.   The Committee further directs that the department
 should informed the Committee about writing/publication of final excavation Reports on quarterly basis till September
 2007.
 
ENCROACHMENT AND SECURITY OF MONUMENTS/SITES
(Recommendation at Para 53)
 
25.       The Committee is concerned about the illegal encroachment of monuments/archaeological sites under the
 protection of Archaeological Survey of India.  In this context, the Committee would like to reiterate the
 recommendation made in its 85
th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Culture which is as under:
"The Committee expresses its anxiety over the incidents of encroachment upon the land of Centrally Protected
 Monuments.  The Committee is more concerned about the inability of Archeological Survey of India to get back the
 land from encroachers.  Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that a complete assessment should be made
 regarding encroachment of monuments/sites under the protection of Archaeological Survey of India all over the
 country.  Prompt action ought be taken against the encroachers with the help of State Governments/Local
 Administrations and the matter should be pursued at the highest level.  The Committee also recommends that adequate
 budgetary provisions should be made for security arrangements and protection of monuments, as this is the most crucial
 aspect of preserving our cultural heritage and wherever possible modern gadgets like, electronic surveillance cameras
 should be installed in the monuments.  The Committee feels that security is a sovereign function.  Hence, it is the
 responsibility of Central Government to get the monuments and other important assets protected.  In view of this, the
 Committee is of the opinion that the Union Home Ministry should pay the bills towards the expenses incurred for
 paying the Central Security Agencies under this head.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Culture should pursue the matter at
 the highest level." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
26.       As recommended by the Committee a complete assessment of the encroachment on centrally protected
 monuments (State-wise) under the jurisdiction of the respective circles of the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is
 at Annexure.
 
27.       As and when any encroachment is reported by the field office, the Superintending Archaeologist of the
 respective circles initiates immediate necessary action under the provision of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
 Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and Rules, 1959 followed by the notices/orders for removal of such encroachments by the
 Directorate. The Superintending Archaeologist of the Archaeological Survey of India who is also vested with a power

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
 of Estate Officer initiates necessary action against the encroachers under the provisions of Public Premises (Eviction
 and Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971. For removal of the encroachers, ASI needs the assistance of the State
 Governments/District Administration.  Delay in receipt of such assistance is often a major constrain, and wherever
 necessary the matter is taken up at the highest levels of the State Government.
 
28.       For security of the protected monuments, ASI in addition to regular monument attendants (about 3450 in
 number), and temporary status staff (about 1000 in number) has also engaged 789 private security personnel.   294
 Central Industrial Security Force(CISF) personnel have also been deployed at Red Fort, Delhi and 165 CISF personnel
 are deployed at Taj Mahal, Agra.   ASI has also requisitioned State Police.
 
29.       An approximate amount of Rs.5 crores towards the expenditure on account of deployment of private security
 personnel at Centrally protected monuments and Rs. 7 crores towards deployment of CISF at Red Fort, Delhi and Taj
 Mahal, Agra will be incurred during the current financial year 2005-06. 
 
30.       In so far as provision of modern gadgets like electronic surveillance, cameras etc. is concerned, these are
 installed at Taj Mahal, Agra on the advice of the C.I.S.F.  Installation of such devices can be considered at other
 important Centrally protected monuments depending upon availability of finance..
 
31.       In so far as payment of bills towards the expenditure incurred for availing security services of the C.I.S.F. is
 concerned, Secretary(Culture)  had taken up the matter with Home Secretary as advised by the Committee.  The
 response of the Ministry of Home Affairs was not favourable.  In their reply, the  Home Secretary has stated that while
 according approval for creation of regular posts of C.I.S.F. Personnel for one of the Ministries, Cabinet has already
 approved the proposal for bearing recurring expenses on security by borrowing Ministry.  Hence, “the cases of Red Fort
 and Taj Mahal which are part of their proposal cannot be processed on different premises”.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
32.       The Committee observes that installation of modern gadgets like electronic surveillance, cameras, etc. in all
 monuments of national importance primary requirement in view of the present security scenario of the country and
 feels that installation of cameras at Taj Mahal, Agra only is an inadequate step like adrop in an ocean.  The Committee
 recommends that adequate funds should be made available to the Department for this purpose.   
 
33.       As regards, expenditure incurred for availing security services of the CISF is concerned, the Committee notes
 the reply of the Home Secretary.  The issue, however, may be taken up with Ministry of Finance for providing
 additional fund to meet the expenditure incurred for availing security services for the protection of monuments of
 national importance.
 
CONSERVATION/PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS AND REGISTRATION OF ANTIQUITIES
(Recommendation at Para 58, 64 and 68)
 
34.       The Committee is of the view that beautification and development of archaeological sites no doubt adds to the
 ambience of these sites.  However, the Committee recommends that while taking up work, the focus should be on
 actual conservation/preservation of the sites and the beautification aspect should only supplement the
 conservation/preservation work undertaken by the Archaeological Survey of India.  The Committee also recommends
 that more amount should be spent on conservation/preservation of the sites in comparison to site
 development/beautification etc. 
 
35.       The Committee notes the response of the Archaeological Survey of India to the observations made by the
 Committee in its 85
th Report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Culture.  The Committee hopes that with
 the existing staff and expertise, Archaeological Survey of India would be able to successfully execute the National
 Mission for Antiquities and Built Heritage and the laudable goals of the Mission would be achieved within the fixed
 time frame.
 

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
36.       The Committee observes that the Ministry of Culture has decided to involve private agencies in handling the
 National Mission of Antiquities.  The Committee recommends that adequate care should be taken while finalizing such
 kind of deal so that the expenditure to be incurred on the National Mission of Antiquities is spent in the best interest of
 the nation and the valuable information about Indian Antiquities and Monuments are not handed over to foreign hands. 
 The Committee further recommends that strict criteria should be fixed to determine expertise and professionalism in
 this field.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
37.       As a matter of policy, priority is invariably given for conservation/preservation of monuments in
 comparison to development/beautification  etc. of the sites as evident from the following budget provisions made
 for the current financial year:
                                                 
Total budget for  Conservation works                       Rs.9645 lakh
 
Budget for conservation/ Preservation of                       Rs. 8625 lakh
            Monuments (structural conservation,                             (89%)
maintenance and chemical preservation)
 
Budget for environmental (Horticultural)                        Rs.1020 lakhs
Development & beautification etc.                               (11%)
                               
38.       Adequate care has been taken in the Mission document to ensure that the expenditure for the Mission work is
 made in the best interest of the nation and also to ensure that all the objectives of the National Mission are fulfilled. 
 Besides, care would be taken to ensure that no valuable information about Indian Antiquities and Monuments are
 handed over to foreign hands. While engaging private experts for any work relating to the Mission strict criteria would
 be fixed to assess their expertise, capability and antecedents
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
39.
              The Committee notes the reply.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
            The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest. (Para 3)
 
MONUMMENTS/SITES UNDER PROTECTION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
 
The Committee notes the reply.        (Para 7)
 
ORGANISATIONAL SET UP AND THE POST OF DIRECTOR GENERAL OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
 SURVEY OF INDIA
 
            The Committee observes that the decision to fill-up the post of Director-General, Archaeological Survey of India
 was taken long back vide Government Notification of May 2002.  But still the Ministry did not make any effort to
 implement it and it is abundantly clear from the fact that no suitable change was made in the recruitment rules and also
 no justification has been given for not reviving the post of Additional Director-General which constitutes the feeder
 channel for promotion to the post of Director General.   In view of this the Committee reiterates it recommendation that
 a person who has no basic qualification or knowledge of archaeology cannot handle the apex responsibility of a
 Scientific Institution like Archaeological Survey of India. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the post of
 Director General, Archaeological Survey of India should be filled up as per the requirements of the Notification of May
 2002 without any further loss of time. (Para 10)
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA AS A SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DEPARTMENT

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
 
            The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Ministry will expedite the matter sincerely and inform the
 Committee about the progress regarding extension of benefits of a Scientific and Technical Department to the
 Archaeological Survey of India.(Para 13)
 
SARASVATI PROJECT
 
            The Committee is surprised to note that its recommendations made in the context of Sarasvati Heritage Project
 the Department of Culture in its reply has not mentioned a single word about the Sarasvati Project or the irregularities
 pointed out by the Committee about the preparation of that project.  Our country has a rich and composite cultural
 heritage.  The Archaeological Survey of India is the custodian of that rich cultural heritage and as such its role to
 safeguard the cultural fabric of the country is of crucial national importance.  Therefore, the Committee reiterates that
 before undertaking any excavation of any such mythological projects like, Sarasvati Heritage Project, Archaeological
 Survey of India should made proper Scientific and technical appraisal and no extraneous factors should go into the
 decision making.  (Para 16)
 
VACANCIES AND STAFF STRENGTH IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
 
            The Committee notes the reply.   The Committee however, would like to be apprised of the progress from time
 to time made in this matter.(Para 19)
 
NON-WRITING/PUBLICATION OF EXCAVATION REPORTS
 
            The Committee notes the reply and desires that final reports pertaining to all 56 excavations, which are still
 pending, would be completed by September 2, 2007, positively.   The Committee further directs that the department
 should informed the Committee about writing/publication of final excavation Reports on quarterly basis till September
 2007. (Para 24)
 
ENCROACHMENT AND SECURITY OF MONUMENTS/SITES
 
32.       The Committee observes that installation of modern gadgets like electronic surveillance, cameras, etc. in all
 monuments of national importance primary requirement in view of the present security scenario of the country and
 feels that installation of cameras at Taj Mahal, Agra only is an inadequate step like adrop in an ocean.  The Committee
 recommends that adequate funds should be made available to the Department for this purpose.   
            As regards, expenditure incurred for availing security services of the CISF is concerned, the Committee notes
 the reply of the Home Secretary.  The issue, however, may be taken up with Ministry of Finance for providing
 additional fund to meet the expenditure incurred for availing security services for the protection of monuments of
 national importance.
(Paras 32 and 33)
 
CONSERVATION/PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS AND
REGISTRATION OF ANTIQUITIES
 
            The Committee notes the reply.(Para 39)
Annexure
 
THE LIST OF NUMBER OF ENCROACHMENT ON CENTRALLY PROTECTED MONUMENTS (STATE-
WISE) UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE RESPECTIVE CIRCLES OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
 SURVEY OF INDIA
 
S.No. Name of State and Circle Number of
 Encroachments
1. Andhra Pradesh (Hyderabad Circle)   14
2. Assam (Guwahati Circle)     2

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
3. Bihar (Patna Circle)     2
4. Chhatisgarh (Raipur Circle)     6
5.          NCT of Delhi (Delhi Circle)   14
6 Gujarat (Vadodara   Circle)   13
7 Haryana (Chandigarh Circle)     6
8. Himachal Pradesh (Shimla Circle)     2
9. Jammu & Kashmir (Srinagar Circle)     5
10. Karnataka (Dharwad Circle)   56
11 Maharashtra  (Aurangabad and Mumbai Circles)   29
12. Madhya Pradesh (Bhopal Circle)     2
13 Orissa (Bhubaneswar Circle)     7
14. Punjab (Chandigarh Circle)     1
15 Rajasthan (Jaipur Circle)     2
16. Tripura (Guwahati Circle)     1
17 Uttar Pradesh (Lucknow,Agra and Patna Circles)   85
18 Uttranchal (Dehradun Circle)     5
 Total 252
 
M I N U T E S
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.15 a.m. on Friday, the 19th May 2006 in Room No. '63’, First Floor, Parliament
 House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri Kamal Akhtar
3.         Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.         Shri Janardhana Poojary
5.         Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
6.         Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.         Shri Ramdas Athawale
8.         Shri Adhir Chowdhury
9.         Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10.       Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
11.       Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
12.       Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
13.       Shri Manabendra Shah
14.       Shri Umakant Yadav
 
            SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer

107th report of Committee on Transport,Tourism & culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/107threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:19:51]
 
2.         The Committee considered the following six draft Reports on the:
 
(i)         Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Road Transport and Highways;
 
(ii)        Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Culture;
 
(iii)       Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Tourism;
 
(iv)       Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Shipping;
 
(v)        Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation; and
 
E(vi)     Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
 Ninety-first Report on ‘Functioning of the Archaeological Survey of India’.
 
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the six Reports.    The Committee also authorized the Chairman to
 nominate the Members for presentation of the said reports to the Parliament during the current session.
 
3.         *                                              *                                              *.
 
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 11.15 a.m.
           
*  Relates to other matter.