 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty Third Report on the subject ‘ 
 (Presente 
(Laid on t 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
March, 2023/ Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Report on the subject ‘ Commission of Railway 
Safety’  
 
resente d to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th March, 2023 ) 
aid on t he Table of Lok Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
346 
REPORT   
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Commission of Railway 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty Third Report on the subject ‘Commission of Railway 
Safety’  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th March, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24 th  March, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2023/ Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
4. REPORT                                1-23 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   24-26    
    6. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
27-29


i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Shrey Kansal, Secretariat Assistant 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Forty Sixth Repor t on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Twenty Third Report on the subject ‘Commission of Railway Safety’. 
2. The Three Hundred Twenty Third Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e was presented to the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 and thereafter was presented to the Par liament on 
the 8th  December, 2022.  
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Twenty Third Report were received fro m the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
25th  January, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 23 rd  
March, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
March 23, 2023                                                       Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Chaitra 2, 1945 (Saka)                                       Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
AC  Air-Conditioned 
ARMV  Accident Relief Medical Van 
ART  Accident Relief Train 
ATR  Action Taken Report 
CCRS  Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
CCTV  Closed Circuit Television 
CPC  Central Pay Commission 
CRS  Commission/ Commissioner of Railway Safety 
DFCCIL  Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited 
EMU  Electric Multiple Unit  
GAD  General Arrangement Drawing  
GD  Golden Quadrilateral 
GPS  Global Positioning System 
GQ  Golden Diagonal  
HVAC  Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning Unit 
ICF  Integral Coach Factory 
IR  Indian Rail 
ISO  International Organization for Standardization  
LC  Level Crossing 
LCD  Liquid Crystal Display 
LED  Light Emitting Diodes 
LHB  Linke Hofmann Busch 
MCF  Modern Coach Factory 
MEMU  Mainline Electric Multiple Unit  
MLC  Manned Level Crossing 
MoR  Ministry of Railways 
MoRTH  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
NDRF  National Disaster Response Force  
NHAI  National Highways Authority of India 
OBCMS  On board Condition Monitoring System  
PAPIS  Public Address and Passenger Information System 
PAS  Passenger Announcement System 
PICCU  Passenger Information Coach Computing Unit 
PIS  Passenger Information System 
POMKA  Portable Medical Kit for Accident  
RCF  Rail Coach Factory 
RDSO  Research Design and Standards Organisation 
RE  Revised Estimate 
RLDA  Rail Land Development Authority 
ROB  Road Over Bridge 
RSP  Rolling Stock Programme 

iv 
 
RUB  Road Under Bridge 
SMART  Specially Modified Aesthetic Refreshing Travel  
ToBR  Transaction of Business Rules 
UDAY  Utkrisht Double Decker Air Conditioned Yatri Express 
UMLC  Unmanned Level Crossing 
WSP  Wheel Slide Protection 
 

Page 1 of 26  
 
REPORT  
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action T aken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as con tained in its Three Hundred Twenty Third 
Report on ‘Commission of Railway Safety’ which was presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha on 15 
th  June, 2022 and thereafter presented to both the Ho uses of Parliament on 8 th  
December, 2022.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the  Ministry on 25 
th  January, 2023 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations co ntained in the Report. The replies have been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 41  
Total: 1 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 17, 37, 44 and 49 
Total: 4 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 16, 18, 24, 28, 31, 32, 34, 36, 45 and 48 
Total: 10 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil  
Total: Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 2 of 26  
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
Consequential Train Accidents  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee appreciates the Railway Board for the reduction of consequential train 
accidents from 2010-11 to 2022-23. The Committee al so congratulates the RDSO for the 
development of indigenous Train Collision Avoidance  System 'KAVACH', which will go a long 
way in reducing accidents through a cost-effective measure. The Committee recommends that 
KAVACH should be introduced phase-wise, through all  the routes of India Railways. In first 
phase, all the routes where there are regular cases  of accidents should be considered and 
KAVACH should be installed expeditiously. 
(Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. As informed by Ministry of Railways, 
i. Till now, 1445 Route km of Indian Railways netwo rk in South Central Railway has been 
brought under Kavach. 
ii. Kavach roll out is being planned in a phased ma nner as below: 
a. At present Kavach roll out is planned on 3000 Ro ute km of New Delhi – Mumbai and 
New Delhi – Howrah routes for which tendering is in  progress and finalized for 1165 
Route km.  
b. Further survey and detailed estimate preparation  for 6000 Route km on balance 
GD/GQ Route is in progress. 
c. Subsequently Kavach will be provided on other Routes of Indian Railways. 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 3 of 26  
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Role of the Ministry of Civil Aviation  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the Deputy Commissioner s of Railway Safety come from 
Ministry of Railways on deputation basis and go bac k to the Ministry after completion of their 
deputation period. The Committee notes that the Deputy CRS is one of the senior most officers in 
the circle offices and comes second in hierarchy af ter the CRS. The Committee feels that such an 
important post should not be filled up on deputatio n basis, as the incumbent may not be inclined 
to give suggestions/ recommendations in his Reports  against the Ministry of Railways, to which 
he originally belongs and would be sent back after his deputation period is over. The Committee 
recommends that the officers of the rank of Deputy CRS should be appointed in the Commission 
on absorption basis, just like the CRS and it should not be a deputation post. The Committee is of 
the firm view that appointing Deputy CRS on absorption basis will ensure grant of full autonomy 
which would make the Commission more independent and effective. 
 (Para 17) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 As per Recruitment Rules of the post of Dy. CRS , the officers are equivalent to Director 
rank officer i.e. level-13 whereas CRSs are of Addi tional Secretary rank officer i.e. Level-15, 
which are recruited on absorption basis from amongs t Railway Officers with minimum 05 years 
service in Level 14. Hence, if Dy. CRSs are selecte d on permanent absorption basis in the 
Commission under Ministry of Civil Aviation, there will hardly be any promotion avenue for 
Dy.CRS. Hence, existing system of taking officers on deputation seems adequate. 
 
Upgradation of post of CCRS and requirement of sepa rate Secretariat for 
Commission   
Recommendation/Observation 

Page 4 of 26  
 
2. The Committee notes that CCRS is working under t he Administrative control of Ministry 
of Civil Aviation. The Committee recommends that th e Commission of Railway Safety may be 
made an independent autonomous body just like many other regulatory institutions of the 
country to improve efficiency and freedom of action. 
 (Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The autonomy and independence of Commission is ensured by virtue of its functioning 
under a Ministry different from the Ministry of Rai lways by placing Commission under Ministry 
of Civil Aviation. There is no interference in day to day working of the Commission by the 
Ministry of Railways. Sufficient safeguards have be en in-built in the powers, duties & 
constitution of the Commission to ensure its independent working. 
 
Unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes the progress in elimination of such crossings by constructing RUBs 
and ROBs and hopes that the work would be expedited  to eliminate all such crossings in near 
future. The Committee also hopes that sufficient bu dgetary allocation may be made for the said 
purpose. The Committee also recommends that a mecha nism should be devised to complete the 
construction of ROBs and RUBs in a stipulated perio d and in case of a delay, the concerned 
agency should be penalized. 
 (Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 As informed by M/o Railways, all unmanned Level  Crossings (LCs) on Broad Gauge 
have already been eliminated by 31.01.2019. 
3.2 Elimination of all manned level crossings shall  be done in phased manner as per policy 
and priority subject to availability of funds, prov ided, State Govt. has to acquire and make 
available encumbrance free land, at their own cost for the ROB/RUB approaches.  Elimination of 
LCs is the priority area of the Government and the priority is being accorded to elimination of 
LCs on Golden Quadrilateral- Golden Diagonal (GQ-GD ) routes, which carry about 60% of 
passenger/ freight traffic on Indian Railway. No su ch time line has been fixed for Elimination of 

Page 5 of 26  
 
Manned Level Crossings (MLCs). Progress of eliminat ion of MLCs in previous years is as 
under: 
2009-2014---996 Nos. 
2014-2019---2310 Nos. 
2019-2022---3101 Nos.  
3.3 From the above, it is clear that Railway is emp hasising elimination of MLCs to enhance 
safety of trains and rail road users. For low traff ic density route of Railway, State Governments 
are encouraged to construct ROB/RUB at their own cost. 
3.4 Fund allocation has been increased every year f or LC elimination works in past. 
Expenditure for construction of ROBs/ RUBs is as under: 
    Year 
                            Expenditure (Rs. in crores)              
2009-2014               4578 
2014-2019               13890 
2019-2022               11885 
Budgetary allocation has been enhanced to Rs. 6500 crore in 2022-23.  
3.5 Normally, Railway undertakes construction of RO B in Railway Portion whereas 
approaches are constructed by State Govt. However, now priority is being given for construction 
of ROBs/RUBs works on single entity to enhance prog ress. There is no problem in construction 
of ROB in Railway portion. However, construction of  approaches of ROB is difficult due to 
various reasons enumerated as under (which are resp onsibility of State Govt/Road owning 
agencies): 
• Land acquisition requirements. 
• Removal of encroachments  
• Shifting of utilities 
• Fixing the alignment of approaches 
• Allocation of requisite funds by State Government . 
3.6 Remedial Measures initiated by Railways:- 
• Joint survey with all Stakeholders including Stat e Government to finalise the tentative 
General Arrangement Drawing (GAD). 
• Standardization of drawings for various superstru ctures (Spans) to save time of 
design.   

Page 6 of 26  
 
• Signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) betwee n Ministry of Railways and 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) / N ational Highways Authority 
of India (NHAI) to eliminate all level crossings on  National Highway Corridors on 
single entity basis by MoRTH/ NHAI by construction of ROBs/RUBs at their own 
cost. 
• Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed between Ministry of Railways, with 
State Government of 5 States (Maharashtra, Bihar, U ttarakhand, Haryana and Kerala 
for construction of ROBs on single entity basis by State Government.   
• The implementation of MoUs has been started in th e State of Maharashtra & Bihar at 
present. MoU between State Government of Gujarat an d Railways is finalized and 
likely to be signed shortly. 
• Similarly, signing of MoU between Ministry of Rai lways & Uttar Pradesh State   
Governments is in discussion and expected to be signed shortly. 
 
3.7 Elimination of Level Crossings (LCs)  
i. The elimination of Level Crossings (LCs) is a co ntinuous process and a major thrust area 
for Railways as well as State Governments.  All the  Unmanned Level Crossings 
(UMLCs) on broad gauge line have since been elimina ted from the network of Indian 
Railways. 
ii. The elimination of balance LCs by construction of ROB/RUBs is being done at enhanced 
pace.  In the last three financial years i.e. 2019- 20, 2020-21 & 2021-22, about 3101 
manned LCs have been eliminated.  The outlay for co nstruction of ROB/RUBs is 
increased every year.  Elimination of LCs involves cooperation and coordination from 
State Governments due to their involvement and cons ent for cost sharing, making 
available encumbrance- free land for approaches and utility shifting in approaches, which 
is the responsibility of the concerned State Govern ment/Road owning agencies.  These 
activities generally take a lot of time and cause d elay in construction of ROB/RUB/LC 
elimination process. 
iii. To overcome the above issue, Railway is emphas izing on execution of ROB/RUB for 
elimination of LCs on single entity basis for minim izing the coordination-related delays 
between State Governments and Railways. 

Page 7 of 26  
 
iv. For Golden Quadrilateral/Golden Diagonal routes  and important LCs on high density 
routes, the cost of construction of ROB/RUBs is bor ne by Railways on priority; however, 
encumbrance-free land and consent for closure of LC s are to be given by the concerned 
State Governments. 
v. Regular meetings (Bi-monthly) are being conducte d by Zonal Railways with State 
Governments and NHAI for resolving issues arising from time to time. 
vi. For fast tracking of ROBs, 188 combinations of additional drawings for super structure 
have been standardized for railway spans and made a vailable on the online portal, which 
can be readily utilized by State Governments and NHAI. 
 
Miscellaneous Safety Issues  
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee further noted the dilapidated cond ition of many railway quarters across 
the country which requires urgent attention, since it is a big safety risk to the residents. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that all such rail way quarters may be repaired at the earliest 
and sufficient funds may be provided for the purpos e. Besides many Railway stations and goods 
sheds are located in congested areas, sometimes lea ding to accidents during transportation of 
goods by lorries. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that steps may be taken to relocate the 
goods sheds to safer places in order to prevent accidents. 
 (Para 49) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 M/o Railways has informed that for modernizatio n of Railway colonies, Railways 
undertake replacement of old and dilapidated railwa y colonies on regular basis, depending upon 
age and condition of quarters and availability of f unds and it is an ongoing process.  Efforts are 
being made to modernize more number of quarters eac h year through maintenance and repair 
with more fund allocation under demand No.11 (500).   For repair and maintenance of residential 
buildings, Rs 1866.02 crore have been allotted in y ear 2022-23 which is 9.76% higher as 
compared to  the previous year [Rs 1700.04 crore (R E)].  During last 10 years, total Rs 16470.09 
crore have been spent on all zonal Railways under g rant 11(500) for  maintenance & repair of 
quarters. 
 

Page 8 of 26  
 
4.2 Also, during the last 5 years, a total of Rs 23 84.45 crore have been spent in the Plan Head 
51 for Staff Welfare which inter-alia includes cons truction/improvement/repairs of quarters, 
water supply arrangement, electric wiring in staff quarter etc.  As per the available data, 7,257 
No. of new quarters has been constructed during the  last 5 years and a total no. 3,34,976 of 
quarters have been repaired by the Railways during the last 5 years.   Further, during the year 
2022-23, three umbrella work costing Rs950 crore ha ve been sanctioned for Zonal Railways for 
construction/Repairs/improvement  of new quarters under Plan head 51 "Staff Welfare".  
 
4.3 In addition, colony redevelopment has been star ted by Indian Railways in a big way for 
tapping the real estate potential of the Railway la nd (in big /metropolitan cities) at no cost to 
Railway. For this purpose 104 nos. of colonies have  been entrusted to RLDA under which 
approx 22,200 new quarters will be constructed apar t from generating some surplus Revenue. It 
may be seen from the above that substantial measure s are being taken by Railways to improve 
the standard of housing accommodations.  
 
4.4 Regarding relocation of Goods shed, Zonal Railw ays examine the requirement of shifting 
of Goods Sheds and take necessary action as require d. Further Zonal Railways have been 
advised time to time to provide all facilities including approach road at Goods Sheds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 9 of 26  
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Role of the Ministry of Civil Aviation  
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that presently the powers of  the CRS are derived from the Railways 
Act, 1989. The Committee also notes that in exercise of the powers conferred under the Railways 
Act, 1989, the Statutory Investigation into Railway  Accidents Rules, 1998 are framed by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Railway (Notices  of and Inquiries into Accidents) Rules, 1998 
are framed by the Ministry of Railways. Further tho ugh the CRS functions under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Civil Aviatio n, the Commissioners of Railway Safety are 
recruited from amongst officers of Indian Railways on absorption basis and the Deputy CRS 
work in the Commission on deputation basis. The Com mittee also notes that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation provides administrative, establishment and  financial support to the CRS. The 
Committee is of the opinion that the involvement of  two Ministries viz, Ministry of Railway and 
Civil Aviation, leads to avoidable confusion in the command structure of the CRS and there is an 
urgent need to free the CRS from the undue influences of both the Ministries. 
 (Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Commission of Railway Safety is an independent apex statutory body on the matters 
pertaining to Safety of Indian Railways and Metro R ailways. To have adequate effectiveness of 
the Commission as an independent agency, Ministry o f Civil Aviation is of the view that 
autonomy of Commission of Railway Safety needs to b e maintained by way of consultation by 
Ministry of Railways with the Commission while maki ng changes in those chapters of Indian 
Railways Act/Manuals etc. which pertain to Commission’s working. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.2 The Committee desires to know the specific step s taken by the Ministry or the plans 
thereof to ensure the functioning of the Commission  as an independent agency and free 
from any influences of both Ministry of Railways an d Ministry of Civil Aviation. The 

Page 10 of 26  
 
Committee also desires to know the details of the p roposed changes/amendments that can 
be made in relevant Acts/Rules/Manuals, to maintain  the autonomy of the Commission of 
Railway Safety.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee is of the opinion that to ensure t he impartial working of the Commission 
of Railway Safety, it is essential that the Commiss ion works outside the control of both the 
Ministries of Railways and Civil Aviation. In order  to make the functioning of the Commission 
more effective, it is strongly felt that the Commis sion should be provided greater powers and 
independence. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Commission of Railway Safety 
should be made an autonomous statutory body on the lines of many other independent regulatory 
bodies. CRS should have independent technical manpo wer and autonomy with respect to 
administrative, establishment and financial issues. 
 (Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The autonomy and independence of Commission is ensured by virtue of its functioning 
under a Ministry different from the Ministry of Rai lways. There is no interference in day to day 
working of the Commission by the Ministry of Railways. 
 
2.2 Also, recently, the post of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety has been upgraded 
from Level 16 to the Apex Level i.e. Level 17. 
  
2.3 However, to ensure better functioning of the Co mmission, Ministry of Civil Aviation is 
of the view that autonomy of Commission of Railway Safety needs to be maintained by way of 
consultation by Ministry of Railways with the Commi ssion while making changes in those 
chapters of Indian Railways Act/Manuals etc which pertain to Commission’s working.  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.4 The Committee notes the suggestion of the Minis try of Civil Aviation that the 
autonomy of Commission of Railway Safety needs to b e maintained by way of consultation 
by Ministry of Railways (MoR) with the Commission, while making changes in those 

Page 11 of 26  
 
chapters of Indian Railways Act/Manuals etc which p ertain to Commission’s working. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the valid suggestion of MoR may be examined and 
a mechanism may be adopted in coordination with the MoR to implement the same.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that as per the existing sch eme, the Ministry of Railways have full 
power and authority to amend the provisions of the Railways Act, 1989. However, the Committee 
notes with serious concern that Ministry of Railway s brings about unilateral change in such 
rules, codes and manuals, without consulting the CR S which has a bearing on jurisdiction of the 
Commissioners. The Committee also notes that the Railways Act, 1989 also gives absolute power 
to Ministry of Railways in accepting/regulating/mod ifying any condition proposed by CRS. The 
Committee notes that the CRS is the Principal Techn ical Advisor to the Ministry of Railways, in 
safety related matters and is of the firm opinion t hat the views of the CRS should mandatorily be 
taken into account in such cases. The Committee the refore recommends that the Ministry of 
Railways should avoid unilateral changes in Rules, Codes & Manuals which affects Railway 
Safety without consulting CRS. If any, changes are made it should be based on consensus 
between Ministry of Railway; Ministry of Civil Avia tion and the CRS. The Committee also 
recommends that a complete review of the procedure adopted for amending provisions in the 
Railways Act, 1989 may be done to include the suggestions of CRS.  
(Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation is of the view that autonomy of Commission of Railway 
Safety needs to be maintained by way of consultatio n by Ministry of Railways with the 
Commission while making changes in those chapters o f Indian Railways Act/Manuals etc which 
pertain to Commission’s working. 
  
3.2 Unilateral changes are also not in consonance w ith para 4(1) of the “Transaction of 
Business Rules” (ToBR) issued by the Cabinet Secretariat which inter-alia states that, “When the 
subject of a case concerns more than one department , no decision be taken or order issued until 
all such departments have concurred or, failing suc h concurrence, a decision thereon has been 
taken by or under the authority of the Cabinet”. 

Page 12 of 26  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.3 The Committee reiterates its aforesaid Recommen dation made under Paras 1.2 & 
2.4 of Chapter III of this Report and recommends th at the Ministry of Railways should 
avoid unilateral changes in Rules, Codes and Manual s which affect railway safety without 
consulting CRS. The Committee also notes the Cabine t Secretariat’s “Transaction of 
Business Rules” (ToBR) in this regard and recommend s that in case, the concurrence of 
both Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railways, is not reached, the Cabinet Secretariat may 
be approached to resolve the issue.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee appreciates that almost 90% of the  recommendations of the CRS are 
accepted by the Ministry of Railways during the las t five years. However, the Committee notes 
with concern that while a time frame has been defin ed for the Commission to submit accident 
Reports to Ministry of Railway viz., 30 days for pr eliminary and 180 days for final accident 
Reports, but no time frame has been defined for the  Ministry of Railway to submit its Action 
Taken Reports and due to which generally the ATRs a re received quite late. The Committee also 
expresses its concern that 15 ATRs are still pendin g in the Railway Board from Ministry of 
Railway with the oldest accident being of the year 2013-14 which implies a delay of more than 8 
years. The Committee is of the opinion that such an  inordinate delay in submission of ATRs 
makes the whole effort of accident investigations f ruitless. The Committee therefore feels that 
there is an urgent need to streamline the procedure  of submitting ATRs to the Commission by 
Railway Board. The Committee recommends that there should be a fixed time frame for 
submission of ATRs by the Railway Board as well, in  order to make the process of investigating 
the causes of the accident and taking effective mea sures to avoid the recurrence of such 
accidents and resultant loss to property and human lives. 
 (Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 In order to take effective measures by Indian R ailways to avoid the recurrence of rail 
accidents, there should be a fixed time frame for s ubmission of ATRs by the Railway Board, 
since delay in implementation of safety recommendat ions is not desirable from public safety 

Page 13 of 26  
 
point of view. However, in cases where there is a d elay due to non-receiving information from 
any third agency, monthly status of the same should be forwarded by MoR to CCRS Office. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.2 The Committee reiterates its recommendation and  is of the strong opinion that 
Railway Board, Ministry of Railways should expeditiously submit its Action Taken Reports 
and a fixed time frame should be stipulated for sub mitting accident Reports, which should 
be strictly followed.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee expresses its serious concern at t he disregard shown by the Railway 
Board towards the recommendations/suggestions of CR S, which has specifically been set up to 
provide technical guidance on matters relating to R ailway safety. The Committee specifically 
notes that no rules/regulations exist for Dedicated  Freight Corridor Corporation of India 
Limited (DFCCIL) or goods trains and no intimation was given to CRS regarding the accidents 
on DFCCIL routes. Further, though the CRS has taken  up the issue with MoR, no action has 
been taken by them till date. The Committee also no tes that in 2018, MoR has amended Rules 
without considering the opinion of CRS. Besides, it  also expresses its concern at the fact that 
only 8-10% of accidents are enquired by CRS, while rest of the accidents are enquired by 
Railways itself and in such cases the reports are not even referred to CRS for comments. 
(Para 31) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 It is submitted that around 90% of the recommen dations of the CRSs contained in 
Accident Inquiry Reports have been accepted by the Ministry of Railways during the last 5 years. 
 
5.2 However, to further the safety of train operati ons in India, 
                             
train operation rules on DFCCIL should also involve safety concurrence of Commission since its 
alignment runs all along adjoining Indian Rail (IR) lines, Level Crossing (LC) gates are common 
at some places, there are interconnection at places  with IR system and in emergency these lines 
can be used for passenger trains in future. 
 

Page 14 of 26  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.3 The Committee notes that alignment of Dedicated  Freight Corridor Corporation of 
India Limited (DFCCIL) runs all along adjoining Ind ian Railways (IR) lines, Level 
Crossing (LC) gates are common at some places, ther e are interconnection at places with 
IR system and in emergency these lines can be used for passenger trains in future. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that a mechanism may be developed to ensure safety of 
train operations on DFCCIL and IR lines and their use in case of an emergency.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee is of the firm view that the recom mendations made by the Commission of 
Railway Safety should receive utmost importance fro m the Ministry of Railways. The Committee 
takes exception to the fact that, on certain occasi ons, the Ministry of Railways neither consults 
the Commission of Railway Safety before amending ru les or rejecting a recommendation nor 
furnishes reasons for not accepting the recommendat ions made by the Commission of Railway 
Safety. The Committee therefore recommends that CRS  should be invariably consulted in such 
cases. The Committee observes that this state of af fairs will not augur well for a safe 
environment as the inter-ministerial non-cooperatio n is neither good for the country nor the 
institutions they represent. It also recommends tha t regulations should be immediately framed 
for DFCCIL or goods trains and may be brought under  the ambit of CRS. The Committee also 
expresses its dismay at the fact that only 8-10% ca ses are enquired by CRS and feels that since 
CRS is the apex technical institution as regards pa ssenger safety, it should be involved in 
accident investigation in most of the cases. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that 
necessary amendments in existing laws may be made. The Committee is of the opinion that it 
should be made mandatory for the Railway Administra tion not to reject or overrule any 
recommendations made by the Commissioners without a  meeting between the Chairman, 
Railway Board and the Chief Commissioner of Railway  Safety, where the matters can be 
discussed threadbare and agreements reached. While expressing their inability to accept the 
recommendations, the Railway Board should invariabl y give detailed reasons for not accepting 
the recommendations. 
 (Para 32) 
 

Page 15 of 26  
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation is of the view that it should be made mandatory for the 
Railway Administration to not reject or overrule an y recommendations made by the 
Commissioners unilaterally, without a Joint meeting  between the Chairman, Railway Board and 
the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety, where the  matters can be discussed in details and 
agreements can be reached for overall safety of train operations in the country. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.2 The Committee notes the reply and would like th e Ministry of Civil Aviation to take 
up the issue, concerning amendment of Rules or non acceptance/rejection of 
recommendations made by the Commission of Railway S afety without consulting them or 
citing any reasons for such rejection, expeditiousl y with Ministry of Railways and devise a 
mutually acceptable mechanism for both Ministries. The Committee also desires to know 
whether any steps have been taken by the Ministry t o frame regulations for bringing 
Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Lim ited (DFCCIL) or goods trains, 
under the ambit of CRS for overall safety of train operations in the country.      
 
Training of Officers of Commission  
Recommendation/Observation 
7. Committee fails to understand the logic of MoR b ehind the non-inclusion of officers from 
the Commission for training along with the Railway officers on regular basis so that both 
Railways and Commission are on the same platform as  regards technological advancements. 
The Committee recommends that immediate steps may b e taken to train the officials of 
Commission including the deputationists along with the officials of the MoR and the training 
imparted should be of a global level. The Committee  feels that there is a genuine need of the 
officers of Commission of Railway Safety to get exposed to the latest technological advancements 
taking place in the railway sector in India and abr oad, otherwise there is a real danger that the 
technical knowledge of the officers of the Commissi on will be obsolete and they may not be able 
to perform their assigned duties at the optimum lev el. The Committee recommends that the 
officers of the Commission should be exposed to lat est global technologies and any new 

Page 16 of 26  
 
technology introduced by the Railways through train ings in the country and abroad, so that they 
are in a position to perform their role effectively. 
 (Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 As per Section 9 of The Railway Act 1989, all r easonable facilities to Commission’s 
officials to discharge their function are to be pro vided by M/o Railways. With the advancement 
of technology, railway officers have been sent abro ad to get a firsthand knowledge of the same 
but this opportunity of global safety practices is not extended to officials of the Commission. 
  
7.2 Safety certification of new infrastructure is t he statutory function of the Commission and 
if exposure to latest technologies is not ensured, it will create hurdles in smooth discharge of 
duties of the Commissioners. Therefore, it is highl y essential that institutionalized training 
arrangement is made to enable Commissioners and Dep uty Commissioners to upgrade their skill 
for effective discharge of their duties. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.3 The Committee notes that the officials of Commi ssion of Railway Safety are not 
given the opportunity to equip themselves with the global safety practices in the country or 
abroad; whereas the officers of Ministry of Railway s are being given such training in the 
country and abroad also, to get a firsthand knowled ge of the same. The Committee feels 
that the officers of both Ministry of Railways and Commission of Railway Safety should be 
on the same platform as regards worldwide technolog ical advancements and reiterates its 
recommendation that the officers of the Commission of Railway Safety should also be given 
equal opportunity for attending institutionalized t raining programmes in the country and 
abroad, so that they are in a position to perform their role effectively.  
 
Upgradation of post of CCRS and requirement of sepa rate Secretariat for 
Commission   
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee appreciates the upgradation of the  post of CCRS to Apex level of pay 
matrix of 7th CPC. The Committee is of the opinion that such a step will enhance the status of 

Page 17 of 26  
 
the Commission, keeping in view its important respo nsibility to ensure overall safety of Indian 
Railways. It would result in attracting the best av ailable technical talent in the country to the 
Commission. The Committee also recommends that a se parate Secretariat may be provided to 
the Commission to assist the CCRS in expeditious settlement of its work. 
(Para 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 CRS is working under the Ministry of Civil Avia tion and adequate staff has been 
provided for its day-to-day working. Hence, there i s no need for provision of a separate 
secretariat to the Commission. However, for better functioning of the Commission, the 
requirement of additional staff has been taken up.  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.2 The Committee notes the reply in this regard an d desires to know the steps taken by 
the Ministry to meet the staff requirement of the C RS. The Committee recommends that 
for better functioning of the Commission, the addit ional requirement of staff at all the 
levels may be ascertained and necessary actions may  be taken at the earliest to fulfill the 
requirements. 
 
Miscellaneous Safety Issues  
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee observes that during train acciden ts, the loss of life and property can be 
minimized if the Rail coaches are as per global saf ety standards. The Committee recommends 
that technology matching global standards should be  adopted so as to introduce global 
standards of safety for Indian Railway coaches. A r ailway station, a coach manufacturing 
factory/workshop and a stretch of railway track may  be selected and bids may be invited from 
leading global agencies across the world for implem entation of the global best standards, which 
may then serve as a model for other railway station s/railway coach factories/railway tracks 
across the country.  
 (Para 45) 
 
 

Page 18 of 26  
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 As informed by M/o Railways, adoption of Smart Rolling Stock (coach) is an ongoing 
process. Several steps have been taken by IR to make rail travel more secure and comfortable for 
passengers. Some of them are listed below: 
 
A.         SMART Coaches 
1. In view of the latest development in rolling sto ck technology, Indian Railways has 
planned for manufacture of SMART featured enabled c oaches with ultramodern features. 
101 SMART coaches have been manufactured by MCF/Rae Bareli.  
2. These SMART coaches are equipped with CCTV camer as, PICCU, PAPIS system, etc., 
to keep close surveillance on all the activities in side coaches.  This will help to mitigate 
any untoward incident inside coach and will further  enhance the comfort, security and 
safety to onboard passengers. These features are fu rther expected to enhance the level of 
safety and maintenance standards which will further  result into reduced maintenance 
requirement. 
3. Brief of the features available in SMART coaches  are as under:- 
i. PICCU (Passenger information coach computing uni t), 
ii. PAPIS(Passenger announcement/Passenger informat ion system), 
iii. Digital Destination Board 
iv. Wi-Fi infotainment system 
v. Security & Surveillance monitoring CCTV cameras.  Cameras fitted on the coach give 
live recording. 
vi. Emergency talkback 
vii. On board Condition Monitoring System (OBCMS). 
viii. Monitoring of Brake and WSP. 
B.         Monitoring of other sub system 
i. HVAC (Heating ventilation and air conditioning u nit) 
ii. Toilet Occupancy Sensor 
iii. Energy metering module 
iv. Ventilation fan sensor 
v. Working of water pump 

Page 19 of 26  
 
vi. Water level in water tanks 
C.         CCTV cameras 
i. Provision of CCTV cameras in train coaches has b een one of the priority items in 
relation to safety and security of onboard passenge rs. In this context, Indian Railways 
has further planned for proliferation of CCTV cameras in its coaches. 
ii. CCTV cameras have been fitted in around 6,200 c oaches so far, further fitment of 
CCTV cameras in coaches is under process. 
D.         PAPIS (PUBLIC ADDRESS & PASSENGER INFORMATION SYSTEM)   
i. There has been continuous demand from passenger through various forums for 
provision of Public announcement and information sy stem with quality display 
system within coaches to facilitate passengers with  updated information about 
running status and latest status of arriving statio n in advance. This would ensure that 
passengers get advance information and get adequate  time to prepare to de-board 
from the trains without any haste. In this context,  GPS based PAPIS & LED 
Destination Board has been developed. This system p rovides passengers information 
in audio/visual form for station arriving, departed with other features like speed of the 
train, locations of the coach and kilometer run by the coach on per day/month/year 
basis. The design also has provision to facilitate infotainment to passengers through 
content on Demand.   
ii. PAPIS system is also available in premium train s like Vande Bharat, Humsafar, Tejas 
and UDAY Express.  GPS based PAPIS in EMU & Kolkata  Metro has already been 
installed.  
iii. Further, newly manufactured EMU / Mainline Ele ctric Multiple Unit (MEMU) rakes 
are already equipped with such technology / system. 
iv. Further, ICF and RCF have been advised for prov iding GPS based PAPIS in 50 LHB 
coaches each and work in around 27 coaches and 11 coaches respectively. 
v. Also, RSP work of integrated upgradable console with GPS Based PAPIS and 
LED/LCD Destination Boards in 5,000 coaches has als o been distributed among 
Zonal Railways.  

Page 20 of 26  
 
vi. Around 8,000 coaches have the provision of PAPI S, whereas around 1,500 coaches 
have only PIS (but not PAS) and around 1,900 coache s have only PAS (but not PIS). 
Further fitment of PAPIS in coaches is under process. 
E.         Automatic Fire and Smoke Detection System in AC coaches 
i. With a view to improve fire safety in running tr ains, Automatic Fire and Smoke 
Detection System are being provided in AC coaches.  The specifications for 
Automatic Fire and Smoke Detection System have been  upgraded integrating the air 
brake system in the coaches with Fire and Smoke detection system. 
ii. Instructions have already been issued to Produc tion Units in June 2017 that all newly 
manufactured AC coaches be provided with Automatic Fire and Smoke Detection 
System. For retrofitment in existing coaches, sanct ion under Bulk RSP has been 
obtained and is underway at Zonal Railways. Fire & Smoke detection system are 
available in around 7800 AC coaches.  
F.         Fire detection and Suppression system in Pantry cars and Power cars 
i.  Power Cars are more prone to fire due to presen ce of Diesel Alternator sets along 
with fuel tanks and other high voltage equipment. P antry Cars are also more prone to 
fire due to cooking being carried out in these coac hes. In this respect, Automatic Fire 
detection and suppression systems are being provided in Power cars and Pantry cars.  
ii. Instructions have already been issued to Produc tion Units in April 2017 that all newly 
manufactured Power Cars and Pantry Cars be provided  with Fire detection and 
Suppression system. For retrofitment in existing Po wer Cars and Pantry Cars, 
sanction under Bulk RSP has been obtained and is un derway at Zonal Railways. Fire 
detection & suppression system is available in arou nd 1607 Power Cars and 744 
Pantry Cars. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
9.2 The Committee commends the steps being taken by  the Ministry of Railways viz., 
introduction of Specially Modified Aesthetic Refres hing Travel (SMART) Coaches; 
monitoring of other sub system; installation of CCT Vs in coaches; Public Address & 
Passenger Information System (PAPIS); automatic fir e & smoke detection system in AC 
coaches; and fire detection & suppression system in  pantry cars & power cars, to ensure 

Page 21 of 26  
 
safety of railway coaches. The Committee would also  like to reiterate its recommendation 
as regards selection of a particular railway statio n; a coach manufacturing 
factory/workshop; and a stretch of railway track fo r implementation of the global best 
standards, which may thereafter established as a mo del for other railway stations/railway 
coach factories/railway tracks across the country.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. While appreciating the efforts made by Railways  and Railway Protection Force to save 
numerous lives, the Committee recommends that urgen t steps need to be taken to minimize the 
unfortunate incidents of people, especially women a nd children, falling on tracks and getting 
seriously injured/ killed. It should be ensured tha t Railway Police has safety training for 
undertaking on-the-spot rescue measures. The Commit tee emphasizes the need for delegation of 
powers to lower level officials also in order to en able swift action for addressing safety risks in 
Railways. The Committee also recommends that a Safe ty Task Force may be constituted in every 
State to respond to emergencies and that it should consist of young and robust personnel who 
have been given the necessary training and exposure  to international best practices. The 
Committee feels that another important requirement is the need to ensure that immediate and 
prompt help is rendered to accident victims. The Co mmittee is underscoring this fact because 
there have been instances wherein railway accident victims were stuck inside boggies for hours, 
without getting any help. Hence, detailed evacuatio n plan, in coordination with different 
agencies, should be put in place. A comprehensive s afety Master Plan for improvement of safety 
and security standards in railways may be worked out and implemented in a time-bound manner. 
It should be ensured that International Organizatio n for Standardization (ISO) Safety Audits are 
conducted periodically for all the institutions under the Ministry. 
 (Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 As informed by M/o Railways, Indian Railways a re fully prepared to quickly access the 
accident site for conducting rescue and relief oper ations in co-ordination with other Government 
and non-Government organisations within the initial  hours of the accident. Railways have a 
network of 182 Accident Relief Trains (ARTs), 167 A ccident Relief Medical Vans (ARMVs) 
and stationary Portable Medical Kit for Accidents ( POMKAs) placed at identified locations, 

Page 22 of 26  
 
which cover the entire rail network of Indian Railw ays. These trains are provided with rescue 
equipment and trained man power. Immediately on rec eipt of information about an accident, 
involving or likely to involve injuries or deaths, ARMV is rushed to the site of the accident. The 
time required for the relief trains to reach the accident spot depends upon the distance and fitness 
of the approach track.  Many a times Railway doctor s, paramedics and other officials reach the 
accident site by road, depending upon accessibility of the site by road. 
 
10.2 On receiving information of the accident, not only the Railways’ resources, but resources 
from other Government and non-Government organisati ons are also requisitioned, as per the 
need. For this purpose, contact details of such non -Railway resources are kept at the Railway 
stations and Railway hospitals/primary health centers as well as in the divisional and headquarter 
control rooms of the Zonal Railways. On-board staff  viz.,  Loco Pilot, Assistant Loco Pilot, 
Guard, Travelling Ticket Examiner, escorting staff etc., are trained in first aid and disaster 
management. These on-board staff act as first respo nders, they carry out rescue and relief 
operations till the time ART/ARMV reaches the accid ent site. Assistance is also sought from 
civil administration, National Disaster Response Fo rce (NDRF) and Armed Forces in case of 
major accidents. 
 
10.3 The Railway Board has already issued an Accide nt Protocol to describe the standard set 
of activities/procedures of reporting and handling of serious train accidents. Moreover, Disaster 
Management Plans have been prepared at Divisional, Zonal and Railway Board Level to deal 
with natural and man-made disasters in Railways. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.4 The Committee notes the steps taken by the Min istry to reduce accidents and 
minimize casualties. However, the Committee desires  to know whether the Railway Police 
has safety training for on-the-spot rescue measures  and whether there is any delegation of 
powers to lower level officers for taking swift act ion for addressing safety risks as 
recommended by the Committee.    

Page 23 of 26  
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil - 
 
***** 
  

Page 24 of 26  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Role of the Ministry of Civil Aviation  
The Committee desires to know the specific steps taken by the Ministry or the plans thereof 
to ensure the functioning of the Commission as an i ndependent agency and free from any 
influences of both Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee also 
desires to know the details of the proposed changes /amendments that can be made in 
relevant Acts/Rules/Manuals, to maintain the autono my of the Commission of Railway 
Safety.  
(Para 1.2) 
The Committee notes the suggestion of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that the autonomy of 
Commission of Railway Safety needs to be maintained  by way of consultation by Ministry 
of Railways (MoR) with the Commission, while making changes in those chapters of Indian 
Railways Act/Manuals etc which pertain to Commissio n’s working. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the valid suggestion of MoR may be examined and a 
mechanism may be adopted in coordination with the MoR to implement the same.  
(Para 2.4) 
The Committee reiterates its aforesaid Recommendati on made under Paras 1.2 & 2.4 of 
Chapter III of this Report and recommends that the Ministry of Railways should avoid 
unilateral changes in Rules, Codes and Manuals whic h affect railway safety without 
consulting CRS. The Committee also notes the Cabine t Secretariat’s “Transaction of 
Business Rules” (ToBR) in this regard and recommend s that in case, the concurrence of 
both Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railways, is not reached, the Cabinet Secretariat may 
be approached to resolve the issue.  
(Para 3.3) 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation and is of the strong opinion that Railway 
Board, Ministry of Railways should expeditiously su bmit its Action Taken Reports and a 

Page 25 of 26  
 
fixed time frame should be stipulated for submittin g accident Reports, which should be 
strictly followed.  
(Para 4.2) 
The Committee notes that alignment of Dedicated Fre ight Corridor Corporation of India 
Limited (DFCCIL) runs all along adjoining Indian Ra ilways (IR) lines, Level Crossing 
(LC) gates are common at some places, there are int erconnection at places with IR system 
and in emergency these lines can be used for passen ger trains in future. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a mechanism may be devel oped to ensure safety of train 
operations on DFCCIL and IR lines and their use in case of an emergency.  
(Para 5.3) 
The Committee notes the reply and would like the Mi nistry of Civil Aviation to take up the 
issue, concerning amendment of Rules or non accepta nce/rejection of recommendations 
made by the Commission of Railway Safety without co nsulting them or citing any reasons 
for such rejection, expeditiously with Ministry of Railways and devise a mutually 
acceptable mechanism for both Ministries. The Commi ttee also desires to know whether 
any steps have been taken by the Ministry to frame regulations for bringing Dedicated 
Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL) or goods trains, under the ambit 
of CRS for overall safety of train operations in the country.      
(Para 6.2) 
Training of Officers of Commission  
The Committee notes that the officials of Commissio n of Railway Safety are not given the 
opportunity to equip themselves with the global saf ety practices in the country or abroad; 
whereas the officers of Ministry of Railways are be ing given such training in the country 
and abroad also, to get a firsthand knowledge of th e same. The Committee feels that the 
officers of both Ministry of Railways and Commissio n of Railway Safety should be on the 
same platform as regards worldwide technological ad vancements and reiterates its 
recommendation that the officers of the Commission of Railway Safety should also be given 
equal opportunity for attending institutionalized t raining programmes in the country and 
abroad, so that they are in a position to perform their role effectively.  
(Para 7.3) 
 

Page 26 of 26  
 
Upgradation of post of CCRS and requirement of sepa rate Secretariat for 
Commission   
The Committee notes the reply in this regard and de sires to know the steps taken by the 
Ministry to meet the staff requirement of the CRS. The Committee recommends that for 
better functioning of the Commission, the additiona l requirement of staff at all the levels 
may be ascertained and necessary actions may be tak en at the earliest to fulfill the 
requirements. 
(Para 8.2) 
Miscellaneous Safety Issues  
The Committee commends the steps being taken by the  Ministry of Railways viz., 
introduction of Specially Modified Aesthetic Refres hing Travel (SMART) Coaches; 
monitoring of other sub system; installation of CCT Vs in coaches; Public Address & 
Passenger Information System (PAPIS); automatic fir e & smoke detection system in AC 
coaches; and fire detection & suppression system in  pantry cars & power cars, to ensure 
safety of railway coaches. The Committee would also  like to reiterate its recommendation 
as regards selection of a particular railway statio n; a coach manufacturing 
factory/workshop; and a stretch of railway track fo r implementation of the global best 
standards, which may thereafter established as a mo del for other railway stations/railway 
coach factories/railway tracks across the country.  
(Para 9.2) 
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry  to reduce accidents and minimize 
casualties. However, the Committee desires to know whether the Railway Police has safety 
training for on-the-spot rescue measures and whethe r there is any delegation of powers to 
lower level officers for taking swift action for ad dressing safety risks as recommended by 
the Committee.   
(Para 10.4) 
***** 

27 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

28 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 23rd March, 2023 in Committee Room 
„4‟, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
7.  Shri Tapir Gao 
8.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
11.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12.  Shri Prince Raj 
13.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
14.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
16.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
18.  Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon‟ble Chairman  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to consider and adopt 
four draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee  xxx    xxx    xxx. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda for the meeting i.e., consideration and 
adoption of the following draft Action Taken Reports on:- 

29 
 
i. xxx    xxx    xxx; 
ii. xxx    xxx    xxx; 
iii. 323rd Report on 'Commission of Railway Safety'; and 
iv. xxx    xxx    xxx 
4.         The Committee considered the aforesaid draft Reports.  After a brief discussion, the 
Committee adopted the four draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry 
out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting in all the Reports. 
5.         The Committee authorized the Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri A. A. Rahim, M.P., to present the abovementioned Reports in Rajya Sabha on 24 th March 
2023. The Committee also authorized Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and i n his absence, Shri Kamlesh 
Paswan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
WITNESSES 
xxx    xxx    xxx  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
24.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
25.       The meeting adjourned at 5:31 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                  Swarabji B. 
23rd March, 2023                                                                                                            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
*Relates to other matters 
 