Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on 
the Helicopter Operations in India
 
REPORT NO. 
182
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its One Hundred Sixty-ninth Report on
the Helicopter Operations in India
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ......................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—10
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 11
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—16

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-2013)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shri Khagen Das
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
17. Dr. Kruparani Killi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
26. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty Second Report  on “Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee Contained in its  One Hundred Sixty Ninth Report
on Helicopter Operations in India”.
2. The One Hundred Sixty Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 11
th August, 2011 to the
Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its
One Hundred Sixty Ninth Report was received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
2
nd March, 2012.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 18 th October, 2012.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 18, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Asvina 26, 1934  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

(iv)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAI – Airports Authority of India
AICs – Aeronautical Circulars
AIP – Aeronautical Information Publication
AME – Aircraft Maintenance Engineers
A TC – Air Traffic Controller
CAE – Canadian Aviation Electronics Ltd.
CARs – Civil Aviation Requirements
DGCA – Directorate General of Civil Aviation
ELT – Emergency Locater Transmitter
ENR – Excess Noise Ratio
FDTL – Duty Time and Flight Time Limitation
FSD – Flight Standards Directorate
HAL – Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
ICAO – International Civil Aviation Organization
IFR – Instrumental Flight Rules
IHST – International Helicopter Safety Team
IMC – Instrument Meteorological Conditions
LTC – Leave Travel Concession
MEL – Minimum Equipment List
NSOP – Non-Scheduled Operators
PHHL – Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited
RWSI – Rotary Wing Society of India
SOPs – Scheduled Operators
SOPs – Standard Operating Procedures
VFR – Visual Flight Rules

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred Sixty Ninth Report on ‘Helicopter
Operations in India’ of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, which was presented to the Parliament on
the 11
th August, 2011.
2. Action Taken replies were received from the Government on the 2 nd March, 2012 in respect
of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The recommendations made by
the Committee and the Action Taken Replies submitted by the Ministry have been enumerated in
succeeding paragraphs.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
3. The Committee observes that even after a period of almost six decades since its inception,
the helicopter operations in India is still in a rudimentary stage as compared to that in the western
countries in terms of existence of a separate regulatory mechanism, rules and regulations as well
as necessary infrastructure specific to helicopters. The Committee found that currently, the
helicopter operations i.e. rotary wing aircrafts are being governed by the set of rules, regulations
and mechanism under the DGCA which are meant for the fixed wing aircraft. In view of significant
differences between the two, the Committee feels that there is an urgent need to put mechanism,
rules, regulations and the required infrastructure specific to the helicopter sector in place, without
further delay.
(Para 29 of the 169
th Report)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
4. In India, Helicopter market is growing rapidly. Presently India has approx 300
Helicopters, which is expected to increase to 500 in next 5 years. In view to promote the
Helicopters travel in the country Government/State Governments/Ministry of Civil Aviation and
Ministry of Tourism is providing assistance in promoting Helicopters services. Proper
infrastructure may be created at Hilly and remote areas, with no connectivity by other mode
of travel. This would help to connect such places by Air. Presently Helicopters regulations,
which are applicable to the fixed wing Aircrafts. Since the Helicopters has been designed for
ease of travel and require minimum infrastructure to operate, a special focus may be given to
Helicopter Industry. Rules, regulations and mechanism for operations of fixed wing aircraft and
Rotary Wing Aircraft are laid down separately. Helicopter operations are primarily governed by
the following regulations:
Aircraft Rules: Sections B, F, K, N, P and R of Schedule II of Aircraft Rules, 1937
specifically deal with helicopter.
Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs)
5. A number of requirements, specifically for helicopters exist in all the sections of CARs
published by DGCA. These CARs deal with aspects pertains to helicopter pilot licensing and
training, simulators, maintenance and AME licensing, flight operations, heliports/helipads, including
special helicopter operations like off-shore, hill-flying, under-slung, HEMS etc. The latest CAR on

2
“Minimum Safety Requirements for Helicopter Landing Areas used on Regular basis” was issued
on 4 th August, 2011.
Circulars
6. Apart from above Rules and CARs, DGCA regularly issues Circulars inter-alia , dealing with
helicopter operations. The latest Operations Circular on “Weather clearance for helicopter flights”
was issued on 4 th November, 2011.
7. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and would like to have further information
on the assistance provided for promotion of helicopter services to various agencies.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
8. The Committee also found that currently, helicopters are being used mainly for VIP
operations and transporting people to offshore oil operations. The Committee feels that the
Government has not taken enough steps for expansion of helicopter sector in India. The Committee
is of the opinion that helicopter operations have to be expanded to such other areas as tourism,
medical emergencies, disaster management, maintenance of law and order, etc.
(Para 30, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
9. Helicopter Operations in our country has expanded to many areas other than V .I.P.
Operations and Transporting Passengers to offshore locations. Some of these are as follows:-
(a)
Pilgrimage Tourism – Amarnath Yatra, Kedarnath Yatra, Manimahesh yatra and Mata
Vaishno Devi which are some of he important pilgrimage places where Helicopters are
being extensively.
(b) Heli-Skiing – At least 06 Helicopters are used during the season. These Operations take
place from Manali, Himachal Pradesh and Gulmarg in Jammu and Kashmir.
c) Power Lines wash – Helicopters are being used for hot wash of insulators of
Transmission Lines by Helicopters to avoid frequent breakdown of Power Supply.
(d) Passenger Service – Helicopters are also being used to convey Passengers in Inter
Island Helicopter Services in Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep. The same type
of Helicopter Service is also quite popular in North-East India like Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh. These services are being provided by State
Governments on subsidized rates.
(e)
Aerial Survey – Geological Survey of India has also been utilizing helicopters for
mapping the metal/mineral contents in various parts of the country.
10. Being the largest Helicopter operator in India, Pawan Hans helicopters limited (PHHL) has
been providing its services in areas of Offshore, Onshore, VIP Operations, Medivac, Passenger
Transportation etc. In order to promote the tourism PHHL has been providing its regular service
to Mata Vaishno Devi, Sri Kedarnathji, Sri Amarnathji, Andaman & Nicobar, Lakshadweep and north
Eastern Part of the country. PHHL has one dedicated Helicopter for Medivac service, deployed with
ONGC, which is fully equipped with necessary life saving equipment.

3
11. For Disaster Management PHHL has submitted a detailed proposal to National Disaster
Management Authority (NDMA) for deploying 5-6 Helicopters at strategic locaions across the
country. During the disaster, PHHL played crucial role in the Orissa Flood (September 2011) and
Sikkim Earthquake (September, 2011). During Orissa Flood, PHHL’s Mi-172 Helicopter was stepped
into emergency services. During this natural calamity at Orissa, PHHL Helicopter (Mi-172) carried
a load of 61 ton, of relief material and other essential items. During the Sikkim earthquake PHHL
deployed 3 Helicopters for rescue Operations and rescued approx 500 people from different
locations, with a total 63 hours of flying during this operation.
12. Under the maintenance of Law and Order, PHHL has deployed one Mi-172 Helicopter with
Government of Orissa for anti-naxalite operations. PHHL is also operating one Dauphin Helicopter
for Government of Maharashtra at Garhchiroli and Dhruv Helicopters for BSF, positioned at Ranchi
and Raipur for maintaining Law and Order.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
13. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
14. In this connection, the Committee would like to make special mention about the use of
helicopters in medical emergency, a strong case for which was made out by the representatives
of the Rotary Wing Society of India before the Committee. The Committee is also convinced that
this country holds a huge potential for using helicopters in this area. Many lives can be saved by
bringing the accident victims from remote and inaccessible areas for providing immediate medical
help during golden hour. The Committee would like that a Feasibility Study may be got conducted
by involving all the stakeholders, government as well as private, to promote the use of helicopters
in those areas.
(Para 31, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
15. CAR on helicopter Emergency Medical Services (HEMS) already exists and one helicopter
susbidised by Lakshadweep Administration is actively involved in ferrying patients from Islands to
Main Land. However, utilization of helicopter services for HEMS will be cost effective and popular
only if adequate subsidy is provided and insurance agencies are also actively involved in the
process. PHHL has submitted a detailed proposal to National Disaster Management Authority
(NDMA) for long term Strategy in disaster management including Medical emergencies. PHHL has
proposed to tie-up with National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) and identifying hospital and
Trauma Centers near Highways. These Hospital and Trauma Centers could be used during medical
emergencies and by providing the immediate medical support during the crucial Golden hour of the
patient, many lives can be saved.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
16. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee may be apprised on
the action taken by National Disaster Management Authority over the proposal submitted
by Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited on the disaster management.

4
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee also feels that promotion of tourism to remote and inaccessible areas can
be done by making helicopters services available for the tourists to such places. The Committee
recommends that the Government should take steps to make heli-tourism more attractive and
affordable by reducing cost of operation through fiscal incentives, lowering taxes on ATF,
waiving off RNFC, rationalizing landing and parking charges after consultation with the State
Governments.
(Para 32, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
18. PHHL has taken various initiatives in the area of promoting tourism and providing
connectivity to inaccessible areas. In additional PHHL has been exploring the possibilities of
deploying Helicopter services in the various new areas (subject to commercial viability) to promote
the tourism in the country e.g. Machail Yatra, Hemkunt Sahib, Karnataka-Hampi Circuit, Tourist
attractions in Himachal Pradesh, Golden Triangle (Delhi-Agra-Jaipur), Religious Circuits in the State
of Kerala, Rajasthan, Gujarat and Bihar, West Bengal, Goa, Madhya Pradesh etc.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
19. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee would like to have
information on the introduction of helicopter services in the above mentioned new areas and
the impact of such services on promotion of tourism on these areas.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
20. Presently, we are having 250 odd helicopters in operation, which are likely to be increased
significantly in the coming areas. In view of the great potential for helicopter travel in the country,
urgent need for dedicated helicopter training organizations can hardly be over-emphasized. The
Committee is not aware about the future requirement of the trained manpower for the helicopter
sector. One gliding centre at Pune and one training academy at Gondia have been proposed.
Currently, we have one fixed simulator in private sector in Delhi and one full motion simulator is
being established by HAL at Bangalore. The existing training facilities, thus, are inadequate to meet
the future requirements of the industry. The Committee does not know about the status of those
centres that were being set up. It would like to have a status report in respect of the proposed
centres.
(Para 33, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
21. Helicopter market in India is growing rapidly, which will require trained manpower in
future. At present there is only one helicopter training Institute with Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited (HAL), based in Bangalore. IGRUA and Gondia Flying Institutes are likely to be
functional in near future. In addition, regular induction of helicopter pilots from Defence Forces
also takes place. Besides these, some pilots get training abroad and convert foreign Licences to
Indian Commercial Helicopter Pilot Licences (CHPL). In view of providing helicopter Pilots,
PHHL is also in the process of setting up a Pilot Training Institute at Hadapsar, Pune. This Pilot
Training Institute will have all modern facilities required for training of Pilots as per international
Standards.

5
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that merely setting up two
or three flying training institutes is not going to address the issue of shortage of pilots in
helicopter industry totally. The Committee is of the opinion that setting up more flying
training institutes or pilot training institute is the need of the hour.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
23. The Committee recommends that the Government should address the issue of shortage of
helicopter pilots on priority since the industry is gaining momentum rapidly. The Committee feels
that the Government should appoint a Committee of experts to review the present system of
examination and procedures for award of licenses to pilots. It may consider creating of national
pool of independent examiners, standardize the syllabi, increase the frequency of examinations and
rationalize the charges for skill tests.
(Para 34, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
24. As recommended by the Expert Committee Examination System at DGCA’s Central
Examination Office has been revamped. Most the examinations are now conducted online and
frequency of the examination is being increased.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that revamped examination
system at DGCA will yield fruitful results in addressing the issue of shortage of helicopter
pilots.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
26. The Committee further notes that for monitoring proficiency of pilots operating over 250
helicopters, DGCA is having four helicopter Inspectors on secondment basis from the industry. The
Committee feels that efforts should be made to have more Inspectors who are type qualified and
in current flying. In the longer term, the Committee feels that there is a need to have adequate
number of Flight Inspectors with long experience to handle proficiency monitoring of pilots. While
doing so, our future requirements should be kept in mind.
(Para 35, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
27. Number of helicopter Inspectors in DGCA has increased from 4 to 7. All these inspectors
are seconded from the industry and are type rated on more than one type of helicopter.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that the Government will
give serious consideration on the appointment of sufficient number of helicopter inspectors
for safety of pilots and passengers.

6
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
29. The Committee notes that a number of agencies such as PSUs, corporate houses and the
State governments are operating helicopters in India. The Committee, therefore, feels that their
involvement will play a major role in providing requisite infrastructure for helicopter operations in
the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that wider consultations needs to be done with
all the stakeholders while creating a regulatory mechanism for this purpose.
(Para 36, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
30. A system of involvement of all stake holders while framing regulations already exists. Draft
of new regulations is always placed on the website and the same is finalized after incorporating
comments and suggestions received from the stake holders.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
32. The Committee notes with concern the instances of forceful landing/take off of helicopters
in low visibility, bad weather and even during nights, which are serious breaches of aviation
security norms. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that at times technical
clearances are given to the helicopters with minor defects to take off. The technical personnel
including pilots are put under pressure not to oppose these deficiencies due to commercial or other
reasons. It happens mainly in the case of chartered helicopters and those under the State
governments flying VIPs. Such violations of rules have led to fatal accidents losing several precious
lives. Lack of proper maintenance and non-observance of operating manuals, mechanical failures
and lack of required instruments have been found as the causes of these accidents. It points out
towards the ineffectiveness of safety audit and mandatory inspections of the helicopters and other
facilities for testing their airworthiness. The Committee recommends that technical personnel/pilots
be provided adequate legal/administrative protection to decline to fly in the absence of mandatory
technical, weather and other clearances. Some kind of penal provision may be considered against
those putting such pressure on the pilots to fly without proper clearances. Conversely, the strictest
actions be taken against those pilots/technicians who violate these requirements even under some
kind of duress. Their licences may be immediately cancelled if prime facie  they appear to have
done so.
(Para 37, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
33. DGCA regularly carries out surveillance/audits of all the helicopter operators and suitable
action against personnel/pilots/organization for any violation, is taken as per the enforcement system
in place.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.

7
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
35. In order to ensure independent and impartial enquiry into accidents, the Committee would
like to reiterate its earlier recommendation made in its 168 th Report which is reproduced below:
“The Committee is of the view that creation of an independent authority for accident
investigation on an urgent basis will instill confidence in the minds of travelling public.”
(Para 38, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
36. An Independent Accident Investigation Bureau has been set up in the Ministry of Civil
Aviation. The relevant rules are under process.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee may be apprised on
the status of framing and implementing of relevant rules.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
38. The Committee recommends that the entire gamut of helicopter operations in India may be
reviewed and adequate/appropriate steps may be taken to ensure safer helicopter travel. The
Committee recommends that guidelines/regulations for take off/landing of helicopters during low
visibility should not only be strengthened but enforced strictly.
(Para 39, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
39. Enforcement of Guidelines/Regulations for Take-off/Landing during Low Visibility is ensured
through regular surveillance/audits of all the helicopter operators and suitable action against
personnel/pilots/organization for any violation is taken as per the enforcement system in place.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
41. The Committee notes that Helicopter Cell has been set up in the DGCA. It, however, is
surprised to find that the Helicopter Cell within the DGCA does not have representation of AAI that
provides ATC services. Though there is a provision of coordination with AAI, the Committee is of
the view that for better coordination between AAI and DGCA in this matter, it would only be
appropriate, if AAI is permanently represented in the Helicopter Cell of the DGCA. The Committee
would also like to be informed of the details of the major observations/decisions made by the
Helicopter Cell and the Action Taken for implementation thereof.
 (Para 40, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
42. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.

8
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. For expanding the helicopter operations to the newer areas as has been suggested by the
Committee elsewhere, India will have to have a number of heliports, vertiports and heli-routes in
the country. The Committee also emphasizes the need for developing a network of helipads and
heliports in and around metros as well as in the hilly and remote parts of the country. The
Committee is of the opinion that a dedicated heliport wing may be established in the Airports
Authority of India to oversee the development of heliports and vertiports and heli-routes in the
country.
(Para 41, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
45. PHLL has been exploring the possibilities of providing Helicopter services in the various new
areas to promote the tourism in the country and to provide better Air-connectivity to inaccessible
areas. To support this, it is required to have proper Infrastructure in place. PHHL has taken
initiatives in this regard and submitted detailed proposal to ministry of Civil Aviation for
development of Helipads, heliports and other supporting Infrastructure e.g. Passenger Lounge,
Terminal building etc. in the country.
46. In order to provide Air-Connectivity in Inaccessible areas of North East, PHHL has
submitted a detailed 5 year plan (2012-17) to Ministry of Civil Aviation covering projected
requirements of all North Eastern States during next 5 years, which is under consideration in the
Ministry.
47. A general Manager along with supporting staff in ATM directorate of Airports Authority of
India (AAI) is handling helicopter matters pertaining to Standard Operating Procedures and
helicopter routing etc. These procedures and routings are framed after the Heliport operator has
obtained necessary permission for establishment of Heliport from DGCA.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
48. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
49. The Committee feels that a concerted coordination mechanism involving Union and State
governments, meteorological department and other agencies should be evolved to make helicopter
operations safer one. The existing Air Traffic Rules may be reviewed to eliminate delays in
helicopter departures/arrivals from major airports. Flight routing may be made as direct as possible
independent of fixed wing traffic to ease the congestion at the airports.
(Para 42, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
50. In order to avoid delays to helicopters, AAI has promulgated separate helicopter corridors
for Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore Airport without interfering operation of fixed wing aircraft.

9
51. A dedicated Helicopter Routing for Juhu Airport at Mumbai and IGI Airport at New Delhi
has already been published.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
53. Since the LTC travellers now constitute a significant number, the Committee is surprised to
find that under CCS (LTC) Rules, they are not allowed to travel by Helicopters. The Committee
is of the view that LTC travellers should also be allowed to travel by helicopters and the matter
may be taken up with the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions for amendment
of the LTC rules accordingly.
(Para 43, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
54. In view of promoting Helicopter services in the country, PHHL had earlier proposed that
Helicopter services may be considered to avail the LTC from Government employees. The proposal
has been submitted to Ministry of Finance for consideration.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and likes to have the information on the
action taken by the Ministry of Finance on the proposal of PHHL on including helicopter service
in LTC for Government employees.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee is surprised to note that around 120 aircrafts which might include
helicopters were not capable of operating in hilly terrains and the operators of such aircrafts have
been advised not to operate in such areas till the necessary instruments (ELTs conforming to 406
MHz) were fitted. Deadline given for this was 31-3-2010. In such a situation, the Committee feels
that the possibility of such aircrafts operating in hilly areas cannot be ruled out, particularly in view
of the lax and inadequate monitoring in the sector. The Committee only hopes that these
instruments would have been placed by the given date, and if not, all such aircrafts should be
grounded and not allowed to fly until they have compiled with this.
(Para 44, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
57. Presently all operating helicopters are fitted with ELT operating on 406 MHz frequency.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
58. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
59. The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that the main obstacle for the proper
planning of the helicopter operations has been the lack of proper infrastructure with the State

10
governments and they have been advised to build proper infrastructure with meteorological briefing
and to follow the civil aviation requirements issued from the Union Ministry of Civil Aviation from
time to time. The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has failed
to ensure the cooperation and compliance from the State governments for helicopter operations. It,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may take up these issues with the concerned State
governments proactively to get the needful done.
(Para 45, ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
60. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
61. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that in the
absence of proper infrastructure and adequate support from the state governments, the
helicopter industry in the country could not see much growth in coming years.

11
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 13)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee may be apprised on
the action taken by National Disaster Management Authority over the proposal submitted
by Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited on the disaster management. (Para 16)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee would like to have
information on the introduction of helicopter services in the above mentioned new areas and
the impact of such services on promotion of tourism on these areas. (Para 19)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that merely setting up two
or three flying training institutes is not going to address the issue of shortage of pilots in
helicopter industry totally. The Committee is of the opinion that setting up more flying
training institutes or pilot training institute is the need of the hour. (Para 22)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that revamped examination
system at DGCA will yield fruitful results in addressing the issue of shortage of helicopter
pilots. (Para 25)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that the Government will
give serious consideration on the appointment of sufficient number of helicopter inspectors
for safety of pilots and passengers. (Para 28)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 31)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 34)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee may be apprised on
the status of framing and implementing of relevant rules. (Para 37)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 40)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 43)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 48)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 52)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and likes to have the information on
the action taken by the Ministry of Finance on the proposal of PHHL on including helicopter
service in LTC for Government employees. (Para 55)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 58)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee feels that in the
absence of proper infrastructure and adequate support from the state governments, the
helicopter industry in the country could not see much growth in coming years. (Para 61)
11

MINUTES

14

15
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18 th October, 2012 in Room No. 074,
Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
6. Dr. Kruparani Killi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shrimati Ranee Narah
9. Shri Prabodh Panda
10. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered and adopted the draft reports on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its (i) One Hundred Sixty Eighth
Report on the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA)- Issues and Challenges; (ii) One
Hundred Sixty Ninth Report on the Helicopter Operations in India; (iii) One Hundred Seventy
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) – Ministry of Civil Aviation; and (iv) One Hundred
Seventy Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) – Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways, with minor modifications.
15
*** Relate to other matters.

16
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.20 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.