PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 167
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL MUSEUM
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10 MARCH, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 11 MARCH, 2011)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10 MARCH, 2011)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 11 MARCH, 2011)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
THE FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL MUSEUM
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 10 TH MARCH, 2011)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 11 TH MARCH, 2011)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—17
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 18—24
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 25—31

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2010-2011)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Narendra Kashyap
5. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Shri Thomas Sangma
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
10. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Aditya Nath
12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
13. Shri V . Kishore Chandra S. Deo
14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
15. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri P. Karunakaran
17. Shri Jose K. Mani
18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Rajaram Pal
20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
22. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq
23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
24. Shri Dushyant Singh
25. Shri Jitendra Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sugumar
29. Shri Kabir Suman
30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal*
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 19 th January, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf
this One Hundred Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of National Museum’.
2. The Committee had decided to examine the functioning of National Museum in view of
certain feedback received about its facilities and upkeep. The Committee visited National Museum
on 14
th September, 2010.
5. The Committee held discussions with the Ministry of Culture and CPWD on
30th September, 2010. The Committee expresses its gratitude to the officers of the Ministry of
Culture and National Museum for their cooperation in furnishing the required feedback and
information in connection with the examination of the subject.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 25
th January, 2011.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
January 25, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 5, 1932  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
1. The National Museum which was formally inaugurated in August, 1949 in Delhi has in its
possession over 2 lakhs works of exquisite art, both Indian and foreign origin, covering more than
5000 years of cultural heritage. The Museum houses collections of Pre-historic Archaeology,
Archaeology, Anthropology, Jewellery, Paintings, Decorative Arts, Manuscript, Central Asian
Antiquities, Numismatics, Arms and Armour pre-Columbian and Western Art epigraphy, etc. The
National Museum initially housed at the Rashtrapati Bhavan, was shifted to its present building at
Janpath in the year 1960. It is now within the administrative control and fully financed by the
Ministry of Culture, Government of India.
2. National Museum was set up with the following vision:-
(i) To Collect antiquities and art objects of historical, cultural and artistic significance for
their protection, preservation and research;
(ii) To disseminate knowledge about significance of the objects, their history, culture and
artistic excellence;
(iii) To serve as a cultural center for enjoyment and interaction of people in and around
artistic and cultural activity; and
(iv) To serve as the National Art Treasure House
3. The Committee had received some inputs about the prevailing state of affairs in all the
Museums under the Union Ministry of Culture, particularly about the National Museum, New Delhi.
The issue was placed before the Committee and it was decided to go into the affairs of this
Museum. Accordingly, it also decided to make an on-the-spot visit of the Museum, which was done
on the 14
th September, 2010.
4. During the interactions with the Museum authorities and those from the Ministry, the
following major issues came up on which the observations/recommendations of the Committee have
been given in the following paragraphs:
CLOSURE OF GALLERIES
5. During the visit, the Committee was informed that the Octagonal building of the National
Museum had three floors i.e. Ground, First and Second and has in all 26 galleries. Out of these,
20 galleries were open to the public and 6 galleries were closed for renovation. The Ministry
provided the status of these six galleries and stated that two new galleries namely, ‘Early Man and
‘Ethnic Arts’ were to be opened shortly.
6. When the attention of the Ministry of Culture was drawn to the reported closure of galleries
in National Museum, the Ministry informed about the status of these galleries which is as follows:
Galleries open to the public Galleries under renovation
Ground Floor Ground Floor
1. Harappan Civilization 1. Decorative Arts-I.
2. Maurya, Sunga, Satavahana Art 2. Manuscripts.

2
3. Kushan (Gandhara & Mathura) 3. Central Asian Antiquities-II
including Ikshavaku Art
4. Gupta Art 4. Tanjavur Paintings.
5. Early Medieval Art 5. Musical Instruments.
6. Bronzes 6. Wood Carving
7. Late Medieval Art
8. Buddhist Art
9. Indian Miniature Paintings
10. Transparencies of Indian Scripts & Coins
11. Decorative Arts-II
12. Coins
13. Central Asian Antiquities-I
14. Maritime Heritage
15. Ajanta Paintings
16. Decorative Arts and Textiles
17. Pre-Columbian & Western Art
18. Coins and Copper Plates
19. Tribal Life Style in North-East
20. Arms & Armour
7. When asked about the reasons for closure of the six galleries, the Committee was informed
as follows:-
(i) Decorative Arts-I: This gallery was vacated for Nizams’ Jewellery exhibition and
further used for mounting other temporary exhibition like Zenkoji, Iranian Days,
Faberge etc. and the work relating to redisplay of decorative art objects was started
in January, 2009 but the work could not be completed due to shortage of display
materials.
(ii) Manuscripts: For modernization of this gallery, the existing exhibits were shifted to
the store in April, 2003 and 12 specially designed stainless steel showcases with Pull
and Slider System for smooth operator of showcases glasses and proper locking
system were purchased from the local market. Similar 13 wooden showcases were
fabricated in house with a view to have metallic Pull and Slider System as said above.
Quotations for the same have been received and processed but not yet finalised
pending a demo on the same as the technical specifications are under review.
(iii) Central Asian Antiquities-II: Due to second floor roof leakage, the Central Asian
Murals were shifted from second floor to Central Asian Antiquities-II Gallery in April,
2004. However, after the roof treatment made by CPWD, these exhibits were sent
back to second floor. But presently, the space of this gallery is being used for storing
the packet boxes of Garden and Cosmos exhibition and few other Central Asian
objects.

3
Four galleries namely ‘Harappan Civilization’, ‘Indian Miniature Paintings’,
‘Coins’ and ‘Arms & Armour’ have been renovated. Rest of the galleries, except
‘Old Coins and Copper Plates Gallery’ in the Second Floor, have been partially
renovated since they were first installed. The Committee was informed that there
are two Coins Galleries—one Old Coins and Copper Plates Gallery in the second
floor and the other Coins Gallery in the first floor. The former gallery was
mounted in 1960 with 204 coins dated from 2
nd Cent. B.C. along with some copper
plates grants. As the old coins and copper plates gallery in the second floor was
comparatively small in size, therefore, a new Coins Gallery was mounted in 2005
in the first floor with 1669 coins dating from 6 th Cent. B.C. Wherein varieties of
India coins are displayed.
(iv) Tanjavur Paintings: All the old frames of each of the Tanjavur School of Paintings
on display was to be replaced and work has been started in July, 2007 but due to
shortage of synthetic moulding and other wooden materials, the work could not be
completed.
(v) & (vi) Musical Instruments and Wood Carving:  In order to upgrade the musical
instruments gallery, all the musical instruments on display were shifted to the nearest
Wood Carving Gallery as there was roof-leakage in anthropology store and renovation
work was started in November, 2008 but could not be completed due to roof leakage
in the instruments gallery and shortage of display materials as well.
8. In response to a pointed question as to what was the frequency and time frame of
renovation of the galleries, the Ministry informed that there was no laid down frequency of
renovation of the galleries. The renovation of the galleries was done, partly or fully, from time to
time, whenever needed. A gallery or a showcase with multiple displays of exhibits requires
renovation either due to change of its showcase, background clothes or labels required to be
modified/replaced, pedestal to be replaced, walls repainted, objects requiring conservation need to
be replaced. CPWD was entrusted with the works on walls, fixtures on tracks for general lighting
in the gallery, etc.
9. The Committee was further informed that while renovating the galleries, besides display
techniques adopted as per the nature of exhibits, the following factors are kept in mind:–
1. Refurbishing Redesigning the galleries keeping in mind the visitor
Interface and Communication.
2. Contextualize All the Artifacts by Graphic and Textual treatments.
3. Communication Provide layers of information for the curious visitor.
4. Languages Bilingual individual and Group label are provided
with the exhibit(s)
5. Displays Redesign display systems for better aesthetics,
visibility and safety.
6. Lighting Improvised lighting to highlight the artifact by spot/
focussed lighting besides ambient/LED lighting in the
Gallery.
7. Technology Use of modem upgradeable device in the form of
Projection and Interactive.

4
10. Apart from these six galleries mentioned above, it was noted that another important gallery
meant for exhibiting valuable jewellery was also closed. This gallery is located in the strong room
(vault) of the museum. The gallery was last used in January, 2009.  Renovation work was required
to be undertaken in this space for its usage to display the museum’s own collection. However, the
same could not be started due to sudden demise of Curator (N&E) on 27.06.2008 and secondly,
the post of Deputy Curator (Jewellery) was vacant since 07.01.1994.
11. On being asked about the efforts made to fill these posts, it was informed that the
proposal for filling up the post of Curator (N&E), was sent to UPSC on 8.12.2009. In February,
2010, UPSC intimated that number of the candidates was found to be eligible. The post of
Deputy Curator (Jewellery), was deemed abolished as it lay vacant for a long time. The proposal
for revival of the post was under consideration in the Ministry, in consultation with IFD/Ministry
of Finance.
12. Regarding closure/renovation of the galleries, the Secretary while tendering evidence before
the Committee inter-alia submitted:
...You mentioned about so many galleries being closed. It came to my personal attention
only two or three months ago. They write in their notes that Secretary need not be
disturbed. I went and found that some of them were closed because of vigilance cases. I
protested. If somebody has done something wrong in that gallery, the people of India
cannot be deprived of that gallery. I am writing to CBI to take whatever material they want
and please take it wherever they want and let us open the gallery. You cannot have galleries
closed because of some vigilance case and other problems. I assure you we will go into
the closed galleries which came to our notice.....
13. The Committee is at loss to note that out of 26 galleries in National Museum, 7
remained closed for 3 to 4 years, Manuscript Gallery being closed for 8 years from 2003.
The Committee found that the reasons given were not convincing at all. For example,
‘Central Asian Antiquities-II’ gallery after repairing of roof leakages, remained closed as
the space of the gallery was being used for storing the exhibition material. Some of the
galleries were sealed by the investigation agencies pending vigilance inquiries into theft
cases. Decorative arts-I gallery remained closed due to shortage of display materials.
Another gallery - ‘Thanjavur Paintings’ could not be opened because of shortage of
synthetic moulding and other wooden material. Two galleries - Musical Instrument and
Wooden Carving - were remained closed due to roof leakage and shortage of display
material. Another gallery could not be opened after the demise of the Curator in-charge of
the gallery in 2008.
14. The Committee finds such excuses as shortage of display and other material, posts
being vacant, leakage, etc. for keeping the large number of galleries closed for long time,
unacceptable. It, in fact, reflects an utterly casual attitude as well as lack of proper
planning. Problems mentioned above, if taken up promptly and consistently, should have
been undoubtedly sorted out within reasonable time to complete the work. The Committee
is of the view that if this is the state of affairs in the National Museum situated in New
Delhi, condition of museums in other cities cannot be expected to be any better. The
Committee emphasises the need to sensitize the concerned authorities to ensure that the
problems enumerated above which led to the closure of almost 1/4
th of the galleries of
National Museum, are addressed in time.
15. The Committee finds that the National Museum despite having a large building and
a huge collection in its possession, several of its galleries are closed mainly due to lack of

5
adequate manpower, essential logistics and proper maintenance. The Committee is also
surprised to note that there are no laid down guidelines with regard to the taking up of
renovation of galleries of museums and the work is taken up only when the problem has
reached to an alarming stage which finally results in closure of galleries. The Committee
recommends the Ministry of Culture to explore the techniques and practices available world-
over for renovation of galleries and museums. The Committee recommends the Government
should frame guidelines for renovation of museums in the country in a fixed time schedule.
The guidelines may consist of details as to when and how the galleries will be taken for
renovation with a view to ensure that display of the collections continues without
interruption.
16. The Committee feels that every Museum should have some extra space so that in
case any gallery has to be closed due to renovation, etc., the collection from those galleries
could be safely shifted to unutilized space. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
idea of creating additional space/galleries to display more number of collections in its
possession, may be considered and acted upon.
MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL MUSEUM
17. National Museum is a large building whose maintenance is at present being done through
CPWD. The Committee was informed that two types of problems are being faced in the National
Museum –
(1) Leakage/seepage in the roof and walls;
(2) Water logging in the basement due to blockage of sewer lines.
All these problems become acute during the monsoon season every year. There are more
than 10 places in the building where leakage causes severe problems including the 2
nd floor
galleries and stores. The water some times comes down to 1 st and ground floor also.
18. The Committee was informed that the CPWD has been doing roof treatment for the last
more than a decade. Even then, the leakage continues every year. This year also they have made
roof treatment and assured that leakage may not create problem. Inspite of all possible efforts made
by the National Museum and paying lakhs of rupees to CPWD, the seepage/leakage and water
logging persist.
19. However, recently following works involving civil works have been assigned to the National
Council of Science Museum (NCSM).
• Renovation of Temple Chariot at the lawn of the Museum by NCSM (2010).
• Uniform External Signage and Uniform Internal Signage System by NCSM (2010).
• Refurbishing of Special Exhibition Gallery including lighting for Canadian Exhibition by
NCSM (2010).
• Installation of CCTV system in the Special Exhibition Gallery by M/s. Kamex Electronic
and Systems Ltd., New Delhi.
20. It was informed that the renovation, replacement and maintenance of the Gallery show-
cases was being done through departmental carpentry staff and painters who re-touch the Gallery
walls and show-cases without the help of the CPWD.

6
21. The Committee was also informed that the Air Conditioning plant was 20 years old which
required to be overhauled/replaced; condensation problem to be addressed as it leads to water
accumulation/flooding in the basement; and modification in the building to make it more effective
in climatic control by providing Centralised AC system with insulation of the building. The air-
conditioning unit should be able to run round the clock, temperature and humidity are required
to be maintained at optimum level i.e., temperature 20°C plus/minutes 1°C and relative humidity
50 plus/minus 5%.  Arrangements should be made for maintaining above parameters during failure
of electricity and water supply. There is a provision for emergency power backup which is not
adequate for the entire Museum during electricity failure.
22. The Committee notes the problems faced in maintaining the building of National
Museum as CPWD, it appears has not been able to do the job to the satisfaction of museum
authorities. Despite their consistent efforts, the problems of water logging, seepage, etc.
continue to persist. The Committee is of the view that National Museum is not like any
other building; it houses lakhs of invaluable collections and precious items which need to
be preserved and maintained under perfect conditions. The CPWD has been engaged in
building sector since 1854 including handling of maintenance of buildings of hundreds of
cultural institutions in the country. By this time, CPWD must have acquired expertise in
handling the maintenance works of the Museums or similar institutions. The Committee
recommends that a dedicated wing may be created in the CPWD which can handle the work
of maintenance of buildings of cultural institutions like the National Museum. The
Committee also recommends that the performance of the CPWD may be closely monitored
and in case things do not improve the maintenance of the building of National Museum and
its various civil and electrical works may be taken away from CPWD and handed over to
some specialized and competent agencies preferably under the Government for better
maintenance and upkeep of the Museum building.
SECURITY
23. Another disturbing feature that came to the notice of the Committee was the closure
of galleries in the museum due to theft and vigilance cases. The Secretary, Department of
Culture informed the Committee that he was writing to the CBI about this. The Committee
hopes that while the investigative/enforcement agencies must do their work, the Ministry
also needs to be seriously looking into this aspect and ensuring that the acts of pilferage,
theft, etc. do not recur at all. Needless to say that such things do happen mainly because
of lax of security and supervision by the persons on the higher positions in the museum
administration.
24. The Committee has been expressing concerns about the security of museums from
time to time in its earlier Reports. The museums have highly valuable and precious
collections which form part of our rich and diverse heritage. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to make use of the best technology available to safeguard the museum to
prevent theft or unwanted incidents. The Committee hopes that the matter should be taken
up with the investigative agencies to get things expedited and to ensure that the gallery
closed due to pending inquiry into theft be opened at the earliest.
Display of Exhibits
25. The Committee was informed that only selected exhibits were displayed in any  museum for
public. For display of objects in a Museum depends on the availability of display area, logistics etc.
Position in this regard in various Museums/Galleries is as under:–

7
Sl. Name of Museum Total No of No of Artifacts on Percentage
No. collections of Display %
Artifacts
1. National Museum 2,06,000 15,681 7.61
2. Indian Museum 1,10,000 3500 3.18
3. Victoria Memorial Hall 28,393 1500 5.28
4. National Gallery of 17000 1000 5.88
Modem Art, New Delhi
26. The Committee was informed that out of the total collection of the National Museum as
given below, only 7.61% were currently on display:–
Department Objects Department Objects
Anthropology 9,480 Archaeology 9,650
Arms & Armour 6,722 Central Asian 12,382
Decorative Arts 9,444 Jewellry 569
Manuscripts (Persian & 8,718 Manuscripts (Sanskrit) 5,425
Arabic)
Numismatics 1,19,603 Epigraphy 322
Paintings 16,323 Pre-Columbian & 2,909
Western Art
Pre-Proto historic 5437
Total 2,06,984
27. Thus, about 93% of entire collection, the Committee found, was the reserved collection. As
per the international standard, it was informed, only a small percentage of possession is displayed
at any point of time. However, there is a provision for displaying these objects in rotation by
arranging temporary exhibition from the reserved collection.
28. Further, to a query on the number of collections added to the National Museum, the
Ministry informed that a total of 2269 objects were added during the period of 1994-2010. Out
of this 1360 objects were purchased and remaining 906 objects were acquired through gifts,
etc.
29. When asked, if this number was not small, the Ministry informed that it was mainly due
to Art Acquisition Committee of the National Museum being defunct since 1997.
30. The Committee notes that out of 2,06,000/- collections with the National Museum,
only 15,681, constituting 7.61 per cent of total collection, were on display. The Committee
is not satisfied with the number as well as selection of items on display in the National
Museum. The Committee does not agree with the idea of justifying lower display percentage
on the basis of this percentage in other museums. Although the Committee was not
informed about this percentage in other world museums, it however, learnt that display

8
percentage in Louvre in France was about ten. Here also it is less. The Committee was not
informed about the capacity of National Museum to have items on display. The Committee
feels that our efforts should be to have maximum of them on display at a time to ensure
maximum exposure of our rich and diverse heritage to the people. Visitors, in fact, can not
come to the National Museum again and again.
31. The Committee also observes that the displays in the Museum are not rotated
regularly and therefore, the visitors lose the charm of visiting the museum. The Committee
recommends that a year long display-schedule may be drawn up and publicised widely
showing which of the artifacts will be on display when, so that people know this beforehand.
It would enable them to plan the time of visiting the museum. In the summer vacations,
time may be extended in the evening and the museum should be made more attractive/
interesting to the students through creative audio-visual presentations.
32. The Committee expresses its concern about the fact that the Art Acquisition
Committee of the National Museum has been defunct for the last 16 years affecting the
addition of objects adversely. No justification for this can convince the Committee about this
delay. The Committee recommends that reasons for this delay must be looked into and
steps be initiated immediately to constitute the Art Acquisition Committee. The Committee
would like to be informed about this at the earliest.
33. The Committee fails to understand how the 909 objects (2269-1360) could be added
during the period when Art Acquisition Committee was not functioning. The Committee
would like to be informed of the procedure adopted for acquisition of collections during that
period.
VERIFICATION OF COLLECTIONS
34. It was informed that the National Museum usually gets its collection verified by its officers
in a routine matter, but due to shortage of staff, it could not be done during recent past. At
present, it is understaffed and as soon as its Gazetted posts were filled up, in-house verification
of holdings would start. The last physical verification was done in the year 2003.
35. The Committee was further informed that a techno-commercial proposal towards
consultancy for design & development of the e-Museums Project for the National Museum was
submitted by the National Institute for Smart Government (NISG), Hyderabad, which will address
digitization of Art Objects, Preventive Conservation Project and verification of holdings in the
National Museum.
36. The Committee finds it hard to believe that no verification of artifacts kept in the
Museum had been done since 2003. The Committee expresses its concern about such a
casual approach towards protection and upkeep of the valuable treasures of the nation. The
Committee fears that when the verification process is taken up some of the objects may
be reported missing. Lack of manpower given as reason for not undertaking the
verification, is neither convincing nor acceptable. Help of professional agencies may have
been taken for doing this verification. The Committee feels that the Ministry should have
been more watchful and National Museum pro-active in this regard, which they have failed
to do so. The proposal of digitization of art objects is a good effort but physical verification
is required to account for the articles. The Committee recommends that the Government
should make all out efforts to take up the process of verification of articles without further
loss of time and to ensure that the process of verification is started soon and be done
regularly in future.

9
DIGITIZATION
37. The Committee finds that there is a minimal use of IT in the affairs of National
Museum. The Paintings and Manuscripts for major part of the collection in possession of
National Museum are very fragile and some of them are rarest of rare and one of its kinds
and their frequent physical handling can cause irreparable damage to them. The Committee
found that the museum not equipped to use digital and new media. Today in the digital age
of internet, interactive games and computers, most museum are in need of drastic
upgradation for this purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that, as a first step,
digitization of objects, both for their conservation and for giving access to scholars,
researchers and general public, through Internet and other means must be considered for
expeditious implementation.
SPACE CONSTRAINT
38. The National Museum is housed in a octagonal building consisting of three floors  and have
26 galleries. The National Museum, however, is facing the problem of  shortage of space. Only 7%
of the collections could be, displayed in the museum due to shortage of adequate space.
39. The Committee was informed that the building of National Museum was planned in three
phase - phase I completed in 1960, and phase-II completed in 1989. EFC for phase-III carried out
in 2003 and an amount of Rs.33 crore was sanctioned for the project. Thereafter the plans were
submitted for approval of NDMC. However, the work could not be commenced owing to the non-
shifting of Archeological Survey of India (ASI) establishments from the National Museum premises.
40. The Committee expresses its concern at slow progress of phase III of the building
expansion plan that was started in 2003. Seven years is, in fact, too long to justify the delay
for whatever reasons. Large number of our collections is not being displayed mainly due to
the shortage of display areas. The Committee notes with dismay that despite the fact that
the EFC for the phase-III was carried out way back in 2003 and an amount of Rs.33 crore
was also sanctioned, the project is yet to be taken up. The Committee has learnt that the
process of providing alternative accommodation to the ASI is on and that is taking time.
If the non-shifting of ASI was the main reason of delay in the expansion plan of the
museum, the Committee fails to understand why the allocation of alternative
accommodation to the ASI was taking such a long time. The Committee hastens to add that
while earmarking new accommodation to the ASI, its enhanced need for more space due to
its increasing strength should be kept in mind. The Committee recommends that efforts be
made to expedite shifting of the ASI to a suitable space so that its functioning is not
adversely affected and the expansion plan of the museum could be taken up without further
delay.
41. The Committee further recommends that the cost assessment of the project would
need to be revised/reviewed and adequate allocation made so that the work does not suffer
for want of funds.
SIGNAGE
42. The Committee while visiting the Museum noted that the signage and the labels
about the displays were unattractive and too small in size to see. Certain errors of
translation in Hindi and those of typing were also noticed. The Committee recommends that
the immediate steps may be taken to make the signage and tags more visible and attractive
to the visitors.

10
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF NATIONAL MUSEUM
43. The National Museum is headed by a Director General (HAG scale). There are three posts
of Directors, eleven posts of curators, four posts of Deputy Conservator/Deputy Chemist, eleven
posts of Deputy Curators, 22 posts of Assistant Curators and other supporting staff.
44. The vacancies existing in National Museum are as follows:–
Group Sanctioned Posts Filled V acant
Group ‘A’ 33 12 21
Group ‘B’ (Gaz) 11 06 05
Group ‘B’ 49 27 22
(Others)
Group ‘C’ 91 58 33
Group ‘D’ 93 66 27
Total 277 169 108
45. The Committee was informed that the post of Director-General is vacant since September,
2007. The vacancy was circulated in October 2007. But this could not materialize as the
Recruitment Rules (RRs) for the post was to be revised as per the direction of the Prime Minister’s
Office to fill up the post by professionals in the field through search-cum-selection Committee
procedure. The RRs were finalized in October 2009 and the vacancy was advertised for filling up
the post. The search-cum-selection Committee headed by Cabinet Secretary did not find any
suitable candidate for the post. However, it was informed that the process of looking for suitable
candidate, under the search mode, is still on. Additional charge of the post of Director-General,
National Museum has been assigned to the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Culture until the post is
filled up on regular basis.
46. The Committee was informed that new posts at 2
nd and 3 rd levels i.e., Additional Director–
General and Joint Director-General are being created.
47. The Committee was further informed that out of 3 posts of Directors, 2 posts were vacant
and the third would fall vacant in January 2011; out of the 11 posts of curators, five posts were
vacant, all the four posts of Deputy conservator/Deputy chemist were vacant; out of 11 posts of
Deputy curators, 8 posts were vacant and out of the 22 Assistant Curator level posts, 14 posts
were vacant. The Committee was also informed that out of 33 posts of sanctioned at Group ‘A’
level 21 were lying vacant.
48. The Ministry informed that there were altogether 277 sanctioned posts and 116 cadres/RRs
in the National Museum spread over all these groups. Therefore, unified RRs for group ‘A’, ‘B’
‘C’ and ‘D’ category may not be feasible.
49. The Committee was informed that UPSC was the recruiting agency for Group ‘A’ posts.
The steps taken for filling of any vacant post in the National museum is as under:
• Museum sends proposal for filling up of vacant post to the Ministry.
• Ministry examines proposal for correctness vis-a-vis the RR attached to the post.
• The vacancy is circulated to all Ministries/Departments of Government of India and the
State Governments inviting applications from eligible candidates.

11
• An advertisement is issued in the national dailies both in English and Hindi.
• The advertisement is also sent to the Employment News for being published. They
generally take 3 to 4 weeks to publish the advertisement in the Employment News.
• Generally, applications are invited within 60 days from the date of publication of the
advertisement in the Employment News. The countdown for the post begins only on
publication of the advertisement in the Employment News.
• On expiry of the last date, the applications are collated and scrutinized.
• Proposal is made and sent to UPSC for selection of candidates.
• UPSC invariably seeks additional information/clarifications which are complied by the
Ministry and at times after obtaining the requisite information from the museums/
concerned authorities.
• UPSC fixes a date for the meeting of the selection and also calls the candidates for
personal talk.
• UPSC recommends the name of the short-listed candidate. Sometimes UPSC comes
back with a comment “having not found any suitable candidate for the post”. In such
an eventuality the entire process from the point of advertisement is repeated.
• On receipt of recommendation, approval of the Minister is obtained and the selected
candidate is appointed (if it is a promotion post). If it is post on deputation or direct
recruitment, offer of appointment to the candidate is made and on receipt of his or her
acceptance appointment is made.
50. The Ministry informed that the entire process took 1 to 2 years before a post was finally
filled up.
51. In case of Group B posts to be filled up by Direct Recruitment, it was informed that UPSC
is the recruiting agency. National Museum through Ministry of Culture makes a requisition to UPSC
who issues advertisement and makes the selection. In case of posts to be filled by promotion/
deputation, National Museum advertises the posts and makes selection as per prescribed recruitment
rules and Director-General, National Museum is the appointing authority.
52. For Group ‘B’ (Non-Gazetted) posts Staff Selection Commission is the recruitment agency
for which National Museum sends the requisition to SSC to make recruitment against the vacant
posts and DG, NM is the appointing authority.
53. Recruitment agencies for Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts are Staff Selection Commission and
Employment Exchange respectively. NOC are required to be obtained from the Surplus Cell,
Department of Personnel for filling up the post belonging to Group ‘C’ and ‘D’. After obtaining
NOC for Group ‘C’ posts, requisition are sent to Staff Selection Commission for nomination for
appointment. Similarly, after obtaining NOC for Group ‘D’ post, local Employment Exchange is
requested for sending names for taking interview for selection by the National Museum.
54. The Secretary while deliberating before the Committee also opined that not only the posts
of heads but the below level post should also come out of the purview of UPSC since they are
overburdened.
55. The Committee is happy to note that based on its earlier recommendations, the
Government has delinked the selection of heads of cultural bodies including that of
Director-General, National Museum from the purview of UPSC and adopted the procedure
of search-cum-selection process. However, the Committee is surprised to note that the

12
Government could not find suitable candidates for the post of Director-General and the
National Museum, as a result, remained headless during the last many years which had a
telling impact on all the activities of the National Museum. The Committee is afraid that
if such a state of affairs continued for a few more years, the condition of the National
Museum may become from bad to worse.
56. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the appointment of DG of National
Museum should be handled at the highest level and the Government should take urgent
steps to appoint a professional as the Director-General from among the museum experts.
57. The Committee emphasizes the need to make the post of Director-General, National
Museum more attractive by providing adequate autonomy, both administrative and financial,
to avoid unnecessary delays in its urgent works. The Committee is of the view that there
are many experts in this country who could have been persuaded to work for the
betterment of this institution in the manner acceptable to them.
58. The Committee is surprised at the maze of recruitment procedure which is not only
extremely complicated but also difficult to follow. In this connection, the Committee takes
note of the evidence tendered by the Secretary on the 30th September, 2010 which is
reproduced below:-
“...As you rightly pointed out, why do we need so many recruitment rules? It is
almost one recruitment rule for 1.5 posts. If you go through the recruitment rules,
you will be amazed, and, after putting in 35 years in the bureaucracy, even, I cannot
decide much on all this, Why do we need such complications? And, that is the
question which I have been asking, to which I will retire without an
answer……..These were created by our convoluted systems in deference to what we
call inter-Ministerial operating procedures, which go on ensuring, through checks and
balances, that every form of check that is possible is put in place. It has formed like
silt, sedimentation, and over decades has reached such a level that it would require
to be dealt with sternly. My first submission is that the number of vacancies is mind-
boggling…”
59. The Committee feels that this has created all the mess in National Museum as all
the problems is attributed to shortage of staff. The Committee finds that mainly due to
shortage of manpower, the work of verification of artifacts could not be taken up and some
of the galleries had to be closed for unduly larger period. The Committee finds that in many
cases steps to fill up vacancies were taken years after the posts were fallen vacant, as a
result, during the period of 1994 to 2003, many posts which were lying vacant for more than
one year were deemed to be abolished and as such they could not be filled up.
60. The Committee is of the view that the Government’s instruction that a post lying
vacant for more than one year may be deemed abolished, was being followed mechanically
with total disregard to its consequences to the functioning of National Museum. If this
instruction is to be followed in all the Museums, in a few years’ time the Museums will be
without any employee and then the Government would have a strong case to hand them
over to private parties for running them.
61. The Committee, thus, has a strong reason to believe that the Government has failed
to give attention to the National Museum which it deserved. It recommends that efforts be
made to revive all the lapsed posts and they are filled up at the earliest.
62. The Committee welcomes the creation of new posts of Additional Director-General
and Joint Director-General. The Committee has, however, noted that the selection through

13
UPSC is a rigid and time consuming procedure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the posts of Additional Director-General and Joint Director-General may be kept outside the
purview of UPSC selection process and instead the search-cum-selection process may be
adopted. It should be ensured that the posts may be filled up within a period of three
months.
63. The Committee finds that the plethora of recruitment rules and the lack of
autonomy in decision making at the level of National Museum are greatly affecting the
functioning of the institution. The Committee recommends that National Museum may be
made an independent autonomous body with all the inherent powers to administer its affairs
including recruitment and staffing. The recruitment process of National Museum may be
delinked from UPSC and Staff Selection Commission. The Museum may be authorized to
devise its own procedures for selection of officers and staff the same way the central
universities are recruiting their faculties and supporting staff.
64. The Committee notes the lack of commitment in the Ministry not only in filling up
of the posts but also in reassessing the requirement of staff. The Committee observes that
the staff strength in various categories was assessed many years ago. The Committee
recommends that a reassessment of the vacant positions should be taken up expeditiously
and placed before the Government.
65. The Committee came to know that Museology courses were being run in many universities.
However, these courses were not able to fit in the working of the Museums. The Committee was
informed that one of the reasons for vacant posts was that adequately qualified candidates were
not available mainly because our educational system did not offer specialized courses on museology
at the university level.
66. The Committee was also informed that some of the degrees/qualifications can be added in
the curricula of the universities and in the recruitment rules of National Museum for instance:-
➢ Diploma/Degree in Museology
➢ Heritage Management
➢ Masters in Business management
➢ Degree/Ph.D in Conservation
➢ IT courses/Diploma
67. The Committee notes that there are number of museums all over India both under
Government and private control and most of them are in a state of neglect and need
attention by specially trained staff. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the matter
may be taken up with the Ministry of Human Resources Development to look into the
course details and revamp it to make it more useful content-wise. The practical aspect of
training such as internship in a museum may be added so that the people recruited should
be actually handling the objects and that they know how to handle the objects, collection
display etc. The Committee also recommends that possibility of integration of museuology
course in the university curricula may be explored.
68. The Committee also recommends that since the requirement of museums are
specific, the appointing agency may be persuaded to keep a separate cadre for museuology
with transferable options in the other Government museums on deputation basis all over
India. This will give exposure to all to work in other museums also and in their place of
choice.

14
SOUVENIR SHOP
69. The Committee came to know that a shop has been opened which has articles like
handbags, notebooks, diaries, mugs-all embellished with Indian art and craft motifs for sale to the
visitors. It also sells art books and miniatures of Mughal paintings depicted on a wide array of
items like plates, cups and tray. The revamped museum shop has been conceptualised with the
efforts of civil society who mooted the idea. The shop has since been inaugurated. An Addendum
to the Agreement will be signed by the National Museum and The Handicraft and Handlooms
Exports Corporation of India Ltd. shortly after its vetting by the Ministry of Law. However, as and
when the 3rd Phase of the Museum will be constructed, existing temporary structure of HHEC
shop may have to be dismantled and shifted to a suitable location.
70. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry in setting up the Souvenir
Shop. However, the Committee is of the view that publicity through print and electronic
media is required to be given to the shop so that more people come to buy the products.
Further, all the Government agencies/PSU/State Government Emporia/all offices of State and
Central Government where memento/gifts are purchased may be informed of the products
available in the shop and briefed through Bulletin/Brochure every month. Internet shopping
may also be introduced to tap the potential market.
WEBSITE OF NATIONAL MUSEUM
71. A glance at the website of the National Museum shows that the website is neither attractive
nor very descriptive as it should have been. There is a lot of things that can be uploaded to make
it more interactive. It does not provide for virtual tour of the museum which may attract visitors.
Further, there is no feedback column through which queries of the visitors can be resolved on site.
The Museum has only one contact number on the website and the committee is not aware whether
specialised staff is recruited there to answer the queries.
72. In an age where everything is just a click away, the Committee recommends that
National Museum should make efforts to make the site more attractive, descriptive and
interactive.
GENERAL
73. The Committee was informed that National Museum is a cultural centre organising academic
and cultural programmes including special lectures by eminent scholars in India and abroad on
various topics related to Museums. Some of the activities are as follows:
• Film shows on art, historical and heritage Gallery talks  on various themes related to
Galleries by Curators.
• Special Programmes i.e. visit and workshop for disadvantaged sections.
• Gallery of the Month and one object from its reserve collection highlighted as Object
of the Month separately.
• Guides Programme to the galleries.
• Summer Holiday programme entitled Workshop on Art & Crafts for school children.
• Painting competition for school children.
• Workshop on Indian Art for University students.
• Organizing the Memorial lectures.

15
• Assisting schools for setting up Museum corners.
• National seminars and workshop on Indian Art in other Museums under out reach
programme.
• Organizing the Photographic exhibition on Museum objects in other Museums.
• The Museum is bringing MCD, NDMC and Govt. school students by hiring bus.
• The Museum is also conducting in-service Training course in Museology for
Museum personnel.
• National Museum also organises various Workshops, Conferences and Seminars in
various parts of the country to have exchange of opinions amongst Conservators,
Curators and to generate the public awareness towards the need of Care of Cultural
property. Further the Museum brings out various catalogues and brochures on
various artifacts for which are available in the Museum reception for the general
public.
74. The Committee was also informed about the facilities available to the visitors:
• Film shows on art, historical and heritage are organized in the auditorium for the benefit
of the students and public as well.
• Audio Guided Tour is available in five languages viz. English, Hindi, German, French
and Japanese.
• Sale of plaster cast replicas to the public.
• Museum publications such as art books, catalogues, portfolios, picture post cards and
reproduction of paintings are available for sale at reception counter.
• Cloak room facility.
• The Cafeteria on the second floor Museum building provides soft drinks, tea, coffee,
snacks and lunch.
• Wheel chairs are available at main entrance hall for the physically challenged persons.
• Photographs of art objects to the public on payment.
• Training opportunities to the Museum personnel.
• Permission to photograph the objects for reproduction and publication.
• Access to the reserve collection and its reference library for Museum professional and
scholars.
• Advice on identification of art objects owned by individuals and institutions is offered
by the experts with prior appointments.
75. The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry. It, however, emphasizes
the need to have Citizen partnership in the Museum. For this purpose people may be
invited to the functions to be held in Museums. They should also be involved through
publications, post cards and souvenir.
76. The Committee is also of the view that although audio guides are available in the
museum but its content needs improvement. The Committee recommends that views of

16
general public may be taken to enhance the content and it should also include history of
Delhi and information about other monuments. The content may also be according to the
taste of the tourists such as for children so that they are not bored by the long lectures.
GOSWAMI COMMITTEE REPORT
77. The Committee was informed that the Central Advisory Board on Culture constituted a sub-
committee under the chairmanship of Prof. B.N. Goswami to study and recommend measures for
revamping the Museum management. The main recommendations of the Committee as informed by
the Ministry are :–
Immediate steps
(a) Appoint an ‘Administrator’ immediately
(b) Make all out search for a professional Director General
(c) Create posts of Additional DG and Joint DGs
(d) Ensure conservation and security of exhibits on display and in storage
(e) Institute maintenance, through a specialized agency other than CPWD
(f) Establish a Museum Advisory Board, with powers of direction
(g) Establish a Consultative Committee on International Experts
(h) Exempt all technical posts from the purview of UPSC
(i) Adopt Search-cum-Selection procedures where required
Next Step to be taken
(a) Re-open and re-organize spaces and galleries
(b) Complete third phase of the Museum expansion
(c) Delegate fuller financial/administrative powers to DG & Board
(d) Restructure/reorganize/recruit on contract in a flexible manner
(e) Empower suitably to control executing agencies including CPWD.
78. The Committee notes that the Ministry has taken some measures to comply with the
recommendations of the Goswami Committee Report. However a lot needs to be done like
setting up an “Advisory Board or a Committee” with specialists from fields of exhibition,
gallery, collections management, presentation etc. so that they can pool their efforts and
guide the curators and others in setting up the National Museum. The Committee
recommends that the observations of the Goswami Committee should be taken in positive
way and the Ministry should start implementing it without delay.
CONCLUSION
79. The Committee appreciates the frank admission by the Secretary, Ministry of
Culture before the Committee, which has been reproduced in para 12 of this Report. He
clearly shares the concern of the Committee that administration of museum leaves much
to be desired in several aspects that have been described and commented upon by the
Committee in this Report. The Ministry of Culture has been considered so important that

17
it has been put directly under the charge of the Prime Minister himself. But the Committee
is surprised to see that this importance is not reflected by the manner in which the affairs
of the museum are being managed. The Committee hopes that its observations and
recommendations regarding the functioning of the Museum would be brought to the notice
at the highest level in the Government for taking immediate steps to conduct the affairs
of not only of the National Museum, Delhi but, of all the museums under the Ministry, in
the professional manner.

18
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CLOSURE OF GALLERIES
The National Museum consists 26 galleries. The Committee is at loss to note that out
of 26 galleries in National Museum, 7 remained closed for 3 to 4 years, Manuscript Gallery
being closed for 8 years from 2003. The Committee found that the reasons given were not
convincing at all. For example, ‘Central Asian Antiquities-II’ gallery after repairing of roof
leakages, remained closed as the space of the gallery was being used for storing the
exhibition material. Some of the galleries were sealed by the investigation agencies pending
vigilance inquiries into theft cases. Decorative arts-I gallery remained closed due to
shortage of display materials. Another  gallery - ‘Thanjavur Paintings’ could not be opened
because of shortage of synthetic moulding and other wooden material. Two galleries -
Musical Instrument and Wooden Carving - were remained closed due to roof leakage and
shortage of display material. Another gallery could not be opened after the demise of the
Curator in-charge of the gallery in 2008. (Para 13)
The Committee finds excuses such as shortage of display and other material, posts
being vacant, leakage, etc. for keeping the large number of galleries closed for long time,
unacceptable. It, in fact, reflects an utterly casual attitude as well as lack of proper
planning. Problems mentioned above, if taken up promptly and consistently, should have
been undoubtedly sorted out within reasonable time to complete the work. The Committee
is of the view that if this is the state-of-affairs in the National Museum situated in New
Delhi, condition of museums in other cities cannot be expected to be any better. The
Committee emphasises the need to sensitize the concerned authorities to ensure that the
problems enumerated above which led to the closure of almost 1/4th of the galleries of
National Museum, are addressed in time. (Para 14)
The Committee finds that the National Museum despite having a large building and
a huge collection in its possession, several of its galleries are closed mainly due to lack of
adequate manpower, essential logistics and proper maintenance. The Committee is also
surprised to note that there are no laid down guidelines with regard to the taking up of
renovation of galleries of museums and the work is taken up only when the problem has
reached an alarming stage which finally results in closure of galleries. The Committee
recommends the Ministry of Culture to explore the techniques and practices available world-
over for renovation of galleries and museums. The Committee recommends that the
Government should frame guidelines for renovation of museums in the country, in a fixed
time schedule. The guidelines may consist of details as to when and how the galleries will
be taken for renovation with a view to ensure that display of the collections continues
without interruption. (Para 15)
The Committee feels that every Museum should have some extra space so that in
case any gallery has to be closed due to renovation, etc., the collection from those galleries
could be safely shifted to unutilized space. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
idea of creating additional space/galleries to display more number of collections in its
possession, may be considered and acted upon. (Para 16)
MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL MUSEUM
The Committee notes the problems faced in maintaining the building of National
18

19
Museum as CPWD, it appears has not been able to do the job to the satisfaction of museum
authorities. Despite their consistent efforts, the problems of water logging, seepage, etc.
continue to persist. The Committee is of the view that National Museum is not like any
other building; it houses lakhs of invaluable collections and precious items which need to
be preserved and maintained under perfect conditions. The CPWD has been engaged in
building sector since 1854 including handling of maintenance of buildings of hundreds of
cultural institutions in the country. By this time, CPWD must have acquired expertise in
handling the maintenance works of the Museums or similar institutions. The Committee
recommends that a dedicated wing may be created in the CPWD which can handle the work
of maintenance of buildings of cultural institutions like the National Museum. The
Committee also recommends that the performance of the CPWD may be closely monitored
and in case things do not improve the maintenance of the building of National Museum and
its various civil and electrical works may be taken away from CPWD and handed over to
some specialized and competent agencies preferably under the government for better
maintenance and upkeep of the Museum building. (Para 22)
SECURITY
Another disturbing feature that came to the notice of the Committee was the closure
of galleries in the museum due to theft and vigilance cases. The Secretary, Department of
Culture informed the Committee that he was writing to the CBI about this. The Committee
hopes that while the investigative/enforcement agencies must do their work, the Ministry
also needs to be seriously looking into this aspect and ensuring that the acts of pilferage,
theft, etc. do not recur at all. Needless to say that such things do happen mainly because
of lax of security and supervision by the persons on the higher positions in the museum
administration. (Para 23)
The Committee has been expressing concerns about the security of museums from
time-to-time in its earlier Reports. The museums have highly valuable and precious
collections which form part of our rich and diverse heritage. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to make use of the best technology available to safeguard the museum to
prevent theft or unwanted incidents. The Committee hopes that the matter should be taken
up with the investigative agencies to get things expedited and to ensure that the gallery
closed due to pending inquiry into theft be opened at the earliest. (Para 24)
DISPLAY OF EXHIBITS
The Committee notes that out of 2,06,000/- collections with the National Museum,
only 15,681, constituting 7.61 per cent of total collection, were on display. The Committee
is not satisfied with the number as well as selection of items on display in the National
Museum. The Committee does not agree with the idea of justifying lower display percentage
on the basis of this percentage in other museums. Although the Committee was not
informed about this percentage in other world museums, it however, learnt that display
percentage in Louvre in France was about ten. Here also it is less. The Committee was not
informed about the capacity of National Museum to have items on display. The Committee
feels that our efforts should be to have maximum of them on display at a time to ensure
maximum exposure of our rich and diverse heritage to the people. Visitors, in fact, can not
come to the National Museum again and again. (Para 30)
The Committee also observes that the displays in the Museum are not rotated
regularly and therefore, the visitors lose the charm of visiting the museum. The Committee
recommends that a year long display-schedule may be drawn up and publicised widely

20
showing, which of the artifacts will be on display when, so that people know this beforehand.
It would enable them to plan the time of visiting the museum. In the summer vacations,
time may be extended in the evening and the museum should be made more attractive/
interesting to the students through creative audio-visual presentations. (Para 31)
The Committee expresses its concern about the fact that the Art Acquisition
Committee of the National Museum has been defunct for the last 16 years affecting the
addition of objects adversely. No justification for this can convince the Committee about this
delay. The Committee recommends that reasons for this delay must be looked into and
steps be initiated immediately to constitute the Art Acquisition Committee. The Committee
would like to be informed about this at the earliest. (Para 32)
The Committee fails to understand how the 909 objects (2269-1360) could be added
during the period when Art Acquisition Committee was not functioning. The Committee
would like to be informed of the procedure adopted for acquisition of collections during that
period. (Para 33)
VERIFICATION OF COLLECTIONS
The Committee finds it hard to believe that no verification of artifacts kept in the
Museum, had been done since 2003. The Committee expresses its concern about such a
casual approach towards protection and upkeep of the valuable treasures of the nation. The
Committee fears that when the verification process is taken up some of the objects may
be reported missing. Lack of manpower given as reason for not undertaking the
verification, is neither convincing nor acceptable. Help of professional agencies may have
been taken for doing this verification. The Committee feels that the Ministry should have
been more watchful and National Museum pro-active in this regard, which they have failed
to do so. The proposal of digitization of art objects is a good effort but physical verification
is required to account for the articles. The Committee recommends that the Government
should make all out efforts to take up the process of verification of articles without further
loss of time and to ensure that the process of verification is started soon and be done
regularly in future. (Para 36)
DIGITIZATION
The Committee finds that there is a minimal use of IT in the affairs of National
Museum. The Paintings and Manuscripts for major part of the collection in possession of
National Museum are very fragile and some of them are rarest of rare and one of its kinds
and their frequent physical handling can cause irreparable damage to them. The Committee
found that the museum not equipped to use digital and new media. Today in the digital age
of internet, interactive games and computers, most museum are in need of drastic
upgradation for this purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that, as a first step,
digitization of objects, both for their conservation and for giving access to scholars,
researchers and general public, through Internet and other means must be considered for
expeditious implementation. (Para 37)
SPACE CONSTRAINT
The Committee expresses its concern at slow progress of phase III of the building expansion
plan that was started in 2003. Seven years is, in fact, too long to justify the delay for
whatever reasons. Large number of our collections is not being displayed mainly due to the
shortage of display areas. The Committee notes with dismay that despite the fact that the

21
EFC for the phase-III was carried out way back in 2003 and an amount of Rs.33 crore was
also sanctioned, the project is yet to be taken up. The Committee has learnt that the
process of providing alternative accommodation to the ASI is on and that is taking time.
If the non-shifting of ASI was the main reason of delay in the expansion plan of the
museum, the Committee fails to understand why the allocation of alternative
accommodation to the ASI was taking such a long time. The Committee hastens to add that
while earmarking new accommodation to the ASI, its enhanced need for more space due to
its increasing strength should be kept in mind. The Committee recommends that efforts be
made to expedite shifting of the ASI to a suitable space so that its functioning is not
adversely affected and the expansion plan of the museum could be taken up without further
delay. (Para 40)
The Committee further recommends that the cost assessment of the project would
need to be revised/reviewed and adequate allocation made so that the work does not suffer
for want of funds. (Para 41)
SIGNAGE
The Committee while visiting the Museum noted that the signage and the labels
about the displays were unattractive and too small in size to see. Certain errors of
translation in Hindi and those of typing were also noticed. The Committee recommends that
immediate steps may be taken to make the signage and tags more visible and attractive to
the visitors. (Para 42)
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF NATIONAL MUSEUM
The Committee is happy to note that based on its earlier recommendations, the
Government has delinked the selection of heads of cultural bodies including that of
Director-General, National Museum from the purview of UPSC and adopted the procedure
of search-cum-selection process. However, the Committee is surprised to note that the
Government could not find suitable candidates for the post of Director-General and the
National Museum, as a result, remained headless during the last many years which had a
telling impact on all the activities of the National Museum. The Committee is afraid that
if such a state of affairs continued for a few more years, the condition of the National
Museum may become from bad to worse. (Para 55)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the appointment of DG of National
Museum should be handled at the highest level and the Government should take urgent
steps to appoint a professional as the Director-General from among the museum experts.
(Para 56)
The Committee emphasizes the need to make the post of Director-General, National
Museum more attractive by providing adequate autonomy, both administrative and financial,
to avoid unnecessary delays in its urgent works. The Committee is of the view that there
are many experts in this country who could have been persuaded to work for the
betterment of this institution in the manner acceptable to them. (Para 57)
The Committee is surprised at the maze of recruitment procedure which is not only
extremely complicated but also difficult to follow. In this connection, the Committee takes
note of the evidence tendered by the Secretary on the 30
th September, 2010 which is
reproduced below:-
“...As you rightly pointed out, why do we need so many recruitment rules? It is
almost one recruitment rule for 1.5 posts. If you go through the recruitment rules,

22
you will amazed, and, after putting in 35 years in the bureaucracy, even, I cannot
decide much on all this, Why do we need such complications? And, that is the
question which I have been asking, to which I will retire without an answer…...These
were created by our convoluted systems in deference to what we call inter-Ministerial
operating procedures, which go on ensuring, through checks and balances, that every
form of check that is possible is put in place. It has formed like silt, sedimentation,
and over decades has reached such a level that it would require to be dealt with
sternly. My first submission is that the number of vacancies is mind-boggling…”
(Para 58)
The Committee feels that this has created all the mess in National Museum as all
the problems is attributed to shortage of staff. The Committee finds that mainly due to
shortage of manpower, the work of verification of artifacts could not be taken up and some
of the galleries had to be closed for unduly larger period. The Committee finds that in many
cases steps to fill up vacancies were taken years after the posts were fallen vacant, as
a result, during the period of 1994 to 2003, many posts which were lying vacant for more
than one year, were deemed to be abolished and as such they could not be filled up.
(Para 59)
The Committee is of the view that the Government’s instruction that a post lying
vacant for more than one year, may be deemed abolished, was being followed mechanically
with total disregard to its consequences to the functioning of National Museum. If this
instruction is to be followed in all the Museums, in a few years’ time the Museums will be
without any employee and then the Government would have a strong case to hand them
over to private parties for running them. (Para 60)
The Committee, thus, has a strong reason to believe that the Government has failed
to give attention to the National Museum which it deserved. It recommends that efforts be
made to revive all the lapsed posts and they are filled up at the earliest. (Para 61)
The Committee welcomes the creation of new posts of Additional Director-General
and Joint Director-General. The Committee has, however, noted that the selection through
UPSC is a rigid and time consuming procedure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the posts of Additional Director-General and Joint Director-General may be kept outside the
purview of UPSC selection process and instead the search-cum-selection process may be
adopted. It should be ensured that the posts may be filled up within a period of three
months. (Para 62)
The Committee finds that the plethora of recruitment rules and the lack of
autonomy in decision making at the level of National Museum, are greatly affecting the
functioning of the institution. The Committee recommends that National Museum may be
made an independent autonomous body with all the inherent powers to administer its affairs
including recruitment and staffing. The recruitment process of National Museum may be
delinked from UPSC and Staff Selection Commission. The Museum may be authorized to
devise its own procedures for selection of officers and staff the same way the central
universities are recruiting their faculties and supporting staff. (Para 63)
The Committee notes the lack of commitment in the Ministry not only in filling up
of the posts but also in reassessing the requirement of staff. The Committee observes that
the staff strength in various categories was assessed many years ago. The Committee
recommends that a reassessment of the vacant positions should be taken up expeditiously
and placed before the Government. (Para 64)

23
The Committee notes that there are number of museums all over India both under
Government and private control and most of them are in a state of neglect and need
attention by specially trained staff. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the matter
may be taken up with the Ministry of Human Resources Development to look into the
course details and revamp it to make it more useful content- wise. The practical aspect of
training such as internship in a museum may be added so that the people recruited should
be actually handling the objects and that they know how to handle the objects, collection
display etc. The Committee also recommends that possibility of integration of museology
course in the university curricula, may be explored. (Para 67)
The Committee also recommends that since the requirement of museums are
specific, the appointing agency may be persuaded to keep a separate cadre for museology
with transferable options in the other Government museums on deputation basis all over
India. This will give exposure to all to work in other museums also and in their place of
choice. (Para 68)
SOUVENIR SHOP
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry in setting up the Souvenir
Shop. However, the Committee is of the view that publicity through print and electronic
media is required to be given to the shop so that more people come to buy the products.
Further, all the Government agencies/PSU/State Government Emporia/all offices of State and
Central Government where memento/gifts are purchased may be informed of the products
available in the shop and briefed through Bulletin/Brochure every month. Internet shopping
may also be introduced to tap the potential market. (Para 70)
WEBSITE OF NATIONAL MUSEUM
In an age where everything is just a click away, the Committee recommends that
National Museum should make efforts to make the site more attractive, descriptive and
interactive. (Para 72)
GENERAL
The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Ministry. It, however, emphasizes
the need to have Citizen partnership in the Museum. For this purpose people may be
invited to the functions to be held in Museums. They should also be involved through
publications, post cards and souvenir. (Para 75)
The Committee is also of the view that although audio guides are available in the
museum but its content needs improvement. The Committee recommends that views of
general public, may be taken to enhance the content and it should also include history of
Delhi and information about other monuments. The content may also be according to the
taste of the tourists such as for children so that they are not bored by the long lectures.
(Para 76)
GOSWAMI COMMITTEE REPORT
The Committee notes that the Ministry has taken some measures to comply with the
recommendations of the Goswami Committee Report. However a lot needs to be done like
setting up an “Advisory Board or a Committee” with specialists from fields of exhibition,
gallery, collections management, presentation etc. so that they can pool their efforts and
guide the curators and others in setting up the National Museum. The Committee

24
recommends that the observations of the Goswami Committee should be taken in positive
way and the Ministry should start implementing it without delay. (Para 78)
CONCLUSION
The Committee appreciates the frank admission by the Secretary, Ministry of
Culture before the Committee, which has been reproduced in para 12 of this Report. He
clearly shares the concern of the Committee that administration of museum leaves much
to be desired in several aspects that have been described and commented upon by the
Committee in this Report. The Ministry of Culture has been considered so important that
it has been put directly under the charge of the Prime Minister himself. But the Committee
is surprised to see that this importance is not reflected by the manner in which the affairs
of the museum are being managed. The Committee hopes that its observations and
recommendations regarding the functioning of the Museum would be brought to the notice
at the highest level in the Government for taking immediate steps to conduct the affairs
of not only of the National Museum, Delhi but, of all the museums under the Ministry, in
the professional manner. (Para 79)

25
MINUTES

26

27
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Thursday the 30 th September, 2010 in Committee
Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
3. Shri Narendra Kashyap
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil
8. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
9. Shrimati Ranee Narah
10. Shri Rajaram Pal
11. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq
12. Shri Dushyant Singh
13. Shri Rakesh Singh
14. Shri K. Sugumar
15. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
27

28
** *
** *
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE
1. Shri Jawhar Sircar, Secretary
2. Dr. C.V . Ananda Bose, Administrator (NM)
3. Dr. Vijay S. Madan, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Amaresh Singh, Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
1. Shri O.P. Tripathi, SE(VBC), CPWD
2. Shri S.K. Chawla, SE(E) DCEC- VI
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee***
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
7. Thereafter, the Committee took the functioning of National Museum for examination and
the representatives of Ministry of Culture and CPWD were called to present their views on
the subject. The Chairman recalled that the Committee had visited the National Museum on the
14
th September, 2010 to take stock of the facilities available to tourists particularly in the context
of Commonwealth Games. The Chairman also pointed out that there was shortage of manpower
and that the National Museum is functioning without Director-General for a long time. He
mentioned about the Souvenir shop which was opened recently that left lot to be desired. Further
multiplicity of recruitment rules and its impact on recruitment was also pointed out by the
Chairman.
8. The Secretary gave an overview of the major problems faced by the National Museum
such as recruitment procedure which took unduly long time shortage of museum specialists with
managerial capabilities, vacancies at senior level for long time. He also emphasised the need to
create Digital corners so that the items could be viewed even when they are not displayed.
Audio-guides placed in the Museum needs improvement in the content. On the maintenance and
leakage in the Building, he informed that the Ministry had taken up the matter a number of times
with the Urban Development Ministry to solve this problem. The officials of the CPWD also
gave their version on the maintenance of building.
* Relate to other matters.
*** Relate to other matters not included in this Report.

29
9. Members raised several queries to which the representatives replied. To some of the
queries raised by the Members, the Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish written replies at
the earliest.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 1.40 P.M. to meet again on 8 th October, 2010.

30
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday the 25 th January, 2011 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
3. Shri Narendra Kashyap
4. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
6. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
7. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
9. Shri P. Karunakaran
10. Shrimati Ranee Narah
11. Shri Rajaram Pal
12. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
13. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq
14. Shri Jitendra Singh
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered the draft 162
nd Report on the ‘Functioning of National Museum”. After some
discussion, the Committee adopted the Report.
2. * * *
3. * * *
30
*** Relate to other matters not included in the Report.

31
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 1.52 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters not included in the Report.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.