92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
NINETY-SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED
 IN ITS EIGHTY-FOURTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-06) OF
 DEPARTMENT OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 27.2.2006)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 27.2.2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2006/PHALGUNA, 1927(SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                       
INTRODUCTION                                                                                               
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE            
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                       
ANNEXURE                                                                                            
MINUTES                                                                                                                                               
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2005-2006)
1.         Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
Smt. Hema Malini
Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
Shri Shatrughan Sinha
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Vacant*
 
LOK SABHA
Shri Ramdas  Athawale
Shri Raj Babbar
Shri Anil Basu
Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
Shri N.S.V. Chitthan

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
Shri Adhir Chowdhury
Dr. K. Dhanaraju
Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
Shri Dip Gogoi
Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
Shri Samik Lahiri 
Shri Sudam Marandi
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
Shri Manabendra Shah
Shri Dushyant Singh
Shri Madan Lal Sharma
Shri Chengara Surendran
Shri Umakant Yadav 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
* Vacancy caused by induction of Smt. Ambika Soni in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 29.1.2006
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
 having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-Second Report of the
 Committee on the                                       Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of
 the Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Road
 Transport and Highways.
 
2.       The Eighty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
 and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the  29
th  April 2005. 
 
3.       The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth Report were
 received from the Department of Road Transport and Highways on 2nd September 2005.
 
4.       The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the      22
nd February 2006.
 
NEW DELHI ;
February 22, 2006
 Phalguna 3, 1927 (Saka)                                              
NILOTPAL BASU
 Chairman Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations as
 contained in its Eighty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) (Demand No. 86) of Department of Road
 Transport and Highways, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 29
th April, 2005.
 
 2.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 2
nd September, 2005 in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorised as follows: -
 
(i)         Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Government:
            Para Nos. 20, 29, 80, 83 & 86 and 97                                               Total- 5

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
(ii)        Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government
 replies:
Para No.  Nil.                                                                                      Total- Nil.
(iii)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
 Committee:
 Para Nos.  95 and 96                                                                              Total- 2
(iv)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the    Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 35, 43, 56, 62 & 63, 65, 69, 73 and 89                                   Total- 8
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of Action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Department.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Eighty-fourth
 Report, action taken thereon by the Government, and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of
 action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
ANALYSIS OF THE TENTH PLAN PROVISIONS AND ANNUAL                                    PLAN 2005-06
(Recommendation at Para 20) 
 
5.         The Committee regrets to note that BE Plan Provision of Rs.7912 crore of Department of Road Transport and
 Highways was brought down to Rs.6766 crore on account of slow implementation of Externally Aided Projects by
 NHAI and the Department.  Further, there was delay in finalization of the loans and obtaining approvals for the
 procurement for the externally aided component of the Corridor Project of NHDP (Phase-II) being financed by the
 Asian Development Bank (ADB).  Also, there was delay in award of works to the contractors and consultants for
 development of NH-34 in West Bengal.  These instances clearly bring out that on the one hand, the Department of
 Road Transport and Highways emphasizes that funds for development and maintenance of National Highways are
 inadequate while, on the other hand, the Department is not able to utilise the higher allocation made to it at BE stage.  
 The Department has failed to make optimal utilization of the funds at its disposal. The reasons for shortfall mentioned
 are delay in land acquisition, poor performance of the contractors, law and order problem etc. are very general in nature
 and are repeated every year. As a result of these, the budgetary allocations of the Department were reduced at RE
 stage.  The Committee is of the view that there is a lack of monitoring system in the Department of Road Transport and
 Highways.  The lack of a proper monitoring system in the Department is exemplified by the delay and non-completion
 of the construction of flyover at Murthal in Haryana and the failure of the Department of Road Transport and Highways
 in verifying the credentials of the contractors who had submitted forged bank guarantees.  The Committee observes that
 the budget allocations of the Department of Road Transport and Highways have been substantially increased during
 2005-06. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Road Transport and Highways should devise
 strategies, whereby they are able to fully utilize the funds at their disposal.  They should also evolve some mechanism
 to identify bottlenecks causing delays and work towards resolving all such hindrances in coordination with all the
 concerned agencies.  This would also help them to avoid time overrun and consequential cost overrun of the projects to
 be executed by them.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
 
6.         The main reason for non-utilization of the approved funds of 2004-05 was non-execution of loan agreements
 with Asian Development Bank (ADB) and World Bank for Projects under NHDP-Phase-II due to procedural delay like
 clearance from ADB / World Bank, high tender rates, delay in signing loan agreement, etc.  However, most of the
 problems have now been resolved. 
 
7.         Out of total length of 6736 kms under NHDP Phase-II, projects consisting of 814 km. are already under
 implementation and the projects for the length of 5722 kms are scheduled for award by Dec., 2005 in phased manner. 
 The projects for the balance 200 kms. shall be awarded in the next financial year 2006-07.  With the award of these
 projects, substantial expenditure is expected to be incurred on their implementation. 
 
8.         Major initiatives and steps to remove constraints and bottlenecks in the implementation of North-South and East-
West Corridor have been undertaken to expedite the implementation of projects and making improvement in the internal

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
 process on the basis of lessons learnt during the implementation of NHDP Phase-I.  Some of the important initiatives
 and improvements carried out are as under:
(i)                     Process for acquisition of land is being simplified.  The Allocation of Business Rules is proposed to be
 amended in this regard.
(ii)        State Governments have appointed senior officers as Nodal Officers for resolving the problems of pre-
construction activities. Regular follow-up meetings are being held with the officers of State Governments and with
 Nodal Officers.
(iii)       For speedy construction of ROBs, an MOU has been signed with M/s IRCON.  M/s IRCON now shall be
 responsible for obtaining necessary approvals and clearances at different stages from Railways and constructing the
 ROBs entrusted to them in a time bound manner.
(iv)       One officer of the Railways has been posted at NHAI to co-ordinate all activities relating to approvals on ROBs
 from the Railways.
(v)                    Action has been taken against the defaulting civil contractors.  Seven contracts have been terminated. 
 Seventeen contractors have been declared as non-performing and banned from further NHAI works, till their
 performance improves.
(vi)       The existing monitoring system is being improved by setting up Wide Area Network (WAN) which will enable
 rapid communication between field officers and higher officers and vice-versa. A PERT/CPM and resource based
 monitoring is being evolved for.
(vii)      A Committee of Secretaries has been constituted to address inter-ministerial and Centre - State issues regarding
 land acquisition, utility shifting, environmental clearance, clearance of rail / road over bridge (ROBs) etc.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
9.         The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (NHDP)
(Recommendation at Para 29) 
 
10.       The Committee notes that the target date of completion of the Golden Quadrilateral has been revised twice i.e.
 from December 2003 to December 2004 and now up to December 2005.  The Committee had discussed this issue in its
 82
nd Report on Demands for Grants 2004-05 of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and recommended that
 the Government should take all necessary steps to make sure that the works proposed to be completed by December
 2004 are completed within that period.  However, the Committee notes that the progress of four-laning on the Golden
 Quadrilateral project as on December 2004 was only 74%.  Thus, the steps taken by Department of Road Transport and
 Highways for timely completion of the project had not been adequate.  The Committee, therefore, would like to
 reiterate its earlier recommendation made in its 82
nd Report that the Government should take all necessary steps and
 evolve a monitoring mechanism to ensure quality of construction, making officials accountable for failure, transparency
 in implementation process, penalizing defaulting contractors etc. so that the remaining part of the project is completed
 by December 2005 and the need to further revise the target date of completion does not arise.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
 
11.       As on 31.7.2005, 84% of the length of Golden Quadrilateral has been completed.  It is expected that due to
 monitoring and clearance of bottlenecks at the level of Committee of Secretaries (CoS), the Golden Quadrilateral
 Project will be completed substantially (92%) by December 2005 except for re-awarded contracts and contracts which
 are having the completion date after December 2005. 
 
12.       Standardized documents and third-party audits are some measures taken to ensure quality of work.  Apart from
 Engineers India Ltd and Central Road Research Institute, the Highway Research Station, Chennai, and Gujarat
 Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara are being proposed to be engaged in to conduct quality audits. 
 
13.       Major initiatives and steps taken to remove constraints/bottlenecks in the implementation of National Highway
 Projects to expedite implementation of projects have been enumerated in reply to Para 20.

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
14.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires that there would be continuous efforts in the
 forthcoming phases of NHDP so that there is no time and cost over-run.
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS NOT COVERED UNDER NHDP:
(Recommendation at Para 35) 
 
15.       The Committee notes that in response to its recommendation for an equitable development of non-NHDP
 National Highways, the Department of Road Transport and Highways has formulated projects for development of such
 highways.  The Committee recommends that the Government should give its approval for the Accelerated North-East
 Road Development Project and NHDP Phase IV at the earliest.  Also the projects under NHDP Phase III should be
 taken up at the earliest so that the deadlines set for these projects are met.  The Committee is of the view that
 Department of Road Transport and Highways has now gained sufficient experience during the implementation of
 Golden Quadrilateral.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department of Road Transport and Highways
 should adopt a proactive approach and take care that the hindrances resulting in delay in timely completion of such
 projects do not recur.  Action should be taken in advance to ensure that such bottlenecks do not impede the timely
 implementation of the projects and the deadlines set for the project are met unlike the Golden Quadrilateral where the
 target date of completion has gone up by two years so far.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
 
16.       Stretches of National Highways, state roads and roads of strategic importance being included under the Special
 Accelerated Road Development Programme (SARDP) have been identified.  Approval of the scheme is in advance
 stage.  Proposal for improvement to two lane National Highways, standard with paved shoulders under NHDP Phase IV
 has been finalized and action has been initiated for taking approval of the Government.
 
17.       Under NHDP Phase-III, 10,000 km of National Highways is being developed to 4/6 lane on BOT basis.  In the
 first phase, (NHDP Phase-IIIA), 4,000 km is being taken up.  As on 24.8.2005, 13 packages covering 811 km have
 been awarded.  One project is nearing completion.  The targeted date for completion of NHDP Phase-IIIA is December
 2009. For the remaining 6,000 km NHDP-III B, as an advance action, only preparation of Detailed Project Report
 (DPR) has been approved.  There is no approval yet to take up 4/6 laning work in these 6,000 kms.
 
18.       On the basis of the experience of implementation of NHDP Phase I, major initiative and steps have been taken
 on the identified bottlenecks such as land acquisition, shifting of utilities, construction of Road over bridges, close
 monitoring of projects.    The NHDP Phase III will be implemented mainly on ‘Build Operate & Transfer (BOT)’
 basis.  The Model Concession Agreements are being streamlined for active participation of the private entrepreneurs.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
19.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department and expects that Special Accelerated Road Development
 Programme (SARDP) would be implemented at the earliest.  The Committee is also of the view that the Department
 should expedite all the background work for the ensuing projects based on the experience gained by it while
 implementing the Golden Quadrilateral Project.
 
CENTRAL ROAD FUND
(Recommendation at Para 43) 
 
20.       The Committee takes exception to the fact that funds accruing to the Central Road Fund due to levy of additional
 cess since 1.4.2003 have not been provided to the Department of Road Transport and Highways, inspite of the fact that
 this additional cess of 50 paise per litre on petrol and diesel was levied primarily to support the implementation of
 National Highway Development Project (NHDP).  There has been no positive outcome to this impasse inspite of a
 direction by the Cabinet for implementation of the recommendations of the Group of Ministers.  The Committee
 recommends that the Department of Road Transport and Highways should take up the matter with the Ministry of

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
 Finance so that the funds due to the Department are provided to it at the earliest and the projects under National
 Highway Development Project do not suffer for want of funds.         
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
21.       During the year 2005-06 an amount of Rs.3269.74 crores has been allocated to NHAI from the Central Road
 Fund. This amount includes the additional cess for the current year.   No fund towards the previous accruals since
 1.4.2003 due to additional cess has been provided. This is being taken up with the Ministry of Finance.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
22.       The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance may be impressed upon to release the previous
 fund accruals since 1.4.2003 in view of the high cost of implementation of NHDP.
 
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH- EASTERN REGION
(Recommendation at Para 56) 
 
23.       One of the objectives of the Tenth Plan for Road Sector is special attention to the development of roads in
 North-Eastern region.  Although three years of the Five Year Plan have gone by, the Government has not taken any
 concrete steps for improving the National Highways network in this region.  Also, the Special Accelerated Road
 Development Programme in the North-Eastern region is still under consideration of the Government. The Committee
 feels that development of road network is very crucial in the context of the development of North-Eastern region of the
 country.  In view of the geographical location and strategic importance of the region, there is a need to provide an all
 weather National Highway network in this region.  The Committee recommends that the Department of Road Transport
 and Highways should pay immediate attention to the development of National Highways in the North-Eastern region. 
 Further, the Special Accelerated Road Development Programme should be expeditiously approved by the Government
 so that work on the project could actually begin and the funds allocated for the project during the year could be
 optimally utilized. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
 
24.       This Department is fully aware of the need for expediting developmental works of National Highways in the
 North-Eastern region. Further, the Special Accelerated Road Development Programme for the North-Eastern region is
 under advanced stage of approval.    Adequate funds are being provided for development and maintenance of National
 Highways in North Eastern areas.  During the current year, an amount of  Rs.956.50 crore has been earmarked for
 development of Central Sector Roads which is against the previous year’s (2004-05) provision of Rs.262.21 crores.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25.       The Committee desires that the substantially higher allocation for the development of Central Sector Roads in
 2005-06 as compared to 2004-05 would actually translate to better condition of roads in the North-Eastern Region. 
 Further, the Committee recommends that the Special Accelerated Road Development Programme (SARDP) should be
 implemented at the earliest in the North-Eastern Region.
 
PARTICIPATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR IN DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL
 HIGHWAYS
(Recommendation at Paras 62 & 63) 
 
26.       The Committee feels that in view of the huge resource gap of around Rs. 1,06,000 crore in the road sector during
 the Tenth Plan, there is a genuine need to attract private sector investment in this sector to a large extent.  However, the
 Government has not been able to attract private sector investment to the desired extent.  The Committee recommends
 that the Government project the success of the Golden Quadrilateral to the private sector to encourage them to
 contribute more and more to the development of this sector.  This would definitely help the Government to reduce the
 resource gap position to a large extent.
 
27.       The Committee is apprehensive whether the Government will be able to ensure private sector participation in the

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
 North-Eastern region of the country to the extent required by them.  The Committee recommends that, in such a
 scenario, keeping in view the socio-economic conditions of the North-Eastern region, the Government must provide
 resources for the projects on its own and the developmental activities in road sector for North-Eastern region should not
 be allowed to be a casualty.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
 
28.       The Government has already encouraged private sector participation in road construction industry in various
 forms.  These include projects under Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) toll and BOT Annuity schemes for
 construction.
 
29.       The general policy of the Government is to take all the future projects on National Highway Development
 Project (NHDP) on public private partnership basis.  Where the public private partnership is not possible, contracts
 would be awarded on normal construction contract, i.e., Engineering Procurement Contract (EPC) basis.   In line with
 this policy, NHDP Phase-IIIA projects are being taken on Built, Operate and Transfer basis. 
 
30.       The scope of private sector investment is limited at present in the NE region for various reasons.   However,
 efforts will be made to maximize private investment within the existing ambit of feasibility. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
31.       The Department has not specified the efforts contemplated by it to maximize private investment in the North-
Eastern Region.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its apprehension on the success of private sector participation in
 the Road Sector in the North-Eastern Region. 
 
NEED FOR AN INTEGRATED TRANSPORT POLICY
(Recommendation at Para 65) 
 
32.       The Committee observes that one of the objectives for the Tenth Plan for the road sector is ‘Development of
 roads to be considered an integral part of the total transport system supplementing other modes, integrating the
 development plans with railways and other modes of transport’.   This objective of the Tenth Plan reinforces the need to
 have an integrated transport policy in the country.  The Committee is of the view that the modal-mix in terms of
 transport is very adverse in the country inspite of the fact that we have long inland waterways, a fairly large railway
 network and the recent upsurge in the aviation and road transport sector.  However, in absence of the right kind of
 modal-mix the country is not making optimum utilization of all those resources.  There is, therefore, a need to have a
 more balanced and equitable distribution of passenger and freight traffic in the country.  The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that the Government must come forward with an integrated transport policy to make optimum utilization
 of the various transport facilities available in the country.
           
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
 
33.       The Planning Commission had formulated an Integrated Transport Policy in the year 2001.  As a follow-up to
 the above policy, this Department is in the process of formulating a National Road Transport Policy.  A draft National
 Road Transport Policy has already been circulated among the States/UTs and other stake holders inviting their
 suggestions/comments.  The draft National Road Transport Policy has also been posted on the official website
 (www.morth.nic.in
) inviting comments and suggestions.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
34.       The Committee further recommends that it should be apprised about the follow-up action on the Draft National
 Road Transport Policy and to incorporate the same in the Integrated Transport Policy of the Government.
 
DAMAGE IN TSUMANI HIT AREAS
(Recommendation at Para 69) 

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
 
35.       The Committee observes that the Tsunami waves caused extensive damage to the road network and bridges in
 the Southern Parts of the country.  The Committee appreciates the promptness with which the Department of Road
 Transport and Highways responded to the situation and carried out the relief measures in the tsunami hit areas.  The
 Committee strongly recommends that the Department should consider the proposals submitted by the State
 Governments for restoration of the damages on priority basis so that construction/repair works could be carried out at
 the earliest.  The Committee further observes that damage to the National Highways has badly affected the tourism
 potential in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands, which is the lifeline of these islands.  The Committee recommends that
 priority should be given to the restoration of the National Highway network and bridges etc. in these islands.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
 
36.       Proposals for repair and restoration of National Highways in Tsunami hit  areas have been received from the
 concerned State Governments.  This Department has sanctioned proposals during the year 2004-05 amounting to Rs
 53.53 crore.  State-wise details are as below:
 
Sl No Name of State Amount (Rs in crores)
1 Tamil Nadu 26.40
2 Kerala 16.00
3 Andhra Pradesh 11.13
Total 53.53
37.       Andaman & Nicobar Islands
:  Andaman Trunk Road (ATR) was declared as National Highway No 223 on 25-2-
2004.  An administrative decision has been taken to entrust NH-23 to BRO for the development and maintenance. 
 Necessary notification in this regard is being issued.
38.       Austin Creek Bridge on ATR was damaged during Tsunami.  Ministry has requested the Chief Engineer, A&N
 PWD to carry out necessary repair and rehabilitation.  Repair work for this bridge has been taken up.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
39.       The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should closely monitor the utilization of funds
 allocated to the States for the restoration/repair of the National Highways in the Tsunami hit areas and also ensure early
 completion of the work. 
 
RESTRICTION ON EXPENDITURE BY MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Recommendation at Para 73) 
 
40.       The Committee appreciates the concern of the Ministry of Finance for ensuring that the expenditure position in
 all the Ministries should have an even flow throughout the year. In order to achieve this, Ministry of Finance have
 issued a direction that only 33% of the BE should be spent in the last quarter of the year.  However, so far as
 Department of Road Transport and Highways is concerned, the working in different parts of the country is affected due
 to weather conditions and the restriction imposed by the Ministry of Finance creates a setback to the physical activities
 in the areas of construction of Highways and Bridges by the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
 the Ministry of Finance may reconsider its decision and taking into account the peculiarity of the pattern of utilization
 of funds due to factors which are beyond the control of the Department, the Department of Road Transport and
 Highways should be exempted from any such restriction on expenditure and should be allowed to spend their allocated
 budget on various activities which are required to be carried out during that particular period.           
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
 
41.       The matter is being taken up with Ministry of Finance.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
42.       The Committee recommends that the response of the Ministry of Finance should be intimated to it.
 

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
ROAD SAFETY
(Recommendation at Para 80) 
 
43.       Road safety is of paramount importance and undermining it can have disastrous results.  This is evident from the
 fact that the rate of accidents as well as number of fatalities in our country are unusually higher compared to most of the
 other countries.  The Committee notes with concern that there may be a shortfall of Rs.1 to 4 crore in this sector.  The
 Committee is of the view that the Department of Road Transport and Highways, as the agency for distribution of funds
 under this head, has the responsibility to ensure optimum utilization of funds.  The Committee recommends that
 Department of Road Transport and Highways should impress upon the concerned agencies / NGOs the need for early
 completion of formalities and submission of relevant documents so that the funds earmarked for the purpose during a
 particular year are not underutilized.    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
 
44.       As against revised estimate of Rs 32.20 crore, the actual expenditure is Rs 28.49 crore.  The shortfall is due to
 delay in supply of cranes, non-receipt of Final Action Taken Reports in respect of release of final installment of grant-
in-aid under the scheme of ‘Refresher training to drivers in unorganized sector’, etc.  The Committee has also
 recommended that the restriction of spending in the last quarter needs to be relaxed for infrastructure related
 Departments like Road Transport and Highways.
 
45.       The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
46.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
 
POLLUTION TESTING AND CONTROL
(Recommendation at Paras 83 & 86) 
 
47.       The Committee understands the reasons for shortfall in respect of Pollution Testing Equipments during 2004-
05.  Since revised emission norms have been introduced from 1.10.2004, the Committee recommends that Department
 of Road Transport and Highways should impress upon the State Governments for early procurement of pollution testing
 equipments during 2005-06 so that, if required, the allocation for the purpose could be increased at RE stage.  
           
48.       The Committee is of the view that vehicular emission has become one of the major sources of environmental
 pollution and the share of the transport sector in total emissions is a matter of serious concern.  The Committee
 appreciates the steps taken by the Department of Road Transport and Highways in controlling vehicular pollution.  The
 Committee recommends that the Department of Road Transport and Highways should impress upon the State
 Governments the need for effective monitoring and enforcement of these norms for on-road vehicles so as to minimize
 its ill effects.                                                                                                             
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
49.       All States/UTs have been advised on 18
th May, 2005, impressing upon the need for taking necessary steps for
 effectively monitoring and enforcement of vehicular emission norms.  They have also been advised about a scheme of
 this Department wherein reimbursement to the extent of 75% of cost of pollution testing equipment can be made by this
 Department to States.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
50.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
DIFFERENTIAL PRICING SYSTEM FOR PRIVATE VEHICLES
(Recommendation at Para 89) 
51.       The Committee expresses its concern that in the absence of user-friendly public transports, the people in the
 country are resorting to excessive use of private vehicles and this has put the roads under undue pressure.  The
 Committee observes that most of the investment on roads is being extracted from the public itself but the returns
 accruing to the users are not equitable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the efforts of the Government

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
 should focus on developing public transport, which discourage excessive use of private vehicles.  The Government
 should adopt a methodology, whereby, in the more densely populated states, the rich and the affluent are asked to pay
 more for keeping more than one vehicle. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
52.       The observations of the Committee have been noted.  The registration and control of motor vehicles comes
 under the purview of the States/UTs.  Hence, the recommendations of the Committee in this regard have been
 communicated to the States vide letter dated 27/5/2005.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
53.       The Committee is of the opinion that its recommendation should be incorporated in the National Road Transport
 Policy so as to have a binding effect on the States/UTs.
 
USE OF RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(Recommendation at Para 95) 
 
54.       The Committee understands that Automotive Research Association of India, Pune has been set up by the Indian
 vehicle and automotive ancillary manufacturers and it is the Department of Road Transport & Highways's authorised
 certification agency for emissions norms etc.  Almost all vehicle manufacturers and major ancillary manufacturers are
 members of this institute.  The Committee is at a loss to understand as to why Government of India's emission norms
 etc. may be certified by an agency which has vehicle manufacturers as its members and on which the Department of
 Road Transport & Highways does not have any administrative control.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that
 either the Department of Road Transport & Highways should have control on the Automotive Research Association of
 India, Pune or the Association should be divested of the power of fixing emission norms as apex certification agency. 
 It is a direct case of the manufacturers themselves being the regulators, which promotes the scope of corruption in the
 functioning of the Institute.  The Committee desires that a proper enquiry may be instituted in the functioning of this
 institute.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
55.       Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), Pune is an authorized testing agency under Central Motor
 Vehicles Rules (CMVR), 1989 to test the vehicles and give type approval certificate as to the compliance of the
 provisions of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Rules thereunder.  There are three other testing agencies namely, Indian
 Institute of Petroleum (IIP), Dehradun, Vehicles Research Development Establishment (VRDE), Ahmednagar and
 Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute (CFMTTI), Budni, which are also authorized under CMVR for
 this purpose.
56.       ARAI is an independent entity governed by Governing Council.  This Department is not a member of Governing
 Council.  Department of Heavy Industry is the nodal agency of Central Government for dealing with ARAI.  Emission
 norms of motor vehicles for various categories of vehicles in different States/areas in the country are being legislated on
 the basis of a road map prepared by Mashelkar Committee on Auto Fuel Policy, set up by Ministry of Petroleum and
 Natural Gas.  The recommendations of this Committee, which have the approval of Union Cabinet form the basis of
 emission norms.  There is also a Standing Committee on Emission (SCOE) under this Department, in which all the
 stakeholders such as authorized testing agencies, Bureau of Indian Standards, Society of Indian Automobile
 Manufactures, Automotive Component Manufacturers Association, Department of Heavy Industry and representatives
 of various State Governments are represented.  Their recommendations are examined in this Department and norms are
 notified following due process of law.  Vehicle Manufacturers represented by Society of Indian Automobile
 Manufacturers (SIAM) do provide their inputs, but they are not in a position to influence the decision making.
57.       New institutional arrangements are being thought of, by both Department of Heavy Industry and this
 Department, which could cover the aspects of technical regulations in future.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
58.       The Committee takes note of the fact that the Department of Road Transport & Highways is not having any
 member in the Governing Council of the Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), Pune, which is an
 independent entity and that the Department of Heavy Industry is the nodal agency of Central Government for dealing
 with that institution. The Committee finds it surprising that although the Department of Road Transport & Highways is
 responsible for the working of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Central Motor Vehicles Rules (CMVR), 1989, it has
 no administrative control over the agency authorized to test the vehicles and give type approval certificate as to the

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
 compliance of the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Rules thereunder.   The Committee, therefore, reiterates
 its recommendation that either the Department of Road Transport & Highways should have control on the Automotive
 Research Association of India, Pune or the Association should be divested of the power of fixing emission norms as
 apex certification agency.
 
(Recommendation at Para 96) 
59.       The Committee is constrained to note that the Department of Road Transport & Highways could utilize only
 Rs.7.00 lakh for Research & Development out of the total allocation of Rs.7.9 crore during 2004-05, which makes
 evident as to how much priority the Department of Road Transport & Highways attaches to the Research &
 Development activities.  The Committee is dissatisfied that the Department of Road Transport & Highways has no
 Research & Development mechanism of its own and the Department has to depend upon other organisations for its
 Research & Development activities.  The Committee recommends that Department of Road Transport and Highways
 should develop an institutional mechanism to undertake research and development activities.  The Department should
 also create a regulator of its own with the requisite technical wherewithal for fixing emission norms, product design and
 development etc.  The Committee also recommends that the Research & Development activities should also be used for
 developing technology for creating cost-effective high quality road network such as existing in Malaysia and some
 other countries.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
60.       This Department is aware of the important role played by Research & Development activities in the
 development of sustainable road infrastructure of the country and fully shares the concern expressed by the Committee. 
 In order to make full use of Research & Development allocation of Rs.4.85 crore during 2005-06, steps have been taken
 to launch several R&D schemes.  A proposal for creation of independent testing facilities for expansion joints for
 bridges on National Highways at CRRI with Department’s share as Rs.2.2 crore has been approved.  Proposal, namely,
 establishment of Ministry’s Chair in the area of development of highway system at IIT, Roorkee with one-time
 endowment of Rs.1 crore is under consideration.  Development of GIS based National Highways Information System
 by CRRI costing about Rs.10 crore has been sanctioned.
61.       The Department of Road Transport has two exclusive research and development zones - one for Bridges and
 other for Roads, including Traffic and Transportation, each headed by a Chief Engineer, for administration of the
 research and development activities.  The Department invites the proposals from various research/academic institutions
 including Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) Laboratories, Indian Roads Congress (IRC) and reputed
 public/private institutions engaged in R&D activities in the areas of improvement in road and bridge design,
 introduction of improved/emerging materials, environment-friendly new construction techniques and enhancement of
 road traffic safety, etc.
62.       The R&D activities of the road sector as organized by this Department are being implemented through Central
 Road Research Institute, Engineering Colleges including IITs, Indian Roads Congress etc.  This Department is
 coordinating and funding all these research activities.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63.       The Committee notes from the reply that the allocations for research and development has been substantially
 scaled down from Rs.7.9 crore during 2004-05 to Rs.4.85 crore in the current Financial Year 2005-06.  Apparently, the
 abysmally poor utilization of the allocated funds in the previous year is the reason for steep scaling down of the outlay. 
 Further, the present programmes for R & D are scattered among various organisations and therefore the Committee
 reiterates its earlier recommendations made in this context that the Department of Road Transport and Highways should
 develop an institutional mechanism to undertake research and development activities.
 
(Recommendation at Para 97) 
 
64.       The Committee observes that development of road data bank and computerized project monitoring system and
 promotion of use of information technology in the highway sector is one of the objectives of the Government in the
 Tenth Plan.  However, it appears that the Government has not achieved much progress in this sector especially the use
 of Information Technology in online project monitoring system.  The Committee is of the view that Information
 Technology can also be used as an effective tool for monitoring the implementation of the projects undertaken by the
 Department. They should also make efforts to integrate research and development activities with their monitoring
 system so that proper monitoring could be kept on the projects undertaken by them, which will also help them to keep

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
 tab on time overrun and cost overrun of such projects. The Committee also recommends that efforts cited by the
 Department of Road Transport & Highways like creation of Ministry's chair in the area of development of highway
 system at Indian Institutes of Technology and creation of independent testing facilities for bridges on National
 Highways at Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi may be pursued more vigorously and in case of any difficulty,
 parallel institutions may be identified for Research & Development activities.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:
65.       The Department is making efforts for the promotion of use of information technology in the highway sector. 
 Application of information technology for online monitoring of projects and management of traffic etc. is being made
 in the NHDP implemented by NHAI.  The Advanced Traffic Management System of Intelligent Transport System
 (ITS) has already been installed between Kotputli to Kishangarh on NH-8.  This is proposed to be replicated in other 4-
laned stretches.  The system of architecture for Advanced Traveller Information Systems (ATIS) is also proposed on
 selected routes.  Automation in toll collection is `the normal application through Information Communication
 Technology (ICT).  This would further be upgraded by introduction of Electric Toll Collection.   The scheme of ‘Road
 Watch’ is proposed on major identified corridors whereby user would be able to give suggestions/complaints on the
 conditions of highways, through computer network.  Development of GIS based Road Information System for National
 Highways is under progress.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
66.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
           
         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
(Para 3)
 
ANALYSIS OF THE TENTH PLAN PROVISIONS AND ANNUAL                                    PLAN 2005-06
 
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
(Para 9)
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (NHDP)
 
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires that there would be continuous efforts in the
 forthcoming phases of NHDP so that there is no time and cost over-run.
(Para 14)
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS NOT COVERED UNDER NHDP:
 
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department and expects that Special Accelerated Road Development
 Programme (SARDP) would be implemented at the earliest.  The Committee is also of the view that the Department
 should expedite all the background work for the ensuing projects based on the experience gained by it while
 implementing the Golden Quadrilateral Project.
(Para 19)
CENTRAL ROAD FUND
 
            The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance may be impressed upon to release the previous
 fund accruals since 1.4.2003 in view of the high cost of implementation of NHDP.
(Para 22)
 
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH- EASTERN REGION
 
            The Committee desires that the substantially higher allocation for the development of Central Sector Roads in
 2005-06 as compared to 2004-05 would actually translate to better condition of roads in the North-Eastern Region. 
 Further, the Committee recommends that the Special Accelerated Road Development Programme (SARDP) should be

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
 implemented at the earliest in the North-Eastern Region.
(Para 25)
 
PARTICIPATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR IN DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL
 HIGHWAYS
 
            The Department has not specified the efforts contemplated by it to maximize private investment in the North-
Eastern Region.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its apprehension on the success of private sector participation in
 the Road Sector in the North-Eastern Region. 
(Para 31)
NEED FOR AN INTEGRATED TRANSPORT POLICY
 
            The Committee further recommends that it should be apprised about the follow-up action on the Draft National
 Road Transport Policy and to incorporate the same in the Integrated Transport Policy of the Government.
(Para  34)
 
DAMAGE IN TSUMANI HIT AREAS
 
            The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should closely monitor the utilization of funds
 allocated to the States for the restoration/repair of the National Highways in the Tsunami hit areas and also ensure early
 completion of the work. 
(Para 39)
 
RESTRICTION ON EXPENDITURE BY MINISTRY OF FINANCE
 
            The Committee recommends that the response of the Ministry of Finance should be intimated to it.
(Para 42)
ROAD SAFETY
 
46.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
(Para 46)
 
POLLUTION TESTING AND CONTROL
           
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
(Para 50)
 
DIFFERENTIAL PRICING SYSTEM FOR PRIVATE VEHICLES
            The Committee is of the opinion that its recommendation should be incorporated in the National Road Transport
 Policy so as to have a binding effect on the States/UTs.
(Para 53)
 
USE OF RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 
            The Committee takes note of the fact that the Department of Road Transport & Highways is not having any
 member in the Governing Council of the Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), Pune, which is an
 independent entity and that the Department of Heavy Industry is the nodal agency of Central Government for dealing
 with that institution. The Committee finds it surprising that although the Department of Road Transport & Highways is
 responsible for the working of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Central Motor Vehicles Rules (CMVR), 1989, it has
 no administrative control over the agency authorized to test the vehicles and give type approval certificate as to the
 compliance of the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Rules thereunder.   The Committee, therefore, reiterates
 its recommendation that either the Department of Road Transport & Highways should have control on the Automotive
 Research Association of India, Pune or the Association should be divested of the power of fixing emission norms as
 apex certification agency.

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
(Para 58)
           
The Committee notes from the reply that the allocations for research and development has been substantially scaled
 down from Rs.7.9 crore during 2004-05 to Rs.4.85 crore in the current Financial Year 2005-06.  Apparently, the
 abysmally poor utilization of the allocated funds in the previous year is the reason for steep scaling down of the outlay. 
 Further, the present programmes for R & D are scattered among various organisations and therefore the Committee
 reiterates its earlier recommendations made in this context that the Department of Road Transport and Highways should
 develop an institutional mechanism to undertake research and development activities.
(Para 63)
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
(Para 66)
M I N U T E S
XIV
FORTEENTH  MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 4.30 p.m. on Wednesday, the 22
nd February 2006 in Committee Room '074’, Ground
 Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Kamal Akhtar
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri Janardhana Poojary
Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Anil Basu
Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
Shri Adhir Chowdhury
Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
Shri Manabendra Shah
                        SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered the following six draft Reports:
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-
fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Road Transport and Highways;
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
 Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Culture;
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
 Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Shipping;
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-

92nd Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/92ndreport.htm[28-08-2018 13:14:42]
seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Tourism;
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Eighty-
eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry of Civil Aviation; and
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Ninetieth
 Report on the ‘Development of Airport Sector with special emphasis on new modern airports’.
 
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the six Report with minor modifications.    The Committee also
 authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the
 current session.
3.         The Committee also decided to meet on 21
st, 22nd, 23rd, March, 2006 to examine the Demands for Grants (2006-
07) of the concerned Ministries/Departments and on 27th and 28th March 2006 to adopt the draft reports thereon. . 
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m.