 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA       165 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
ITS ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) OF THE MINISTRY 
OF CULTURE 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SEVENTH REPORT 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) OF THE MINISTRY 
OF CULTURE 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................................................. 1-20 
4. O BSERVATIONS /C ONCLUSIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS ––  AT A GLANCE .......................................... 21-24 
5. M INUTES ....................................................................................................................... 25-28 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2010-2011)  
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury      -------      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 4.  Shri Narendra Kashyap 
 5.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
 8.  Shri Satish Sharma 
 9.  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10. Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK  SABHA  
 11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13. Shri V.Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 15. Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 16. Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 22. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq 
 23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25. Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28. Shri K. Sugumar 
 29. Shri Kabir Suman 
 30.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31. Shri K.C. Venugopal* 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 

 
INTRODUCTION  
  I , the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, h aving been 
authorised by the Committee to present on its behal f, do hereby present this One Hundred Sixty Fifth R eport on “Action Taken 
by the Government on the Recommendations/Observatio ns of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Fi fty Seventh 
Report on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 of the Ministry of Culture”. 
2.  The One Hundred Fifty Seventh Report of the Dep artment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  Transport, 
Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 22nd April, 2010. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Fift y Sixth Report 
were received from the Ministry of Culture on the 24th November. 2010. 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the Report  at its meeting held on the 20th December, 2010. 
 
 
 
  SITARAM  YECHURY 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
December  20, 2010 Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Agrahayana 29 , 1932 (Saka)  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT  
1.The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on observations/recommendations as contained 
in its One Hundred Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture, wh ich was presented to 
the Parliament on 22nd April, 2010.  
2.  Action Taken replies was received from the Gove rnment on 24th November, 2010, in respect of all th e 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The Replies have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been acc epted by the Government: 
 Para Nos.12, 35, 53, 58, 75, 82, 95, 104, 112 and 126 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies: 
 Para Nos. 29, 33, 37, 38, 40, 41, 49, 50, 63, 92, 106, 121 and 134 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government have not been accepte d by the 
Committee: 
 Para Nos.16, 17, 18, 29, 30, 32, 45, 51, 52, 57, 6 1, 62, 72, 81, 84, 88, 105 and 120  
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 Para Nos. Nil 
3.   The Committee desires that final replies in re spect of the recommendations, which have been categ orized as interim 
replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest. 
4.  On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Co mmittee has made observations on each item of the action taken/proposed 
to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee contained in the One Hundred Fifty Seventh Report, action 
taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of acti on taken have been 
given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
5.  The Committee underlines the need for more allo cation to the Ministry of Culture lest many of its important activities 
should suffer. For the year 2010-11, the Ministry of Culture has been allocated an amount of Rs.735 cr ore, which comes to less 
than 12 paise per hundred rupees being spent under the General Budget. However, the Committee is surpr ised to find that 
during the first three years of the Eleventh Five Y ear Plan, the Ministry as in the past has not been able to utilize even the 
reduced allocation. Under-utilization of funds by the Ministry of Culture is a recurring phenomenon ye ar after year. During the 
year 2009-10 the allocation of Rs. 700 crore was re duced to Rs. 630.00 crore at RE stage, however, the  Ministry could utilize 
only an amount of Rs. 533.40 crore. The Committee r ecommends that the Ministry should identify the bot tlenecks and make 
corrective measures to utilize the allocations as per the norms laid down for the purpose.    
         (para 12 of the 157th Report ) 
Reply of the Government  
6.  During the year 2009-10, as against Plan alloca tion of Rs.700.00 crore which was reduced to Rs.630.00 crore at RE stage, 
the Plan expenditure of Rs.573.79 crore has been in curred upto 31.03.2010 which constitute about 91.08 % of RE 2009-10. To 
utilize the entire Plan allocation, in the beginning of the current financial year, the Ministry reviewed the last year’s expenditure 
position in light of the short coming in achieving the optimal utilization of Plan funds and identifie d various bottlenecks. To 
make corrective measures to utilize the allocations , the Secretary (Culture) had addressed a D.O. lett er dated 03.05.2010 
instructing all the Cultural Organizations and Divisional Heads under the Ministry of Culture for suitably phasing the budgetary 
expenditure, especially under Plan, from the very b eginning of the financial year so that the expendit ure is incurred in an even 
manner to meet the required financial target first by the end of September, 2010 and also by the end of March, 2011. In addition 
to this, the Ministry has taken a decision regardin g release of grants in two instalments of 75% and 2 5% to Autonomous 

Organizations/Grantee Institutions to enable them t o plan their activities well in advance and for bet ter expenditure 
management. These remedial measures will help in optimal utilization of Plan funds during the current financial year 2010-11. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE.  
7.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and h opes that the Ministry would be able to optimally u tilize the 
resources in 2010-11.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
8.  The Committee notes the comments of the Ministr y of Finance. However, the Ministry of Finance/Plan ning Commission 
has not offered any solution to the problem of the Ministry of Culture which the Committee still appre ciates, The Committee 
deplores the “one size fits all” attitude of the Mi nistry of Finance and recommends that the non-utili zation of funds due to the 
hostile weather and season may be given a special s tatus to ensure that allocation is not reduced at R E stage. Till there is no 
respite on this account, the Ministry of Culture wi ll have to make efforts to maximize this expenditur e before the review of the 
RE allocation begins.    (Para 16 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
9.  The above recommendation has been referred to M inistry of Finance and Planning Commission for taki ng appropriate 
action thereon. The ATR will be submitted on receipt of final reply from MoF and Planning Commission. 
10.  In order to maximize the Plan expenditure befo re review of the RE allocation begins, the Secretar y (Culture) had already 
addressed a D.O. letter dated 03.05.2010 instructin g all the Cultural Organizations and Divisional Hea ds under the Ministry of 
Culture for suitably phasing the budgetary expendit ure, especially under Plan, from the very beginning  of the financial year so 
that the expenditure could be incurred in an even manner to meet the required financial target by the end of September, 2010. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
12.  The Ministry should also explore new methodolo gy for conservation and preservation with the help of 
Scientists/Universities which can be done in all-we ather conditions. The Committee observes that the f und allocated to ASI 
need to be given a special status to make it non-lapsable.  (Para 17 ibid ) 
 
Reply of the Government  
13.  In addition to traditional methods of conserva tion and preservation Archaeological Survey of Indi a is open to new 
methodology wherever it is found essential. We have  requisite interactions with Scientists/Technocrats  of 
IITs/NITs/CBRI/SERC and other reputed institutions. Workshops/Seminars are being conducted regularly to update the skills of 
conservation professionals. It will be much useful if funds allocated to Archaeological Survey of India are made non-lalpsable. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
15.  The Committee once again recommends to the Min istry of Finance and the Planning Commission to understand the needs 
of the institutions working under the Ministry of C ulture and the limitations of those institutions to spend the money during the 
first six months of the financial year.  (para 18 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
16.  The above recommendation has been referred to Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for tak ing appropriate 
action thereon. The ATR will be submitted on receipt of final reply from MoF and Planning Commission. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
17.  Reply in response to Committee’s recommendation con tained in para 16 and 18 is disappointingly casual.  Merely 
passing on its recommendation to Planning Commissio n and Ministry of Finance and waiting for reply ref lects an 
attitude which needs to be guarded against, if we w ant to improve the things. The Committee would like  to know when 

these recommendations were forwarded to the Plannin g Commission and Ministry of Finance and what their  response 
is.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
18.  The Committee notes the excavation work in var ious places and recommends that every care be taken  to ensure that the 
time schedule prescribed for each of the excavation work is adhered. (Para 29 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
19.  The excavation/exploration work proposed by Ar chaeological Survey of India (ASI), State Archaeolo gy Departments, 
Universities and Research institutions is being giv en permission on yearly basis i.e. for every field season Proposals for 
exploration/excavation are called every year and ar e placed before the Standing Committee (SC) of Cent ral Advisory Board of 
Archaeology (CABA) for recommendation. The licence issued by ASI for carrying out the scheduled exploration/excavation by 
various agencies is valid till 30th September every  year. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sit es and Remains Act, 
1958 clearly mentions under Chapter III (Constructi on and other Operations in Protected Area) under Ru le 14 (Period of 
Licence) which mentions “Every liecnce shall be in force for such period not exceeding three years as may be specified in the 
licence: Provided that the Director General may, on  application made to him at least one month before the expiry of a licence, 
extend its period by one year at a time so that the  aggregate period does not exceed five years”. For this field season (2010-
2011) proposals for exploration/excavation have bee n received by ASI and shall accordingly be recommen ded/ not 
recommended by the SC of CABA. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
20.  The Committee is not convinced with the reply that gives only procedural details and no account of tim e schedule 
of the excavation work carried on has been given.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
21.  The Committee recommends that ASI should explo re new scientific methods to preserve and conserve the heritage sites. 
The major research and scientific institutions may be roped in to explore newer technology and scienti fic knowledge for 
preservation and conservation of heritage sites. (para 30 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
22.  In the conservation of heritage structures tra ditional methods and techniques take precedence over the others. However, to 
incorporate new technology for conservation/preserv ation of monuments we have taken the services of II T Delhi, IIT Kanpur, 
lIT Chennai, NIT Warangal, CBRI Roorkee, Survey of India Dehradun, IISC Bangalore, SERC Chennai and ma ny other 
scientific institutions. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
23.  The Committee would like to know, if any standard n ew technique has been developed for different kinds  of 
heritage sites, or it is taken on case to case basis.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
24.  The Committee is of the view that there is a n eed for publications in archaeology for general awa reness in all the major 
Indian languages, besides some foreign languages, t hese publications should aim at creating interest i n the public about our 
ancient monuments and archeological sites as well t he importance of preserving these as our cultural h eritage. Such awareness 
in the general public would facilitate better protection/maintenance of these sites.  (para 32 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
25.  Archeological Survey of India brings out publi cations for dissemination of knowledge among the ma sses in the form of 
brochures, folders and guide books under the informative series. These are being published in English, Hindi and other regional 
languages also. So far no such literature has been brought out in any other foreign language. 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
26.  The Committee had noted while examining Demands for  Grants (2010-11) that utilization of allocation fo r this 
purpose was very poor and explanation given was not  convincing. Action Taken Reply also does hardly ad d anything 
new. The Committee expresses its concern again abou t the manner in which the awareness generation acti vity is being 
handled.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
27.  Further, there is need for generating interest  amongst general public, specially children, by put ting some special 
programme such as puppet show, documentary etc. Mor eover, the display boards should be made bilingual and it should have 
all the relevant information about a particular sit e. Brochures should be made available in local lang uage also NGOs/College 
students may also be roped in to act as volunteers/guides to ensure. the local participation.  (para 33 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
28.  Under the Cultural Awareness programs, photogr aphic exhibition, painting competition, debates and  similar other 
programs are being organized for school and college  students by the regional offices of the ASI throug hout country on 
special/heritage days/week. Bilingual display board s with relevant information are provided by the loc al offices of ASI. 
Brochures in local languages are also available at ticketed and important monuments. These programs ar e held during the 
special/heritage days/week, these are being celebrated with the participation of school and college students. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
33.  The Committee notes the steps taken by the ASI  in involving school children in their effort to popularize and preserve our 
monuments. The Committee recommends that the local community and the students of local colleges and ed ucational 
institutions may also be involved in the various activities/efforts of ASI. 
(Para 37 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
34.  Under the Cultural Awareness programs, photogr aphic exhibition, painting competition, debates and  similar other 
programs are being organized for school and college  students by the regional offices of the ASI throug hout country on 
special/heritage days/week. Bilingual display board s with relevant information are provided by the loc al offices of ASI. 
Brochures in local languages are also available in ticketed and important monuments. Regarding the pro grams held during the 
special/heritage days/week these are being celebrated with the participation of school and college students. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
29.  The Committee notes the reply and feels that these activities being very useful, need to be organized more 
frequently even in remote and rural areas.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
30.  The Committee hopes that upgradation/ moderniz ation of all site museums will be completed in time. 
(para 35 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
31.  The upgradtion/modernization of Archaeological  Site Museums keeping in view of the 14 Museum Refo rms Points is 
under process. The following museums are selected for upgradation/modernization and work is in progress: 
1. Archaeological Museum, Red Fort, (Mumtaj Mahal),  Delhi. 
2. Indian War Memorial Museum, Red Fort, Delhi. 
3. Archaeological Museum, Sarnath, Uttar Pradesh. 
4. Archaeological Museum, Kamlapur, Hampi. 

5. Archaeological Museum, Nagarjunakonda, Andhra Pr adesh. 
6. Archaeological Museum, Taj Mahal, Agra, Uttar Pr adesh. 
7. Archaeological Museum, Hazarduari Palace, West B engal. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
32.  The Committee may be apprised about the progress ma de so far and scheduled date of completion of the 
upgradation/modernization work.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
36.  The Committee notes that inspite of cuts/reduc tions in all the heads, ASI was provided with increased allocation from the 
scarce resources to meet their expenditure. However, the Committee is concerned to note that ASI was able to incur expenditure 
only to the tune of Rs. 110.07 crore. ASI should en sure their spending of funds in an effective way so  that the entire allocated 
fund is utilized within the stipulated time frame specified. The Committee may be apprised about the reasons for non-utilization 
of funds. 
(para 40 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
37.  Archaeological Survey of India has incurred Rs .126.68 crores under Plan in the financial year 2009-2010 against the total 
allocation of Rs.127.00 crores, which is 99% of the  funds allocated. As regards spending of funds duri ng the current financial 
year 2010-11, ASI has incurred 41 % & 45% under Plan & Non-Plan respectively upto 31st August, 2010 and it is expected that 
the budget allotted to the ASI will be incurred fully. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
38.  The Committee was informed that the expenditure upto Feb. 2010 as Rs. 110.07 crore. It seems Rs. 20.00 crore has 
been the last minute spending by ASI.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
39.  During the Commonwealth Games it is anticipate d that a large number of tourists would visit vario us monuments in and 
around Delhi under the protection of ASI. There is a need for common entry ticketing system alongwith availability of tickets 
on Internet. The Committee feels that unifying the entry system to the various monuments under the con trol of ASI as well as 
the tourists booking their entry tickets through Internet would be of great help to tourist. The common entry ticket systems need 
to be introduced before the commonwealth Games 2010 . The Committee recommends that the ASI should coor dinate with the 
Ministry of Tourism to ensure that the tourists had  a pleasant and hassle free experience during their  visit to various 
monuments, The Committee further recommends that cl eanliness and other basic facilities may be ensured  at all the 
monuments. (Para 41 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
40.  The Hon’ble Prime Minister has launched Common  Entry Tickets on 2nd Dec. 2009 and implemented by ASI from 3rd 
Dec. 2009 which is appreciated widely. These ticket s are made available at ASI HQ, Circle Offices, Sub -Circle offices, ticket 
booking counters and steps are being taken up so th at tourist have hassle free entry to the monuments.  ASI has some practical 
difficulties while making entry tickets available  through Internet. However, ASI is in constant touch with Ministry of Tourism, 
ITDC and various tour operators for effective implementation of common entry ticket system. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
41.  The Committee notes the reply and still feels that making of tickets available through Internet should  be pursued 
within a time schedule.  
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
42.  The Committee is concerned at the lack of coor dination between the Central and State Governments. So much so, the ASI 
was not aware of the steps taken by the State Gover nments to protect their monuments. The monuments un der the control of 
State Governments also need to be preserved and pro tected. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should 
ensure that the monuments under the control of State Governments are also protected and maintained. If necessary, the Ministry 
should also explore the possibility of giving adequ ate finance to the State authorities in this regard . The Committee is of the 
view that Government needs to take effective steps to coordinate and facilitate the monitoring of prot ection of monuments by 
State Governments.    (Para 45 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
43.  Archaeological Survey of India is continuously  interacting with various States for ensuring prope r protection and upkeep 
of monuments protected by each State Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
44.  The Committee deserved more specific and pointed re ply to a very serious issue involving protection of  our 
heritage in an integrated manner.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
45.  The Committee is of the view that ASI has spre ad itself thin and a severe shortage of technical p ersonnel has hamstrung 
the conservation efforts. The Committee will like t o invite the attention to the recommendation of the  R.N. Mirdha Committee 
that a minimum of 9,000 monument attendants would b e needed to provide security to the existing struct ures. The Government 
of India needs to rethink its ‘fence and forget’ approach towards the monuments.  (Para 49 ibid ) 
46.  The shortage of staff and monument attendants is a serious problem affecting the safety, security  and upkeep of various 
monuments adversely. The monuments need to be prote cted just like any other assets of nation. The Comm ittee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government should make efforts on a war footing to ensure that staff strength as recommended by various 
Committees may be increased and personnel are posted at the earliest.  (para 50 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government paras 49 and 50  
47.  As regards to restructure and strengthening of  staff strength in ASI, at present Manpower Managem ent and Planning 
Consultants have been appointed to look into the ma tter regarding number of manpower requirements/stre ngthening the staff 
position after getting survey of field offices. The  report will be submitted shortly and after getting  the approval of competent 
authority, the position of manpower will certainly be improved. However, we have requested Director General for Resettlement 
to provide 1000 Ex-Servicemen for watch and ward ag ainst the lying vacant posts of Monument Attendants  till these posts are 
filled-up. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
48.  The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Committee may be apprised of the findings of the Ma npower 
Management and Planning Consultants as and when rec eived. It would also like to know about the fate of  the proposal 
for engaging 1000 ex-servicemen as Monument Attendants.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
49.  The Committee has come to know that there are hundreds of attendants who are protecting the monuments for 20 years or 
more have not been regularized till date. As a result, their basic pay is static and no other allowances are being paid to them. It is 
also learnt that some of them had gone to Court, bu t could not get any relief. It is a strange situati on when there is a huge 
backlog at different levels including that of monum ent attendants, yet the existing staff are not bein g adjusted. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that Ministry of Cul ture should adopt humanitarian approach and take st eps to increase their 
wages taking into account their length of service and rate of inflation.  (Para 51 ibid ) 
 

Reply of the Government  
50.  As regards, regularization of C.S./T.S. worker s, the position of vacant posts being ascertained b y collecting the 
information from the different Circles. Some posts have not been allowed to be filled by the Screening  Committee under 
optimization scheme. The matter has already been pu rsued with Secretary (Culture) vide DG’s D.O. No.23 -40/2003-Adm.I, 
dated 20.8.2010 to allow this office to fill up those posts that are kept in abeyance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
51.  The Committee is dismayed to see the reply received  from the Ministry of Culture. Perhaps the Ministry  of 
Culture did not care to read the reply before furnishing it to the Committee. They have simply forwarded the comments 
of ASI without taking any action on the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
immediate action may be taken by the Ministry of Culture to fill up the vacant posts in ASI.  
52.  The Committee may be apprised of the vacancies in different circles and the number of posts filled so far there.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
53.  The current framework operates at two levels-C entral that looks after nationally important monuments, and the State-level 
that is responsible for State protected monuments. There is an urgent need of activating a third level  of institutional and legal 
arrangement involving local bodies and all these le vels need to work with a very close coordination an d well defined 
partnership, financial, etc.  (para 52 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
54.  Some State Governments, Municipal Corporation and Heritage bodies have their Resolutions, By-laws , Legislations, for 
protection of cultural heritage. Further, various NGOs and individuals are working for heritage. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
55.  The Committee is fully aware that in heritage prote ction/conservation several agencies and bodies are involved at 
different levels. The Committee had recommended the Ministry of Culture to ensure a close coordination amongst all of 
them. Currently, there is no mechanism in place for  regular communication, coordination and cooperatio n amongst 
these bodies. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should take appropriate action to accomplish the 
objectives.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
56.  The Committee recommends that for preservation  of our monuments activities should be decentralize d. The historical 
monuments can be better protected by the involvemen t of local people. The Ministry should come out wit h a decentralized and 
integrated mechanism that would fill the gaps exist ing today in this regard. The Committee has already  expressed its serous 
reservation about the proposed National Heritage Commission that it will not be able to address the major issues currently faced 
in identifying, developing, protecting, etc. of our  rich heritage scattered all over the country from Delhi to Talukas and remote 
villages. 
(Para 53  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
57.  For preservation and conservation of historica l monuments involvement of public-private partnersh ip is being adopted at 
various cases through National Culture Fund (NCF). Even various projects are being taken up involving public participation. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
58.  The Committee notes the reply.  
 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
59.  The Committee was informed that the proposal f or restructuring the Archaeological Survey of India had been prepared as 
per the guidelines of Department of Personnel & Tra ining and Ministry of Finance, Department of Expend iture taking into 
account the requirements of each Wing/Branch of the  Archaeological Survey of India including Horticult ure Wing. The 
proposal has been submitted to the Ministry of Cult ure for further action in the Matter. The Committee  is constrained to note 
that the proposal for restructuring of the Horticultural Branch is pending for a long time and till date no decision has been taken. 
The Committee recommends that the Government should  take speedy action on the proposal of restructurin g of Horticulture 
Branch of ASI so that they can take additional activities.  (para 57 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
60.  The long pending proposal of Horticulture Wing  has been agreed. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
61.  The Committee may be apprised of the details of the restructuring and the time to be taken in the restructuring of 
Horticulture wing.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
62.  The Committee realizes the need for green envi ronment and gardens around the monuments. The Commi ttee notes that 
there is severe shortage of gardeners and posts nee d to be filled up. The Committee, therefore, recomm ends that Ministry of 
Culture should take immediate steps to fill up the vacant posts. 
(Para 58 ibid  )  
Reply of the Government  
63.  Some posts have not been allowed to be filled by the Screening Committee under optimization schem e. The matter has 
already been pursued with Secretary (Culture) vide  QG’s D.O. No.23-40/2003-Adm.I, dated 20.8.2010 to allow this office to fill 
up those posts that are kept in abeyance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
64.  The Committee notes the reply.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
65.  The Committee notes that despite there being s trict rules under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeo logical Sites and 
Remains Act 1958, the problem of encroachment of monuments could not be checked. The Committee was informed that the 35 
monuments, all managed by the Central Government, c ould not be traced. Delhi, the headquarters of Arch eological Survey of 
Indian tops the list with 12 untraceable monuments.  They now exist only in memory and in history books . The Committee 
would like to invite the attention of the Government to the plight of the older Forts in the Country. Many of these forts are made 
up of dry sandstone on foundation of clay, sand and rock. These forts are facing the problem of encroachments also. These forts 
are ill-maintained and in a dilapidated condition. The growth of tourism and the large number of visit ors are putting unbearable 
pressure on the structures, One example is the Jais almer fort also known as ‘Sonar Qila’  or Jewel of Desert’  which is reported 
to have been listed among the most endangered sites  of the WorId Monuments Fund. It is reported that t he waste water has 
seeped through decayed drains and penetrated the walls of the Fort resulting in cracks in various structures of the Fort. The Fort 
is also facing the problem, of encroachment.  (Para 61 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
66.  For removal of encroachments instructions have  been issued to all field offices to ensure effecti ve removal of 
encroachments from protected monuments. The recent amendment under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act, 2010 has more strong provision to curt ail encroachments further strong penalties are impo sed on defaulters. So 
far as the Jaisalmer Fort is concerned, the ASI is intensively interacting with various experts, geologist, State Governments and 
other stake holders to formulate various modalities to address the issue. 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
68.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Culture should take up the matter with the concerned State 
Governments and other authorities to ensure that the forts which are part of our cultural heritage are not further damaged due to 
human action. The Committee also recommends that th e Ministry should take effective steps to protect t he forts from neglect 
and destruction.    (para 62 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
69.  For better preservation and conservation of Fo rts all over the country, ASI is taking up the matt er with all State 
Governments. So far as forts those are under Centra l Protection, special efforts are being taken up th rough regular works 
programmes. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
67. The Committee notes its dismay that the Government has not responded to the maintenance aspect of the 
monuments which was the major thrust of its recomme ndation. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation and hopes that with amended Act, ASI  will be able to deal with encroachment problem mor e 
effectively. The Committee desires that action should be formulated to save the Jaisalmer Fort in a time bound manner.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
71.  The Committee feels that since in the removal of encroachment, the major role has to be played by the state Government, 
their stake has to be properly recognized. The Mini stry should initiate consultation with State Government and work out a plan 
for rehabilitation. Financial assistance for heritage protection needs to be increased. The Committee, therefore, recommends for 
a separate allocation for dealing with illegal encr oachments in ASI monuments and rehabilitation to so lve this perennial 
problem.     (para 63 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
72.  ASI is constantly approaching State Government s on the issue of removal of encroachments. Even fi eld offices are 
approaching case-wise. However, the details are bei ng worked out for separate allocation required for removal of 
encroachments. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
73.  The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed about the development regarding separate allocation 
for removal of encroachments.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
74.  The Committee appreciates the setting up of Na tional Mission on Monuments and Antiquities which w ill bring in record 
all the cultural and heritage properties and antiqu ities available in the country. The documentation o f the heritage sites and 
antiquities is a gigantic task for which the Govern ment of India have sanctioned a budgetary allocatio n of Rs. 90 crore and the 
project has to be completed within a period of five  years from 2007-12. The Committee, in view of urge ncy of the work, calls 
up on the Ministry to complete the work in a time b ound way and make available more funds if required for the purpose. The 
Committee is also of the view that Mission has to do a huge task which cannot be completed without the involvement of general 
public. The Committee recommends that Government should take steps to sensitize the masses and take assistance of the NGOs 
already working in this area.  (para 72 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
75.  The National Mission on Monuments and Antiquit ies was launched on 19th March, 2007 for a time per iod of five years 
i.e. 2007-2012 with the objective to prepare a Nati onal Register on built heritage and sites from publ ished and unpublished 
sources available with different organizations and institutions. The documentation of antiquities will be undertaken through the 

primary data available with various Central, State Governments, Universities, Local Bodies, Private Mu seums, etc. in the 
template prepared by NMMA. 
76.  To build a credible National database, NMMA ha s prepared two templates on built heritage and site s and antiquities. 
About 80,000 unprotected built heritage and sites have been compiled from secondary sources. About 2,00,000 antiquities from 
different sources have been documented as per the f ormat of NMMA. To document the data various documen tation resource 
centres across the country have been identified by NMMA to share and document the data available with them. Keeping in view 
of the archaeological potentiality in remote areas like North East, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand etc. and non availability of 
reliable secondary sources, the primary survey of b uilt heritage and sites is felt essential before th ese are eroded by mandate 
made and natural factors 
77.  Identification and sharing on data on built he ritage, sites and antiquities with various NGO’s is also in process. As part of 
outreach programmes, NMMA has circulated a calendar of its own with the theme on the importance of doc umentation of built 
heritage, sites and antiquities along with a diary meant for distribution to various organizations. To  sensitize the people on our 
cultural heritage and also about documentation work various manuals, legislative frame works are being prepared and translated 
in various languages for circulation among the publ ic. Print and electronic media are also being used for the purpose. 
Preparation of short documentary films emphasizing themes on the importance of built heritage, sites antiquities have also been 
initiated. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
78.  The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by  the Ministry for creating a database of built heri tages, sites 
and antiquities and recommends that the work may be finished in time bound manner.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
79.  The Committee notes the efforts of Zonal Cultu ral Centres in preserving the Indian Culture. Howev er, the Committee is 
not happy that plan allocation of Rs. 14 crore of the year 2009-10 was reduced to Rs. 12.75 crore at RE stage. Such reduction is 
not usual but in cash starved Department, efforts s hould be to utilize the plan outlay for some other similar purpose, if 
organizing folk dance festival in Delhi was no poss ible. The Committee feels that there need to be mor e publicity of the events 
being organized by Zonal Cultural Centres. Without reaching the masses, the Zonal Cultural Centres can not achieve their 
objectives. The Committee, therefore, recommends th at concerted efforts should be made for publicity o f the events at school 
and college levels also.   (para 75 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
80. An amount of Rs. 14.00 crore was allocated for the Zonal Cultural Centrei  (ZCCs) in Budget Estima tes (BE) for the year 
2009-10 which was reduced to Rs. 12.75 crore at Rev ised Estimates (RE) due to deferment of Folk Dance Festival which was 
earlier planned to be organized from 23rd to 29th J anuary 2010 in Delhi but was rescheduled for the mo nth of October, 2010. 
This reduction was also on account of the overall r eduction in Plan funds of the Ministry of Culture a t RE 2009-10. However, 
subsequently, additional amounts were made available to the ZCCs at the 2nd Supplementary stage and ac tual expenditure was 
Rs. 14.27 crore against the BE of Rs. 14.00 crore. 
81.  The activities of the ZCCs are usually covered  by local Doordarshan and other local channels, FM channels and local 
News papers. The ZCCs have devised the mechanisms t o publicize their programmes also by way of pamphle ts, banners, 
posters, hoardings and newspaper advertisements. 
82.  The ZCCs invite students to participate/attend  programmes organized by them from time to time. Th ey also organize 
special programmes like Children Theatre Workshops etc. for students and youth. In order to popularize  the folk arts amongst 
youth, they are also organizing some attractive, th eme-based programmes as also workshops in universit ies, colleges and 
schools, training classes and children competitions. 
83.  ZCCs also sponsor School Children performances  during Republic Day Parade at Rajpath and receive prizes, every year. 
Some of the important programmes are organized in t he campus of reputed schools, colleges and Universi ties. In February, 

2010, Octave -the Festival of North East - was orga nized in the campus of Khalsa College, Amritsar. Th e next edition of this 
festival is going to be held in the campus of Aurangabad University so as to reach out to maximum number of students. 
84.  The recommendation of the Committee has been n oted and conveyed to all the ZCCs to step up their effort at reaching out 
to the masses and school/college/university students and ensure adequate publicity. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
85.  The Committee notes the reply.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
86.  The Committee notes the role of the three Akad emies, viz.  Sangeet Natak Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi and Sahi tya 
Akademi and National School of Drama in promotion o f literary, visual and performing arts. However, th e Committee is 
constrained to note that there has been lack of consistency in the matter of utilization of plan outlays in these Akademies during 
the year 2009-10. An amount of Rs. 13.10 crore was provided for Sangeet Natak Akademi and was reduced to Rs. 12.2 crore at 
RE stage. In the case of Lalit Kala Akademi an amou nt of Rs. 6 crore was reduced to Rs. 1.5 crore at R E stage for which no 
reasons have been given. An amount of Rs. 10.5 cror e allocated at BE 2009-10 was reduced to Rs. 6.30 c rore at RE stage on 
account of slow pace of expenditure incurred in the  first two quarters of the financial year. The Comm ittee would like to know 
the actual reasons of non-utilization of funds by these Akademies and also the Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
have pro-active approach while assessing the schemes to be carried out by the Societies during the financial year, so that there is 
no last-minute change which may result in non-utilization of plan outlays.  (para 81 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
87.  The para relates to reduction in Revised Estim ates for three Akademies and National School of Dra ma. The reduction of 
Plan funds for Akademies under RE stage was mainly because of overall reduction in Plan funds for the Ministry at RE stage 
and also on account of deferment of some plan activ ities as well as the adjustment of unspent balance of the previous financial 
year 2008-09. The suggestion regarding the proactiv e approach towards schemes to ensure better utiliza tion of funds has been 
made for the future. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
88.  The Committee observes that the reply of the Minist ry has not addressed the specific issue of underuti lization of 
plan outlays pointed out by the Committee. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends that it may be informe d about the 
schemes which were deferred during the year 2008-09  and the details of the adjustment of the unspent b alance and the 
reasons therefor.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
89.  The Committee is of the view that Sangeet Nata k Akademi has to do much more and reach the general  public through 
mass media. Further, there is need for innovative e fforts so that the reach of Sangeet Natak Akademi i s widened. The 
Committee hopes that Lalit Kala Akademi will be abl e to improve its infrastructural facilities before the Commonwealth 
Games. Further, more regional centres should be est ablished with focus on more art galleries. The Comm ittee hopes that with 
the increased allocation, Sahitya Akademi wouid be able to do its job effectively. However, there is n eed to set up more 
bookshops and mobile vans so that the efforts of Sahitya Akademi reaches the masses. Mobile vans should visit various schools, 
residential areas, office complex etc. to reach to the general public. (para 82 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI  
90.  Observations made in para - 82 have been noted  for future compliance. 
 
 

SAHITYA  AKADEMI  
91.  Akademi is planning to open more Sales outlets  at different parts of the country and also propose s to purchase mobile 
vans through which Akademi publications can be sold at various schools, residential areas and office complexes etc. 
LALIT KALA  AKADEMI  
92.  The Akademi will complete the improvement of i ts infrastructure facilities before the Commonwealth Games. 
93.  The Akademi has already initiated action to se t up new Regional Centres in the following places: 
  Maharashtra (Mumbai), Bangalore (Karnataka), Patn a (Bihar), Shillong (Meghalaya), Bhopal (M.P.), 
  Shimla (H.P.) 
  Efforts are being made to explore the possibility  to open more Regional Centres across the country. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
94.  The Committee notes the reply.   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
95.  The Committee notes the efforts made by IGNCA in promoting the activities under its control. The Committee 
recommends that there is need to set up more sub-centers in various parts of country. 
(Para 84 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
96.  IGNCA has Regional Centres at Varanasi, Bangal ore and Guwahati. The proposal for setting up addit ional sub-centres is 
under active consideration and various aspects, suc h as location, man-power requirement, financial imp lications, etc. in this 
regard are being assessed. In the first phase, IGNCA proposes to set up sub-centres at Jaipur and Jammu. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
97.  The Committee notes the reply and feels that Western region has no Centres or Sub-Centres. It may be considered 
seriously in first stance.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
98.  The National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA) is a  unique institute of the country which represents t he evolution and 
pictorial transformation in the visual arts in Indi a over the last century? However, the Committee is not happy over the 
utilization of plan allocation by the NGMA. The amount of Rs. 7 crore provided in BE 2009-10 was reduced significantly at RE 
stage of Rs. 5.3 crore, on account of slow pace of expenditure incurred by NGMA. Committee finds the reason given for under-
utilization of funds ambiguous. The Committee notes that the new building in New Delhi is under construction and hopes that it 
will be completed at the earliest. Further, the Com mittee is of the view that safety of the articles k ept in the Museum is of 
paramount importance. The Committee recommends that  necessary fund may be provided for installing late st security gadgets 
to beef up the security of the Museum. (para 88 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
99.  The reply furnished by NGMA in this respect is  appended (Annexure). The observation has been noted that the building’s 
construction has been completed except the third block and was inaugurated in 2009. The issues still pending viz.  refurbishment 
of auditorium, installation of lighting and securit y equipments including CCTVs are proposed to be com pleted during the 
current year. 
 
 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
100.  The Committee recommends that the pending work shou ld be completed in a time bound manner and the date  of 
completion may be communicated to the Committee.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
101.  The Asiatic Society undertakes activities con nected with conservation of Art objects, sculptures  and manuscripts, 
augmentation of research programmes, strengthening of publication activities, computerization of libra ry activities etc. 
however, the Committee fails to understand as to wh y the work for improvement and upgradation of the i nstitution was not 
taken up as a result of which the amount of Rs. 21 crore allocated to the Asiatic Society was reduced to Rs.I0.5 crore. The 
Committee hopes that they would be able to utilize the plan outlay optimally during the year 2010-11.       (para  92 ibid)  
Reply of the Government  
 102. In response of Committee’s observation that t he amount allocated of Rs. 21 crore to the Asiatic Society was reduced to 
Rs. 10.5 crore, it may be stated that the amount was allocated to Asiatic society, Kolkata for carrying out construction work and 
purchase of some property. The work could not be un dertaken in the absence of necessary administrative  approvals from 
Archaeological Survey of India and other competent authorities. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
103.  The Committee notes the reply. The Committee,  however, may be apprised of the reasons for not ge tting the 
administrative approval for carrying out constructi on works on purchase of some property from ASI and other competent 
authorities and by when the work would be complete. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
104.  The Committee notes that National Archives of  India has highly competent professionals in the fi eld of Archives record 
management, conservation, reprography and other related field of Archival Science. The National Archives has the great task of 
managing records. The Committee is also of the view  that the National Archives should conduct regular courses for the 
employees of Government offices and if possible dep ute staff from its organization to assist various o ffices to maintain record 
in a better way. However, the Committee notes that the plan outlay of Rs. 4.50 crore made in BE 2009-1 0 was reduced to Rs. 
3.75 crore at RE stage. Again an amount of Rs. 5.00  crore has been provided in BE 2010-11. The Committ ee feels that there is 
some sort of inconsistency in the planning which ha s resulted in the fluctuation of plan outlay at BE and RE stages which can 
affect the functioning and activities of the National Archives of India. 
(para 95 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
105.  The National Archives of India is running a p ost Graduate One Year Diploma Course in Archives an d Records 
Management as well as short term certificate course s in various disciplines of Archives keeping includ ing Records 
Management, Reprography, Care and Conservation of Books, Manuscripts and Archives at professional level and Servicing and 
Repairs of Records at Sub-Professional level which are being attended by the private candidates as wel l as sponsored staff 
members from various State Archives and Central Gov ernment offices. In addition, the Department is run ning a regular 
programme for Departmental Records Officers of the Government Departments to guide them in maintaining  their records in a 
proper and scientific manner. The Department is als o deputing its officers from time to time to inspec t Departmental Records 
Rooms of the Government Departments and advice them  accordingly on various related Record Management i ssues. Besides 
conducting regular courses, the National Archives o f India is also conducting on request training prog rammes in Records 
Management, Digitization/Microfilming and Conservat ion, for the benefit of the Government employees of  public sector 
undertakings and libraries etc. in different parts of the country in collaboration with them. Similarly, programmes are also being 
conducted in collaboration with them. Similarly, pr ogrammes are also being conducted in collaboration with the States/UT 

Archives and State Governments in Human Resource De velopment in the field of Archives, Records Managem ent, 
Conservation and Reprography. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
106.  The Committee noted the reply.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
107.  The Committee notes that India has a number o f Museums under its control, both Government and pr ivate. The 
allocations to the Museums is enough as is evident from the utilization of allocation under Museum head. In 2009-10, allocation 
of Rs. 72.36 crore was made. The actual expenditure  upto 31st March, 2010 is Rs. 71.50 crore. However,  there is need for 
detailed pamphlets listing numerous exhibitions, IMAX and Space Shows, optional audio tours for an extra fee, special lectures 
and the Restaurants which can create interest in the minds of people.  (para 104 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
108.  The museums under the control of Government h ave been persuaded for nearly 1/2 years on a regula r basis to embark 
upon the 14-point reforms agenda, which include the suggestions given by the Parliamentary Standing Committee. An appraisal 
of the progress made is being done constantly, with Museum Heads being called for meetings, specifically on the subject. They 
are also being enthused to adopt 14-points through various BoT and Advisory Group meetings. Museums ha ve been spurred 
into action and most of them have started showing results on the suggested areas. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
109.  The Committee notes the reply.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
110.  There is also need to review the timings of t he Museum which should be extended in evening hours  keeping in view that 
in most part of India, days are very hot. During Sc hool vacations, time should be extended so that chi ldren can visit it in the 
evenings with their parents.   (para 105 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
111.  This has been deliberated upon and museums ha ve been asked to adopt flexible timings as per loca l conditions. The 
National Gallery of Modern Art has formed a separat e Sub-Committee to look into this subject. During t he impending 
Commonwealth Games, both National Museum and National Gallery of Modern Art have extended their hours till 9.00 p.m. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
112.  The Committee recommends that keeping in view  the weather conditions, the Museums should be opened in evening also 
by deputing more staff.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
113.  Further, Security should be strengthened in a ll the museums. The punishment for doing any damage  to the museum 
should be explicity displayed at all the prominent places.  (para 106 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
114.  Security is one key issue on the reforms agen da of the museums. Some of the iconic museums like Indian Museum and 
Vitoria Memorial Hall are in the process of handing  over the security to CISF. National Museum and Sal arjung Museum 
already have CISF cover. NGMA has an elaborate priv ate security apparatus in place. Besides the physic al security, the 
Museums already have appliances like CCTVs etc. in place and already in the process of further augment ing the security 
through modern x-ray machines at entrance, etc. 
 
 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
115.  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that modern equipments and gadgets need to be used for securing 
the museums and their objects.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
116.  More than that India’s brilliant IT and engin eering brains could be garnered to design new and e xciting exhibits, marking 
the beginning of transforming museums into “edutainment” destinations.  
(para 107 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
117.  It is acknowledged that the role of IT has no t been utilized to the required extent till now. Ho wever, National Council of 
Science Museums is being involved with all the proc esses requiring IT intervention. In various museums , an offer from the 
British Council to educate museum professionals into ways of transforming museums into education sectors is being deliberated 
upon in the Ministry. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
118.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should n ot delay the opportunity from British Council to ed ucate 
museum professional and get the benefit from their expertise.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
119.  The Committee notes that the Central Secretar iat Library with a huge depository of books and volumes are not accessible 
to the common public due to security reasons. The C ommittee recommends that the Central Secretariat Li brary may be moved 
out of the high security area and housed at a place  where the researchers, students, academicians and general public can access 
it. The Ministry of Culture may also explore the possibility of constructing a new campus for the Central Secretariat Library. 
        (para 112  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
120.  The Central Secretariat Library (CSL) has a c ollection of 6.5 lakhs volumes. It has also two Bra nch Libraries located at 
Bahawalpur House and R.K. Puram. The Tulsi Sadan Li brary located at Bahawalpur House is primarily mean t for books in 
regional languages whereas the R.K. Puram Library caters to the needs of Government employees working in adjoining areas. 
121.  The main Library in Shastri Bhavan has a rese arch collection in the Area Study Division. It has a rich collection of 
Government documents including the Reports and docu ments published before Independence. The use of thi s collection has 
reduced in recent years due to strict security meas ures. The CISF has been advised to allow entry of s tudents, academicians/ 
researchers in Shastri Bhavan. 
122.  The Ministry of Culture is exploring the possibility of shifting CSL to another building possibly in Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) located in the Central Vista area. The IGNCA Trust has been requested to provide a suitable space 
for CSL. The matter is under consideration. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
123.  The Committee notes the reply.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
124.  The allocation to the Public Libraries was Rs . 40.62 crore in the year 2009-10. The expenditure upto 31st March, 2010 is 
Rs. 40.13 crore. The Committee is of the view that the Government should provide funds to the Librarie s through Ministry of 
Culture, if it can be utilized by them. However, there need to be some improvement as such the catalogue of the libraries should 
be available on internet. The Computers and softwar es installed in the libraries should be in working conditions all the time so 
that readers are not put to inconvenience. The conc ept of community libraries should be explored and t hey should be promoted 
with wide publicity.    (para 120 ibid ) 

Reply of the Government  
125.  Ministry of Culture has asked the Libraries u nder its control to send their requisition for additional funds so that same can 
be considered in the first Supplementary Budget. Fo r public libraries, Raja Rammohun Roy Library Found ation (RRRLF) is 
providing financial assistance under its ‘Matching’  and ‘Non-Matching’ Schemes to more than 13000 Publ ic Libraries all over 
the country which includes Village and Panchayat Li braries. These libraries also function as places fo r social interactions and 
serve the local communities. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
126.  The Committee may be apprised of the additional fun ds required by the Libraries and sought by the Mini stry of 
Culture in the first Supplementary Budget.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
127.  The Committee at the same time observed that wherever large collections did exist, they were not  fully used because of 
rigid rules, Library users were not trusted and were asked security deposit, which every library users may not afford.  
        (para 121 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
128.  Delhi Public Library (DPL) has more than 50 b ranches all over National Capital Territory of Delh i. It does not take 
security deposit from the borrowing members. The membership registration fee is nominal (Rs.2 only) and membership is given 
against an identity proof. However, in most of the State Central Libraries and District Libraries, boo ks are issued against a 
security deposit (normally cost of the borrowed boo k). This is done primarily to prevent loss of books . Most of these libraries 
offer free reading room services and readers can consult books within the library. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
129.  The Committee is also aware that although DPL has m ore than 50 branches but it caters mainly to the ar eas in 
New Delhi. The Community centres in various areas can be used for mobile DPL vans which can be on rotation basis.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
130.  The Committee is at a loss to note that there  is no mechanism to reflect the expenditure incurre d for North-East in the 
same financial year. Thus the Committee finds the accounting procedure complex and it is not known how much expenditure is 
incurred for North-East Region. Besides this how much the excess expenditure includes the component of North-East Region is 
not clear. The committee, therefore, recommends tha t necessary accounting system should be devised in consultation with 
C&AG and simplified to give a true picture of the expenditure incurred in North-East Region.  (para 126 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
131.  The necessary accounting system for monitorin g of the expenditure incurred under NER Head for va rious Cultural 
Organizations and Central Schemes has already been devised by the % CCA from the current financial year. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
132.  The Committee notes the reply.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
133.  The Committee notes that the Government has n either shown any long-term vision nor any substanti al short-term action 
to arrest the decay that has set in. The Ministry of Culture must move its wheels to generate a vision for the future that includes 
a sensible policy towards their missions. The Commi ttee recommends that the National Culture Policy ma y be brought out at 
the earliest.      (para 134 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  

134.  A National Committee for drafting a National Culture Policy was constituted on 11-11-2006, the t erms of the Committee 
was extended up 30-6-2008. The Committee has met si x times but could not arrive at a consensus. The co mmittee members 
have put forth various views and the same are under consideration.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
135.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the National Culture Policy would be formulated at the earliest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS-AT GLANCE  
ANNUAL PLAN 2010-11 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and  hopes that the Ministry would be able to optimally  utilize the 
resources in 2010-11.  (Para 7) 
  Reply in response to Committee’s recommendation c ontained in para 16 and 18 is disappointingly casual. Merely 
passing on its recommendation to Planning Commissio n and Ministry of Finance and waiting for reply ref lects an 
attitude which needs to be guarded against, if we w ant to improve the things. The Committee would like  to know when 
these recommendations were forwarded to the Plannin g Commission and Ministry of Finance and what their  response 
is. 
(Para 17) 
Archaeoloeical Survey of India 
  The Committee is not convinced with the reply tha t gives only procedural details and no account of t ime schedule 
of the excavation work carried on has been given.  (Para 20) 
  The Committee would like to know, if any standard  new technique has been developed for different kin ds of 
heritage sites, or it is taken on case to case basis.  (Para 30) 
Cultural Awareness Programme 
  The Committee had noted while examining Demands f or Grants (2010-11) that utilization of allocation for this 
purpose was very poor and explanation given was not  convincing. Action Taken Reply also does hardly ad d anything 
new. The Committee expresses its concern again abou t the manner in which the awareness generation acti vity is being 
handled.      (Para 26) 
  The Committee notes the reply and feels that thes e activities being very useful, need to be organize d more 
frequently even in remote and rural areas.  (Para 29) 
  The Committee may be apprised about the progress made so far and scheduled date of completion of the  
upgradation/modernization work.  (Para 32) 
Fund Allocation for ASI 
  The Committee was informed that the expenditure u pto Feb. 2010 as Rs. 110.07 crore. It seems Rs. 20.00 crore has 
been the last minute spending by ASI.  (Para 38) 
  The Committee notes the reply and still feels tha t making of tickets available through Internet shou ld be pursued 
within a time schedule.   (Para 41) 
Protection of Monuments 
  The Committee deserved more specific and pointed reply to a very serious issue involving protection of our 
heritage in an integrated manner.  (Para 44) 
Staff Strength of ASI 
  The Committee notes the reply and desires that th e Committee may be apprised of the findings of the Manpower 
Management and Planning Consultants as and when rec eived. It would also like to know about the fate of  the proposal 
for engaging 1000 ex-servicemen as Monument Attendants. 
(Para 48) 
  The Committee is dismayed to see the reply receiv ed from the Ministry of Culture. Perhaps the Minist ry of 
Culture did not care to read the reply before furnishing it to the Committee. They have simply forwarded the comments 

of ASI without taking any action on the recommendation of the Committee.The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
immediate action may be taken by the Ministry of Culture to fill up the vacant posts in ASI.  (Para 51 ) 
  The Committee may be apprised of the vacancies in  different circles and the number of posts filled so far there. 
        (Para 52) 
  The Committee is fully aware that in heritage pro tection/conservation several agencies and bodies ar e involved at 
different levels. The Committee had recommended the Ministry of Culture to ensure a close coordination amongst all of 
them. Currently, there is no mechanism in place for  regular communication, coordination and cooperatio n amongst 
these bodies. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should take appropriate action to accomplish the 
objectives. 
(Para 55) 
  The Committee notes the reply.  (Para 58) 
Horticulture Branch of ASI 
  The Committee may be apprised of the details of t he restructuring and the time to be taken in the re structuring of 
Horticulture wing.    (Para 61) 
  The Committee notes the reply.  (Para 64) 
Encroachments and Rehabilitation 
  The Committee notes its dismay that the Governmen t has not responded to the maintenance aspect of th e 
monuments which was the major thrust of its recomme ndation. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation and hopes that with amended Act, ASI  will be able to deal with encroachment problem mor e 
effectively. The Committee desires that action should be formulated to save the Jaisalmer Fort in a time bound manner. 
        (Para 67) 
  The Committee notes the reply and would like to b e informed about the development regarding separate allocation 
for removal of encroachments.  (Para 73) 
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
  The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Ministry for creating a database of built he ritages, sites 
and antiquities and recommends that the work may be finished in time bound manner.    
        (Para 78) 
Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCC) 
  The Committee notes the reply.  (Para 85) 
  The Committee observes that the reply of the Mini stry has not addressed the specific issue of underu tilization of 
plan outlays pointed out by the Committee. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends that it may be informe d about the 
schemes which were deferred during the year 2008-09  and the details of the adjustment of the unspent b alance and the 
reasons therefor. 
       (Para 88) 
  The Committee notes the reply.  (Para 94) 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (lGNCA) 
  The Committee notes the reply and feels that West ern region has no Centres or Sub-Centres. It may be considered 
seriously in first stance.   (Para 97) 
 

National Gallery of Modern Art 
  The Committee recommends that the pending work sh ould be completed in a time bound manner and the da te of 
completion may be communicated to the Committee.  (Para 100) 
The Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
  The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, how ever, may be apprised of the reasons for not gettin g the 
administrative approval for carrying out constructi on works on purchase of some property from ASI and other 
competent authorities and by when the work would be complete. 
       (Para 103) 
National Archives of India 
  The Committee noted the reply.  (Para 106) 
Museums 
  The Committee notes the reply.  (Para 109) 
  The Committee recommends that keeping in view the  weather conditions, the Museums should be opened i n 
evening also by deputing more staff.  (Para 112) 
  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that  modern equipments and gadgets need to be used for securing 
the museums and their objects.  (Para 115) 
  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should  not delay the opportunity from British Council to educate 
museum professional and get the benefit from their expertise. 
(Para 118) 
Libraries 
  The Committee notes the reply.  (Para 123) 
  The Committee may be apprised of the additional f unds required by the Libraries and sought by the Mi nistry of 
Culture in the first Supplementary Budget.  (Para 126) 
  The Committee is also aware that although DPL has  more than 50 branches but it caters mainly to the areas in 
New Delhi. The Community centres in various areas can be used for mobile DPL vans which can be on rotation basis. 
        (Para 129) 
Project/Schemes for Promotion of Art and Culture for North-East 
  The Committee notes the reply.  (Para 132) 
National Culture Policy 
  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the National Culture Policy would be formulated at the earliest. 
        (Para 135)  
 
 
.. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
V 
FIFTH  MEETING  
  The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday the 20th December, 2010 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury     -------     Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Shadi La1 Batra 
 3. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 4. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 5.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK  SABHA  
 6. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 7.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 8. Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 9. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 11.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 12. Shri K. Sugumar 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 * * * 
 * * * 
 * * * 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  of the Committee and informed them about the agend a of the 
meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following Draft Reports: 
(i) 162nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred  Fifty 
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Tourism; 
(ii) 163rd Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundre d Fifty 
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; 
(iii) 164th Report on Action Taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations contained in the One Hundr ed Fifty 
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Shipping; 
(iv) 165th Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundre d Fifty 
Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture; and 
(v) 166th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred  Fifty 
Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 

3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6. A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7. The meeting adjourned at 5:10 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 