PA R L IAM E N T  O F IND IA
R A JY A  SA B H A 145
D E PA R T M E N T -R E L A T E D P A R L IA M E N T A R Y  S T A N D IN G
C O M M IT T E E O N T R A N S P O R T , T O U R IS M A N D C U L T U R E
ONE HUNDRED AND FOR TY -FIFTH REPOR T
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDR ED
AND THIRTY-SIXTH R EPORT ON DEMANDS FOR  
GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE MINISTRY OF TOURISM
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED T O THE RAJY A  SABHA  ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK SABHA  ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
R A JY A  SA B H A  SE C R E TA R IA T
N E W  D E L H I
D E C E M B E R , 2008/A G R A H A Y A N A , 1930 (SA K A )D E C E M B E R , 2008/A G R A H A Y A N A , 1930 (SA K A )

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV A TIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE MINISTRY OF TOURISM
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—19
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 20—24
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 25—28

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
3. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Shanta Kumar
6. Shrimati Hema Malini
*7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
10. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shrimati Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Prahlad Joshi
21. Shri P. Karunakaran
22. Dr. P.P. Koya
23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Rakesh Singh
31. Shri Suraj Singh
* Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.  26.11.2008.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Forty-fifth Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Thirty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Tourism”.
2. The One Hundred and Thirty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the
28th April, 2008.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained on its
One Hundred and Thirty-sixth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on the
27th August, 2008.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the
18th December, 2008.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 18, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 27, 1930  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred Thirty-sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) (Demand No.93) of the Ministry of Tourism, which was presented to the
Parliament on 28th April, 2008.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 27th August, 2008 in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been
categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 9, 23, 24, 51, 52, 54, 61, 68, 69, 75 and 76 Total-11
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government replies:
Para No. 101 T otal-1
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 14 and 22 T otal-2
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
still awaited:
Para Nos. 30, 37, 38, 58, 64, 82, 83, 86, 92 and 97 Total-10
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which
have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry of Tourism. The recommendations
of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Thirty Sixth Report, action taken thereon by the
Government and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken
have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS AND ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2008-09
(Recommendation at Para 9)
5. The Committee observes that the Ministry of Tourism projected a requirement of
Rs.5405.58 crore (10% basis) and Rs.6569.61 crore (20% basis) for the entire Eleventh Plan
against this requirement, the Planning Commission approved an allocation of Rs.5156.00 crore for
carrying out major activities of the Ministry viz.  Augmentation of Tourist infrastructure,
Development of Human Resource for hospitality and travel trade, Promotion and Publicity, Creating
budget accommodation etc. The Committee also notes that in the Annual Plan 2008-09 the Ministry
has projected an outlay of Rs.1062.85 crore against which an amount of Rs.1000.00 crore was
allocated. The Committee deplores the tendency of Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
for imposing cuts on the amounts demanded by the Ministry. This mismatch between projected
amount and sanctioned outlay may result in widening further the gap between the tourism potential

2
and development of tourism synergies for achieving the goals. The Committee feels that in order
to attain the National growth targets in the Eleventh Plan period, huge planned funding is required.
Thus, the Government spending for the Ministry of Tourism will have to be significantly stepped-
up from the present level to meet the investment targets. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should be provided with Rs.6569.61 crore (20% basis)
by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for the Eleventh Plan Period as per their
original demand. The Committees also recommends the Ministry of Tourism to take appropriate
caution and remedial action to absorb in time the allocation made to them.
Reply of the Government
6. The Ministry accepts the recommendation that Government spending on tourism needs to
be stepped up with increased plan outlay.
7. The views of the Hon’ble Committee has been conveyed to the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission for providing Rs.6569.61 crore (20% basis) as per original proposal for the
Eleventh Five Year Plan.
8. The Ministry is taking conscious efforts to incur evenly paced utilization, which was
evident in 2007-08 with Ministry achieving upto 42% in second quarter, 69% in third quarter and
99.86% by 31st March, 2008.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
9. The Committee notes that as per the recommendation of the Committee the Ministry
of Tourism has requested the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for providing
Rs.6569.61 crore (20% basis) as per original proposal for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The
Committee again calls upon the Ministry to pursue with the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission for allocating the projected outlay. The Committee hopes that with
the allocation of the projected outlay for the Plan, the Ministry will be able to fully exploit
the tourism potentials besides developing tourist infrastructure in the country.
(Recommendation at Para 14)
10. The Committee notes that during 2007-08, the plan outlay of Rs.996.62 crore of Ministry
of Tourism was not subjected to any cut at RE stage. However, the Committee notes that during
the year 2007-08, out of the budgeted allocation of Rs.996.62 crore, the Ministry could spent
Rs.658.55 crore upto December, 2007 which clearly indicates the poor fiscal management in the
Ministry of Tourism. The Committee observes that the major portion of the budgetary outlays has
been utilized during the last quarter of the financial year. The Committee disapproves the tendency
of spending funds desperately towards the end of the financial year especially, in the months of
February and March. The Committee expects that the maximum amount of plan outlay would be
utilized suitably and substantially during the first two quarters of the financial year so that the
Ministry will be in a position to demand for higher allocations of the funds at RE stage for
implementation of various projects/schemes of augmentation of tourists infrastructure and
Promotion and publicity of tourism in the country. The Committee therefore, recommends the
Ministry to plan and incur their expenditure uniformly so that funds are utilized appropriately
throughout the year and the Ministry should shun the practice of incurring expenditure
indiscriminately towards the last quarter of the financial year. This way no alibi will be provided
to the Ministry of Finance to reduce the allocation at RE Stage. The Committee also recommends
that the Ministry should do away with procedural hurdles and maintain close liaison for the purpose
of review, monitoring, implementation and coordinating of projects/schemes to achieve the
envisaged targets.

3
Reply of the Government
11. The Ministry is taking special efforts for better fiscal management and as a result it has
been able to achieve evenly paced utilization of budget.
12. The Ministry of Tourism has been making efforts to incur the expenditure uniformly so that
funds are utilized appropriately throughout the year. During 2007-08 Ministry has utilized 99.86%
(provisional) of the Plan allocation of Rs.953.00 crore with the pace of the expenditure evenly
spread over the year. The expenditure up to second quarter was Rs.397.00 crore (42%) and upto
third quarter Rs.657.00 crore (69%) which was higher than the target expenditure set by Ministry
of Finance and result of proactive steps towards better fiscal management and budget utilization
in Ministry.
13. Constant efforts are also being made to strengthen the monitoring mechanism for early
implementation of projects to achieve the envisaged targets.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
14. The Committee notes the reply and desires to have the expenditure pattern of the
Ministry for the year 2007-08 and 2008-09 upto December, 2008 to ascertain the progress
of fiscal management, utilization of budgetary allocation and the details of the physical and
financial target set for achieving the progress. The Committee desires that for better
physical and financial monitoring of the projects sanctioned by the Ministry, proper
coordination with States/Union Territories may also be maintained through review meetings
and site visits from time to time.
AUGMENTATION OF TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE
(Recommendation at Para 22)
15. The Committee notes that one of the reasons for underutilization of allocation is unspent
balances with the States and also non-submission of utilization certificates by most of the States
on time. The Committee observes that most of the time the Central Government delay in release
of funds to the State or releases it at the fag end of the financial year and expects the States to
utilize it in a very short time. The Committee criticizes this practice as obviously the States are
not in a position to spend the entire amount in such a short period and therefore have unspent
balance lying with them. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the release of the funds to
the States should be made on time so that they could utilize the amount rationally under proper
monitoring of expenditure. The Committee also desires that there should be proper coordination
with the State Government, so as to obtain utilization certificates and to safeguard that money
released is spent only on approved infrastructure development projects.
Reply of the Government
16. The Ministry of Tourism has planned and incurred the expenditure uniformly so that funds
are utilized appropriately throughout the year. The funds are released to the State Governments
based on their project proposals which are complete as per the scheme guidelines. It is further
submitted that the Ministry released funds to State Governments/Union Territories for infrastructure
projects which have implementation schedule of 2-3 years. To avoid the accumulation of unspent
balance with the States, the Ministry of Tourism releases the 2nd instalment only when the UC for
the 1st instalment is received. For better physical and financial monitoring of the projects
sanctioned by the Ministry, proper coordination with States/Union Territories is also being
maintained through review meetings and site visits from time to time.

4
17. In the year 2007-08, the Ministry of Tourism released 70% of available budget for
infrastructure development by the end of September and 100% by the end of December to allow
sufficient time to State Governments to start the implementation of the projects.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
18. The Committee feels that waiting unduly long for utilization certificates would
unnecessarily delay the infrastructure projects and thereby creation of assets for tourism
infrastructure development. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry to evolve
a more efficient mechanism for the utilization of funds and obtaining the Utilization
Certificate. The Committee further recommends that proper coordination with States/Union
territories should also be maintained for the purpose.
(Recommendation at Para 23)
19. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is making efforts to develop quality
tourism infrastructure at major tourist destinations and circuits for developing tourist products and
providing better services to both domestic and international tourists. The Committee observes that
tourism is one of the economic sectors in the country that has the potential to grow at high rate
and can ensure consequential development of the infrastructure of the destinations and circuits. The
Committee feels that the infrastructure development holds the key to India’s sustain growth in the
tourism sector, therefore, tourist sites and destinations needs to be carefully selected on the basis
of their potential to provide all infrastructural facilities required by the tourists within such
destinations and circuits. The Committee is of the opinion that, if, India has to exploit its vast
inherent potential in tourism, then it must provide exclusive quality tourism product and destinations
comparable with other Asian countries like Singapore, Malaysia, Maldives, Thailand and China. As
tourism cannot develop independent of other infrastructure, therefore, a lot of information
dissemination is required in addition to hospitality and the scope and reach of the domestic tourism
should also be broadened through development of these competitive destinations and circuits. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to develop quality tourism at identified tourist
circuits and destinations with focus on mega destinations and circuits that match international
standards and satisfy the domestic and international tourists. The aggressive marketing and publicity
of these destinations and circuits should also be done to generate a niche market of Indian tourism
products. The Committee also urges the Ministry that while selecting a destination or a circuit they
should attach priority for harmonious growth and development of all the Regions and States.
Reply of the Government
20. The mega destinations/circuits have been identified in consultation with the State
Governments on the basis of data indicating foot falls, and potential arrivals for creation of world
class infrastructure in all regions of country. The Ministry is working with other Central
Government Ministries and concerned State Governments to achieve convergence and synergy with
other Government programmes so that the impact of investment in these destinations and circuits
is maximized. The Ministry of Tourism has also taken up issues related to air, rail and road
connectivity with the concerned Ministries for holistic development of these destinations/circuits.
21. Developed destinations/circuits are also being promoted in domestic and overseas markets.
(Recommendation at Para 24)
22. The Committee also recommends that in order to maximize the impact of investment on
tourism infrastructure, the Ministry should make efforts for convergence of these mega destinations

5
and circuits and projects with Jawahar Lal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) for
integrated development of infrastructure services, urban renewal, asset management and urban
governance.
Reply of the Government
23. The Ministry of Tourism has already made efforts for convergence of mega destinations
and circuits which are covered under Jawahar Lal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM) for their holistic and integrated development. Convergence of the resources is being
ensured so that the tourism related infrastructure and urban civic infrastructure complement each
other.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
24. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is making efforts with the State
Government to identify the sites/location for the development of mega destination and
circuits. The Committee also notes that the Ministry was making efforts for better
coordination and convergence of the resources with other Government schemes so as to
increase the flow of investment in these mega circuits/destination. The Committee feels
that a more consistent and proactive approach in vigorous marketing of product needed to
provide quality tourism infrastructure in the country. We would have to gives added impetus
to this effort which is yet to show the desired impact. The Committee recommends the
Ministry to pursue the matter with other Ministries and the State Governments in this
regard.
RURAL TOURISM
(Recommendation at Para 30)
25. The Committee notes that the rural tourism projects promoted under the scheme for
Product/Infrastructure Development of Destinations/Circuits targets rural artisans, artists and
service providers as primary beneficiaries for increase of tourist traffic to these rural destinations.
The Committee is of the view that Rural Tourism has great potential and prospects in the country
as it helps to provide boost to local performing arts and help conserve the local culture apart from
preventing rural urban migration. The Committee feels that the Rural Tourism needs to be given
impetus by allocating funds for the Rural Tourism projects for each State and the villages should
be identified for priority development involving the local bodies in the management. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Ministry to focus development of rural tourism infrastructure involving
local community in order to promote tourism in rural area and percolate its socio-economic benefit
there.
Reply of the Government
26. So far Ministry of Tourism sanctioned 128 rural tourism sites in 27 States.
27. In order to ensure that the socio-economic benefits of tourism percolate down to the rural
communities, Rural Tourism projects have focussed on boosting livelihood and preserving traditional
craft. The emphasis is on the site artisans structured involvement, progressing from national to
regional and international levels at Dilli Haat, the India International Trade Fair, the Toshali Mela
in Bhubaneshwar and at the India@60 roadshow in Singapore. Several sites such as Hodka in
Gujarat, Aranmula in Kerala, Nagger in H.P., Hee-Bermoik in Sikkim are proving to be successful
models of income generation, cultural preservation and gender empowerment.

6
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
28. The Committee feels that the number of sanctioned 128 rural tourism sites in 27
States is very less that needs to be increased to cover all the States/U.Ts. Besides, the status
of these projects, amounts released and utilized so far and number of projects pending and
completed are not known to the Committee for each State. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should furnish these information to the Committee and
attach priority by allocating funds for the rural tourism projects for each State and the
villages should be identified for priority development. The Committee feels that such a
scheme can better work by involving the local bodies and by community participation in the
management.
SHORTAGE OF ACCOMMODATION
(Recommendation at Para 37)
29. The Committee notes that to meet the shortage of about 40,000 rooms during the
Commonwealth Games 2010 in Delhi and NCR, the Ministry has mooted a proposal to Central and
State Governments for augmenting the accommodation infrastructure for growth and quality of the
tourist facilities and to create infrastructure by converting selected Government properties into
heritage hotels and making use of the vacant land in Government premises including surplus land
available with the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Railways and D.D.A. for creation of land banks and
development of hotels sites on revenue sharing basis and granting extra FSI/FAR for hotels. The
Committee also notes that a capital and interest subsidy schemes for accommodation infrastructure
upto 3 star and heritage basic hotels and a tax holiday for five years to budget and upto 4 star
category hotels have been introduced as a incentive to combat crisis besides finalization of
guidelines for the home stay programme under “Incredible India Bed and Breakfast Scheme”. The
Committee observes that there is a steep escalation for room tariffs in India which is an indication
of increasing demand for tourist accommodation. The committee feels that if such a condition
prolongs, the tourists being priced out and may opt for an alternative destination in another country.
The Committee is of the view that the migration of the tourist might have long-term implications
in terms of potential loss of future stream of tourists in favour of competing tourist destinations.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to explore the possibility of construction of
hotels on surplus land with Airports Authority of India and Ministry of Railways to meet the
demand for additional rooms in the wake of the Commonwealth Games 2010. The Committee also
urges the ministry to impress upon the Central and States Governments for implementation of
single window clearance system for tourism projects in order to encourage the private players to
build hotels in the country. This would not only optimize the utilization of infrastructure facilities
but also make the future investment viable.
Reply of the Government
30. Ministry of Tourism has been in regular touch with the State Governments and the various
Land Owning Agencies to allocate land on joint venture/revenue sharing basis and also to provide
incentives and benefits to facilitate the growth of the accommodation sector in the country. The
matter was also taken up at the State Tourism Secretaries meet in January, 2008. Ministry of
Tourism has through its Task Force meetings on creation of additional accommodation for the
Commonwealth Games been pursuing with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Railways
to explore the possibility of construction of hotels in their surplus land. So far fourteen Task Force
meetings have been held. This Ministry is also in constant touch with the States of Uttar Pradesh
and Haryana for the identification of additional hotel sites.

7
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
31. The Committee notes that Ministry of Tourism has been in regular touch with the
State Governments and the various Land Owning Agencies to allocate land on joint venture/
revenue sharing basis and also to provide incentives and benefits to augment the growth of
the accommodation in the country. The Committee also notes that a Task Force on creation
of additional accommodation for the Commonwealth Games has been actively pursuing with
the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Railways for exploring the possibility of
construction of hotels on their surplus land. However, the Committee is disappointed to note
that nothing has concretized till now and the Committee is not satisfied with the pace of
progress for attending to the shortage of accommodation particularly in the wake of the
ensuing Commonwealth Games 2010. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry should act fast for creation of additional rooms and pursue the matter with the
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Railways for construction of hotels on the surplus
land.
(Recommendation at Para 38)
32. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to take steps for facilitating additional hotel
accommodation thorough “Incredible India Bed and Breakfast Scheme” and consider extending of
tax concession benefits to budget home stay accommodation so as to facilitate availability of rooms
at affordable costs for the tourists who desires to stay with Indian families and experience Indian
culture and cuisine. An integrated publicity campaign in domestic and overseas markets should also
be carried periodically.
Reply of the Government
33. The Incredible India Bed and Breakfast Scheme has been launched all over the country. The
Government of NCT of Delhi had vide “The National Capital Territory of Delhi (Incredible India)
Bed and Breakfast Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2007 decided that (i) domestic
water and power tariff will be levied on these premises; (ii) no luxury tax will be applicable to such
establishments and (iii) property tax will be levied as on tenanted premises on pro-rata basis.
Minister of Tourism and Culture had written to the Chief Ministers of Uttar Pradesh and Haryana
respectively to pass a similar notification for the afore-mentioned scheme on the same lines as
Government of NCT Delhi by offering similar incentives and concessions so as to attract home
owners into joining the scheme and help solve the accommodation problem. Government of Uttar
Pradesh has recently launched the Bed and Breakfast Scheme in the State. Ministry of Tourism had
also written to all State Governments/ Union Territories to consider granting similar incentives to
Bed and Breakfast establishments. Government of Uttar Pradesh has recently launched the Bed and
Breakfast scheme in the State. In order to publicise the scheme, Ministry of Tourism had launched
a pilot publicity campaign in the print and electronic media in Delhi.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
34. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the “Incredible India Bed and Breakfast
Scheme” has been launched allover the country and the Government of NCT of Delhi has
been providing some concessions and incentives in terms of tariffs and taxes to attract the
home owners for joining the scheme. The Committee also notes that the Ministry of
Tourism has requested all State Governments and UTs to consider granting similar
incentives to Bed and Breakfast establishments. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Ministry to pursue the matter with the concerned State Governments for passing similar
incentives and concessions to the home owners who joins the Scheme to help to solve the

8
accommodation problem. The Committee also desires the Ministry to give adequate publicity
with location of the units in the print and electronic media for benefit of the tourists.
Efforts be made for creating an electronic database about this having link with the website
concerned.
SHORTAGE OF TRAINED MANPOWER
(Recommendation at Para 51)
35. The Committee notes that India has positioned itself as a major human resources supply
nation in the hospitality industry. The Committee is, however, concerned about the continuing
shortage of about 191000 trained manpower per annum in the tourism sector. The Committee is
of the view that the problem of trained manpower in the country may further aggravate, if the
Government does not come forward with concrete plan/policy. The Committee notes that in view
of the shortage of trained manpower in the tourism sector, the Ministry is setting up of more
Institutes of Hotel Management in the States and providing financial assistance for the
modernization and capacity enhancement of the existing ones as also of the Food Craft Institutes.
Reply of the Government
36. As observed by the Committee, the Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned setting up of a
number of State Institutes of Hotel Management and Food Craft Institutes. In the last financial year
and as of date during the current year, 9 new State IHMs and 5 new Food Craft Institutes have
been sanctioned. These 9 State IHMs are located at Yupia (Arunachal Pradesh), Ailawng (Mizoram),
Dimapur, Bodhgaya, Fursatganj (Uttar Pradesh), Hamirpur (Himachal Pradesh), Bhatinda, Sholapur,
Kozhikode (Kerala). The FCIs will be located at Nawgaon (Assam), Muzafarpur, Garhmukteshwar
(Uttar Pradesh), Jammu, Haasan (Karnataka).
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
37. The Committee notes that the Ministry has sanctioned setting up of 9 new State
IHMs and 5 new Food Craft Institutes in the country. The Committee feels that the step
taken by the Ministry is not adequate to address the continuing shortage of trained
manpower in the tourism sector. The Committee is of the view that till the time these
institutes will become functional, the demand and supply gap might further widen. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to come forward with a comprehensive
plan/policy which can adequately address the shortage of trained manpower in the tourism
sector.
(Recommendation at Para 52)
38. The Committee is of the view that the shortage of trained manpower in the tourism sector
can be better addressed by augmenting the infrastructure of existing training institutes in the country
besides opening more such training institutes in the private sector. The Committee, however, urges
the Ministry to provide institutional and integrated curricula for creation of trained manpower in the
tourism sector and the NCHMCT should be granted regulatory status to regulate, co-ordinate,
monitor, control and standardize quality of the educational institutions affiliated to it. This may help
to achieve excellence in the growing demand of trained manpower in the tourism sector.
Reply of the Government
39. The Ministry of Tourism is one with the perception of the Hon’ble Committee that the
shortage of trained manpower in the tourism sector can be better addressed by augmenting

9
infrastructure of the existing training institutes in the country besides opening more such training
institutes in the private hands. As a follow up of this thinking, the Ministry of Tourism has
sanctioned setting up of 9 State IHMs and 5 FCIs during the previous financial year and as of date
during the current year. These State sponsored institutes will not only augment the trained
manpower requirement of the industry but will also serve as model institutes to stimulate similar
efforts in the private sector. The MoT is equally alive to the necessity of sustaining quality in
hospitality education imparted. It is for this reason that the NCHMCT has been given the mandate
to also affiliate private IHMs which have necessary institutional infrastructure and faculty. As of
now, 7 private institutes stand affiliated to the NCHMCT. The NCHMCT would continue its efforts
to affiliate more private institutes in future also.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
40. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is augmenting infrastructure of
the existing training institutes in the country besides opening more such training institutes
in the private hands. The Committee is however, concerned with the quality of the
hospitality education imparted by the privately managed institutes and recommends the
Ministry to ensure that all these private IHMs were affliated to the NCHMCT, besides
ensuring proper infrastructure and faculty.
CRUISE TOURISM
(Recommendation at Para 54)
41. The Committee is perturbed to note that despite its recommendations in the earlier reports
on Demands for Grants urging the Government to bring out a comprehensive cruise tourism policy,
the Government has not formulated the cruise tourism policy till date. The Committee feels that
in the absence of a comprehensive cruise tourism policy the Ministry will not be able to popularize
the cruise tourism and address all the aspect of facilitating creation of infrastructural, encourage
investments from the private sector and create a congenial and hospitable environment for growth
of cruise tourism in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of pursue
vigorously the matter of finalization of cruise tourism policy and development of dedicated cruise
terminals at important ports with the Department of Shipping without further delay.
Reply of the Government
42. The Cabinet has approved the Cruise Shipping Policy which will enable creation of
infrastructure for cruise tourism, with the directions that an appropriate fiscal regime be put in
place in consultation with the Ministry of Finance.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
43. The Committee notes that as per its recommendation the Cabinet has approved the
Cruise Shipping Policy for the growth of cruise tourism in the country. The Committee
recommends that all efforts may be made for formulation of appropriate fiscal regime at
the earliest. The Committee hopes that with the implementation of the policy, a sustained
and structured growth for the sector could be thought of.
MEDICAL TOURISM
(Recommendation at Para 58)
44. The Committee notes that the concept of Medical Tourism is gaining momentum in the

10
country as it offers competitive cost and quality. The Committee also notes that the Government
is facilitating promotion of Medical Tourism and has introduced a new category of medical visa
for foreign tourists visiting India for medical treatment. The Committee feels that if, the country
has to become a major medical hub it must prepare a road map incorporating all possible challenges
and solutions for achieving recognition of the Medical Tourism and a synergy between the hospital
and tour operators should be ensured to promote this sector. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Ministry to prepare a blue print to tap latent potential, quality and standardization
of medical services besides promoting India as holistic health destinations globally. An integrated
publicity campaign should also be launched in the overseas markets.
Reply of the Government
45. The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare., Government
of India.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
46. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is pursing the matter with the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for achieving reorganization of medical tourism and
maintaining synergy between tour operators and hospitals in the country. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to frame guidelines at the earliest, in consultation with the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for standardization of medical services in the
country.
ADVENTURE TOURISM
(Recommendation at Para 61)
47. The Committee notes that the Adventure Tourism is India’s relatively new segment although
it offers a perfect playing ground for development of adventure sports like white water river rafting,
paragliding, hot air ballooning, skiing, mountain biking, scuba diving, hiking-trekking and rock
climbing-rappelling etc. The Committee also notes that Ministry of Tourism has formulated guidelines
on safety and quality norms for adventure tourism activities and is providing financial assistance to
various States/U.Ts for development of Adventure Tourism projects and infrastructure facilities
required for trekking, rock climbing, mountaineering, aero-sports, winter-water related sports, trekker
huts, wildlife viewing facilities, etc. The Committee recommends the Ministry to attach priority to this
special interest tourism and promote it with renewed zeal and vigour across the globe.
Reply of the Government
48. Ministry of Tourism is revising the existing safety guidelines on Adventure Tourism “Basic
Minimum Standards for Adventure Tourism Activities”, in collaboration with State Government
Tourism Departments and Adventure Tour Operators Association of India for including new
Adventure Tourism activities in all promotional material.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
49. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is revising the existing safety
guidelines on Adventure Tourism for providing the Basic Minimum Standards for Adventure
Tourism Activities in consultation with State Governments and other stakeholders. The
Committee recommends the Ministry to take early action for revising guidelines to
incorporate the safety and quality norms for development of Adventur e Tourism activities
in the country.

11
RELAXATION OF THE RESTRICTED AREA PERMIT (RAP)/PROTECTED AREA PERMIT
(PAP)/INNER LINE PERMIT (ILP) REGIME
(Recommendation at Para 64)
50. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is in constant touch with Ministry of
Home Affairs to relax/abolish the requirement of permit system in the country as the growth of
international tourism is based on development of tourism in that destination. The Committee is of
the view that foreign tourists constitute an important component of tourists who wish to visit the
country specially the North Eastern States and Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands.
The restrictions on foreigners to stay beyond permitted period and visiting only selected islands/
regions/destination has discouraged the foreign tourists arrival in the country. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that in order to optimally exploit the potential of tourism in these islands/
regions/destinations, the restrictions on the foreigners on visiting the islands/regions may be
removed and they may be permitted to stay/ enjoy the beauty of the islands/regions/destination for
a longer periods. The Committee also feels that opening up new islands/regions/destination for
foreigners also needs to be given priority. The Committee recommends the Ministry of Tourism to
vigorously pursue the matter of review of liberalization of the entire RAP/P AP/ILP regime at the
highest level in the Ministry of Home Affairs which act as a hindrance to the growth and
development of domestic and international tourism to those regions. The Committee may be
apprised of the outcome in the matter from time to time.
Reply of the Government
51. In order to boost tourism in these areas, the issues for which relaxation/abolition of the
RAP/PAP regime, is being sought, are:
• Tourists desirous of visiting areas having the RAP/PAP regime are required to travel in
a group of minimum of 4. Some of the places also require that they should be
accompanied by a liaison officer. In fact several areas such as Nanda Devi in
Uttarakhand and some areas of Sikkim do not permit individual tourists. The requirement
should be removed as the trend today is increasingly towards individual tourists.
• The maximum number of days that the tourist is permitted to stay at these places is
also restricted to 7, 10 or 15 days (only exception are the Andaman and Nicobar Islands
where they are permitted 45 days). This restriction should be removed so that tourists
can visit these areas at leisure.
• The routes for regions covered by RAP/PAP regime are also delineated by the Ministry
of Home Affairs due to which the tourists are restricted from visiting other interesting
places which may fall off these routes. This restriction should also be removed.
• Some of these States mentioned above even have an Inner Line Permit which has to
be taken by the domestic tourists visiting these areas. There is an urgent need to
completely relax/withdraw this permit as growth of international tourism to a region is
based on development of tourism in that destination.
52. The entire area of Arunachal Pradesh is covered by the Protected Area Regime under the
Foreigners (Protected Areas) Order, 1958. No foreigners can enter or stay in the State without
obtaining a permit from the competent authority.
53. In this regard, the Government of India, in consultation with all concerned has now decided
to open the following tour circuits for the foreign tourists in Arunachal Pradesh.
1. Along — Mechukha.

12
2. Existing Pasighat — Jenging — Yiungkiong to be extended upto Tuting.
3. Daporijo — Nacho Circuit via Taliha and Sayum.
4. Ziro — Palin — Nyapin — Sangram — Kaloriang.
5. Doimukh — Sagalee — Pakke Kasang — Seppa.
It has also been decided to delegate powers to the Government of Arunachal Pradesh for
issue of Protected Area Permit (PAP) in respect of the following:—
(a) To the visiting foreign tourists in a group of two or more persons (as against the
existing requirement of group strength of four or more persons) for a maximum period
of 30 days.
(b) To a group of two foreign tourists even if they are not married couples and to
foreigners married to Indian nationals belonging to the State of Arunachal Pradesh for
visiting the State on tourist visas.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
54. The Committee notes that although the Government has relaxed the permit system
in the Arunachal Pradesh to the visiting foreign tourists but for the rest of the North-
eastern region and Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands, it has not undertaken
a review exercise as suggested by the Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Government should consider relaxation/withdrawal of permit system as growth of
International tourism in a region is based on the easy accessibility of that area to the
tourist.
DOMESTIC CAMPAIGNS
(Recommendation at Para 68)
55. The Committee notes that the Ministry is launching a multi-pronged promotional campaign
in the domestic markets under Incredible India Campaigns. The nation wide campaigns “Sare Jahan
Se Achcha” and “Atithi Devo Bhava” aroused interest among the masses to travel within the
country besides sensitization and educating the public of preservation of monument and places of
tourist interests. The Committee feels that despite “Incredible India Campaigns” there still persists
a gap in information dissemination among middle class domestic travelers especially from rural
India about the places of tourist interests in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends
the Ministry to print the information brochures in all regional languages including Hindi and English
containing all minute details about tourist accommodation, unit rates, bus/taxi fares, climate,
seasons and must see places details etc. and these are distributed to the tourists with the help of
the States Tourism Departments so that the domestic travellers could largely be encouraged. The
Committee also recommends the Ministry to continue to focus on the diverse and varied tourism
product of the country and create awareness about varied attractions amongst domestic travelers
to tap and achieve the tourist potential available in the country.
Reply of the Government
56. The recommendations are accepted.
57. Through the Incredible India campaigns, the Ministry of Tourism has been endeavoring to
create interest and awareness about the different tourism products of the country for both domestic
and international markets to realize the full potential of the Indian tourism product.

13
58. Tourism Departments of the State Governments undertake promotion of their State through
advertising campaigns and production of publicity material. To effectively reach the target audience,
the promotion material of the State Governments is produced in the regional languages.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
59. The Committee notes that the Ministry accepted the recommendations of the
Committee. The Committee would also like to know the follow-up actions taken by the
Ministry to implement the recommendations. The Committee notes that the Ministry of
Tourism is undertaking promotion campaigns under ‘incredible India’ for creating interest
and awareness about the different tourism products of the country in both, domestic and
international markets. The Committee reiterates that the Ministry should continue to
promote the diverse and varied tourism products in different locations for making India as
preferred round the year destination. The promotional material so prepared should be made
available to the tourist for their use.
(Recommendation at Para 69)
60. The Committee also desires the Ministry to design integrated tour packages to suit to the
budget and need of the tourists in collaboration with the Tour and Travel Operators to make
domestic tourism a viable, popular and comfortable mode besides strengthening tourists’ facilities
at the tourist destinations, viz. transport, accommodation, catering, hygiene and sanitation etc.
Reply of the Government
61. In this regard letters have been sent to all the Service Providers to design tour packages
to make domestic tourism a viable, popular and comfortable mode for the tourists.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
62. The Committee notes that the Ministry has sent a letter to all the Service Providers
to design tour packages to make domestic tourism a viable, popular and comfortable mode
for the tourists. The Committee recommends that the tour and travel operators should be
motivated to come out with a customized tour packages which suits to the budget of the
tourists. The Committee desires to know the progress made in the matter.
OVERSEAS CAMPAIGNS
(Recommendation at Para 75)
63. The Committee notes that the allocation for overseas publicity and promotion has been
increased substantially for the year 2008-09. The Ministry through its Overseas Offices endeavours
to position India through “Incredible’ India” campaign as a preferred tourist destination in the major
source markets to increase India’s share in the international tourist arrivals. The Committee
observes that India with its rich culture and history, has vast and varied in-built tourism potential
and it should be exploited by the Ministry to its full potential. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Ministry to promote India as a round the year destination through a 360 degree
communication strategy, both in domestic and overseas market through a unique brand line
“Incredible India” campaign as a unique and preferred tourist destination. The Committee also urges
the Ministry to regularly review and monitor the functioning of the Overseas Offices in order to
ensure effecting marketing and positioning of India as preferred tourist destination in the global
markets.

14
Reply of the Government
64. The recommendations are accepted.
65. The Overseas Publicity budget for the year 2008-09 is Rs. 220 crores. The budget
allocation for Overseas promotion includes release of international campaigns to reach the target
audience in all the international markets to project India as preferred destination with multiple year
round attractions and the promotional activities carried out by the overseas offices of Ministry of
Tourism.
66. The Incredible India domestic campaign also endeavour to promote diverse tourism
products in different locations making India as round the year destination.
67. The promotional activities of the Ministry of Tourism are supplemented by the promotional
activities of the overseas offices. The Ministry of Tourism regularly reviews and monitors the
functioning of the overseas offices.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
68. The Committee notes the reply and recommends the Ministry to release
International campaign in overseas market to project India as preferred tourist
destination.
(Recommendation at Para 76)
69. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to take initiatives to promote and market
‘India’ overseas targeting consumers directly through electronic and print media and internet based
marketing and dissemination of information. The Committee urges the Ministry to produce publicity
material in various foreign languages and regularly launch awareness campaigns to sensitize/educate
stakeholders in the tourism industry and general public on various issues pertaining to tourism
such as tout menace, sanitation, preservation of monuments and tourist places, treatment of tourists
etc.
Reply of the Government
70. The recommendations are accepted. The Ministry of Tourism is undertaking promotions and
marketing of Incredible India through integrated campaigns. The Incredible India campaigns are
released in the potential overseas’ markets through print, electronic and online medium targeting to
the up market segment who have the means to travel. The Publicity material produced by Ministry
of Tourism — Press Ads, brochures etc. are translated into different foreign languages like
German, French, Italian, Japanese, Korean etc. for the non-English speaking markets. Incredible
India website has also been translated into French, Japanese and Chinese languages for a more
effective reach in the markets.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
71. The Committee notes that the Ministry is undertaking promotion and marketing
India through integrated campaigns which includes print, electronic and online medium to
target the up-market segment. However, the Committee finds no mention in the reply of
any remedy to the problem affecting the tourism sector at large such as, tout, sanitation,
preservation of monuments and tourist places, treatment of tourists etc. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to explore the way to sensitize/educate the stakeholders and
general public in the tourism industry on these scores.

15
ROAD CONNECTIVITY
(Recommendation at Para 82)
72. The Committee notes there are number of destinations and circuits having huge tourist
potential. The Committee, however, is deeply concerned over the poor road connectivity of these
tourism destinations and circuits including cultural heritage sites. It observes that many of tourist
destinations are away from the National Highways and lack road connectivity of desired standard.
However, the Committee notes that an Inter-Ministerial Group of Secretaries is looking after the
road connectivity projects to identify the road links to tourist destinations, assess their present
condition and suggest measures to improve connectivity to all major destinations/heritage sites with
the National Highways. The Ministry of Tourism has provided a list of 11 roads to the group for
improvement and upgradation which connects the tourist destinations and circuits including heritage
sites. The Committee is aware that improvement and upgradation of State roads, is the
responsibility of State Government. Therefore, the Ministry of Tourism should impress upon the
respective State Governments/UTs to improve the condition of such roads and Government of
India should consider the proposals for improvement of State roads under Central Road fund
Scheme.
Reply of the Government
73. The Ministry of Tourism has been requesting State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations to improve the condition of State roads. The Department of Road Transport and
Highways has also been requested to consider the proposals for improvement of State roads under
the scheme of Central Road Fund.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
74. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has mooted a proposal to the
Department of Road Transport and Highways for improvement of State Roads under the
Central Road Fund Scheme. The Committee expresses its concern about large scale of
under utilization of CRF by the States/U.Ts. The Committee recommends the Ministry to
expeditiously pursue the matter with the Department of Road Transport and Highways for
improvement and upgradation of State Roads which are connecting the tourist destination
and circuits including cultural heritage sites.
(Recommendation at Para 83)
75. The Committee is perturbed to note that lack of connectivity is the major impediment for the
growth of tourism in India. The Committee feels that there exists a large domestic tourist movement
in the country but in the absence of poor access to the places of tourist interest, the tourist cannot
be encouraged to visit such places. The Committee is of the view that domestic tourism cannot be
promoted unless air, rail and road links across the country and especially the places of tourist interest
are improved to desired level. The Committee recommends that tourist destinations in the country
should be well connected with the rail, road and air to ensure the easy accessibility to these places.
In order to improve the connectivity to tourist sites, the Ministry of Tourism should have close
coordination with Ministry of Railways and Civil Aviation for promotion of tourism in the country.
The Ministry of Railways should provide better quality of rail services to encourage tourists to travel
by train. The basic amenities like drinking water, toilets, tea-coffee, parking facilities and
well-maintained clean waiting rooms and porters with trolleys should also be provided at the railway
stations connecting these mega destinations The Ministry of Civil Aviation should develop
infrastructure facilities at airports to meet the rising air traffic requirements and quality of service at

16
the airports connecting mega destinations. The domestic and foreign carriers should also be
encouraged to increase air seat capacity from overseas markets. The helicopter services for remote
areas, like, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and North-Eastern region may also be initiated by
the Ministry of Civil Aviation as a measure to promote tourism in a big way.
Reply of the Government
76. The Ministry of Tourism has taken up the issues related to improvement of road, rail and
air connectivity with the Ministries of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Railways and Civil
Aviation and Planning Commission. The Empowered Sub-Committee of the Committee on
Infrastructure has also constituted the Inter- Ministerial Groups on the issues of road connectivity,
augmentation of accommodation and Cruise Tourism and a Committee on Destination Development
to suitably address the inter-ministerial issues for development of tourism in the country.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
77. The Committee notes that as per its recommendation, the Ministry of Tourism has
taken up the issues related to improvement of road, rail and air connectivity with the
Ministries of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Railways and Civil Aviation and
Planning Commission. The Committee also notes that an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) has
been constituted under Committee on Infrastructure to look into the issues of connectivity
for the growth of tourism in the country. The Committee recommends the Ministry to
impress upon the IMG to come out with a perspective plan for proper connectivity of places
of tourist interest across the country so as to encourage the visit of the tourist to such
places.
MULTICIPLICTY OF TAXES
(Recommendation at Para 86)
78. The Committee is constrained to notes that luxury tax on hotel, V A T on food and beverages
and on Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and higher rate of taxes on tourists transport vehicles in the
States have adverse effect on the growth of tourism. The Committee, however, is perturbed to note
that even after repeated recommendations of the Committee, the Government has not been able to
do much to rationalize the tax regime, which is ailing the tourism sector at large. The Ministry of
Tourism has forwarded two proposals for consideration of Empowered Committee of State Finance
Ministers and Department of Road Transport and Highways respectively, in this regard and a
decision is awaited. The Committee strongly criticizes the lackadaisical approach of the Government
in the matter which has adversely affected the growth of tourism and hospitality sector in the
country. The Committee reiterates that the Government must provide a level playing field to the
tourism and hospitality sector including tourist transport by attempting to rationalize taxes or
eliminate the disparity in tax treatment as levied by the different States and Union Territories. The
Committee recommends the Ministry to pursue vigorously the matter of rationalization of taxes with
the Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers till the matter is favourably resolved. The
Committee also recommends the Government to set up an Empowered Group for rationalization of
roads and transport taxes on tourist vehicles.
Reply of the Government
79. The issue of uniformity and rationalization of tax structure in the tourism sector has
been taken up by the Ministry of Tourism at various fora so that taxes could be rationalized
and a consensus can be evolved on the subject in order to give a further boost to tourism
and promote India as a “Value for Money” destination.

17
80. Ministry of Tourism has taken up the issue of rationalization of Luxury Tax in hotels and
V AT on food and beverages and Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and the high rate of taxation on tourist
transport vehicles with Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers through Ministry of
Finance. In this regard, we have written letters to Empowered Committee of State Finance
Ministers on 09.02.2007, 17.09.2007, 26.03.2008 and Ministry of Finance on 10.05.2007. On the
issue of rationalization of State Luxury Tax and V AT on food and beverages charged by various
States, requisite information has been submitted to the Empowered Committee.
81. The issue was also taken up during the review meeting of the State Tourism Secretaries
which was held on 24.01.2008 and the State Tourism Secretaries were asked to impress upon their
counterparts in the State Finance departments to look into the issue of rationalization of taxes. The
matter was again requested to be considered for favour of relaxing the taxes, in a recently held
meeting of Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers on 5th May, 2008.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
82. The Committee notes that Ministry of Tourism has taken up the issue of
rationalization of Luxury Tax in hotels and V AT on food and beverages and sales tax or
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and the high rate of taxation on tourist transport vehicles with
Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers through Ministry of Finance. The
Committee recommends the Ministry to try to evolve consensus on the subject in order to
give a further boost to tourism and promote India as a “Value for Money” destination.
VISA ON ARRIV AL SCHEME
(Recommendation at Para 92)
83. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has taken up the matter of the issue of visa
on arrival facility on pilot basis to tourists with the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of
Home Affairs for 18 select countries. The Committee welcomes the decision of the Ministry of
Home Af fairs to grant long term tourist visas for 5 years duration with multi-entry facilities to the
nationals of the 18 countries and introduction of Advanced Passenger Information System (APIS).
However, the step is not sufficient to achieve the objective. The Committee feels that with the
liberalization of visa regime and introduction of multiple entry long term tourist visas for tourists
and implementation of APIS would facilitate tourist arrivals in the country and increase India’s
share in global tourism markets. The Committee recommends the Ministry to pursue the matter
with the Ministry of Home Affairs for expediting introduction of multiple entry long term tourists’
visa, provide visa on arrival facilities on pilot basis to the nationals of 18 countries and
implementation of APIS. The Committee also cautions the Ministry that in no way the security
considerations of the country be compromised.
Reply of the Government
84. In order to position India as a global brand, the Ministry of Tourism had mooted a proposal
of granting visa-on-arrival scheme for 18 designated countries. The Ministry of Tourism has
circulated a CoS note to the concerned Ministries on the issue of ‘Visa-on-Arrival’ and ‘Long Term
Visa’.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
85. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has mooted a proposal of granting
visa-on-arrival scheme for 18 designated countries and a Committee of Secretaries (CoS)
note to the concerned Ministries on the issue of ‘Visa-on-Arrival’ and ‘Long Term Visa’ has
already been circulated. The Committee feels that with the liberalization of visa regime and

18
introduction of multiple entry long term tourist visas for tourists and implementation of
APIS would facilitate tourist arrivals in the country and increase India’s share
internationally. The Committee recommends the Ministry to impress upon all concerned
Ministries for expediting the issue of ‘Visa-on-Arrival ’ and ‘Long Term Visa’ facilities under
intimation to the Committee.
SPECIAL TOURISM POLICE
(Recommendation at Para 97)
86. The Committee is constrained to note that incidents of cheating, fleecing, criminal acts and
harassment of foreign tourists including gender abuse mar the image of the country and have an
adverse impact on the foreign tourists arrival. The Committee feels that the issue related with safety
and security is paramount and needs to be looked into seriously. The Committee is aware about the
linkages between Centre and States in the federal set-up and appreciates the efforts of the Ministry
in persuading the States for creation of tourist police force for ensuring the safety and security of
the tourists. The Committee also notes that the Ministry of Tourism is formulating guidelines
regarding formation of tourist police force and has taken several steps to curb the menace of
cheating, over charging and victimization of tourists. The Committee feels that in the critical situation,
the role of media, travel agents and tour operators is crucial in establishing goodwill and image of
that country. The Committee appreciate the ten States who have deployed Tourist Police force.
However, it desires that Ministry should now take initiatives for deployment of special Tourist Police
in the remaining States and bring out a guidelines on the formation of tourism police so as to address
the safety and security related issues in a big way. The Committee also desires that the police
personnel of the States should also be provided special tourist oriented training.
Reply of the Government
87. The Ministry of Tourism has been consistently following up with the State Governments and
Union Territory Administrations requesting them to deploy tourist police in their States at important
tourist centres for safety and security of tourists. The issue of safety and security was discussed
in the Meeting of State Tourism Secretaries, Representatives of Ministry of Home, Ministry of
Defence and Delhi Police on 24th January, 2008. Later, as a result of deliberations, the guidelines
have been formulated in consultation with Ministry of Home, Ministry of Defence to form Tourist
Security Organisation deploying primarily Ex-Serviceman. Hon’ble Minister of Tourism and Culture
has written letters to the Chief Ministers of all States/Union Territories in this regard on 02.05.2008.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
88. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is consistently following up the
State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for deploying tourist police in their
States at important tourist centres for safety and security of tourists and a guidelines have
been formulated in consultation with Ministry of Home, Ministry of Defence to form Tourist
Security Organisation deploying primarily Ex-Servicemen. The Committee recommends the
Ministry to persuade the remaining States for the formation of tourism police force for
ensuring safety and security of the tourists and to curb the rising incidents of cheating,
fleecing criminal acts and harassment of foreign tourists including gender abuse.
COORDINATION WITH V ARIOUS DEPARTMENTS
(Recommendation at Para 101)
89. The Committee notes that the tourism is multi-disciplinary activity and cannot be developed at

19
its own. The Committee also note that there exists a Committee of Secretaries for effective
coordination and making decision on the policy matter amongst different Ministries. The Committee
feels that there is a need to strengthen the system for effective function and close coordination
amongst various Departments and Ministries of the Government i.e. Railways, Urban Development,
Civil Aviation, Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Home, Finance etc. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Ministry to set in place institutional arrangement for better linkages,
interface and coordination amongst various Departments and Ministries so as to increase awareness
about tourism and its social and economic impact on the society.
Reply of the Government
90. The Ministry accepts the need to set in place institutional arrangements for coordination
with other Ministries and the Ministry of Tourism has been taking up the Inter-Ministerial issues
for development and promotion of tourism in the country with the concerned Ministries in the
meetings of Committee of Secretaries, and in the meetings of Empowered-Sub-Committee of the
Committee on Infrastructure headed by the Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission. The
Empowered-Sub-Committee of the Committee on Infrastructure has further constituted three Inter-
Ministerial Groups and an Inter-Ministerial Committee for resolving Inter-Ministerial issues related
to development of tourism.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
91. The Committee notes the Empowered Sub-Committee of the Committee on
Infrastructure is looking into the issues affecting the growth of tourism in the country and
effecting co-ordination and making decision on the policy matter amongst various
Ministries. The Committee however, recommends the Ministry of Tourism to make some
institutional arrangement within the Ministry at apex level for better co-ordination and
inter-face with other Ministries/Department for development and promotion of tourism in
the country.

20
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS AND ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2008-09
The Committee notes that as per the recommendation of the Committee the
Ministry of Tourism has requested the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for
providing Rs.6569.61 crore (20% basis) as per original proposal for the Elevnth Five Year
Plan. The Committee again calls upon the Ministry to pursue with the Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission for allocating the projected outlay. The Committee hopes that
with the allocation of the projected outlay for the Plan, the Ministry will be able to fully
exploit the tourism potentials besides developing tourist infrastructure in the country.
(Para 9)
The Committee notes the reply and desires to have the expenditure pattern of the
Ministry for the year 2007-08 and 2008-09 upto December, 2008 to ascertain the progress
of fiscal management, utilization of budgetary allocation and the details of the physical
and financial target set for achieving the progress. The Committee desires that for better
physical and financial monitoring of the projects sanctioned by the Ministry, proper
coordination with States/Union Territories may also be maintained through review
meetings and site visits from time to time. (Para 14)
AUGMENTATION OF TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE
The Committee feels that waiting unduly long for utilization certificates would
unnecessarily delay the infrastructure projects and thereby creation of assets for tourism
infrastructure development. The Committee therefore, recommends the Ministry to evolve
a more efficient mechanism for the utilization of funds and obtaining the Utilization
Certificate. The Committee further recommends that proper coordination with States/
Union territories should also be maintained for the purpose. (Para 18)
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is making efforts with the State
Government to identify the sites/location for the development of mega destination and
circuits. The Committee also notes that the Ministry was making efforts for better
coordination and convergence of the resources with other Government schemes so as to
increase the flow of investment in these mega circuits/destination. The Committee feels
that a more consistent and proactive approach in vigorous marketing of product needed
to provide quality tourism infrastructure in the country. We would have to give added
impetus to this effort which is yet to show the desired impact. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to pursue the matter with other Ministries and the State
Governments in this regard. (Para 24)
RURAL TOURISM
The Committee feels that the number of sanctioned 128 rural tourism sites in 27
States is very less that needs to be increased to cover all the States/UTs. Besides, the
status of these projects, amounts released and utilized so far and number of projects
pending and completed are not known to the Committee for each State. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should furnish these information to the
Committee and attach priority by allocating funds for the rural tourism projects for each
20

21
State and the villages should be identified for priority development. The Committee feels
that such a scheme can better work by involving the local bodies and by community
participation in the management. (Para 28)
SHORTAGE OF ACCOMMODATION
The Committee notes that Ministry of Tourism has been in regular touch with the
State Governments and the various Land Owning Agencies to allocate land on joint
venture/revenue sharing basis and also to provide incentives and benefits to augment the
growth of the accommodation in the country. The Committee also notes that a Task Force
on creation of additional accommodation for the Commonwealth Games has been actively
pursuing with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Railways for exploring the
possibility of construction of hotels on their surplus land. However, the Committee is
disappointed to note that nothing has concretized till now and the Committee is not
satisfied with the pace of progress for attending to the shortage of accommodation
particularly in the wake of the ensuing Commonwealth Games 2010. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should act fast for creation of additional rooms
and pursue the matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Railways for
construction of hotels on the surplus land. (Para 31)
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the “Incredible India Bed and
Breakfast Scheme” has been launched all over the country and the Government of NCT
of Delhi has been providing some concessions and incentives in terms of tariffs and taxes
to attract the home owners for joining the scheme. The Committee also notes that the
Ministry of Tourism has requested all State Governments and UTs to consider granting
similar incentives to Bed and Breakfast establishments. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Ministry to pursue the matter with the concerned State Governments for
passing similar incentives and concessions to the home owners who joins the Scheme to
help solve the accommodation problem. The Committee also desires the Ministry to give
adequate publicity with location of the units in the print and electronic media for benefit
of the tourists. Efforts be made for creating an electronic database about this having link
with the website concerned. (Para 34)
SHORTAGE OF TRAINED MANPOWER
The Committee notes that the Ministry has sanctioned setting up of 9 new state
IHMs and 5 new Food Craft Institutes in the country. The Committee feels that the step
taken by the Ministry is not adequate to address the continuing shortage of trained
manpower in the tourism sector. The Committee is of the view that till the time these
institutes will become functional, the demand and supply gap might further widen. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to come forward with a comprehensive
plan/policy which can adequately address the shortage of trained manpower in the tourism
sector. (Para 37)
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is augmenting infrastructure of
the existing training institutes in the country besides opening more such training
institutes in the private hands. The Committee is however, concerned with the quality of
the hospitality education imparted by the privately managed institutes and recommends
the Ministry to ensure that all these private IHMs were affliated to the NCHMCT, besides
ensuring proper infrastructure and faculty. (Para 40)
CRUISE TOURISM
The Committee notes that as per its recommendation the Cabinet has approved the

22
Cruise Shipping Policy for the growth of cruise tourism in the country. The Committee
recommends that all efforts may be made for formulation of appropriate fiscal regime at
the earliest. The Committee hopes that with the implementation of the policy, a sustained
and structured growth for the sector could be thought of. (Para 43)
MEDICAL TOURISM
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is pursing the matter with the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for achieving reorganization of medical tourism
and maintaining synergy between tour operators and hospitals in the country. The
Committee recommends the Ministry to frame guidelines at the earliest, in consultation
with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for standardization of medical services in
the country. (Para 46)
ADVENTURE TOURISM
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is revising the existing safety
guidelines on Adventure Tourism for providing the Basic Minimum Standards for
Adventure Tourism Activities in consultation with State Governments and other
stakeholders. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take early action for revising
guidelines to incorporate the safety and quality norms for development of Adventure
Tourism activities in the country. (Para 49)
RELAXATION OF THE RESTRICTED AREA PERMIT (RAP)/PROTECTED AREA PERMIT
(PAP)/INNER LINE PERMIT (ILP) REGIME
The Committee notes that although the Government has relaxed the permit system
in the Arunachal Pradesh to the visiting foreign tourists but for the rest of the North-
eastern region and Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands, it has not undertaken
a review exercise as suggested by the Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Government should consider relaxation/withdrawal of permit system as growth of
International tourism in a region is based on the easy accessibility of that area to the
tourist. (Para 54)
DOMESTIC CAMPAIGNS
The Committee notes that the Ministry accepted the recommendations of the
Committee. The Committee would also like to know the follow-up actions taken by the
Ministry to implement the recommendations. The Committee notes that the Ministry of
Tourism is undertaking promotion campaigns under ‘incredible India’ for creating interest
and awareness about the different tourism products of the country in both, domestic and
international markets. The Committee reiterates that the Ministry should continue to
promote the diverse and varied tourism products in different locations for making India
as preferred round the year destination. The promotional material so prepared should be
made available to the tourist for their use. (Para 59)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has sent a letter to all the Service
Providers to design tour packages to make domestic tourism a viable, popular and
comfortable mode for the tourists. The Committee recommends that the tour and travel
operators should be motivated to come out with a customized tour packages which suits
to the budget of the tourists. The Committee desires to know the progress made in the
matter. (Para 62)

23
OVERSEAS CAMPAIGNS
The Committee notes the reply and recommends the Ministry to release
International campaign in overseas market to project India as preferred tourist
destination. (Para 68)
The Committee notes that the Ministry is undertaking promotion and marketing
India through integrated campaigns which includes print, electronic and online medium to
target the up market segment. However, the Committee finds no mention in the reply of
any remedy to the problem affecting the tourism sector at large such as, tout, sanitation,
preservation of monuments and tourist places, treatment of tourists etc. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to explore the way to sensitize/educate the stakeholders and
general public in the tourism industry on these scores. (Para 71)
ROAD CONNECTIVITY
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has mooted a proposal to the
Department of Road Transport and Highways for improvement of State Roads under the
Central Road Fund Scheme. The Committee expresses its concern about large scale of
under utilization of CRF by the States/U.Ts. The Committee recommends the Ministry to
expeditiously pursue the matter with the Department of Road Transport and Highways for
improvement and upgradation of State Roads which are connecting the tourist destination
and circuits including cultural heritage sites. (Para 74)
The Committee notes that as per its recommendation, the Ministry of Tourism has
taken up the issues related to improvement of road, rail and air connectivity with the
Ministries of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Railways and Civil Aviation and
Planning Commission. The Committee also notes that an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG)
has been constituted under Committee on Infrastructure to look into the issues of
connectivity for the growth of tourism in the country. The Committee recommends the
Ministry to impress upon the IMG to come out with a perspective plan for proper
connectivity of places of tourist interest across the country so as to encourage the visit
of the tourist to such places. (Para 77)
MULTICIPLICTY OF TAXES
The Committee notes that Ministry of Tourism has taken up the issue of
rationalization of Luxury Tax in hotels and V AT on food and beverages and sales tax or
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and the high rate of taxation on tourist transport vehicles
with Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers through Ministry of Finance. The
Committee recommends the Ministry to try to evolve consensus on the subject in order
to give a further boost to tourism and promote India as a “Value for Money” destination.
(Para 82)
VISA ON ARRIVAL SCHEME
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has mooted a proposal of
granting visa-on-arrival scheme for 18 designated countries and a Committee of
Secretaries (CoS) note to the concerned Ministries on the issue of ‘Visa-on-Arrival’ and
‘Long Term Visa’ has already been circulated. The Committee feels that with the
liberalization of visa regime and introduction of multiple entry long term tourist visas for
tourists and implementation of APIS would facilitate tourist arrivals in the country and
increase India's share internationally. The Committee recommends the Ministry to

24
impress upon all concerned Ministries for expediting the issue of ‘Visa-on-Arrival’ and
‘Long Term Visa’ facilities under intimation to the Committee. (Para 85)
SPECIAL TOURISM POLICE
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism is consistently following up the
State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for deploying tourist police in
their States at important tourist centres for safety and security of tourists and a guideline
have been formulated in consultation with Ministry of Home, Ministry of Defence to form
Tourist Security Organisation deploying primarily Ex-Servicemen. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to persuade the remaining States for the formation of tourism
police force for ensuring safety and security of the tourists and to curb the rising
incidents of cheating, fleecing criminal acts and harassment of foreign tourists including
gender abuse. (Para 88)
COORDINATION WITH V ARIOUS DEPARTMENTS
The Committee notes the Empowered Sub-Committee of the Committee on
Infrastructure is looking into the issues affecting the growth of tourism in the country
and effecting co-ordination and making decision on the policy matter amongst various
Ministries. The Committee however, recommends the Ministry of Tourism to make some
institutional arrangement within the Ministry at apex level for better co-ordination and
inter-face with other Ministries/Department for development and promotion of tourism in
the country. (Para 91)

25
MINUTES

VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday the 18th December, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsu1
5. Shri Joachim Baxla
6. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Shrimati Priya Dutt
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the draft 143rd, 144th, 145th, 146th and 147th Reports on the
Action Taken by the Government on the recommondations/observations of the Committee
contained in its (i) One Hundred and Thirty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of
the Department of Shipping; (ii) One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of the Department of Road Transport and Highways;(iii) One Hundred and Thirty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Tourism; (iv) One Hundred and
Thirty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Culture; and (v) One
Hundred and Thirty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation respectively. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the reports without any
modifications.
27

28
3. Thereafter, the Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Birendra Prasad
Baishya to present the reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Adhir Chowdhury and Shrimati Priya
Dutt to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2008.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.