 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
273 
 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Sixty Second Report on 'Development of Buddhist Circuit 
in India' 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2019) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2019) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY THIRD REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Sixty Second Report on 'Development of Buddhist Circuit in India' 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th December, 2019) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th December, 2019) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi,  
December, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka) 
 


C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS               (iv) 
4. REPORT         1-30  
CHAPTER-I-     RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE  
 BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY    
CHAPTER-II-  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE  
 COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF  
 THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY     
CHAPTER-III- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  
 WHICH REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN  
 ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE     
CHAPTER-IV- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  
 WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE  
 STILL AWAITED       
                               
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   31-34   
  
    6. MINUTES         35-36   
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
        
         
        
        
      
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
7. Kumari Selja  
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
12.  Shri Anto Antony 
13.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
14.  Shri Tapir Gao  
15.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
17.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
18.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
19.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
20.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
21.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
22.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
23.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
24.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
26.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
29.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
 
(i) 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on 
its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred and Seventy Third Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Two 
Hundred and Sixty Second Report on 'Development of Buddhist Circuit in India'. 
2.  The Two Hundred and Sixty Second Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 
14th December, 2018. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its Two Hundred and Sixty Second Report were received from the Ministry of 
Tourism on 20th May, 2019. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 5 th 
December, 2019.   
 
 
 T.G. VENKATESH 
NEW DELHI;                                                      Chairman, 
December 5, 2019                                           Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)                    Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

ACRONYMS 
AEDP II   Ajanta-Ellora conservation and tourism Development  
    Plan (AEDP) – Phase II 
ASI    Archaeological Survey of India 
BIMSTEC  Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation     
CCTV    Closed Circuit Television 
CNN    Cable News Network 
CSMC    Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee 
HM(T)    Hon‟ble Minister for Tourism 
IBC    International Buddhist Conclave 
IITM    Indian Institute of Travel and Tourism Management 
IMCCTS   Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee for Tourism 
IRCTC    Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation 
ITDC    Indian Tourism Development Corporation 
MoCA    Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoRTH   Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
NHAI    National Highways Authority of India 
PCC    Prestressed Cement Concrete 
SPV    Special Purpose Vehicle 
UDAN    Ude Desh ka Aam Naagrik 
UT    Union Territory 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken  by the Ministry of Tourism on the 
Recommendations/Observations as contained in its Two Hundred and Sixty Second Report on 
„Development of Budd hist Circuit in India‟ presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 14 th 
December,  2018. 
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry of Tourism on 20 th May, 
2019, in respect of the R ecommendations/Observations contained in the 262 nd Report. The 
replies have been categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  8, 10, 11, 20, 28, 46, 47, 48, 49, 58, 59, 63, 65, 86, 87, 90 
Total: 16 
 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  13, 14, 22, 27, 31, 32, 37, 38, 42, 57, 68, 69, 72, 76, 77, 93 
Total: 16 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 15, 16, 19, 26, 34, 51, 61, 62, 70, 74, 75, 80, 81, 82, 88, 98 
Total: 16 
 
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: 60, 97  
Total: 2 
 
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those 
recommendations/observations which have been categorized as interim replies by the 
Committee should be furnished at the earliest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
LACK OF CONNECTIVITY 
 
a) Road 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee, therefore, recommends that roads connecting the sites in the Circuits 
must be improved. The Ministry of Tourism, along with the States concerned and the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways, must come together to ensure the completion of pending projects 
and develop new projects to connect these places. Moreover, the existing roads must be made 
into four-lane roads and traffic congestion must be checked and resolved. The Committee also 
recommends that existing roads must be maintained to m eet international standards. Roads must 
also be kept litter -free and must be cleaned regularly. Unnecessary speed breakers must be 
removed and roads must be tarmacked. 
(Para 8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. Recommendation of Committee has been noted for compliance. Ministry of Tourism has 
identified Buddhist Circuit as one of the priority areas for development. The Ministry is working 
on improving connectivity and overall travel experience for the visitors in  the circuit and has 
taken up the issue with concerned line Ministries. 
 
1.2. For improvin g the road connectivity in the C ircuit, t he Ministry has taken up the issue 
with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, who has informed that work on four -laning 
of National Highways in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar is in process and is expected to be complete by 
June 2019.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.3. The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2.  The Committee recommends that a Committee or Panel should be instituted, which would 
include the State Governments concerned, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, NHAI, 
Ministry of Tourism and any other stakeholders, to ensure the construction and mainte nance of 
roads connecting the various sites under the Buddhist Circuit. 
(Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. Recommendation of Committee has been noted.  However, construction and maintenance 
of National Highway/ State Highway is the responsibility of conc erned Government in whose 
jurisdiction it falls. The Ministry of Tourism, only takes up the issues with the concerned 
Ministry/ Government for action.  
 

3 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.2. The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to 
pursue, from time to time,  the issue of construction and maintenance of roads/highways 
connecting the various sites under the Buddhist Circuit, with the concerned 
Ministry/Government for timely action. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.  The Committee notes that the Circuit does not suffer from lack of funds. However, 
execution of existing projects leaves much to be desired. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that a timeline be fixed for each project undertaken for construction and perio dic reports be 
submitted on the same, to ensure their timely completion.  
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. Recommendation of Committee has been noted. The projects sanctioned by the Ministry 
under Buddhist Circuit are with specific timelines and Minist ry carries out regular monitoring of 
the projects for its timely implementation.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.2. The Committee notes the reply.   
 
b) Rail 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee further recommends that a special tourist ticket, with additional services 
on specific scheduled trains and key routes (for instance, New Delhi- Gaya, with possible stops in 
Varanasi, Sarnath, Nalanda, Rajgir) would be useful. This could be accompanied by facilities 
such as tourist -assigned ticketing up to 24 hours in advance of departures, discounts on select 
accommodation etc. Circuit specific trains like the Shramjevi Express and the Buddhapurnima 
Express are good possibilities for such a scheme. The Committee further recommends that luxury 
trains such as 'Palace on Wheels' or even hop- on- hop-off trains connecting feasible sites may be 
introduced. The feasibility of a fully AC/superfast train connecting important Buddhist sites to 
metros should be explored. The conditions of Gaya and Cantonment Railwa ys station must also 
be improved upon.  
(Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. Since the matter pertains to Railways Board, Ministry has forwarded the recommendation 
to the Board for their comments. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2. The Committee notes the reply.  However, the Committee desires to be apprised of 
the comments offered by the Railway Board. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. In this regard, the Committee observes that the full potential of the Buddhist Circuit is yet  
 
to be exploited by the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of 

4 
 
 
Tourism must pursue the development of  the Buddhist Circuit with a renewed vigor and zeal. 
(Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
5.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
 
INSUFFICIENT OUTREACH AND PUBLICITY OF THE BUDDHIST CIRCUIT 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee feels that the integrated Buddhist Circuit has no formal brand identity and 
is portrayed and packaged in a fragmented and inconsistent manner. Despite the unique status of 
the Circuit and the enormous international market -size of Buddhist travelers, proactive and 
coordinated destination marketing effo rts are limited and the Circuit is primarily promoted by 
individual operators and religious bodies. Also, there is limited online marketing. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a pan India sub -brand for Buddhist 
tourism, which would b e recognized the world over. Also, the Committee strongly feels the need 
to reclaim the legacy of Buddha which many countries are now claiming for themselves. 
(Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, undertakes several  promotional activities in 
the domestic and international markets for promotion of the varied tourism products and 
destinations of the country including Buddhist Heritage, Sites and Circuits. The Ministry 
produces publicity material and collaterals in Engl ish and foreign languages for domestic and 
international markets; media campaigns in the print and electronic media are undertaken in the 
domestic and international markets; familiarisation tours for trade, media and opinion makers are 
undertaken from over seas to Buddhist Sites and Circuits in the country under the Hospitality 
Scheme of the Ministry. 
 
6.2. Ministry of Tourism has produced two films on promotion of Buddhist Tourism, (1) India 
– The Land of Buddha by CNN    and (2) Following the path of the Bu ddha by TABI Channel 
Japan. 
 
6.3. Both the films have been promoted on electronic and digital media.   India –The Land of 
Buddha film was launched by the Hon‟ble President on World Tourism Day (27th  September 
2018), the film is based on the legacy of Buddha  and it enforces the very idea of India being land 
of Buddha. 
 
6.4. On social media, this film was well received, reaching millions of views in two weeks‟ 
time. In the Incredible India 2.0 campaign, market specific creatives are being used.  Creatives on 
promotion of Buddhist sites are being used in the Buddhist dominating markets, such as China, 
Japan, Korea, etc. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
6.5. The Committee notes the reply and impresses upon the Ministry to put in more 

5 
 
 
efforts for promotion of Buddhist legacy in both national and international Buddhist 
markets, to give a fillip to Buddhist tourism in the country. 
 
6.6. The Committee feels that the Ministry should take up promotion of Buddhist legacy 
to remote areas of the country where digital m eans are very limited.  The Ministry of 
Tourism in collaboration with Ministry of Culture, should promote activities like 
plays/dramas in remote areas of the country.  Various promotional products like books/T -
Shirts/paintings relating to Buddhism should b e launched by the Ministry in the markets 
near the places of Buddhist Circuit.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee further recommends that there should be a single website for Buddhist 
tourism for all the States, something along the lines of a on e- stop solution for all matters and 
information related to Buddhist Circuit which will cater to the needs of a tourist. This site can be 
linked to other sites for related Government agencies etc. 
(Para 47) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. The Ministry of Tourism has developed a dedicated website “indiathelandofbuddha.in”. 
This website was launched in July, 2018 during the International Buddhist Conclave. This site 
has comprehensive information covering not only the sites visited by Buddha but also Buddhist  
Heritage which were developed by Buddhist Disciples and Buddhist Monasteries which are  
popular among Buddhist travelers/seekers . This website is linked to incredibleindia.org, the 
primary website of Ministry of Tourism. The suggestion of the Hon‟ble Committee with regard to 
linking the site with other Government agencies is well taken for implementation. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
7.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
 
7.3. In this electronic era, the Committee feels that a mobile App should be launched 
which will prove very handy and attractive for tourists.  It should be designed in a way so 
that these places are covered under Swadesh Darshan Scheme, Heritage sites and plac es of 
archaeological importance.  Various offers should be launched for probable tourists while 
booking tours to such places from the App itself.  It will not only promote the tourism 
industry in a big way but will also give a major boost to digitalization.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee believes that there is a need to promote the Circuit in a sect -specific 
manner. This will help to promote other States with Buddhist heritages and the Circuit will not 
find itself confined to Gaya and Bodh Ga ya. This will also go a long way towards solving the 
problem of seasonality that ails the Circuit, since other places do not suffer from extremes of 
temperature especially the summer heat, like in Northern India. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that efforts must be made to promote sites specific to the individual sects. The sites 
may be marketed according to the sects.  
(Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. The above recommendation has been noted.  

6 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
8.2. The Committee notes the reply and seeks to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Ministry in the said direction. 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.  Moreover, destinations along the Buddhist Circuit need to be transformed into learning -
contact points, which in turn will stim ulate demand, promote longer stays and generate a desire 
to visit other sites and lead to growth in goods and service providers. 
(Para 49) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1.  The above recommendation has been noted. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
 
9.2. The Committee expects the Ministry to apprise it of the steps taken by the Ministry 
to transform Buddhist sites into Centres of Learning. 
 
 
PROTECTION OF MONUMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF ARTEFACTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Buddhist Circuit would be incomplete without giving the credit where due. The John 
Marshall Museum, apart from preserving the history of the discovery of Buddhist artefacts in 
India, would also serve as a major attraction for tourists, both domestic and international, 
academicians and researchers alike. The Committee, therefore, recommends that though the 
development of the University and the Museum in Kapilavastu is not under its purview, it may 
coordinate with the Ministry of Culture, the respective State Government and its agencies and the 
ASI, to pursue the development of the proposed John Marshall Museum. 
(Para 58) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1. The recommendation is noted for compliance. The Ministry regularly interacts with ASI 
for better convergence and smooth execution of projects in and around premises under the 
purview of ASI. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
10.2. The Committee notes the reply.  
Recommendation/Observation 
11. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the status of implementation and progress 
made with regard to the projects in the Buddhist Sites under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme which 
includes components - of SEL Show, Signages, Solar Lighting, Buddha Theme Park , Tourist 
Facilitation-Center, Parking, Waste Management, Drinking Water Facilities, Helipad 
Development, CCTV & WiFi at Kapilvastu under the project 'Development of Buddhist Circuit' - 
Sarawasti, Kushinagar & Kapilvastu in Uttar Pradesh under the Buddhist  Circuit theme may be 
furnished in the Action taken Reply.  
(Pata 59) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1. The status of sanctioned components at Kapilavastu under the project “'Development of 

7 
 
 
Buddhist Circuit' - Sarawasti, Kushinagar & Kapilvastu in Uttar Pradesh”:- 
 
Sl. 
No  
Component  Sanctioned 
Cost (Rs. in 
lakhs ) 
Physical 
Progress 
Comments 
1 Helipad 
Development 392.40 65% 
Waiting area block: Construction 
work completed. Plastering and 
finishing works are in progress. 
Helipad Area: PCC and 
Reinforcement work completed. 
Concreting of final layer is in 
progress. 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
11.2. The Committee notes the reply.  However, the Committee would like to know 
whether the various components under the project “Development of Buddhist Circuit” 
have witnessed any time and cost overruns. 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee feels that encroachments in and around these Buddhist sites can only be 
resolved through the joint efforts of the State authorities, Ministry of Tourism, Culture and the 
ASI and the active participation of local level authorities. The Ministr y should aim at attaining 
2 
Signage, 
Drinking water, 
CCTV & Wi-Fi 
301.25 45% Work is in progress. 
3 Modern Toilet & 
Solar Lights 277.09 5% 
Solar Lighting: Work is in 
progress. 
Modern Toilet: The work will be 
started very shortly. 
4 Waste 
Management 378.26 30% 
Procurement completed. 
Installation work will be started 
very shortly. 
5 Sound & Light 
Show 838.28 10% 
Script and sample voice over have 
been finalised. Content 
Development is in process. 
 
6 
Buddha Theme 
Park + TFC + 
Parking 
1907.76 5% Work is in progress at foundation 
level. 
 Total 4095.04   

8 
 
 
the tag of World heritage sites and this can only be accomplished when sites are well preserved.  
(Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. Issue of encroachments falls under the jurisdiction of either the State Government or ASI.   
However, the recommendation is noted for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
12.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee feels that the Buddhist Circuit, being a religious Circuit, must be handled 
with extra caution. Care must be taken to ensure that it does not hurt the sensitivities of the 
Buddhist population. The Committee, therefore, recommends that due care an d attention must be 
taken to ensure the cleanliness of the places and maintain the sanctity of the sites. 
(Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1. The Ministry under Swadesh Darshan scheme provides funds for components like Solid 
Waste Management System, Waste Bins, Bottle Flaking Bottles, Sewage Treatment Plant, etc. to 
ensure cleanliness at the sites. 
 
13.2. In addition to above, Ministry also releases several TV/Digital Outdoor/Online Campaign 
on Swachhta at Tourist Sites on regular intervals. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
13.3. The Committee notes the reply.  In the light of various measures enumerated by the 
Ministry, the Committee would like to recommend that the impact of funds released and 
measures taken should be assessed periodically so that the effectiveness of such measures 
can be adequately monitored and corrective and timely action could be initiated. 
 
LACK OF TRAINED TOUR GUIDES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee feels that even if there is a current system in place, the system is not 
sufficient and that these guides are not qualified as per the requirement for trained guides 
in the Buddhist Circuits. Language guides are integral to the Circuit as tourists from other 
countries prefer a guide who can speak their language and serve as a companion rather 
than just a guide. The introduction of short term language courses along with short -term 
courses on becoming a tour guide, with emphasis on cultural sensitivity along with 
practical courses on ticketing, etiquette e tc., must be initiated in order to set an industry 
benchmark. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Culture and 
Ministry of Tourism must work together to develop a program to train bright, young, 
educated youths to become tour guides. T hey should be trained in at least one foreign 
language and in the relevant history of the related sites. The Buddhist Circuit can also set 
up Public -Private-Partnerships with various Heritage Tour companies and harness their 
professionalism to improve the experience of tourists, both domestic and international. The 
Committee is of the view that academic institutions in the field of tourism and government 

9 
 
 
policies need to be better aligned with market demands.  
(Para 86) 
 
15. The Committee further recommends that programmes tailored by IITM, for the 
Buddhist Circuit must not be restricted to Bodh Gaya alone; but should have a wider 
connotation to include the Buddhist Circuit at large. The Committee hopes that the 
"Linguistic Tourist Facilitator" programme is i mplemented sooner rather than later so that 
it may benefit the tourist season in the coming year and it may serve to provide employment 
to the youth in the region. 
(Para 87)  
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1. Ministry of Tourism has recently launched online Certificate Course of Incredible 
India Tourism Facilitator program with an objective to create a pool of skilled and trained 
professionals to facilitate the visit of tourists. Being an online course, persons located even 
in remote areas may undertake this course. Once the candidates have completed the basic 
course, they may register themselves for language Courses.  
 
15.2. Apart from creating professional service providers locally, it will help in creating 
additional jobs for the locals and give them an oppo rtunity to earn little more during the 
tourist seasons. Tourist, international as well domestic would be benefited a lot as they will 
be able to get the helping hand in the shape of Tourist Facilitators at the local level and at 
economical rates. Since, th ese tourist facilitators would be locally grown, they would be of 
immense help to facilitate their visits.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
15.3. The Committee notes the reply. 
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF PILGRIMS/TOURISTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of Tourism and the States who have 
deployed the Tourism Police. However, the Committee feels that much more needs to be done to 
provide security to the tourists to ensure that tourists need not be appre hensive, while travelling 
to explore the Buddhist Circuit. The State Governments must be brought on board to pro vide and 
ensure 24 -hour street light and illumination, especially along unsafe National Highways. The 
Committee desires that the States that are  yet to implement and deploy the tourist police must be 
impressed upon to do so. The Committee is of the opinion that there is a need for an integrated 
and coordinated management approach among the various entities involved at local levels to 
ensure a serene and safe environment. 
(Para 90)   
 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1. In order to ensure safety and security of Domestic &  International tourists, the 
Ministry of Tourism had taken up the matter with State Govt./ UT Administration (as the 
“Public Order” and “Police” are State Subject as per the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution of India) and has proposed to set up Tourist Police at prominent tourist spots.  
 

10 
 
 
16.2. The State Governments/UT Administrations of Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, 
Delhi, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha have deployed Tourist Police in one form or 
the other. 
 
16.3. Ministry of Tourism has also taken up the matter with Ministry of Home Affairs, 
who has identified 25 Tourist sites which may be taken up as a Pilot Project for formation 
of a separate police unit in the States/UTs and also the training module imparting training 
to such Police personnel to sensitize them of the specific requirement of Tourism. Ministry 
of Tourism has already forwarded the list of 25 such sites and a training module given by 
IITM to Ministry of Home Affairs for taking necessary action in the matter.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
16.4.  The Committee notes the reply.  
 
16.5.  The Committee desires the Ministry to ensure the safety and security of 
domestic and international tourists, by  installing CCTV cameras, mobile surveillances and 
toll-free helpline number for betterment of security, at all the Buddhist Circuits without 
any further delay. 
  

11 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
 
LACK OF CONNECTIVITY 
 
Air  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes the issue of seasonality that plagues the Circuit and urges that 
measures must be devised to extend the seasonality of the sector. The aerial distance between 
Gaya and Patna is 88 kms which is covered in one and a half hours by road. Th e Committee 
takes note of the effort of the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Civil Aviation under the 
UDAN scheme of the Centre to connect Gaya with more cities. However, the Committee feels that 
a lot more can be done to increase the footfall in th e popular tourist sites. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the concerned State authorities 
should take necessary action to complete the Kushinagar airport at the earliest to make it 
feasible for use during the pea k season. Moreover, the Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation should explore the possibility of connecting more Buddhist sites by air 
as it is the most efficient and the least time -consuming method of transportation, especially for 
foreign tourists who are generally short on time. To increase the feasibility, the Committee 
impresses upon the Ministry of Civil Aviation to look into chartering smaller aircrafts like ATRs 
or even consider Helicopter trips, as is the practice in many cou ntries. The Committee also 
recommends that ATRs may be used to connect different sites, thereby encouraging the extension 
of the peak season. 
(Para 13) 
 
2. Airport maintenance is also an issue and the Committee recommends that regular 
maintenance of air strips must be ensured by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to ensure passenger 
safety and prevent flight delays. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of Civil Aviation to 
utilize the UDAAN scheme and to work with the respective State Governments to deve lop the air 
connectivity between the Buddhist sites and the major cities and between the Buddhist sites 
themselves. 
(Para 14) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. The Ministry has noted the recommendation for compliance. Ministry has requested the 
MoCA for better a ir connectivity on the routes Varanasi -Bodhgaya, Varanasi -Shravasti, 
Varanasi-Gorakhpur, Bodhgaya-Gorakhpur and Gorakhpur-Patna. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
2.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
  
 

12 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee understands that this task is multi -pronged and will require the assistance 
of various Ministries and Departments at both the State and the Centre. Hence, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take the onus of coordinat ing with various 
Ministries and Departments including the Ministry of Railways to ensure the smooth progress 
and set a time -bound completion date for each project. Infrastructure gaps need to be identified 
and action mobilized.  
(Para 22) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1.  Ministry has formulated Buddhist Circuit Advisory Committee headed by Hon‟ble 
Minister for Tourism (I/C) and its meeting was held in Feb 2018 where in issues affecting the 
development of Buddhist Circuit in the country were discussed. The co mposition of the 
committee includes representatives from Buddhist Stakeholders like ASI, MORTH, MoCA, 
IRCTC, Govt. of Bihar, Govt. of Uttar Pradesh, Travel & Trade, Buddhist Scholars. In addition to 
this the Ministry from time to time keep taking up the is sues with regard to development of 
infrastructure in the Buddhist Circuit with line Ministries on the forum of National Steering 
Committee of Swadesh Drashan Scheme and IMCCTS. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
 
EFFICIENT UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Buddhist Circuit is one of the most promising Circuits with a huge potential for 
development. Buddhist sites are rich in traditions and places of spiritual significance and are 
thus revered by millions of people around the world. The Committee observes that 0.01 crore 
translates to a meagre amount of Rs 1 Lakh towards the development of the Buddhist Circuit 
as a whole. The Committee feels that this token amount allocation is grossly inadequat e for 
the development of the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee is disappointed to state that this 
token sum allocation is highly impractical and is evidence of the lackadaisical attitude 
towards the development of the Buddhist Circuit as a vibrant and viable  tourist destination 
worthy of investment and the respect it deserves. 
(Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. The funds for development of Buddhist Circuit are met from the Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme. Ministry of Tourism has a scheme of Externally Aided Projects ; projects under 
funding from international lending agencies are covered under this scheme. The Ministry 
presently does not have any project being implemented under the above scheme. The last 
project implemented under the scheme was AEDP II which got close d in July 2014. Rs. 0.01 
Crore is token amount kept under this scheme to keep the head alive.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
 

13 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The target market of the Buddhist Circuit is primarily international tourists from East, 
South and South- East Asia. These countries have wide and varied cultures from that of India but 
are bound by our connect with Buddhism. The Committee, therefore, feel s that it is insufficient to 
place the Circuit under the Swadesh Darshan Division as its needs are different from those of 
most domestic destinations. The Committee recommends that a separate, efficient mechanism 
must be set in place, as it is evident that  the one at present is not adequate to meet the needs and 
requirements of the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee reiterates that the development of Buddhist 
Circuit is integral to the development of tourism in India.  
(Para 31) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. The Swadesh Darshan is the flagship scheme of Ministry of Tourism for development of 
tourism infrastructure in the country, under the scheme the Ministry provides financial assistance 
to the State Governments and UTs for development of thematic circuits in th e country.  With 
special focus to develop the Buddhist sites in the country the Ministry has identified Buddhist 
Circuit as one of the thematic circuits for development under the scheme. All components 
required for development of tourist facilities in Budd hist Circuit are covered under the Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must constitute an inter -
State Ministerial Committee at the Central level to look into the disbursal and proper allocation 
of the funds that have been set aside. It is also desired that a time -line may be set for the 
completion of each phase and periodical updates may be sent to the constituted Committee in 
order to ensure that the projects are completed. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. There is no separate allocation of funds for the Buddhist Circuit.  The funds requirement 
is met from the funds allocated under the Swadesh Darshan scheme.  
 
6.2. The projects under the scheme are sanctioned with specific timelines. For completion of 
projects in a time bound manner, the Ministry of Tourism rigorously monitors the implementation 
of projects sanctioned under the scheme. It holds regular reviews meetings by way of organising 
regional workshops, Video Conference with the States and Union Territ ories to review the 
progress of the projects. Regular site visits are also carried out to the project sites. The Ministry 
has also developed an on -line monitoring portal to monitor the real time physical and financial 
progress of the projects. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.3. The Committee notes the reply. 
 

14 
 
 
LACK OF CENTRE -STATE COORDINATION 
   
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee is of the opinion that the lack of coordination and communication 
between the various stakeholders has been a key  factor towards the lack of success of the 
Buddhist Circuit, despite the long gestation period and the availability of funds. Seamless inter -
State coordination is integral to the success of the Circuit. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministr y should put into action the previously proposed 'Buddhist Circuit 
Steering Committee'. This will go a long way in ensuring the proper and timely development of 
the Circuit. 
(Para 37)  
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. The Ministry has formulated Buddhist Advisor y Committee headed by Hon‟ble Minister 
for Tourism (I/C) for seamless coordination among the concerned Ministries/ Departments/State 
Govts/ Stakeholders. The composition of the committee includes representatives from central 
Ministries/ Departments i.e. ASI, MoRTH, MoCA, IRCTC etc., representatives of Govt. of Bihar, 
Govt. of Uttar Pradesh, Travel & Trade and Buddhist Scholars.  
 
7.2. The projects under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme are reviewed by two committees i.e. 
Mission Directorate and Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee before sanctioning and 
during monitoring. The State Govt., Central line Ministries and Private stake hold ers are the part 
of MD headed by the Joint Secretary (T) whereas the SG is part of CSMC chaired by the 
Secretary (T). The apex body in the Swadesh Darshan scheme is National Steering Committee 
headed by the Hon‟ble Minister for tourism and it oversees the overall implementation of scheme 
and coordination between concerned central Ministries.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
7.3. The Committee notes the reply.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should coordinate with 
various stakeholders and ensure that project targets are set. The Committee also desires that 
there must be greater communication with those at the local level in terms of project development 
to ensure that projects recommended are feasible. Once funding has been granted, care must be 
taken to ensure that the target completion date is set and all stakeholders including the 
administration at the local level, are active parti cipants in the development and Maintenance of 
the sites.  
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. The Ministry has formulated Buddhist Advisory Committee headed by Hon‟ble Minister 
for Tourism (I/C) for seamless coordination among the concerned Ministries/ De partments/State 
Govts/ Stakeholders.  
 
8.2. As per the scheme guidelines, the State Governments/ Departments while identifying the 
projects are required to carry out stakeholder consultations while finalizing the components to be 
undertaken for development.  

15 
 
 
 
8.3. For completion of projects in a time bound manner, the Ministry of Tourism rigorously 
monitors the implementation of projects sanctioned under the scheme. It holds regular reviews 
meetings by the way of organizing regional workshops, Video Conference with the States and 
Union Territories to review the progress of the projects. Regular site visits are also carried out to 
the project sites.   The Ministry has also developed an on -line monitoring portal to monitor the 
real time physical and financial progress of the projects. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.4. The Committee notes the reply.   
 
NEED FOR INCREASED STATE PARTICIPATION 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee strongly feels that there needs to be greater initiative and pro-active 
participation on the part of the States concerned and a greater facilitation of communication 
between the Ministry of Tourism, the State Governments and other stakeholders. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should  initiate more effective channels of 
communication with the State Governments. The Committee suggests the formation of a national 
task force for development of the Buddhist Circuit. 
(Para 42) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 9.1. A National Advisory Committee compri sing of Central Ministries/ Departments, State 
Governments, Private Sector and Buddhist Scholars for development of Buddhist Circuit in the 
country has been constituted under the chairmanship of HM (T). This committee discusses the 
bottlenecks / infrastructure required/ steps to be taken f or the development of Buddhist C ircuit in 
the country. Based on discussions the Ministry takes up the issues with the concerned Ministry/ 
Departments and State Govts.  
 
9.2. In addition to above development of Bu ddhist Circuit is also taken up for discussions 
during the National Steering Committee meeting of Swadesh Darshan scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.3. The Committee notes the reply.   
 
PROTECTION OF MONUMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF ARTEFACTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee strongly feels that there should be greater coordination between the ASI, 
State Government and the Ministry of Tourism to ensure the successful and timely 
implementation of the projects at hand. The Committee, t herefore, recommends that the Ministry 
of Tourism, State Government of Madhya Pradesh and the ASI must work together and 
coordinate along with the Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation to ensure 
that the projects are completed as per schedule. The Ministry of Tourism in this regard must take  
 
 

16 
 
 
the lead in coordinating the various agencies and ensure that the ASI completes the required 
renovation and hands over the site to Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation 
and a timeline must be set for the same.  
(Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1. The recommendation is noted for compliance. The Ministry regularly interacts with ASI 
for better convergence and smooth execution of projects in and around premises under the 
purview of ASI. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.2. The Committee notes the reply.   
 
 
PROMOTION OF RESEARCH IN BUDDHIST STUDIES AND CREATION OF 
BUDDHIST DATABASE 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee feels that research on Buddhist studies must be promoted and be given 
adequate weightage. Buddhist a rchitecture is rare as there is little awareness with regard to it.  
Moreover, most of the Buddhist structures are in a dilapidated condition, if not in ruins. The 
Committee understands that there exists a Buddhist Studies department in some Central 
Universities. However, the scholarship around Buddhist Studies leaves much room for 
improvement as they do not produce any research of caliber. The promotion of the Buddhist 
scholarship with regard to the study and research of Buddhist studies is of paramount 
importance. The historiography of Buddhist culture must be studied and preserved. This will help 
invite scholars from many Buddhist nations and can work as a 'soft - power' to promote relations 
with these countries. BIMSTEC countries are eager to study and pr eserve Buddhist Culture and 
we must work to do the same. 
(Para 68) 
12. The Committee strongly feels that the internet of things has opened up new avenues and 
opportunities in Buddhist studies. This may be imbibed by way of soft technology by digitizing 
ancient Buddhist texts and interconnecting various resources related to Buddhist studies. This 
will enable easy access and further promote the study of Buddhist culture and heritage. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends, that steps must be taken to harness  technology in order to 
enhancethe potential of Buddhist Studies and as an extension, the Buddhist Circuit. 
(Para 69) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. Study and research of Buddhist studies and digitization of ancient Buddhist texts and 
interconnecting various resources related to Buddhist studies does not fall under the purview of 
Ministry of Tourism. However, recommendations of committee have been noted and have been 
forwarded to the Ministry of HRD for consideration.   
Further Recommendation/Observation 
12.2. The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee desires to be kept updated on the 
comments received from the Ministry of Human Resource Development. 
 
 

17 
 
 
INCREASED AWARENESS AND SENSITIZATION AMONG THE LOCAL 
POPULATION 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee feels that the aesthetic and practical integration with the surrounding 
urban environment is mostly absent. In many instances, visitor friendly transaction zones 
between the sites and  its surroundings vary from limited to none at all. Often, outside the site 
boundaries, the hustle bustle of 'daily life', commercial activities, squatters, touts etc. destroy the 
sanctity of the place and are intrusive to those who come to seek 'spiritual  contemplation and 
peace'. The Committee recommends that stringent rules must be set in place to limit the use of 
loudspeakers in these areas and offenders must be made liable to pay a penalty. The Committee 
desires that the concerned State Governments and  the local authorities must ensure that 
sufficient steps are taken in this regard.  
(Para 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1. The recommendation is conveyed to the concerned State Governments. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
13.2. The Committee notes the reply. 
 
LACK OF ACCOMODATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. With regard to provision of adequate hotel accommodation/lodging facilities to tourists, 
the Committee recommends that a system of monitoring the various hotels and lodgings must be 
set in place and a standard must be set by the Government for the hoteliers to adhere to. 
(Para 76) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1. Construction and operation of hotels is primarily a private sector activity. The Ministry of 
Tourism, Government of India, only classifies operational hotels across the country under its 
voluntary scheme of classification/approval of hotels in the followin g categories: Star Hotels: 
One, Two, Three, Four, Five & Five Star Deluxe, Heritage, Heritage Classic, Heritage Grand, 
Legacy Vintage (Basic), Legacy Vintage (Classic) and Legacy Vintage (Grand).  
 
14.2. All hotels seeking classification/re -classification as per the extant guidelines of the 
Ministry of Tourism are required to adhere to certain standards of facilities/services. The hotels 
that apply for classification/re -classification by the Ministry of Tourism are inspected by the 
designated Hotel & Restau rant Approval and Classification Committee (HRACC), which 
evaluates the quality of facilities and services against the prescribed parameters. The 
classified/approved hotel is expected to maintain required standards at all times. The 
Classification Committee may inspect a hotel at any time without previous notice. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
14.3. The Committee notes the reply.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee notes that there are plenty of Government owned ITDC Hotels and Yatri 

18 
 
 
Niwas in and around the sites in Buddhist Circuit. The Committee recommends that the 
management of these properties must be operated on a Public- Private Partnership (PPP) model, 
on a lease-term basis. The profits must be market - incentive based. This will  ensure a better and 
more efficient management of these properties and will go a long way in providing better 
amenities.  
(Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1. ITDC is not having any op erational property in Buddhist C ircuit. At present ITDC is 
running the following hotels: 
 
Sr. Name of Hotel State/UT 
1.  The Ashok Hotel New Delhi 
2.  Samrat Hotel New Delhi 
3.  Hotel Jammu Ashok Jammu, J&K 
4.  *Hotel Patliputra Ashok Patna, Bihar 
5.  Hotel Kalinga Ashok Bhubaneswar, Odisha 
* Hotel Patliputra Ashok, Patna (In advance stage of handing over, MoU signed on 29.11.2018 
for transfer to Govt. of Bihar) 
 
15.2. Joint Venture Hotels of ITDC are as follows: 
 
Sr. Name of Hotel State/UT Joint Venture Ratio 
1.  Hotel Ranchi Ashok  
(Operations are closed since 
29.03.2018) 
Ranchi, Jharkhand ITDC: BSTDC 
2.  The Ashok Beach Resort Puducherry ITDC: State Govt. 
3.  Hotel Nilanchal Ashok  
(Operations are closed since 2004) 
Puri, Odisha ITDC: OTDC 
15.3. Any decision with regard to the operation and management of units on PPP Model, on a 
lease term basis is a subject matter of Government decision/ policy matter. As per current 
disinvestment policy of the Government of India, hotels/ properties of  ITDC are  under 
disinvestment.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
15.4. The Committee notes the reply. 
PROMOTION OF LOCAL MARKETS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee recommends that local craftsmanship must be supported and must be 
encouraged to produce goods of higher quality. To do this, sufficient financial and institutional 
backing must be provided by the Ministry of Tourism and the respective State G overnments. This 
must be a joint effort as one cannot be accomplished without the other. Separate shopping and 
workshop areas must be created. These must be made accessible to tourists who will get to 
experience and appreciate the culture and heritage of that place. There is clearly a scope for a  

19 
 
 
 
focused local awareness, skills training and entrepreneurship development drive, to maximize 
local economic and employment impact of the Buddhist Circuit. 
(Para 93) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1. The Ministry under Swadesh Darshan Scheme provides CFA for development of Craft 
Haats, Exhibition Halls and Souvenir Shops for showcasing the local culture, handicraft and 
handloom made by the locals. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
16.2. The Committee notes the reply.   

20 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
LACK OF CONNECTIVITY 
 
(i) Air 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee further recommends that facilities like 'Hot Air Balloon' safaris covering 
various sites may be introduced through private vendors. These rides could be for duration of an 
hour connecting various nearby sites. These may be introduced along similar lines as those in 
Pushkar and the Taj Mahal. These are a huge hit with tourists and has helped to increase the 
popularity of various tourist spots. 
(Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. The development and promotion of tourism including adventure activities such as Hot Air 
Balloon safaris is primarily undertaken by the States/UTs themselves. With the objective to 
address the aspect of safety in such adventure activities, the Ministry of Tourism along with the 
Adventure Tour Operators Association of India (ATOAI) have launched the “Indian Adventure 
Tourism Guidelines (Ver sion 2.0) – 2018” which is a set of guidelines on 'Safety and Quality 
Norms for Adventure Tourism in India'. The guidelines list the basic minimum standards for 
adventure tourism activities. These guidelines cover land, air and water -based activities which  
also include Hot Air Ballooning, Paragliding, Hang Gliding and many other sports. 
 
1.2.     These guidelines would act as a defining and guiding force in respect of key aspects such 
as definition of adventure activity, procedures and approvals, customer t raining, usage of 
equipment, Standard Operating Procedures, risk mitigation, issues of medical concerns and 
emergencies, rescue and safety briefing etc.  These guidelines have been forwarded to the all the 
State Governments/UT Administration for adoption a nd implementation as in return, the tourist 
sites would become more attractive and popular among the visiting tourists.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.3. The Committee observes that despite India having unique endowments of 
biodiversity, rich culture and heritage, the tourism sector has not grown to the desired level 
vis-à-vis its potentiality.  As „Hot Air Balloon Safaris‟ are a huge hit with tourists worldwide 
and have helped to increase the popularity of various tourist spots, the Committee had 
recommended its replication across the country so that t he country‟s huge, but barely 
tapped, potential could be realized.  Since the Ministry of Tourism is responsible for the 
overall coordination and planning of tourism development in the country, the Committee 
had expected the Ministry to undertake initiatives and encourage States/UTs to expand  Hot 
Air Balloon Safaris.  Merely formulating a set of guidelines and forwarding them to all the 
States/UTs appears more a formality devoid of any proactive and practical approach.  The 
Committee would, therefore, once again, urge upon the Ministry to impress upon the  
 

21 
 
 
States/UTs to promote “Hot Air Ballon Sararis” aggressively and update the Committee on 
the progress made in this regard. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that other aerial adventures like paragliding, 
aerial-gliding etc. may also be encouraged around suitable Circuit sites in order to increase their 
popularity and thereby increase the footfall. The Committee wishes that the Ministry of Tourism, 
along with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the respective S tate Governments, should formulate 
guidelines and set a target date for completion of these projects.  
(Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. The development and promotion of tourism including aerial adventure activities like 
paragliding, aerial -gliding, circuit side development etc. is primarily undertaken by the 
States/UTs themselves. However,  the Ministry of Tourism along with the Adventure Tour 
Operators Association of India (ATOAI) have launched the “Indian Adventure Tourism 
Guidelines (Version 2.0) – 2018” which is a set of guidelines on 'Safety and Quality Norms for 
Adventure Tourism in India'. The guidelines list the basic minimum standards for adventure 
tourism activities. These guidelines cover land, air and water -based activities which include 
aerial adventures like paragliding, Hang gliding, Hot Air Ballooning, mountaineering, trekking, 
bungee jumping, paragliding, kayaking, scuba diving, snorkelling, river rafting and many other 
sports. These guidelines have been forwarded to the all the State G overnments/UT 
Administration for adoption and implementation as this would make the tourist sites more 
popular and   also lead to increased footfalls. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.2. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in Para 16 of 262nd Report.  The 
Committee further recommends that periodic meetings based on the guidelines issued be 
held to review and constantly monitor the “Safety and Quality Norms for Adventure 
Tourism in India”. 
   
(ii) Rail 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee feels that trains are a beautiful way to experience the true beauty of our 
country and every effort must be made to ensure that this is an efficient and preferred mode of 
travel for most tourists. The Committee, therefore, recommends that cleanliness in  the stations 
and basic amenities like cloak rooms in the railway stations must be upgraded. More importantly, 
the local populace must be taught to use these facilities and must be educated and made aware of 
keeping the railway premises clean. Open defecat ion along the railway tracks must be 
discouraged and a system of fines must be put in place. The practices of the Delhi Metro may be 
studied, where fines are levied by patrolling officials" for littering. Also, squatters at the railway 
station should be discouraged.  
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. Ministry of Tourism is upgrading the tourist facilities jointly at 26 Identified Railway 
Station with Ministry of Railways on the following lines: - 

22 
 
 
1. Waiting/ Retiring rooms with modern furniture 
2. Renovated, modern Pay and use toilets and enough garbage bins 
3. Executive lounges of international standard 
4. Cloak room facilities 
5. Passenger guidance system 
6. Improvement in the circulating area 
7. Arrangement for handicapped friendly approaches 
8. Improvement of booking and enquiry office 
 
3.2. Under the said initiative, Ministry has sanctioned the project for Joint Development of 
Gaya Railway Station. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.3. The reply does not address the recommendation of the Committee in full.  The 
Committee observes that niche tourism products of the country like Buddhist Circuit may 
be developed so as to overcome seasonality and promote India as a 365 days‟ destination.  It 
is in this context that the Committee desires that all Railway stations of Buddhist Circuit, 
like Rajgir in Bihar, Shravasti and Kushinagar in Uttar Pradesh, should also be upgraded 
with a view to boost tourism in these destinations. 
 
EFFICIENT UTILIZATION OF FUNDS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry does not mention the amount utilized 
so far. The Committee may be apprised of the amount of funds released till date, amounts utilized 
etc. in the Action Taken Report. 
(Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. For Integrated Development of Theme-Based Tourist Circuits in the country, the Ministry 
of Tourism has launched Swadesh Darshan Scheme in 2014 -15. Under the scheme, Buddhist 
Circuit is one of the  fifteen thematic circuits identified for development in the country. Ministry 
has sanctioned five projects for Rs. 361.97 Crore under the scheme for development of Buddhist 
Circuit. The details are as under: 
(Rs.in crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Project Name Amt. 
Sanctioned 
Amt. 
Released 
Amt. 
Utilised 
1. Madhya 
Pradesh 
(2016-17) 
Development of Buddhist 
Circuit in Sanchi -Satna-Rewa-
Mandsaur-Dhar in Madhya 
Pradesh. 
74.94 37.47 32.03 
2. Uttar Pradesh 
(2016-17) 
Development of Buddhist 
Circuit – Srawasti, Kushinagar, 
&Kapilvastu in Uttar Pradesh. 
99.97 
 
45.03 15.03 
3. Bihar 
(2016-17) 
Construction of Cultural Centre 
adjacent to Maya Sarovar on the 
98.73 19.75 1.07 

23 
 
 
western side at Bodhgaya, Bihar 
4. Gujarat 
(2017-18) 
 
Development of Buddhist 
circuit: Junagadh- Gir-Somnath- 
Bharuch-Kutch- Bhavnagar- 
Rajkot- Mehsana in Gujarat 
under Swadesh Darshan scheme 
35.99 7.20 5.45 
5. Andhra 
Pradesh 
(2017-18) 
 
Development of Buddhist 
Circuit: Shalihundam -
Thotlakonda- Bavikonda- 
Bojjanakonda- Amravati- Anupu 
in Andhra Pradesh under the 
theme of Buddhist Circuit of 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
52.34 10.47 6.02 
  TOTAL 361.97 119.92 55.58 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2. The Committee is constrained to note that there has been substantial under -
utilization of funds released against four out of the five projects under the scheme of 
Development of Buddhist Circuit.  Against a total sum of Rs.119.92 crore released during 
2016-17 and 2017 -18, only Rs.55.58 crore has b een utilized and a substantial allocation of 
Rs.64.34 crore has remained unspent.  In a country like ours, where resources are 
constraint, under-utilization of more than 53% of allocation is a matter of great concern; in 
fact the funds released should have  been optimally utilized.  The Committee would like the 
Ministry to chalk out a solid and fresh fiscal road -map so that the released funds are 
utilized productively under the scheme of Development of Buddhist Circuit. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee feels that it is important to understand that the Buddhist Circuit is largely 
seasonal owing to the weather conditions. The winter season ranging from November to March is 
the ideal travelling season. The seasonality of the Circuit is not conducive to a sustained growth 
and the sites wear a deserted look during the off - season. This seasonality extends to rail and 
flight services as well. In order to sustain tourism, the Committee recommends that an off -season 
stabilization fund may be formulated to attract more tourists to make it viable for business. 
 
(Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. The Ministry does not have any scheme for providing off-season stabilization funds. The 
Ministry provides support to service providers i.e. tour operators, hoteliers, State Govts. for 
carrying out marketing of their services/products under the Market Development Assistance 
Scheme.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2. The Committee had recommended provision of an off -season stabilization fund so as 
to overcome seasonality of tourism activitie s in the Buddhist Circuit.  The Committee 
would, therefore, like to know to what extent Market Development Assistance Scheme has 
succeeded in sustaining and developing off-season tourism in the Buddhist Circuit. 

24 
 
 
 
INSUFFICIENT OUTREACH AND PUBLICITY OF THE BUDDHIST CIRCUIT 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. In light of the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry of Tourism must develop a concrete plan of action to target foreign tourists, especially 
East and South - east Asian tourists through student exchange programmes, development of 
Buddhist Studies, tourist apps and other publicity platforms, including n ew age platforms like 
video bloggers and application based targeted audiences (for eg. Instagram, snapchat etc.) 
which is currently absent, to increase awareness about the Buddhist Circuit in India, in other 
countries. 
(Para  51) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. With a view to showcase and project the rich ancient Buddhist Heritage in India and boost 
tourism to the Buddhist sites in the country, and cultivate friendly ties with countries and 
communities interested in Buddhism, the Ministry of Tourism has been org anizing the 
International Buddhist Conclave (IBC) on biennially. 
 
6.2. The participants at IBC comprise senior leaders of various Buddhist sects, scholars, 
opinion makers, journalists and international tour operators from all over the world including 
East and South East Asia, and domestic tour operators. 
Road shows, Know India Seminars etc are also organized to promote the Buddhist sites in the 
country. In May 2018, prior to the International Buddhist Conclave, MoT organized Road Shows 
in the following countries: 
 Yangon, Myanmar 
 Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam 
 Phom Penh, Cambodia 
 Bangkok, Thailand 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.3. The Committee notes that the Ministry‟s reply is silent about giving wider digital 
publicity to Buddhist sites in India and to promote Buddhist Circuit through other new age 
platforms, viz., tourist apps, video blogs, etc. so as to claim the legacy of Budd ha.   The 
Committee desires it may be updated on these aspects as well.  
 
PROTECTION OF MONUMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF ARTEFACTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism needs to work with the Ministry 
of Culture and the ASI on the matter of protection of monuments and preservation of artefacts. 
 
(Para 61) 
8. The Committee emphasizes that the preservation of our heritage should be an issue of 
national importance. Destruction of relics and sites due to a lack of awareness and sensibility 
towards the fragility of ancient sites must be accorded top priority. Effor ts for preservation and 
maintenance should be taken up immediately, experts should be consulted and steps taken to that 

25 
 
 
effect. Lessons may be taken from Countries like Japan and China when it comes to maintenance 
of their historical sites. 
(Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. The recommendation is noted for compliance. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.2. The Ministry‟s reply that the recommendation has been noted for compliance is not 
satisfactory.  The Committee feels that the Ministry should clearly indicate the steps 
taken/proposed to be taken for preservation of ancient Buddhist sites, their relics and 
sanctity and also the historical artifacts of those sites. 
 
PROMOTION OF RESEARCH IN BUDDHIST STUDIES AND CREATION OF 
BUDDHIST DATABASE 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must take the initiative 
to constitute a Task Force which will look into data collection for Buddhist artefacts. The 
Committee feels that this will also go a long w ay in ensuring that precious artefacts which are 
national treasures, are not smuggled out of the country. The Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry of Culture, in tandem with the Archeological Survey of India, must work with various 
Universities, both national and international, to revive Buddhist studies in India. 
(Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. The recommendation is conveyed to the Ministry of Culture. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.2. While making its recommendation in Para 70 of its 262 nd Report, the Committee 
had expected the Ministry of Tourism to take up the matter with the authorities concerned 
and apprise the Committee of the follow -up action taken in this regard.  The stance of the 
Ministry appears lukewarm while passing the recomm endation of the Committee to the 
Ministry of Culture.  The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry of Tourism must 
take up the issues flagged in the said Para once again with the Ministry of Culture and 
acquaint the Committee with their response.  
 
INCREASED AWARENESS AND SENSITIZATION AMONG THE LOCAL 
POPULATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee, therefore, recommends that amenities that cater to the needs of the 
tourists from abroad must be developed. Moreover, the locals must be trained  to identify and 
understand the likes and preferences of people from different countries who are frequent visitors 
there. 'Sensitisation training' of the local people is necessary in order to increase the appeal of 
the Circuit and this can only be accompli shed in cooperation with the local -level authorities, 
Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Culture.  
(Para 74) 
 

26 
 
 
11. The Committee further recommends that the areas surrounding the temple complexes and 
holy sites must be kept free from commercial encroachments. They must also be well -maintained 
and kept clean and litter-free in tandem with the sanctity of the sites. 
(Para 75) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1.  The recommendations are noted for compliance. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
11.2. The reply does not reflect the seriousness of the efforts made by the Ministry in 
developing the much needed amenities for the tourists from abroad.  Though  India has a 
strong domestic tourism base but much of the domestic tourism is „low end‟ and the key 
challenge is to attract „high end‟ foreign tourists.  In order to meet this challenge it is 
imperative to develop excellent infrastructure.  Of equal importance is the adoption and 
promotion of a pro-poor tourism approach to bring the benefit to the poor. The Committee, 
therefore, desires that it should be specifically apprised of the steps taken in compliance of 
its recommendation regarding augmenting the amenities needed by foreign tourists and 
expanding the opportunities for the locals.   
 
DEVELOPMENT OF WAYSIDE AMENITIES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
highways towards the development of infrastructure and wayside amenities. However, the 
Committee feels that providing wayside amenities are integral to the development of the 
Sites under the Buddhist Circuit and is disappointed to know that even the most popular 
sites like Bodh Gaya, Gaya, Sarnath etc. have not received any Expr ession of Interest by 
private stakeholders. This is due to multifarious reasons, chief of them being lack of 
awareness in the market, the market viability of the Circuit being unappealing to investor 
and private players as there is insufficient activity on  the part of the State Governments. 
There needs to be greater co -ordination between the Ministries concerned and the State 
Government for the development of this Circuit. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that States should increase their investment in developing the infrastructure around the 
Buddhist Circuit. States should also devise new business strategies for marketing Buddhist 
heritage. 
(Para 80) 
 
13. The Committee strongly feels that the wider success of the Circuit will depend on 
providing wayside  amenities, visitor comfort facilities (shading, seating, and drinking 
water), opportunities to interact with local people and lifestyles, and interesting 
interpretation and storytelling. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
development of facilit ies in association with major petroleum companies could provide for 
lucrative public-private partnerships.  
(Para 81) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1. The recommendations are noted for compliance . Ministry of Tourism is focussing in 
big way on Development of Wayside Amenities/Toilets on major tourist circuits in the country. 

27 
 
 
In collaboration with MoRTH Ministry is initially developing this facility at following sites under 
Buddhist circuit: 
 
Sl. No. Route National Highway State 
1. Varanasi-Gaya NH-2  Bihar 
2. Gorakhpur-Kushinagar NH-28 Uttar Pradesh 
3 a.  
   b. 
Kushinagar-Gaya Road 
Gaya-Kushinagar Road 
NH-28 
NH-28 
Uttar Pradesh 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
13.2. The Committee feels that still there is a greater need to provide the minimum 
comforts for tourists,  i.e.,  wayside amenities like washrooms, drinking water, resting spots 
and shades, etc. to boost footfalls in Buddhist places.   Moreover, it should be th e 
endeavour of the Ministry to provide those comforts at all the Buddhist shrines, temple 
complexes and holy sites in the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. Further, the Committee feels that there are limited tourist activities beyond Buddhist 
sites. Tours and activity packages are limited to pilgrimages. There is lack of evening 
entertainment like light and sound shows, tourist relaxation and other such enter tainments. 
Tourist spots are not senior citizen friendly and disabled friendly. Tourist Information Centers 
are poorly managed. The Committee, therefore, recommends attracting tourist with special prices 
and events during peak and off -peak seasons which wo uld go a long way towards expanding 
market-share. Local community organisations, monasteries, local bodies and other government 
authorities must engage in joint planning and partnerships in offering experiences beyond 
pilgrimage to the tourists. Packaging the Buddhist Circuit and its heritage in a more creative 
manner will facilitate accelerated growth and improve tour operating opportunities. 
(Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1.  The recommendation is noted for compliance . 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
14.2. The reply furnished by the Ministry is not satisfactory. The words are not backed 
up with actions in so far as development of tourist amenities/facilities is concerned.  
Adequate facilities/amenities need to be in place for the old, elderl y and disabled tourists. 
The Ministry should seriously coordinate with the Ministry of Health at the highest level 
for setting up of medical booths for timely medical assistance to the tourists at these 
Circuits. Besides, special incentives to tourists dur ing peak and off -peak seasons, tourist 
entertainment programmes like light and sound shows, music and film shows, heritage 
walks, etc. together with other creative measures may be taken to boost tourism in 
Buddhist sites.  The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in the said direction. 
LACK OF TRAINED TOUR GUIDES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee is dismayed to note that no Guide Training including refresher course has 

28 
 
 
been conducted for the last three years due to a pending court case involving ASI.  The 
Committee recommends that the matter may be brought to the notice of Cabinet Secretary to 
make efforts to bring an out of court settlement of the case so that the Guide Training programs 
can start afresh.  
(Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1. The Matter regarding  Guide cases was taken up during the 8th Inter Ministerial 
Coordination Committee for Tourism (IMCCTS) meeting held  under chairperson -ship of 
Cabinet Secretary It was suggested  that Ministry of Culture   may  consider instituting a 
system of accreditation  of Guides in place of exiting system of licensing.  Ministry of 
Culture (MoC) and Ministry of Tourism (MoT) may jointly work out a suitable mechanism 
for implementation of the accreditation System.   
 
15.2. Ministry of Tourism has already launched an online certification course "Incredible 
India Tourism Facilitator".  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
15.3. The Committee expects the Ministry to coordinate with the Ministry of Culture to 
evolve a suitable mechan ism for accreditation of Guides in place of existing system of 
licensing.  Further, consistent efforts should also be made to make available experienced 
Tourist Guides/Facilitators at all Buddhist sites. 
 
RATIONALIZATION OF TAXATION SYSTEM FOR THE BUDDHIST  CIRCUIT 
TOURISM 
 
16. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must take it up with the Ministry 
of Finance and follow the example of countries like Mauritius, who have successfully managed to 
attract tourism investment by offering incentives in the 1980's and removed them once the sector 
gained momentum. These include tax -holidays, accelerated depreciation on buildings, initial 
capital allowances, exemptions of customs duties, etc..  These incentives raise returns and offset 
actual or perceive d differences in the cost of doing a business and investing in a location. This 
will also go a long way in promoting Public -Private Partnerships (PPP) and serve to attract 
investment in the Circuit and help the Buddhist Circuit in fulfilling its potential. 
(Para 98) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1. The Ministry of Tourism, vide letter dated 09.01.2018, has requested the State 
Governments/UT Administrations to give due weightage to development of mid segment 
hotels which typically will fall in 3 star and 4 star categories while earmarking/auctioning 
of land for developing hotels.  
 
16.2. The Ministry of Finance, Government of India, on 17th October, 2017, has notified 
the Harmonized Master List of Infrastructure Sub -Sectors to boost supply of hotel rooms in 
the country which includes three Star or higher category classified hotels located outside 
cities with population of more than 1 million.  
 

29 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
16.3. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished as it is silent about the 
Committee‟s recommendation on offering tax incentives.   The Committe e, therefore, urges 
upon the Ministry to impress the Ministry of Finance to extend incentives,  to the investors 
to boost tourism at the Buddhist sites in the country as recommended by it.   

30 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes the efforts of the ASI towards providing facilities for tourists and 
desires that steps should be taken to ensure that such facilities are available at all the sites which 
fall under the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee recommends that p rogress and status of its 
implementation may be furnished in the Action Taken Reply.  
(Para 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. Recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to ASI for seeking their inputs.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.2. The Committee desires that inputs already furnished/yet to be furnished by the ASI, 
may be forwarded for its consideration.   
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee hopes that the SPVs will bring the required infrastructure in the Buddhist 
Circuit.  
(Para 97) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. Nil. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.2. The Committee expects the Ministry to act on its recommendation, at the earliest.  
 
 
********* 
 
 
  

31 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
 The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to 
pursue, from time to time, the issue of construction and maintenance of roads/highways 
connecting the vario us sites under the Buddhist Circuit, with the concerned Ministry/ 
Government for timely action.                                                                                       (Para 2.2) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply.  However, the Committee desire s to be apprised of 
the comments offered by the Railway Board.                                                       (Para 4.2) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and impresses upon the Ministry to put in more 
efforts for promotion of Buddhist legacy in both national and international Buddhist 
markets, to give a fillip to Buddhist tourism in the country.                                       (Para 6.5) 
 
 The Committee feels that the Ministry should take up promotion of Buddhist legacy 
to remote areas of the country where digital means are very limited.  The Ministry of 
Tourism in collaboration with Ministry of Culture, should promote activities like 
plays/dramas in remote areas of the country.  Various promotional products like books/T -
Shirts/paintings relating to Buddhism should be launched by the Ministry in the markets 
near the places of Buddhist Circuit.                                                                               (Para 6.6) 
 
 In this electronic era, the Committee feels that a mobile App should be launched 
which will prove very handy and attractive for tourists.  It should be designed in a way so 
that these places are covered under Swadesh Darshan Scheme, Heritage sites and plac es of 
archaeological importance.  Various offers should be launched for probable tourists while 
booking tours to such places from the App itself.  It will not only promote the tourism 
industry in a big way but will also give a major boost to digitalization.                     (Para 7.3) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and seeks to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Ministry in the said direction.                                                                                        (Para 8.2) 
 
 The Committee expects the Ministry to apprise it of the steps taken by the Ministry 
to transform Buddhist sites into Centres of Learning.                                                (Para 9.2) 
 
 The Committee notes the reply.  However, the Committee would like to know 
whether the various components under the project “Development of Buddhist Circuit” 
have witnessed any time and cost overruns.                                                               (Para 11.2) 
 
  
 

32 
 
 
 The Committee notes the reply.  In the light of various measures enumerated by the 
Ministry, the Committee would like to recommend that the impact of funds released and 
measures taken should be assessed periodically so that the effectiveness of such measures 
can be adequately monitored and corrective and timely action could be initiated. (Para 13.3) 
 
 The Committee desires the Ministry to ensure the safety and security of domestic 
and international tourists, by installing CCTV cameras, mobile surveillances and toll -free 
helpline number for betterment of security, at all the Buddhist Circuits without any further 
delay.                                                                                                                                (Para 16.5) 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
 
 The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee desires to be kept updated on the 
comments received from the Ministry of Human Resource Development.             (Para 12.2) 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee observes that despite India having unique endowments of 
biodiversity, rich culture and heritage, the tourism sector has not grown to the desired level 
vis-à-vis its potentiality.  As „Hot Air Balloon Safaris‟ are a huge hit with tourists 
worldwide and have helped to increase the popularity of various tourist spots, the 
Committee had recommended its replication across the country so that the country‟s huge, 
but barely tapped, potential could be realized.  Since the Ministry of Tourism is responsible 
for the overall coordination and planning of tourism development in the country, the 
Committee had expected the Ministry to undertake initiatives and encourage States/UTs to 
expand Hot Air Balloon Safaris.  Merely formulating a set of guidelines and forwarding 
them to all the States/UTs appears more a formality devoid of any proactive and practical 
approach.  The Committee would, therefore, once again, urge upon the Ministry to impress 
upon the States/UTs to promote “Hot Air Ballon Sararis” aggressively and update the 
Committee on the progress made in this regard.                                                          (Para 1.3) 
 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in Para 16 of 262 nd Report.  
The Committee further recommends that periodic meetings based on the guidelines issued 
be held to review and constantly monitor the “Safety and Quality Norms for Ad venture 
Tourism in India”.                                                                                                            (Para 2.2)  
 The reply does not address the recommendation of the Committee in full.  The 
Committee observes that niche tourism products of the country like Buddhist Circuit may 
be developed so as to overcome seasonality and promote India as a 365 days‟ destination.  I t 

33 
 
 
is in this context that the Committee desires that all Railway stations of Buddhist Circuit, 
like Rajgir in Bihar, Shravasti and Kushinagar in Uttar Pradesh, should also be upgraded 
with a view to boost tourism in these destinations.                                                        (Para 3.3) 
 
 The Committee is constrained to note that there has been substantial under -
utilization of funds released against four out of the five projects under the scheme of 
Development of Buddhist Circuit.  Against a t otal sum of Rs.119.92 crore released during 
2016-17 and 2017 -18, only Rs.55.58 crore has been utilized and a substantial allocation of 
Rs.64.34 crore has remained unspent.  In a country like ours, where resources are 
constraint, under-utilization of more than 53% of allocation is a matter of great concern; in 
fact the funds released should have been optimally utilized.  The Committee would like the 
Ministry to chalk out a solid and fresh fiscal road -map so that the released funds are 
utilized productively under the scheme of Development of Buddhist Circuit.          (Para 4.2) 
 
 The Committee had recommended provision of an off -season stabilization fund so as 
to overcome seasonality of tourism activities in the Buddhist Circuit.  The Committee 
would, therefore, like to know to what extent Market Development Assistance Scheme has 
succeeded in sustaining and developing off-season tourism in the Buddhist Circuit. 
(Para 5.2) 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry‟s reply is silent about giving wider digital 
publicity to Buddhist sites in India and to promote Buddhist Circuit through other new age 
platforms, viz., tourist apps, video blogs, etc. so as to claim the legacy of Buddha.   The 
Committee desires it may be updated on these aspects as well.                                    (Para 6.3) 
 
 The Ministry‟s reply that the recommendation has been noted for compliance is not 
satisfactory.  The Committee feels that the Ministry should clearly indicate the steps 
taken/proposed to be taken for preservation of ancient Buddhist sites, their relics and  
sanctity and also the historical artifacts of those sites.                                                  (Para 8.2) 
  
 While making its recommendation in Para 70 of its 262 nd Report, the Committee had 
expected the Ministry of Tourism to take up the mat ter with the authorities concerned and 
apprise the Committee of the follow -up action taken in this regard.  The stance of the 
Ministry appears lukewarm while passing the recommendation of the Committee to the 
Ministry of Culture.  The Committee, therefore,  desires that the Ministry of Tourism must 
take up the issues flagged in the said Para once again with the Ministry of Culture and 
acquaint the Committee with their response.                                                                (Para 9.2)  
 
 The reply does not reflect the seriousness of the efforts made by the Ministry in 
developing the much needed amenities for the tourists from abroad.  Though  India has a 
strong domestic tourism base but much of the domestic tourism is „low end‟ and the key 
challenge is to attract „high end‟ foreign tourists.  In order to meet this challenge it is 
imperative to develop excellent infrastructure.  Of equal importance is the adoption and 
promotion of a pro -poor tourism approach to bring the benefit to the poor. The 
Committee, therefore, desires that it should be specifically apprised of the steps taken in 

34 
 
 
compliance of its recommendation regarding augmenting the amenities needed by foreign 
tourists and expanding the opportunities for the locals.                                            (Para 11.2) 
 
 The Committee feels that still there is a greater need to provide the minimum 
comforts for tourists,  i.e.,  wayside amenities like washrooms, drinking water, resting spots 
and shades, etc. to boost footfalls in Buddhist places.   Moreover, it should be the 
endeavour of the Ministry to provide those comforts at all the Buddhist shrines, temple 
complexes and holy sites in the country.                                                                      (Para 13.2) 
 
 The reply furnished by the Ministry is not satisfactory. The words are not backed 
up with actions in so far as development of tourist amenities/faci lities is concerned.  
Adequate facilities/amenities need to be in place for the old, elderly and disabled tourists. 
The Ministry should seriously coordinate with the Ministry of Health at the highest level 
for setting up of medical booths for timely medica l assistance to the tourists at these 
Circuits. Besides, special incentives to tourists during peak and off -peak seasons, tourist 
entertainment programmes like light and sound shows, music and film shows, heritage 
walks, etc. together with other creative m easures may be taken to boost tourism in 
Buddhist sites.  The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in the said direction. 
(Para 14.2) 
 
 The Committee expects the Ministry to coordinate with the Ministry of Culture to 
evolve a suitable mechanism for  accreditation of Guides in place of existing system of 
licensing.  Further, consistent efforts should also be made to make available experienced 
Tourist Guides/Facilitators at all Buddhist sites.                                                        (Para 15.3) 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished as it is silent about the 
Committee‟s recommendation on offering tax incentives.   The Committee, therefore, urges 
upon the Ministry to impress the Ministry of Finance to extend incentives, to the investors 
to boost tourism at the Buddhist sites in the country as recommended by it.           (Para 16.3) 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 The Committee desires that inputs already furnished/yet to be furnished by the ASI, 
may be forwarded for its consideration.                                                                         (Para 1.2) 
 
 The Committee expects the Ministry to act on its recommendation, at the earliest.  
(Para 2.2) 
 
 
*********

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


35 
 
 
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 5 th December, 2019 in Room Number 
67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
5. Kumari Selja 
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shrimati Veena Devi 
      9.   Shri Rahul Kaswan 
    10.   Shri  Saumitra Khan 
    11.   Smt Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
    12.   Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
    13. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
    14.   Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
    15.   Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
    16.   Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
    17.   Shrimati Mala Roy 
    18.   Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
    19.   Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
    20.   Shri Dushyant Singh 
    21.   Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer 
  
  

36 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a very war m welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to c onsider and adopt the   
following Reports:- 
(i) *     *     *; 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Sixty 
Second Report on 'Development of Buddhist Circuit in India'; and 
(iii) *     *     *. 
 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Reports after a brief discussion. 
 
4. The Committee then decided to present/lay the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 
9th December, 2019. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman 
and in his absence, Shri Tiruchi Siva, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Kamlesh 
Paswan, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Saumitra Khan , M.P. were  authorized to lay the above 
mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5. The Chairman then thanked the Members including Members of previous Committee and 
Secretariat for their contribution in the preparation of the Reports.  
6. *     *     *. 
7.   The meeting adjourned at 4:14 P.M.  
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                     P. Narayanan 
5th December, 2019                                                                                       Director 
 
 
  
*** Relates to other matters. 