Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
206
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Third Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

51
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Third Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................................. 1—20
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................. 21—24
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 25— 28
7. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 9—32
8. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 33—50

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10.  Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred and Sixth Report on “Action Taken Replies by the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways on the observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and
Ninety Third Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways”.
2. The One Hundred and Ninety Third Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 3
rd May, 2013 to the
Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred and Ninety First Report was received from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
on 28
th August, 2013.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 17 th December, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
17th December, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 26, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ABS – Additional Budgetary Support
ADB – Asian Development Bank
BE – Budget Estimates
BOT – Build-Operate-Transfer
BRDB – Border Roads Development Board
BRO – Border Roads Organization
CCI – Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure
CMVR – Central Motor Vehicles Rules
CoI – Committee on Infrastructure
CoS – Committee of Secretaries
CRF – Central Road Fund
DBFOT – Design Build Finance Operate and Transfer
DPR – Detailed Project Report
DTO – District Transport Office
EI & ISC – Economic Importance and Inter-State Connectivity
EPC – Engineering, Procurement and Construction
ETC – Electronic Toll Collection
FDR – Fixed Deposit Receipt
GBS – Gross Budgetary Support
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
GQ – Golden Quadrilateral
HSD – High Speed Diesel
I & C – Inspection and Certification
ICTT – International Container Transshipment Terminal
IDTR – Institute of Driving Training and Research
IRR – Internal Rate of Return
IWT – Inland Water Transport
JBIC – Japan Bank for International Cooperation
LWE – Left Wing Extremism
(iv)

MCA – Model Concession Agreement
MoRT&H – Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
MR – Maintenance and Repair
NHAI – National Highways Authority of India
NHARSS – National Highways Accident Relief Service Scheme
NH(O) – National Highways (Original)
NHDP – National Highways Development Programme
NSEWC – North-South East-West Corridors
PPP – Public-Private-Partnership
PUC – Pollution Under Control
PWD – Public Works Department
RBI – Reserve Bank of India
RDTC – Regional Driving Training Centre
RE – Revised Estimates
RFID – Radio Frequency Identification
RT&H – Road Transport and Highways
RTO – Regional Transport Office
SARDP-NE – Special Accelerated Road Development Programme (North-East)
SRTC – State Road Transport Corporations
TRW – Transport Research Wing
VGF – Viability Gap Funding
W B – World Bank
(v)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways on the observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and
Ninety Third Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 3 rd May, 2013.
2. The Action Taken Replies received from the Ministry in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:–
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry:
Paragraph Nos. 9, 13, 18, 19, 34, 36, 50, 56, 61, 62, 63, 68, 71, 73, 85, 90, 99,
111, 112, 116, 119, 122, 127, 132, 135, 137 and 140
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Ministry replies:
Paragraph Nos. 35, 37, 138 and 139
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Paragraph Nos. 94, 95 and 104
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are
still awaited:
Paragraph Nos. 34, 36, 62 and 63
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of these recommendations/
observations, which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be
furnished to it at the earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee
contained in the One Hundred and Ninety Third Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and
recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the
succeeding paragraphs
ANNUAL PLAN 2012-13
5. The Committee finds that funds under both plan and non-plan outlays have seen substantial
reduction at RE stage for the year 2012-13. The Committee is not convinced of the reasons for
such drastic reduction of funds especially under plan head from Rs. 23000 crores at BE stage to
Rs. 17773.54 crores at RE stage. The Committee found that reduction of funds at RE stage is
happening every year due to one reason or the other. The Committee feels that the Ministry should
strive to utilize the allocated money. The Committee also feels that major modification of allocation
at the stage of revised estimate should be avoided as it delays the implementation of sanctioned
projects.
(Recommendation at Para 9 of 193 rd Report)

2
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6. The total GBS outlay for Central Sector Roads at BE stage was Rs. 23,000 crore, which
was reduced to Rs. 17,773.54 crore at RE stage, i.e., there was reduction in GBS outlay for
Rs. 5,226.46 crore during RE. To accommodate this drastic reduction, release to NHAI for
Rs. 1,878.95 crore and Rs. 1,777.03 crore under NHAI investment and remittance of toll receipts
cannot be made. Otherwise, these amounts would have been spent. Perhaps M/o Finance reduce
the BE allocation keeping in view the expenditure pattern during the first three quarters of the
financial year.
7. As far as road work is concerned majority of expenditure is incurred during the last quarter
of the financial year due to favorable weather condition. Whereas, M/o Finance imposed restrictions
for ceiling of expenditure by 33% and 15% for the last quarter and last month of the financial year
respectively, which is a main impediment in incurring expenditure for this Ministry. This Ministry
has taken this issue with M/o Finance for relaxing these norms. However, the 33% ceiling was not
relaxed during 2012-13. Even, Parliamentary Standing Committee also recommended relaxing these
ceilings for this Ministry on a number of occasion.
8. This Ministry agrees with the fact that modification of allocation at RE stage delay
implementation of sanctioned projects. However, this aspect is not within the purview of this
Ministry. We are bringing recommendation of the committee to the notice of Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
9. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that it will pursue the
removal of restrictions of 33% ceiling of expenditure for the last quarter with Ministry of
Finance seriously. The Committee may also be apprised on the reaction of Planning
Commission to committee’s recommendations in this regard.
TWELFTH PLAN (2012-17)
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
10. The Committee notes that the total GBS outlay provided during the Twelfth plan is
Rs.1,44,769 crore including central transport sector as against the projected requirement of
Rs.2,64,080 crore excluding central transport sector. The Committee feels that this reduction in
allocation will certainly deter the Ministry in taking-up the new projects/schemes envisaged for the
Twelfth plan period. Projects like connectivity to 50 minor ports, connectivity to 24 airports and
implementation of special packages for J&K and North-Eastern Region have to be dropped by the
Ministry for want of funds from the Government. The Committee also notes that Rs. 6,400 crore
has been allocated against the requirement of Rs. 37,540 crore for works NH(O) for the entire plan
period, which is unsustainable considering the length of roads taken-up for improvement under this
scheme. This reduced allocation for the NH(O) will affect the NH (O) works adversely and
ultimately result in diversion of cess towards development of non-NHDP projects from NHDP
projects. The Committee is concerned to note that such diversion of cess meant for NHDP projects
has been taking place for the last three years which is alarming. The Committee feels that the
Ministry should take up the enhancement of GBS during mid-term plan review so that new
projects/schemes apart from the on-going ones do not suffer.
(Para 13 of ibid)

3
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
11. This Ministry vide d.o. letter No. NH-22023/1/2011-P&M dated 31.08.2012 has taken up
the issue for enhancement in allocation during the Twelfth Five Year Plan with Planning
Commission and M/o Finance. However, the same has been turned down citing overall resource
constraints. Accordingly, all the new schemes/projects envisaged to be taken up during Twelfth
Plan have been dropped. Further to mention that if the level of Annual Plan outlay (about
Rs. 23,000 crore) is maintained for the entire Twelfth Five Year Plan then we will not even able
to reach the total outlay provided for the entire Five Year Plan (Rs. 1,44,769 crore).
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
12. The Committee reiterates its concern about the fact that road sector, one of the
important segments of country’s infrastructure, will not be able to meet the targets with
the current allocation.
ANNUAL PLAN 2013-14
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
13. The Committee finds that the GBS component for the Ministry has seen only a marginal
increase of Rs. 500 crore, from Rs. 23,000 crore in 2012-13(BE) to Rs. 23,500 crore for
2013-14 (BE). As against the projected requirement of Rs. 26,450 crores, the Ministry has been
allocated Rs. 23,500 crore only as GBS for 2013-14 which is about 88% of the projected
requirement. The Committee feels that static allocation forces the Ministry not to take up new
projects/schemes and it also affects the progress of the sanctioned projects adversely. The
Committee finds that Rs. 3,024 crores meant for financing of NHDP will be diverted to NH(O)
works resulting in various schemes under NHDP being delayed. The Committee feels that the
Ministry should find ways to check such diversions in consultation with the Planning Commission
so that major national highway projects are not delayed for want of funds. Implementation of our
road transport Schemes/programmes are not visible/felt at the ground level at all and, therefore,
these may be supported in a big way.
(Para 18 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
14. As stated earlier, regarding poor allocation recommendation has been forwarded to Ministry
of Finance and Planning Commission. The diversion of cess from NHAI to NH(O) was necessitated
due to Gross Budgetary Support 2013-14 being less than what was projected. The shortfall will
be made good by National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) through increased market
borrowings. Further to mention that the projected requirement for 2013-14 (BE) is based on the
criterion specified by the Planning Commission, whereas, the actual requirement was much more.
Diversion of funds has been done in consultation with the Planning Commission.
15. Ministry also agrees with the recommendation of the Committee to take up more projects
through budgetary support. Accordingly, Ministry has decided to take up more projects on
Engineering Procurement Construction (EPC) mode through budgetary support.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
16. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that it will get adequate
budgetary support for EPC road projects.

4
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee also expresses its concern over the reduction in allocation of funds for
Road Transport Sector from Rs. 400 crore in 2012-13(BE) to Rs. 200 crore for 2013-14 (BE).
(Para 19 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
18. The reduction in allocation for road transport sector has been done based on the overall
resource constraints.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
19. The Committee notes the reply and feels that reduction in allocation of funds for
road transport sector will definitely have a negative impact on the schemes and projects
particularly pertaining to road safety related matters.
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
20. The Committee, in view of the complicated and long procedure involving multiple agencies
at different levels coupled with strict norms, legal, administrative, financial etc. that are required
to be followed at different stages, appreciates the constraints under which highways projects have
to be executed. Then there are problems with land acquisition and environmental clearances that
are time taking. But, the Committee feels that such infrastructure projects as highways have to be
taken up and completed in this setting only; there in no escape from the constraints as these are
built into the system. Real challenge, therefore, before the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways is to expedite the projects in minimum time and to maximum possible extent, by having
a robust monitoring and coordination mechanism at different level/stages. Every important agency
involved in the process like financial institutions such as Banks and RBI, State Governments, other
Ministries and particularly Planning Commission will have to realize the urgency and importance of
faster development of Highways and will have to make it a joint effort.
(Para 34 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
21. Observations have been noted. A copy of the recommendations is being sent to Ministry of
Finance and Planning Commission for appropriate action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22. The Committee notes the reply and it may be appraised about observations of the
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission on the monitoring and coordination
mechanism for road projects.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
23. The Committee hopes that certain measures taken recently in respect of making loans from
Banks as secured loans; separating forest clearance from the environmental and efforts made to
revise Concession Agreement will certainly go a long way in expediting our highways development
programmes.
(Para 35 of ibid)

5
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
24. Observations have been noted. No action called for.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
26. In this regard, a disturbing aspect about Planning Commission’s approach towards highways
construction came to notice of the Committee. To Committee’s utter dismay, the Planning
Commission instead of promoting and facilitating highways construction is alleged to have been
exceeding its brief. The Committee feels that the Commission’s overbearing attitude was causing
unease amongst the line Ministries/Departments. It is the considered opinion of the Committee that
documents/papers prepared by the line Ministries for implementing a project may be seen by the
Commission just as is done by the Department of Law and Department of Expenditure; it should
refrain from commenting upon engineering and technical aspects and should confine itself to
planning and allocation/management of resources only. Moreover, the ultimate accountability for
anything done or not done rests with Ministry and not with the Planning Commission. For example,
in the case of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, the Committee learnt that even
Concessionaire Agreements are being finalized in the Commission on the basis of models being
followed in Western Countries. If it is true, the Committee feels that Planning Commission by doing
so was going beyond its original mandate visualized by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, whose idea was
to have such a body which could facilitate faster growth and development in planned manner. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Concessionaire Agreement devised by the Planning
Commission should be reformulated in concurrence with the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways to address the local conditions and changing circumstances. The Committee feels the
Western models will not work in our country because we have our own peculiarities and
constraints.
(Para 36 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
27. The working of Planning Commission is beyond the control of this Ministry. A copy of the
recommendations is being sent to Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for appropriate
action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and expects the Ministry to obtain
responses from the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance on the Committee’s
observations/recommendation and forward to the Committee at the earliest.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
29. The Committee has strong reasons to conclude that PPP as a model for the development
of road projects needs to be reviewed seriously in the light of our experience so far in this regard.
That the private capital is mainly for profit is borne out by the fact that the profitable projects are
being bid out fast. A vast country which needs faster connectivity to its length and breadth has
to adopt an alternative model of project development which is development driven and not profit
driven. Since profitable projects are sold out first, the Government is facing problem in getting
bidders for such non-profitable road projects as those in LWE and North-East Areas. India needs

6
faster construction of roads and the Committee, therefore, recommends that all such projects
without bidders should be developed with the budgetary support from the Government and Planning
Commission needs to be more practical and careful about its role and function.
(Para 37 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
30. The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee. Accordingly, Ministry has
decided to take up more projects on Engineering Procurement Construction (EPC) mode through
budgetary support.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS (NHDP)
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
32. The Committee observes that performance of NHDP from 2006 onwards has not been very
good. For instance out of the 1000 Km. envisaged in NHDP-VI in 2006, the Government could
not award even a single contract till March, 2013. Likewise, out of the 19,800 Km. envisaged in
the NHDP IV , just 187 Km. could be completed till March 2013. Apart from the stated reasons
such as poor market conditions, economic slow down, strict stipulations of RBI for funding
projects, poor response of bidders for projects, the Committee feels that poor performance of
NHDP projects may be due to reasons narrated in previous paragraphs. The Committee, therefore,
feels that the Government should look into such aspects and try to curb such practice to prevent
breakdown of implementation of projects.
(Para 50 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
33. Keeping in view unfavorable market condition for BOT projects, leading to slippage of target
for award of projects under NHDP (projects for only 1,116 km. was awarded as against the target
of 8,100 km.), current financial year 2013-14 onwards Ministry has decided to take up more
projects on Engineering Procurement Construction (EPC) mode through budgetary support.
As far as expressway is concerned it is to mention that in November, 2006 the Government
approved under NHDP Phase-VI, construction of 1,000 km. expressways through PPP on DBFOT
pattern at a total cost of Rs.16,680 crore.
The total land acquisition cost for Delhi-Jaipur and Vadodara-Mumbai Expressway is about
Rs.5,500 crore and Rs.6,000 crore respectively. The overall resource constraint, it would be
difficult to take up these projects till financing arrangements are finalized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that taking up of road
projects under EPC rather than the much hyped PPP model will help the NHAI to complete
NHDP projects within time with permissible cost escalation of projects.

7
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
35. The Committee feels that environment and forest clearance are necessary components of
any development. However, there is no point in delaying the clearance or keeping it in abeyance
for unduly long, affecting the viability of the projects. The Committee recommends that the
Government should fix a specific time frame within which the concerned authorities have to take
a decision on such clearances. There should be an effective coordinating mechanism with different
Government agencies to give clearances in a time bound manner.
(Para 56 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
36. Committee’s recommendation has been noted. NHAI essentially requires environment and
forest clearance in most of the projects. Only few projects require Wildlife clearance.
37. So far as environment clearance is concerned Ministry of Environment and Forest
(MoEF) has setup infrastructure Committee for examining the proposals related to environment
clearance. The Committee is meeting regularly every month. As such there is no delay on the
part of the MoEF in granting environment clearance once the proposal reaches to them. The
delays occur mainly in conducting Public Hearing by the State Pollution Control Board at district
level. This delay can be curtailed if the SPCB convenes public hearing within one month from
the date of receiving documents. Alternatively, the Public Hearing can be exempted in the projects
involving widening.
38. With regard to forest clearance, the delays occur mainly in processing the proposals at State
level. No time limit has been prescribed for processing the application. At times the proposal takes
more than one year in reaching at the level of MoEF, New Delhi/Regional Office. There is no
prescribed time limit for processing such cases.
39. Considering all the factors the following measures can be taken for cutting down the delays
in clearances.
Environment Clearance:
1. Public Hearing was earlier exempted for widening projects under EIA notification 1994.
Under the new EIA notification 2006 public hearing is made mandatory. The process
of public hearing is time consuming and hence if exempted will considerably reduce
the time period.
2. Keeping in view the normal size of projects, the length of NH should be increased
from 30 km. to 100 and widening upto 60m.
Forest Clearance:
1. The powers for granting forest clearance for diversion of protected forest land may
be delegated to MoEF, Regional Office, irrespective of the area.
2. A time limit of 3 months may be prescribed for processing and recommending the
forest proposals at the State Government level.
3. Powers up to 40 ha. may be granted to Regional Office of MoEF.
Meetings are held regularly with Ministry of Environment and Forests to review the pending
proposals.

8
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that the proposed measures will
definitely cut down the delays in environmental and forest clearances in new road projects.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
41. The Committee after examining all the information provided by the Ministry as well as the
National Highways Authority of India expresses its concern over the status and progress of
development of national highways in the country. The NHAI’s ability to spend only Rs.7780 crores
as against the allocated amount of Rs. 20780 crores (RE) during the year 2012-13 certainly does
not inspire confidence with regard to development of national highways. When the concessionaires
who have awarded projects under BOT, are withdrawing from various projects due to funding
issues, the public sector agency is not able to spend even half of the allocated money. The replies
submitted by the Ministry are not convincing.
(Para 61 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
42. During the year 2012-13, a total outlay of Rs. 7,780 crores, which included NHAI
(Investment) of Rs. 6,003 crore and remittance of toll receipt of Rs. 1,777 crore was provided
by the Ministry to NHAI. Above all the total target for market borrowing was Rs. 13,000 crores,
out of which NHAI borrowed Rs. 2,902 crores only. However, the actual expenditure incurred by
NHAI for all its revenue resource was Rs. 15,074.22 crore. Therefore, the question of not
spending of allocated money by NHAI does not arise.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and observes that the NHAI can still
improve its spending pattern of allocated funds.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. The Committee was informed about the poor condition of Rewa-Katni Jabalpur section of
NH-7 and also the non-availability of approach roads to NH-60 of GQ in Medinipur(WB). Poor
condition of NH 25 between Kanpur and Jhansi was also brought before the Committee. The
Committee hopes that NHAI will take-up with State Government of Tamil Nadu on the pending
issues relating to completion of Chennai port-Maduravoyal connectivity project. The Committee was
also informed about the delay in acquisition of land for national highways projects and release of
share of central funds to Kerala. The Committee also hopes that the development of Dehradun-
Gangotri national highway via Harsil will get the due importance from the implementing agencies
and the project will be completed within the stipulated time.
(Para 62 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
45. Maintenance of highways is a continuous process under NHDP. The periodical repair
work for Rewa-Katni-Jabalpur road of NH 7 in the State of Madhya Pradesh has been taken up
by NHAI.
46. NH 60 crosses NH 6 at Kharagpur. NH 60 on the south of Kharagpur is part of GQ and
four laned under NHDP I. For improvement of stretch between Medininpur - Kharagpur section of
NH 60 provision has been made in the Annual Plan 2013-14.

9
47. The status of Four Lane Elevated Road Connecting Chennai Port is as under:
1. The work started in September, 2010 and was scheduled to be completed by
September, 2013. The work was progressing as per schedule. Chief Engineer, Water
Resources Department (WRD), Government of Tamil Nadu issued a notice to NHAI
directing to stop the work on the plea that the road alignment has not been made on
the bank of Cooum river and its alignment along the water way will be hindrance to
the water flow in the river.
2. NHAI made all out efforts at every level to sort out the matter and requested WRD,
Government of Tamil Nadu several times to withdraw its notice and allow NHAI to
resume the work. Thereafter, NHAI had no other option left than to approach the
appropriate court of law. Now the matter is pending in the Hon’ble High Court of
Madras. Further execution of the project will be taken up as per directions of the
Hon’ble High Court of Madras.
LA Process in Kerala is extremely slow despite taking up the issue at highest level,
repeatedly. No appreciable progress has been made in this regard due to inadequate
administrative support despite Kerala Government signing the State Support Agreement.
48. Dehradun is connected with Gangotri ( via Harsil) though NH-72, 58, 94 and 108 with
aggregate length of 328 Km. approximately. Out of 328 km. 4 laning work is about 50 km. (total
length in the route) is in progress under NHDP-III. Four laning of 10 km. length of NH-58 (with
State PWD) has been included in Annual Plan 2013-14 for Uttarakhand. Remaining length of 144
km. of NH-94 and 124 km. of NH-108 is with the BRO, the upgradation development of which
will be carried out during 2013-14 and subsequent years subject to availability of funds and
depending upon inter-se priority of works.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
49. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that necessary follow-up actions are taken
by the Ministry so that the above projects are completed as per target.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
50. The Committee feels that the model Concession Agreement prepared by the Planning
Commission is acting as an impediment in awarding projects as there is no flexibility to
accommodate the local conditions. The Committee is of the opinion that the NHAI may be allowed
to have its own Concession Agreement depending on the local conditions for the roads to facilitated
greater amount of private participation. The Committee also feels that NHAI should not keep on
adding projects in its kitty without completing the existing projects. The Committee hopes that
NHAI should fix its target levels bases on ground realities involved in road projects.
(Para 63 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
51. Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee. The present approval process
which made it necessary that each change had to be taken up through IMG/CCI made it difficult
to have local adaptation taking note of prevailing conditions. Ministry is in the process of taking
up a proposal to provide more autonomy to NHAI.

10
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee notes the reply and it may be appraised on the steps taken to give
more autonomy in taking decisions while awarding road projects.
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (ORIGINAL) WORKS: NH(O)
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
53. The Committee feels that development of non-NHDP highways is not getting much attention
from the Government. Reduced allocation of Rs. 5421.83 crores - 2013-14 against that of
Rs. 6,042 crore for the year 2012-13 (BE) clearly shows the reduced emphasis of Government this
sector. The Committee notes with concern that to meet this shortfall of fund money; out of
cess meant for NHDP, was being diverted under the head. This diversion of cess increased to
Rs. 5,719 crore in 2012-13 from Rs. 1,162 crore diverted in 2011-12. The Ministry has the
planning to divert Rs. 3,024 crore during the current fiscal. The Committee finds that achievement
of targets fixed under the development of non- NHDP is also not encouraging. The Committee feels
that dedicated allocation of funds for this head is a necessity for strengthening the core non-NHDP
national highways.
(Para 68 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
54. The diversion was inevitable in view of limited plan outlay. This was done in consultation
with the Planning Commission. The issue of inadequate plan outlay has already been taken up with
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. However, the proposal has been turned down in
view of overall resource constraint. As stated earlier we are taking up the recommendation with
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee feels that continuous diversion of cess meant for NHDP projects to
other projects and reduced allocation of funds for Non-NHDP projects, will hamper the
achievement of targets in both the sectors. Therefore, the Committee recommends that cess
meant for NHDP projects may not be diverted.
ROAD PROJECTS IN LEFT WING EXTREMISM AFFECTED AREAS
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee is of the view that developing road network in LWE areas forms a strategic
and economic significance to connect them with the rest of the country. The Committee feels
concerned to note that out of the 5477 km road proposed in LWE areas only 2267 km. could be
completed till February, 2013. The Government machinery need to be activated to involve all the
agencies to ensure adequate security for doing the road projects in the regions. The Committee
observes that the relaxation of eligibility conditions is a welcome step to implement the road
projects in Left Wing Extremism affected areas.
(Para 71 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
57. Consequent upon the approval of the proposal, action has been taken to implement the
approved programme. Out of 5477 km. length of roads proposed to be developed at a cost of

11
Rs. 7300 crore, construction has been completed in 2450 km. length and expenditure incurred is
Rs. 2948 crores upto 1 st May, 2013. The development of roads under the programme is scheduled
to be completed by March, 2015.
58. Secretary (RTH) on 01.3.2013 requested Chief Secretaries of concerned States to constitute
District level coordination Committee headed by District Magistrate comprised of District
Superintending of Police, Central Armed Forces, State PWD and contractor to plan and proceed
with the Area domination by Armed Forces for execution of works sanctioned under LWE.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
59. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the constitution of District Level
Coordination Committees in the LWE areas will help to achieve the target completion date
of programme i.e. by March, 2015.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
60. The Committee feels that allocation of funds for maintenance and repair of national
highways is highly inadequate considering the damages etc. in the existing Highways and new
national highways added every year. The Committee learnt that what is allotted is just 1/3rd of the
requirement of funds for maintenance of National Highways. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should project its demand at RE stage for enhancement of allocation under this head for
proper maintenance and upkeep of the existing Highways.
(Para 73 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
61. During the previous year 2012-13, additional allocation under Supplementary Demands for
Grants under M&R for Rs. 500 crore was solicited from M/o Finance at RE stage. However, the
same was not provided to this Ministry. As far as inadequate allocation under M&R is concerned,
this has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance. As a result the M&R allocation has been
enhanced to Rs. 1,995.32 crore during 2013-14.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that even the allocation of
Rs.1,995.32 crore for maintenance and repair of national highways during the current fiscal
is a meager amount considering the vast network of national highways in the country.
SPECIAL ACCELERATED ROAD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME IN NORTH-EAST (SARDP-NE)
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63. The Committee finds that real issue in respect of national highways projects in North-
Eastern part of the country is spending. The Committee notes that only 69 works were awarded
as against the targeted 1980 during 2012-13. The Committee does appreciate the constraints of
working in this region. The Committee, however, hopes that special attention/emphasis would be
given for the timely implementation of various road projects in the NE Region so that national
highways become lifeline for the entire region in economic development, strengthening tourism and
trade to a greater extent.
(Para 85 of ibid)

12
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
64. In order to improve the monitoring of works in the North Eastern Region, the Cabinet
Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) had approved setting up of the post of One Additional Director
General and Three Chief Engineers. One ADG (NER) has already been posted and one Chief
Engineer at Tripura to look after the works of Tripura, Manipur and Mizoram and action is being
taken to fill up the post of 2 CE’s. In addition to this Regional Officers, at Itanagar and Guwahati,
who are officer of the rank of Superintending Engineer, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
are already in existence for monitoring of all works sanctioned by the Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that with the appointment of additional
man power in North-Eastern Region, implementation of various road projects in that region
will be expedited.
ROADS OF INTER-STATE CONNECTIVITY AND ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
66. The Committee feels that the Ministry should take up with State Governments for
identifying more projects under this scheme. There was only one project approved under Inter-state
connectivity scheme and no project could be approved under Economic-Importance scheme during
2012-13. The number of projects approved under Economic-Importance has seen a decline since
2008-09. The Committee hopes that the concerted efforts will be made by the Ministry in
coordination with the State Governments for providing early road connectivity to more destinations
under these categories.
(Para 90 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
67. The Bank of Sanction (BOS), i.e. the existing liability of sanctioned works as on 01.04.2012
was Rs. 1,291.31 crore for works under EI and ISC schemes, whereas, the available Annual
allocation under this scheme is around Rs. 260 crore. In view of this, only selected proposals were
sanctioned during the last two years.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
68. The Committee notes the reply and feels that mismatch between the existing liability
of sanctioned works and available annual allocation under this scheme should be addressed
by the Ministry on priority so that more destinations are covered under this scheme.
CENTRAL ROAD FUND
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
69. The Committee feels that any cut /diversion of the fund meant for NHO would definitely
impact the entire stretch of the national highways uncovered under NHDP, SARDP and LWE.
(Para 94 of ibid)
70. The Committee finds that spending of allocated funds by State Governments is not up to
the mark. The Committee hopes that the Ministry in consultation with the Planning Commission
should find a solution to stop diversion of cess earmarked for national highways under CRF to

13
works under NH (O). Such diversion will definitely delay the NHDP projects and also increase their
cost in long run. The Committee hopes that the Ministry may assist the State Governments to
utilize the funds allocated from CRF.
(Para 95 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
71. This Ministry agrees with the observation of the Committee. In order to provide adequate
allocation under NH(O) for development of NH stretches not covered under NHDP, SARDP and
LWE, this Ministry has no other option but to divert cess money from NHAI due to restricted
budgetary support for Central Sector Roads. This issue has already been taken up with the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance, however, no positive response has been received. The States/
UTs–wise accrual under CRF during the year 2012-13 is Rs.2359.91 crores and releases are
Rs.2350.37 crores.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
72. The Committee feels that the Ministry’s reply on diversion of CRF meant for
national highways for NH(O) works and under-utilization of CRF funds is quite routine
nature and does not address the core issue of the problems.
ROAD TRANSPORT
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
73. The Committee feels that the road transport sector is not getting the attention from the
Government it deserves. Funds for almost all the schemes of this sector were reduced at RE level
during 2012-13. As against the allocation of Rs.400 crores at BE level, the Ministry’s allocation has
been drastically reduced to Rs.130 crore at RE level. This clearly shows the Ministry’s inability to
formulate and execute programmes/projects under various heads. The Committee feels that these
programmes are very important for road safety point of view. BE 2013-14 is half of the BE of
previous year. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will be in a position to spend the entire
allocation Rs.200 crores for the current fiscal and if proper programmes are framed more money
may be demanded at the R.E. level.
(Para 99 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
74. Rs.400.00 crore was allocated at BE stage for various schemes under Road Transport
Sector including Road Safety majority of schemes pertain to grant in aid to States which can be
released only after receipt of necessary utilization / progress report from the States. In spite of
initial slow pace of expenditure, with sustained effort, the Road Transport Wing was in a position
to spend about 160 crore. However, due to budgetary cut, the allocation to RT Wing was reduced
to Rs.130.00 crore at R.E. stage. However, during 2012-13, an amount of Rs.139.16 crore was
incurred on various schemes/programmes of Road Transport Wing which is the highest amount
incurred during the recent years on road transport sector.
75. For better implementation of the scheme, meetings were organized with the State
Governments/implementing agencies from time to time to monitor/review the scheme. The progress
was also monitored through regular follow-up with concerned agencies which were responsible for
implementation of the scheme.

14
76. The suggestions of the Committee for better planning and execution of road transport
projects including better utilization of funds have been noted for compliance . Action is in hand to
appraise some of the scheme for better implementation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
77. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will pursue its case for
enhancement of allocation of funds for road transport sector at RE stage vigorously.
ROAD SAFETY
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
78. The Committee feels that publicity and awareness programmes will have a telling impact on
road safety. However, the Committee feels that  simply spending money on publicity and awareness
on road safety will not yield any fruitful results unless the Government ensures strict enforcement
of rules/regulations on road safety. The much debated amendments to Central Motor Vehicles Act
for enhancing penalties for violations of road safety rules have not seen light of the day so far.
The Ministry of Road Trasnport is delaying the introduction of mandatory fitment of Auto Dipper
as required by Rule 106 of Central Motor Vehicles Rules 1989 and Section 110(1)(j) for reasons
better known to them. The Committee would also like the Ministry to put an effective coordinated
mechanism in place for better enforcement of road safety rules/regulations by the State
Governments.
(Para 104 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
79. The Ministry is pursuing a multi-pronged strategy to improve safety on the roads. In order
to ensure improvement in aspects which come under the jurisdiction of States, viz. enforcement,
health and education related issues are taken up from time to time by the National Road Safety
Council (NRSC) which includes States Transport Ministers, DG Police and Secretary (Transport).
80. The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was passed by Rajya Sabha on 08.05.2012.
The Bill, as passed by Rajya Sabha, was introduced for consideration and passing in Lok Sabha
on 15
th May, 2012. The Bill was taken up for discussion in Lok Sabha on 16 th May, 2012, but the
discussion remained inconclusive. The Bill was listed during Monsoon, Winter and Budget Sessions
of Parliament for discussion, but was not taken up. The Bill is now proposed to be moved in the
Monsoon Session, 2013 of Lok Sabha for being passed.
81. The Ministry finalized the notification GSR 29(E) dated 15.01.1998, thereto inserting the
provision of mandatory fitment of auto dipper in motor vehicles under CMVRs, 1989. The matter
has been deliberated a lot taking inputs from all concerned and it has been found that mandatory
fitment of auto dipper is not feasible in motor vehicles as of now.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
82. The reply submitted by the Ministry shows a lack of Government’s interest in getting
auto dipper installed in vehicle to avoid accidents during nights due to high beam lights. The
Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a status note on this aspect including the
experts, authoritive organization consulted on this, pros and cons suggested and the stand
taken by the Ministry at different points of time on this issue.

15
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
83. The Committee feels that fixing an annual target of imparting training to 20000 drivers in
unorganized sector is a very small one considering the requirement of about two lakh drivers. The
Committee also finds that even the revised scheme for setting up of Institute of Driving Training
and Research Centre has not seen any visible progress so far. The IDTR scheme of the
Government does not appear to yield any visible results so far.
(Para 111 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
84. Keeping in view the need to give training to drivers to improve road safety scenario in the
country, the Ministry has approved training of 56,000 HMV drivers in the first phase during the
financial year 2013-14.
85. As per existing instructions of Ministry of Finance, the scheme is being appraised before
implementation in next five year plan i.e. Twelfth Five Year Plan.
86. The scheme approved during Eleventh Plan, also envisaged to set up Regional Driving
Training Centre (RDTC). Such RDTCs were to be set up either by the State Government or Private
Developers. However, this has not taken off. The issue has been noticed by the Ministry and is being
taken into consideration while appraising the scheme for setting up of IDTR. Ministry is also in the
process of conducting Review and Evaluation Study of Institute of Driving Training and Research/
Scheme as implemented during Eleventh Five Year Plan, to make it more effective during the Twelfth
Five Year Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
87. The Committee notes the reply and feels that the Ministry should look into the main
causes/reasons which act as road blocks for implementing the IDTR scheme and take
corrective measures to address the shortcomings.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
88. The Committee recommends that every Automobile Manufacturer may be asked to establish
such driving training and research schools in different parts of the country wherever they have
adequate dealership. Such a scheme needs implementation by them in proper spirit.
(Para 112 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
89. The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
90. The Committee notes the reply.
CASHLESS TREATMENT FOR ROAD ACCIDENT SCHEME
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
91. The Committee finds that Rs.26 crores has been allocated for National Highway Accident
Relief Scheme for the year 2013-14 as against Rs.30 crore allocated during the last year at BE

16
level. However, Rs.26 crores allocated forcurrent fiscal includes Rs.10 crore for the new scheme
cashless treatment. The Committee considers the allocation of Rs.16 crore only for purchase of
ambulances and cranes as a meager one and hopes that the Ministry will be able to get additional
funds under this head during RE stage. The Committee also hopes that the Ministry will take-up
an early review of the cashless treatment scheme so that it can be expanded to all the major
national highways in coming years.
(Para 116 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Cashless Treatment for Road Accident Victims
92. The suggestions of the Committee for enhancement of funds for purchase of road safety
equipments viz. ambulances and cranes have been noted for compliance.
93. A pilot project for cashless treatment of road accident victims has been approved by the
Ministry and will be launched shortly. Meanwhile, Hon’ble Minister (RT&H) has announced two
more pilot projects - one Ranchi-Rargaon-Maholia stretch of NH-33 and other on Mumbai-Vadodara
stretch of NH-8.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
94. The Committee may be apprised on the steps taken by the Ministry to get additional
funds for purchase of road safety equipment and also a feedback on the pilot project for
cashless treatment of road accident victims.
ROAD SAFETY EQUIPMENT
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95. The Committee hopes that the Ministry expedites the procurement of road safety
equipments during the current fiscal and spends the allocated amount fully.
(Para 119 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
96. The Ministry could not procure road safety equipment during 2012-13 as their specifications
could not be finalized. Now the committee set up by MoRTH under the chairmanship of Shri
Satyendra Garg, the then Joint Commissioner (Traffic) Delhi Police, has revised the specifications
of Interceptor, Speed Detection Radar and Breath Analyzer to be given to the States/UTs for
assisting them in enforcement of traffic laws relating to over-speeding and drunken driving. The
Ministry intends to float tender for procurement and supply of road safety equipments during the
year 2013-14 on the basis of revised specifications.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
97. The Committee notes the reply and feels that the Ministry will not be in a position
to spend the allocated money judiciously since it has not started the process of procurement
road safety equipments during the current year.

17
POLLUTION TESTING EQUIPMENT
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
98. The Committee while appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry to mitigate the pollution
level, desires to have the information on the number of pollution testing equipments provided to
various States and the expenditure incurred in this front so far. The Committee would also like to
have the information on the follow-up action taken by the Ministry after providing equipment to
State Governments on its effective use.
(Para 122 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
99. During the last five years (2007-08 to 2011-12), 1399 pollution testing equipments (Smoke
Meter and Gas Analyser) were procured and supplied to States to strengthen their Pollution Testing
Cell. State-wise details of these pollution testing equipments provided to various States during the
last five years is given at Annexure. An amount of Rs.11.13 crore has been incurred in this front
during the last five years. Year-wise expenditure details are as under:-
Year Funds incurred on procurement of pollution testing equipments
2007-08 3,61,44,016/-
2008-09 3,43,58,988/-
2009-10 49,61,003/-
2010-11 1,96,50,666/-
2011-12 1,62,05,663/-
T
OTAL 11,13,20,336/-
The beneficiary States have been requested time and again to provide feed back of these
equipments alongwith status of the equipments .
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
100. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the process of procurement of
pollution testing equipments will be monitored to be expedited at the earliest by the
Ministry.
COMPUTER SYSTEM AND NATIONAL DATABASE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
101. The Committee hopes that the digitization of records of RTOs would be accorded similar
priority by the Ministry during the current fiscal also. The Committee would like to have the
feedback on the electronic toll collection pilot project on section of NH-45. The Committee desires
that such scheme is expanded to all the busy toll gates at national highways since traffic snarls
and congestion have become nightmare. The Committee also hopes that digitization of driving
license will prevent the issuance of multiple driving license to individuals.
(Para 127 of ibid)

18
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Digitization of records of RTOs
102. A project to digitize legacy data of 5.29 crore Registration Certificates and 5.86 crore
Driving Licenses @ Rs.5 per record (@Rs.7 per record in case of States with difficult terrain) has
been approved. The work is targeted to be completed by the States by 31.03.2015.
103. The ETC Project launched in April, 2012 at Zirakpur - Parwanoo Highway. As response of
pilot Project was encouraging, an inter-operative ETC System between Mumbai-Vadodara
expressway 6 – Toll Plaza was also launched in April, 2013. There is a proposal to set ETC System
on other Toll Plazas in a phased manner.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
104. The Committee notes the reply and feels that phased implementation of Electronic
Toll Collection project will reduce congestion and traffic snarls in toll plazas situated on
busy national highways.
SETTING UP OF INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION CENTRE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
105. The Committee hopes that the new initiatives taken by the Ministry in modernizing transport
sector are well received by the State Governments who are the major agencies in executing central
Government’s schemes/projects on road sector. The Committee feels that the model transport hub
project in Rajasthan will become a milestone in addressing the needs of transport sector at one point.
(Para 132 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Setting up Transport Hub at Railmagra, Distt. Rajsamand, Rajasthan, as a pilot project
106. The Government has sanctioned to set up a transport hub at Railmagra in Rajsamand district
of Rajasthan on a pilot basis so as to create an area dedicated to the development of various
commercial activities related to the transport sector.
107. Rs.2.50 crore was released as mobilization advance during 2012-13. The remaining amount
of Rs.22.50 crores is to be released in suitable instalments after progress of work. The work is to
be executed by the Society, set up by the Government of Rajasthan for executing and running the project.
108. Based on experience from this pilot project, the facility is to be replicated throughout the
country.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
109. The Committee may be appraised on the outcome of pilot Transport Hub at
Railmagra, Rajasthan.
STRENGTHENING PUBLIC TRANSPORT SYSTEM
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
110. The Committee feels that strengthening of Public Transport System is the only way to
provide comfortable, smooth and safe transport system for the public. The Committee hopes that

19
though only 70% of the allocated funds could be spent during 2012-13, the Ministry should
improve its performance during the current fiscal so that the public transport gets the much needed
fillip.
(Para 135 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
111. As less fresh proposals were received from States/State Transport Undertakings/
Corporations during 2012-13 seeking financial assistance under the Strengthening Public Transport
Scheme and also request for release of 2 nd/3rd installment were not received from most of the
beneficiary States/STUs/ SRTCs in r/o proposals sanctioned during 2010-11 and 2011-12, the
;funds earmarked could not be fully utilized.
112. For better implementation of the scheme, meetings are now proposed to be organized with
the State Governments/ implementing agencies from time to time to monitor /review the scheme.
Regular follow-up action with concerned agencies which are responsible for implementation of the
scheme will be taken.
113. The suggestions of the Committee for timely execution of the sanctioned projects including
better utilization of funds have been noted for compliance .
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
114. The Committee notes the reply and would like to know reason for lack of fresh
proposals from States for seeking financial assistance under the scheme. It is of the view
that the Ministry should impress the State Governments to utilize the funds allocated under
the head effectively so that public transport system in the country gets a boost.
CREATION OF NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY BOARD
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
115. The Committee expresses its concern over the inordinate delay in further processing the
Legislation by the Government after it had submitted its report on the Bill in 2010. The Committee
would like to see that most of its concern/recommendations are accommodated.
(Para 137 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
116. The Government has examined the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee and initiated necessary process to incorporate certain amendments in the bill in line with
the recommendations of the Committee for consideration of the Parliament.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
117. The Committee notes the reply and observes that the delay on the part of the
Ministry in bringing an amended National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board Bill
after incorporating the recommendations of the Committee exposes its seriousness towards
strengthening of road safety mechanism in the country.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
118. The Committee after examining the information and data furnished by the Ministry as well
as NHAI feels that Gross Budgetary Support for road sector, one of the major infrastructure

20
sectors, is dwindling. The Ministry during the deliberations had accepted that, in fact, non-
availability of funds for road projects forced many concessionaires to withdraw from their projects
during the last year. The reduced GBS during the Twelfth Plan Period would in fact make the
matter from bad to worse. The Committee hopes that revised guidelines of RBI on funding of road
projects will bring necessary financial inputs from the private players.
(Para 138 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
119. Ministry agrees with the recommendation and the observation has been noted.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
120. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
121. The Committee feels concerned about the poor spending of its allocations by the
Ministry. The Ministry has consistently shown very low spending of its allocations for road
transport sector which comprises important schemes like road safety, driving training and
research, procurement of road safety and pollution testing equipments and National
Highways Accident Relief Scheme. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to improve its
performance in spending allocations for road transport sector.
(Para 139 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
122. The sug gestions of the Committee for proper planning and execution of the road transport
project including better utilization of funds have been noted for compliance .
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
123. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
124. The Committee notes that while on the one side allocations of funds for roads are being
reduced, its targets on various road related projects are being increased despite of non-clearance
of their backlog. The Committee feels that the Ministry should either go for enhancement of funds
at RE stage or revisit its targets fixed and modify them accordingly on the basis of ground realities
faced by them in executing road projects.
(Para 140 of ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
125. This Ministry will try to ensure utilization of the entire BE allocation funds within first three
quarters and solicit additional allocation during RE stage.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
126. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will try to utilize the
allocated funds towards all the projects to the maximum possible extent.

21
21
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
ANNUAL PLAN 2012-13
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that it will pursue the
removal of restrictions of 33% ceiling of expenditure for the last quarter with Ministry of
Finance seriously. The Committee may also be apprised on the reaction of Planning
Commission to committee’s recommendations in this regard. (Para 9)
TWELFTH PLAN (2012-17)
The Committee reiterates its concern about the fact that road sector, one of the
important segments of country’s infrastructure, will not be able to meet the targets with
the current allocation. (Para 12)
ANNUAL PLAN 2013-14
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that it will get adequate
budgetary support for EPC road projects. (Para 16)
The Committee notes the reply and feels that reduction in allocation of funds for
road transport sector will definitely have a negative impact on the schemes and projects
particularly pertaining to road safety related matters. (Para 19)
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
The Committee notes the reply and it may be appraised about observations of the
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission on the monitoring and coordination
mechanism for road projects. (Para 22)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 25)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and expects the Ministry to obtain
responses from the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance on the Committee’s
observations/recommendation and forward to the Committee at the earliest. (Para 28)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 31)
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS (NHDP)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that taking up of road
projects under EPC rather than the much hyped PPP model will help the NHAI to complete
NHDP projects within time with permissible cost escalation of projects. (Para 34)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that the proposed measures
will definitely cut down the delays in environmental and forest clearances in new road
projects. (Para 40)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and observes that the NHAI can still
improve its spending pattern of allocated funds. (Para 43)

22
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that necessary follow-up actions are taken
by the Ministry so that the above projects are completed as per target. (Para 49)
The Committee notes the reply and it may be appraised on the steps taken to give
more autonomy in taking decisions while awarding road projects. (Para 52)
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (ORIGINAL) WORKS: NH(O)
The Committee feels that continuous diversion of cess meant for NHDP projects to
other projects and reduced allocation of funds for Non-NHDP projects, will hamper the
achievement of targets in both the sectors. Therefore, the Committee recommends that cess
meant for NHDP projects may not be diverted. (Para 55)
ROAD PROJECTS IN LEFT WING EXTREMISM AFFECTED AREAS
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the constitution of District Level
Coordination Committees in the LWE areas will help to achieve the target completion date
of programme i.e. by March, 2015. (Para 59)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that even the allocation of
Rs.1,995.32 crore for maintenance and repair of national highways during the current fiscal
is a meager amount considering the vast network of national highways in the country.
(Para 62)
SPECIAL ACCELERATED ROAD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME IN NORTH-EAST (SARDP-NE)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that with the appointment of additional
man power in North-Eastern Region, implementation of various road projects in that region
will be expedited. (Para 65)
ROADS OF INTER-STATE CONNECTIVITY AND ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
The Committee notes the reply and feels that mismatch between the existing liability
of sanctioned works and available annual allocation under this scheme should be addressed
by the Ministry on priority so that more destinations are covered under this scheme.
(Para 68)
CENTRAL ROAD FUND
The Committee feels that the Ministry’s reply on diversion of CRF meant for
national highways for NH(O) works and under-utilization of CRF funds is quite routine
nature and does not address the core issue of the problems. (Para 72)
ROAD TRANSPORT
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will pursue its case for
enhancement of allocation of funds for road transport sector at RE stage vigorously.
(Para 77)
ROAD SAFETY
The reply submitted by the Ministry shows a lack of Government’s interest in getting
auto dipper installed in vehicle to avoid accidents during nights due to high beam lights. The
Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a status note on this aspect including the

23
experts, authoritive organization consulted on this, pros and cons suggested and the stand
taken by the Ministry at different points of time on this issue. (Para 82)
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes the reply and feels that the Ministry should look into the main
causes/reasons which act as road blocks for implementing the IDTR scheme and take
corrective measures to address the shortcomings. (Para 87)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 90)
CASHLESS TREATMENT FOR ROAD ACCIDENT SCHEME
The Committee may be apprised on the steps taken by the Ministry to get additional
funds for purchase of road safety equipment and also a feedback on the pilot project for
cashless treatment of road accident victims. (Para 94)
ROAD SAFETY EQUIPMENT
The Committee notes the reply and feels that the Ministry will not be in a position
to spend the allocated money judiciously since it has not started the process of procurement
road safety equipments during the current year. (Para 97)
POLLUTION TESTING EQUIPMENT
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the process of procurement of
pollution testing equipments will be monitored to be expedited at the earliest by the
Ministry. (Para 100)
COMPUTER SYSTEM AND NATIONAL DATABASE
The Committee notes the reply and feels that phased implementation of Electronic
Toll Collection project will reduce congestion and traffic snarls in toll plazas situated on
busy national highways. (Para 104)
SETTING UP OF INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION CENTRE
The Committee may be appraised on the outcome of pilot Transport Hub at
Railmagra, Rajasthan. (Para 109)
STRENGTHENING PUBLIC TRANSPORT SYSTEM
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know reason for lack of fresh
proposals from States for seeking financial assistance under the scheme. It is of the view
that the Ministry should impress the State Governments to utilize the funds allocated
under the head effectively so that public transport system in the country gets a boost.
(Para 114)
CREATION OF NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY BOARD
The Committee notes the reply and observes that the delay on the part of the
Ministry in bringing an amended National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board Bill

24
after incorporating the recommendations of the Committee exposes its seriousness towards
strengthening of road safety mechanism in the country. (Para 117)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 120)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 123)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will try to utilize the
allocated funds towards all the projects to the maximum possible extent. (Para 126)

25
ANNEXURE

27
ANNEXURE
(Vide para 100)
Status of pollution testing equipments (Smoke meter for diesel vehicle and gas analysers for petrol
vehicle) supplied by MoRTH to States/UTs during the last five years (2007-08 to 2011-12)
State/UT Equipment Equipment Equipments Equipments Equipments
supplied supplied supplied supplied supplied
during during during during during
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
S.M G .A S.M G .A SM G A SM G A SM G A
1 2 34 56 7 8 91 0 1 1
Chandigarh 1 1 – – – – – – – –
Haryana 3 3 7 7 4 4 – – – –
J & K 11 11 1 1 –– 55
Punjab 4 4 7 7 6 6 – – 16 16
Uttar Pradesh 16 16 25 25 24 24 – – 10 10
Uttarakhand 1 1 1 1 2 2 – – – –
Rajasthan 2 2 3 3 3 3 5 5 12 12
Kerala 10 10 17 17 15 15 6 6 6 6
Tamil Nadu 8 8 13 13 15 15 50 50 40 40
Bihar 5 5 10 10 12 12 – – 10 10
Orissa 5 5 10 10 12 12 – – – –
West Bengal 4 2 7 4 6 4 2 2 10 10
Chhattisgarh 2 2 5 5 3 3 – – – –
Maharashtra 5 5 8 8 7 7 – – – –
Manipur 1 1 1 1 2 2 – – – –
Meghalaya 1 1 1 1 3 3 – – 5 5
Mizoram 3 1 3 1 3 3 – – 5 5
Nagaland 2 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 4 4
Himachal – – – – – – 10 10 10 10
Pradesh
Karnataka – – – – – – 25 25 25 25
G o a –– –– – – 44 44

28
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
Madhya – – – – – – 24 24 25 25
Pradesh
Sikkim – – – – – – 2 2 2 2
Tripura – – – – – – 5 5 5 5
Pondicherry – – – – – – 2 2 2 2
Assam – – – – – – – – 23 23
Arunachal – – – – – – – – 11 11
Pradesh
Gujarat – – – – – – – – 10 10
Andhra – – – – – – – – 10 10
Pradesh
T
OTAL 74 70 121 116 121 119 139 139 250 250
Note:
SM: Smoke Meter, GA: Gas Analyser
During 2012-13 pollution testing equipment has not been procured as the committee set up by
this Ministry for finalizing the specification of various equipments including pollution testing
equipments could not finalize its report.

29
MINUTES

30

31
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th December, 2013 in Room No. 67,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
10. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
11. Shri S. Pakkirappa
12. Shri Prabodh Panda
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee. The Chairman introduced Shri
Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary M.P. who for the first time joined the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered and adopted the following draft Action Taken Reports on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14).
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
31
*** Relate to other matters.

32
(iii) Two Hundred Sixth Report on the Action Taken Replies on the Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.
(iv) * * *
(v) * * *
3. The Committee adopted the said reports with certain modifications after some discussion.
4. * * *
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

33
33
LIST OF REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 (with
evidence)
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence)
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

34
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 (with evidence)
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence)
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th January, 1996.

35
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 (with evidence)
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence)
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (l Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

36
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption From Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.8.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001 (8 Reports)
2002 (7 Reports)

37
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 (with evidence)
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
2003 (12 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.

38
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 70
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004
2004 (4 Reports)
2004-05 (12 Reports)

39
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 (with evidence)
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
6.12.2004 (RS)
3.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.09.2005
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
2005-06 (18 Report)

40
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage By Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

41
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.5.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.4.2007
16.4.2007
2006-07 (13 Reports)

42
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
16.8.2007
16.8.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (19 Reports)

43
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133rd
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

44
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
23.10.08
(Presented to Parliament)
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
23.10.08
(Presented to Parliament)
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (10 Reports)

45
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty Ninth Report on Development
of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities
for the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.02.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
03.03.2010
(Presented to Parliament)
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

46
1
158th
159th
160th
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty First Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
01.03.2011
(Presented to
the Parliament)
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

47
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
11.08.2011
(Presented to the Parliament)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
11.08.2011
(Presented to the Parliament)
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
27.04.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
27.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

48
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11. 2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

49
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
196th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways-
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
27.02.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
27.02.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
27.02.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
07.08.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
3
05.11. 2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
20.05.2013

50
1
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
204th
205th
2
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Two Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Culture
4
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
07.08.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
17.12.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
17.12.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
17.12.2013
(Presented to the Parliament)
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
06.02.2014
(Presented to the Parliament)
06.02.2014
3
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
13.01.2014
17.12.2013
2013-14 (5 Reports)
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.