 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
372
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY SECOND REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred Fifty 
Seventh Report on the subject Development of Niche Tourism (including 
Spiritual Tourism), Theme-based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist 
Spots 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  3rd February, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://sansad.in/rs 
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 


 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY SECOND REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fifty Seventh Report on the subject Development of Niche 
Tourism (including Spiritual Tourism), Theme-based Tourist 
Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on   3rd February, 2025) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-50 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   51-53 
6. ANNEXURES         54-60 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
61-63


i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted on 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shrimati Sudha Murty  
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
9.  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
10.  Shri Neeraj Dangi* 
 
Lok Sabha  
11. Shri Mian Altaf Ahmad  
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
14. Shri Anil Firojiya  
15. Shri Tapir Gao  
16. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
18. Shrimati June Maliah  
19. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
20. Shri K. E. Prakash  
21. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  
22. Dr. M. P. Abdussamad Samadani  
23. Kumari Selja  
24. Shri Avimanyu Sethi  
25. Shri Anurag Sharma  
26. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
27. Shri Tangella Uday Srinivas 
28. Shri Devesh Chandra Thakur  
29. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f.  10th October, 2024 in lieu  of  Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy who ceased to 
be  Member of Committee w.e.f. 10th October, 2024. 
 

ii 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Seventy Second Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contai ned in its Three 
Hundred Fifty -Seventh Report on the subject Development of Niche Tourism (including 
Spiritual Tourism), Theme-based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots. 
2. The Three Hundred Fifty Seventh Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
the 21st September, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fifty Seventh Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on 2nd July, 
2024. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  16th 
December, 2024.   
 
 
(Sanjay Kumar Jha) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 16, 2024                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 25, 1946 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ATR Action Taken Report 
CBSP Capacity Building for Service Providers 
CSMC Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee 
CTAs Call to Actions 
DMC Destination Management Committee 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EAC Economic Advisory Council 
FTAs Free Trade Agreements 
ICCA International Congress and Convention Association 
IITF Incredible India Tourist Facilitator 
IITTM Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management 
IMCCTS Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector 
IMF Indian Mountaineering Foundation 
JCI Joint Commission International 
MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
MICE Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, and Exhibitions 
MOEFCC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
NABH National Accreditation Board for Hospitals 
NIDHI National Integrated Database of Hospitality Industry Plus 
NIWS National Institute of Water Sports 
NPMU National Programme Management Unit 
PDMC Project Development and Management Consultant 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PRASHAD Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Heritage Augmentation Drive 
RCS-UDAN Regional Connectivity Scheme - UdeDeshKaAamNaagrik 
SD Swadesh Darshan 
SEIS Service Exports from India Scheme 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
TFL Travel for Life 
UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization 
VGF Viability Gap Funding 
 
 

1 
 
 
   REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism 
on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred F ifty-Seventh 
Report on ‘Development of Niche Tourism (including Spiritual Tourism), Theme -based 
Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots ’ of Ministry of Tourism which was presented to 
both the Houses of Parliament on 21st September, 2023.  
  
  
2.         The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 2nd July, 202 4 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
  
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.: 27, 50, 58, 62, 64, 72, 83, 95, 100, 10 2, 115, 134, 135, 136, 150, 
151 and 154. 
  
Total: 17 
  
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:19, 20, 25, 35, 37, 38, 39, 45, 51, 53, 54, 55, 57, 63, 73, 74,  77, 80, 
82, 84, 85, 86, 89, 90, 91, 92, 96, 97, 99, 114, 120, 121, 124, 129, 130, 146, 152, 153, 
158, 159, 160, 162, 163 and 164. 
Total: 44 
  
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:26, 33, 34, 36, 81, 87, 88, 122 and 149. 
Total: 09 
  
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil                                                                                              
Total: Nil 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
  
Rural Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee while appreciating the Best Village Compe tition initiated by the 
Ministry, is dismayed to note that in the past one year, only one Model Rural Cluster has 
been identified, without any action being taken on the ground. The Committee notes that the 
villages to be covered in the Vibrant Villages pro gramme are located in far -flung areas, and 
close to borders, often in difficult terrains. The Committee feels that the State of Uttarakhand 
has a number of border villages with rich traditions and local culture and recommends that 
the Ministry may make con certed efforts to develop the Model Rural Cluster inUttarakhand 
within a targeted time schedule. 
. 
(Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Suggestion of the Committee is noted. The Ministry of Tourism has now revamped 
the SwadeshDarshan scheme as SwadeshDarshan 2. 0 with the objective to develop 
sustainable and responsible tourism destinations. For this purpose, the Ministry of Tourism 
has also identified 55 destinations in the country for development under the scheme. In 
addition to creating essential and basic inf rastructure at the destinations, the Ministry is 
focusing on creating and curating tangible and intangible experiences so that the destination 
can be holistically developed. As part of this endeavor, the  Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) in its meeting dated 13.09.2023 has in - principally 
approved an experience ‘Vibrant Village Cluster Experience at Gunji’ in the State of 
Uttarakhand. The State Government has been provided the essential technical support by 
providing ‘Project Development a nd Management Consultant (PDMC)’ under this scheme 
and the state has been asked to get the DPR prepared accordingly for further consideration. 
 
Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, And Exhibitions (Mice) & Wedding Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee notes that India has less than 1% share in the Global MICE business 
despite being one of the fastest growing economies. India was ranked 28th with 158 meetings  

3 
 
in 2019 International Congress and Convention Association (ICCA) ranking of cou ntries. 
Indian cities are ranked poorly in the international ranking of cities by ICCA in terms of the 
number of international associations meetings. There are only 07 cities of India in the top 
475 cities, the topmost being Delhi at the 75th position with 37 meetings held and Ahmedabad 
at the bottom at the 424 th position with 04 meetings. Even Goa, which is one of the country’s 
top tourist destinations, is ranked at the 307 th position with 08 meetings. The Committee also 
notes that India’s outbound MICE market is one of the fastest growing markets globally. 
 (Para 50) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      Observations of the Hon’ble Committee has been Noted. 
 
Wedding Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.      The Committee recommends that apart from development of infrastructure and facilities 
to support the growth of wedding tourism, the Ministry may also facilitate easy and uniform 
process of registration of marriages in every state of India even for couples belonging to 
other states. 
. 
 (Para 58) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      The matter has been taken up with all State Governments/ UT Administrations. 
  
Cruise Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee observes that prior to Covid, there was a 35 per cent year -on-year 
growth of cruise traffic in  the country. Post -Covid, from 2021 onwards, there has been an 
increase in cruise traffic but the pre -Covid growth has still not been achieved. Prior to 
Covid, there were 4.7 lakh passengers on cruises and now, about 3 lakh passengers have 
been on cruises. 
 (Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      Observation of the Hon’ble Committee has been Noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 

4 
 
5.        The Committee has been informed about five projects sanctioned under the Assistance 
to Central Agencies Scheme for promot ion of Cruise Tourism in Kerala (Annexure -III) 
from2016-17to2019-20.TheCommittee desires to know if similar assistance has been given 
for promotion of CruiseTourism in other States. 
(Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      The list of Central Financial Assistance sanctioned under the Scheme of Assistance to 
Central Agencies for promotion of Cruise Tourism in other States is at Annexure-II 
  
Medical And Wellness Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee observes that lack of regulation on qu ality of service is a major 
concern and appreciates that the National Strategy is to encourage registration of all 
medical tourism facilitators with the Government. The Committee, however, recommends that 
such registration should    be mandatory as standard isation of services is the biggest 
impediment affecting medical tourism in India. The Committee recommends that while NABH 
accreditation may be highlighted in various source markets, the Ministry should encourage 
major Indian hospitals to obtain the JCI accreditation. 
. 
 (Para 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      Since the matter relates to regulation of health services, it has been taken up with 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
  
Golf Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee further observes that   though   the   Ministry   has drafted the National 
Strategies and constituted National Boards for most areas of Niche Tourism, developed 
websites and published newsletters yet, coordination with the concerned Ministries and 
formulation of pr oject schemes under the various niche areas seem to be wanting. The pace 
of implementation on the ground appears sluggish. Most of the  National Boards and Task 
Forces have held only 2-3 meetings in a year. Most of the websites for Niche Tourism do not 
provide complete and detailed information, necessary for the tourists.  The Ministry’s 
interactions with the stakeholders and State Governments appear sporadic. The growing gap 
between the strategic  vision and implementation needs to be bridged and the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take necessary action for the same. 
 (Para 83) 

5 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      Observation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 Spiritual Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
8.      The Committee notes that of 23 Spiritual Circuits, 05 are yet to be completed out of 
which 02 circuits of Kerala are lagging much behind schedule.The work on the Sabarimala – 
Erumeli – Pampa-Sannidhanam circuit in Pathanamthitta district in Kerala had been 
initiated in 2016-17 while the SivagiriSreeNarayana Guru Ashram circuit had been initiated 
in 2018 -19. At the time of the Demands for Grants 2023 -24, the Committee had been 
informed that the reason for delays in these two Kerala Circuits was due to lack of clearance 
from the Temple Authorities. The Committee has been informed during its Study Visit to 
Kerala in September, 2023 that the status of physical completion of the two projects is 76% 
and 51%, respectively. The Committee is disappointed to see the slow progress on these  
important projects which have a target completion date of June, 2023 and October, 2023 
respectively. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop a clear  cut 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) and  obtain prior clearances and approvals from 
relevant authorities for future compliance in the interest of timely completion of projects. 
 (Para 95) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1      Observations of the Committee is noted. The Ministry of Tourism is regularly 
reviewing the progress of the referred delayed  projects and is providing necessary guidance 
so that the projects are smoothly completed. 
  
Prashad Scheme  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.      The Committee observes that the PRASHAD scheme was launched in 2014 -15 and 
completion of 21 projects out of 45 is certainly not a significant achievement, even taking into 
account the Covid years. The Committee points out that spiritual circuit projects were taken 
under SwadeshDarshan Scheme 1.0 also and the Ministry has had adequate experience of the 
kind of problems that ordinarily come up while dealing with construction and development at 
pilgrimage sites. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to be mindful of the potential 
problems and calibrate suitable response at the DPR stage, so that the projects are not hel d 
up at later stages, causing both time and cost overrun. 
 (Para 100) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      Noted for compliance. 
 

6 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.        The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has taken the initiative to amend 
guidelines and f unding pattern midterm where necessary  and recommends that the Ministry 
may revise the timeline of the delayed projects and ensure that the projects under this scheme 
are completed within the revised timeline. The Committee also recommends that the 
PRASHAD Dashboard when online may be monitored on a real time basis at the level of a 
senior functionary in the Ministry to ensure the completion of all pending projects.. 
 (Para 102) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
10.1      Observation/ recommendation has been Noted. 
  
Promotion of Swadesh Darshan Schemes  
Recommendation/Observation 
11.        The Committee appreciates the Utsav Portal website and the Tourist Train initiatives 
of the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should study the impact of the 
projects completed under the Swadesh  Darshan 1.0 scheme on the tourism and analyse the 
shortcomings so that the same could be improved in SD 2.0. 
(Para 115) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1      The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
  
Potential Tourist Spots  
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      In the meetings with the stakeholders, the    Committee was informed about various 
potential tourist spots in the country which have been placed at Annexure – IX. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine t he concept of Greenfield Tourism 
where new locations can be developed as potential tourism spots with the participation of 
Government of India and the concerned State Government with private investments for 
creation of modern tourist infrastructure, hotels  and all tourist            facilities          and 
connectivity by air, rail and road. The Statue of Unity near Kevadia in Gujarat is a classic 
example of Greenfield Tourism, being a man -made tourist destination which has earned a 
formidable reputation as a popular tourism spot. Another example is tourism on the sand 
dunes near the  Salasar Balaji Temple in the Churu District of Rajasthan where hotels and 
restaurants have come up to cater to the tourists who visit the temple and stay to enjoy the 
sand dunes in the desert. The Committee observes that development of such Greenfield tourist 
spots would take the pressure off the already established tourist spots which sometimes suffer 
from the adverse effects of over tourism.. 

7 
 
(Para 134) 
Reply of the Ministry         
12.1    The suggestion of the Committee is noted. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry may while promoting destinations in 
Arunachal Pradesh or Lakshadweep or such areas which require special permits, highli ght 
the requirement in its campaigns so that tourists are aware of the rules and are able to plan 
their schedule accordingly. 
(Para 135) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    Ministry acknowledges that incorporating permit - related information in promotional 
campaigns for destinations, will help in enhanced tourist awareness, enabling better planning 
for their visits to these areas. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
14.      The Committee further observes that the Ministry had formulated the Draft National 
Tourism Polic y in July, 2022 incorporating key recommendations of NITI Aayog, Sectoral 
Group of Secretaries, global best practices from organizations such as UNWTO and policies 
and strategies formulated by other countries after multiple rounds of consultations and 
feedback from Central Ministries, State Governments and Industry Stakeholders. More than a 
year later, the policy, however, has still not been finalized. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may make every effort to ensure that all concerns of the stakeh olders in the 
tourism and hospitality sector are addressed and the National Tourism Policy is put in place 
in a time-bound manner. 
 (Para 136) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1    The suggestion of the Committee is noted.  Ministry of Tourism is following the 
necessary procedure for seeking approval of the Competent Authority for draft National 
Tourism Policy.  
  
 Promotion Of Tourism Abroad By Indian Missions 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15.      Upon enquiry by the Committee on the background of these Tourism Offi cers and 
whether they have been imparted training in promotion of tourism, it has been informed that 

8 
 
these officers were already dealing with the subject of promotion of Indian culture and 
commerce and hence were having some           domain understanding. The Ministry also 
informed that as such, the Missions and Posts had been carrying on promotional activities 
wherever there were no Overseas Tourism Offices. The Committee appreciates the 
competence of the MEA officers but feels that the MEA may explore the  possibility of posting 
officers from the Ministry of Tourism, who are well trained and experienced in tourism 
promotion, in Indian Missions abroad. The Committee has also been informed that the MEA 
is considering a proposal to the Ministry of Tourism to d esignate Tourism Officers in all 
Missions, in addition to the 20 Tourism Officers already designated in top 20 source markets 
of tourism and recommends that it would be beneficial    to   have designated officers in more 
Missions abroad for tourism promotion. 
 (Para 150) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    In order to have a wide & far reaching tourism promotional effort, Ministry of 
Tourism will work in association with Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) regarding 
possibility as proposed of posting officers from Ministry of Tourism in Indian Missions 
abroad for taking up the tourism promotional efforts to compliment the effort of Ministry of 
External Affairs (MEA). 
 Recommendation/Observation 
16.      The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders that after the closure of the 
Overseas Tourist Officers, India did not figure in the brochures of the overseas tourism 
agents, adversely impacting the prospects of Indian tourism. In its interaction with the MEA, 
the Committee has been informed that the Overseas Tour ist Offices had a lot of funds 
available for this purpose and the Ministry of Tourism is still having discussions with the 
MEA on how to place a separate budget for tourism at the disposal of the MEA which would 
enable them to give brochure support for the  agents and other promotional work. The 
Committee is surprised that these aspects of budget for promotion and campaign schedule for 
the Missions have not yet been resolved as the Overseas Tourist Offices had gradually been 
shut down over the last two years  and only the last eight were closed in March, 2023. There 
was sufficient time for the two Ministries to have the transition formalities in place. Upon 
further query, the Committee has been informed that the MEA is in consultation with the 
Ministry of Tourism to jointly address such concerns arising out of  closure of Overseas India 
Tourism Offices. 
(Para 151) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    Noted for compliance.  
 Recommendation/Observation 

9 
 
17.      The Committee recommends that at regular intervals, virtual  meetings can be 
conducted between the two Ministries by involving the Missions, and other stakeholders like 
tour operators to understand the gaps in tourism promotion and to identify actions required 
by each stakeholder. 
(Para 154) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    Noted for compliance. 
CHAPTER-II 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
  
Sustainable Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.       The Committee notes that India has been r anked at 139, 134, and 128 in the years 
2015, 2017 and2019, respectively under Environmental Sustainability in the World Travel  
and Tourism Competitiveness Ranking. While the new National Strategy and National Board 
for Sustainable Tourism have come into f orce in 2022, the Ministry had been  promoting 
Sustainable Tourism in India for nearly a decade after the launch of Sustainable Tourism 
Criteria for India in 2014. Not much progress has, however, been made in development of 
Sustainable Tourism in the last d ecade as substantiated by India’s low rankings in this 
category. The Committee emphasizes that economic development should not be at the cost of 
the environment and recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the revised Sustainable 
Tourism Criteria be sc rupulously implemented to minimize the adverse impact of tourism  on 
the environment. While a Certification programme  for tourism stakeholders, who have 
successfully implemented sustainable criteria ,has been inexistence for nearly a decade, only 
one Certification has been effected till date. The Committee desires to know the number of 
hotels surveyed for the Certification Programme and the strategy adopted for the survey. 
The Committee observes that while disbursement of monthly newsletters to stakeholders and 
workshops are useful for dissemination of information, the feedback from stakeholders like 
hoteliers and tour operators is equally important to comprehend the problems being faced 
while implementing policies on the ground level. The Committee feels tha t the pace of the 
Ministry in promotion of sustainability in tourism is sluggish and recommends that the 
Ministry may step up its coordination efforts with both the stakeholders and the other Central 
Ministries for effective promotional campaigns.. 
 (Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 

10 
 
1.1      In light of the global endorsement of the Travel for LiFE (TFL) program in the New 
Delhi Leader Declaration, the Sustainable Tourism Criteria for India (STCI) has been 
rebranded as “ TFL Certification powered by STCI” . The  certification has undergone 
modification as per necessary course corrections and industry feedback. The new version of 
TFL certification is now categorised as TFL certification for Classified Units and TFL 
certification for Unclassified Units. The TFL cer tification for Classified Units is applicable 
only for the accommodation units and tour operators with a valid classification certificate 
issued by the Ministry of Tourism, which will ease the application, desktop assessment and 
on-site assessment process. 
  
1.2 Once the application is submitted, it proceeds to the desktop assessment stage where 
the assessor examines the accuracy of the submitted documents. After the desktop assessment 
is concluded, the unit will undergo site inspection, which determines th e validity of issuing 
the certificate as per the scoring mechanism of the certification. At present, one unit has been 
awarded the certificate and four units are at the desktop assessment stage. 
  
1.3 To ease and assist the industry stakeholders, toolkits, user manuals and video 
tutorials are currently provided. Furthermore, the formulation of sustainability templates 
(Including, a sustainability management plan, details of initiative for social and community 
participation, details of initiative for preserv ation of flora and fauna and action plan for the 
preservation of flora and fauna) is being formulated. 
 
1.4 On the occasion of World Tourism Day 2023, TFL Signed Up was launched on the 
Nidhi Plus portal for accommodation units, tour operators, destinations  and other tourism 
eco-players. The TFL Signed Up is a voluntary commitment to sustainable practices and acts 
as a transitioning step of a tourism business which will demonstrate effective sustainable 
management, maximize socio - economic benefits to local communities and maximize 
cultural & historical heritage and environmental benefits. 
  
1.5 Sensitization and handholding session status for TFL Certification and signed up 
session with: 
  
a. States/UTs: Dedicated handholding sessions were organised for the Sta tes and UTs to 
assist in promoting TFL Certifications, including Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Kerala, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh. 
b. Associations: Awareness workshops were organised in collaboration with prominent 
tourism associations such as HAI, IATO, an d AMA stay to provide sensitise them on 
the certification process. 

11 
 
c. SD Destinations: Awareness workshops, conducted in collaboration with 
SwadeshDarshan destinations for the Travel for LiFE signed up and Certification, 
aiming to enhance the integration of S TCI principles within the SwadeshDarshan 
scheme. 
  
1.6 CNA-ST has successfully published a series of eleven newsletters, starting from 
November 2022 until December 2023. These newsletters are dedicated to highlighting the 
sustainable tourism initiatives taking place across the country and have garnered a significant 
viewership. 
  
1.7 Each newsletter encompasses various sections focusing on the comprehensive 
promotion of sustainable tourism in India. The newsletter's circulation extends nationwide, 
reaching recipients through emails and other online platforms. Through the newsletter, CNA -
ST has created sensitisation about sustainable tourism among more than 20,000 tourism 
stakeholders for newsletters published. 
 
1.8 However, it is noted that the feedback mech anism will be incorporated for the 
upcoming issues as a measure to ensure stakeholders involvement and suggestions about 
incorporating sustainable tourism measure in the industry. 
  
1.9 Promotion of TFL certification, TFL signed up, and the newsletter camp aign through 
engaging social media posts showcasing benefits, clear CTAs and user interaction with 
hashtags. Email campaigns are shared for highlighting the newsletter's exclusivity. Focus on 
teasers, exclusive content and testimonials to promote the newsl etter with track metrics for 
campaign optimization. 
  
1.10 Currently, 352 units (113 accommodation units, 170 tourism service providers, 52 
destinations, 15 attractions and 02 other tourism eco-players) have completed the TFL Signed 
Up across India. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee desires to know about the action taken on formulation of dedicated 
schemes, destination, and product development and other initiatives taken by the National 
Board for Promotion of Sustainable Tourism. 
 (Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 

12 
 
2.1      Ministry of Tourism has now revamped its SwadeshDarshan scheme as 
SwadeshDarshan 2.0 (SD2.0) with the objective to develop sustainable and responsible 
destinations   following   a   tourist & destination centric approach. 
2.2 Ministry of Tourism has launched the Travel for LiFE (TFL) as a sector program 
under Mission LiFE. 
 2.3 The program has launched Travel for Life Actions for Tourists and Travel for 
LiFE Certification for Tourism Businesses aims to mainstream sustainabil ity into the 
tourism sector towards developing a sustainable, responsible and resilient tourism sector. A 
suggestive list of TFL activities for IEC and capacity building has been launched for 
tourists and tourism eco-players to create mass awareness and adoption of TFL actions. 
 2.4 TFL Certification powered by STCI for tourism businesses makes the aware about 
best sustainable tourism practices that they can adopt and implement. The certification 
ensures adherence to sustainable practices in development and  which in turn leads to 
enhanced visitor experience. 
 2.5 Ministry in partnership with IITTM is collaboration with universities and school are 
organizing national/state/district level competitions/quizzes for amplification of TFL 
program. 
 2.6 Ministry in partnership with IITTM has launched a Travel for LiFE case study 
competition to compile, analyze and showcase innovative and impactful initiatives in India 
that contribute to sustainable development through tourism related activities. The competition 
has received more than 250 registrations and is still ongoing. The subsequent stages of the 
competition are currently in progress. 
  
Rural Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        The Committee is at a loss to note that the 2022 list of the United Nations World 
Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) featuring the 32 best tourism villages from 22 countries, 
does not contain a single village from India while several countries have two villages in the 
list, and Spain having even three villages. The Committee desires to be informed about the 
number of Indian villages which were nominated for the selection  by the UNWTO. The 
Committee notes that Khonoma in Nagaland has been selected for the “Upgrade” 
programme which would enable the village to receive the necessary support from the 
UNWTO to improve its conditions to meet the selection criteria.  The Committee wishes to 
know the efforts being taken for the development of Khonoma after its inclusion in the 
upgrade list of the  UNWTO. The Committee also desires to know as to how many Indian 
villages have so far been selected by the UNWTO in its best tourism villages list and the 
impact of such selection on the village tourism.. 
 (Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 

13 
 
3.1      In respect to Khonoma, Nagaland, UNWTO Mentorship program has already started 
and several round of interaction with the UNWTO master trainers were conducted by 
UNWTO. 
3.2 Till so far the following villages are selected by the UNWTO Best Tourism Villages: 
  
1. Dhordo, Gujarat (2023): UNWTO BestTourism Village 
2. Pochampally, Telangana (2021):UNWTO Best Tourism Village 
3. Madla,Madhya Pradesh (2023):UNWTO Upgrade Program 
4. Khonoma, Nagaland (2022): UNWTO Upgrade Program 
  
3.3 The villages selected as the UNWTO Best Tourism Villages will get the global 
recognition along with the op portunities of knowledge sharing with the other UNWTO Best 
Tourism Villages through the UNWTO Village Network.  
 
Adventure Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.        The Committee has been informed that the government run institutions like Himalayan 
Mountaineering Institution in Darjeeling, the Nehru Institution of Mountaineering in 
Uttarkashi are booked two -three years in advance for a course in mountaineering or skiing 
or water sports. There is, therefore, a dearth of well trained guides in adventure sp orts. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should roll out more training programmes for 
guides and explore the possibility of establishing more institutions of international standards 
for adventure sports across the country. The Committee also feels that the training institutes 
are mostly located in North India with focus on high altitude mountaineering which is not so 
relevant for adventure sports in South India. The Committee recommends that at least one or 
two Training Institutes should be establis hed in South India which focus on adventure sports 
suitable for its topography, altitude and climate. 
(Para 35) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India has established the National Institute 
of Water-sports (NIWS), a Centre under Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management 
(IITTM) in the coastal State of Goa. It is a Nodal Body to support the development and 
promotion of Water -sports in the country. The institute primarily focuses on training 
personnel in Water -sports and lifeguarding. NIWS also conducts training programs for the 
LokSabha Secretariat, Indian Navy, Indian Air Force, BSF, Fire Service departments of 
different State Governments. The institute provides their expertise to the State Tourism 
Boards regarding the training of manpower and in the preparation of guidelines. 

14 
 
  
4.2 Some of the courses which are conducted by the institute are as follows: 
  
1. Life Saving Techniques – Pool Lifeguard (LST – PpL) 
2. Life Saving Techniques –Watersports Operator (LST- WS) 
4. Life Sa ving Techniques –Waterpark Operations (LST - WP) Surf Life Saving 
Techniques - Silver Certification for Beach Lifeguards (SLST- S) 
5. Surf Life Saving Techniques - Gold Certification for Beach Lifeguards (SLST- G) 
6. Powerboat Handling – Tiller Controlled (PBH-T/ Level II) 
7. Powerboat Handling – Remote Controlled (PBH-T/ Level III) 
8. Personal Watercraft/ Jet Ski Operations (PWC) 
9. Parasailing Operations (Level IV) 
10. Sea Rescue Squad Certification (SRS) 
11. Outboard Moror Maintenance Certification (OBM) 
12. Fibre Reinforced Plastic (FRP) Boat Repair Certification 
13. Wind-surfing (Basic/ Intermediate/ Advance) 
14. Sailing (Basic/ Intermediate/ Advance) 
15. Waterskiing (Basic/ Intermediate/ Advance) 
16. Kayaking (Basic/ Intermediate/ Advance) 
17. Snorkelling Guide 
18. White-water River-rafting Guide (Basic) 
19. Watersports Centre Management Certification Course 
20. Water-sports Orientation Programme 
21. CPR Training 
 
 The    duration   of    the    above-mentioned courses varies from 02 -21 days 
depending on the course selected. 
 
 In the last financial year, from 1st Apr il 2022 to 31st March 2023, NIWS conducted 
178 Courses and trained 3529 trainees. 
  

15 
 
4.3 The Ministry of Tourism has also introduced Tourism Adventure and Escort courses 
to develop capacity in youth to promote regional based specially structured adventure s kill 
development courses under the scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers (CBSP) 
in the FY 2018 -19. The programme will be conducted by IITTM through IISM, Gulmarg 
and Indian Mountaineering Foundation (IMF). The courses i.e. Parasailing, Trekking , Hot 
Air Ballooning and Tourism Escort are covered. The duration of the training program 
conduct these program is 10-15 days. 
4.4 The Ministry of Tourism has been conducting the Incredible India Tourist Facilitator 
(IITF) Certification Programme - a digital initiative that aims at creating an Online learning 
platform with an objective of creating a pool of well trained and professional Tourist 
Facilitators across the country. The system provides the following courses: 
  
i. IITF (basic), 
ii. IITG (Advance - Heritage and Adventure), 
iii. Spoken Foreign Language, and 
iv. Refresher course 
  
All the courses, except IITG -Adventure, mentioned have already been launched and 
operational. The IITG-Adventure course module is being prepared and will be launched very 
shortly. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
5.        The Committee appreciates the initiative of Adventure Tourism Rescue Centre of the 
Ministry to provide for specialized facilities in emergency situations and urges that the 
Ministry may ensure that medical treatment facilities are available near all  adventure 
tourism locations. 
(Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1      The draft Model Adventure Tourism Law envisages a long term goal of establishing a 
network of emergency and medical facilities located near adventure tourism locat ions, 
enhancing the preparedness and response capabilities in emergency situations. The same has 
been proposed in the Model Law draft.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
6.        The Committee recommends that National Insurance companies may also be 
encouraged to have policies covering adventure tourism for licensed adventure tour 

16 
 
operators, adventure guides and the tourists to provide support an d promotion of adventure 
tourism. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1      The matter has been taken up with Department of Economic Affairs. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
7.        The Committee notes that since adventure tours are usually conducted in remote 
areas, adventure tourism has a significant impact on economic development by way of 
income generation for local communities, increased business opportunities, and job creation. 
Besides, adventure tourism can empower local communities by involving them in tourism - 
related activities. At the same time, the Ministry should take proactive steps to determine the 
carrying c apacity of popular adventure tourism destinations to mitigate potential negative 
impacts such as environmental degradation and over tourism. The Committee observes that 
the Ministry should promote sustainable and responsible tourism management practices to  
harness the full development potential of adventure tourism. 
(Para 39) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1      Proactive steps are being taken to promote sustainable and responsible tourism 
practices, ensuring the long -term development potential of adventure touri sm while 
preserving the ecological balance. 
 
Ecotourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.      The Committee observes that guides and naturalists are one of the most important 
elements in imparting quality ecotourism experience by way of  providing valuable 
educational, interpretive and experiential services to the visitors. The Committee has been 
informed that a Certification Scheme for tour operators and other service providers for 
ecotourism and adventure tourism is to be framed by the Ministry. The Committee desires to 
know whether the Scheme has been framed and the number of guides/naturalists who have 
been certified under this scheme so far. 
(Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1    The Ministry of Tourism in collaboration with Ministry of Environment, Forest  and 
Climate Change have trained facilitators, tourism service providers, stakeholders for 
strengthening of Nature Tourism at Ramsar sites in association with the State Tourism 
Department. Ramsar Sites are  Wetlands of International Importance, designated u nder the 

17 
 
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands as part of the international network of wetlands important 
for the conservation of global biological diversity and for sustaining human life through the 
maintenance of their ecosystem components, processes and service s. The convergence of the 
two Ministries aims at supporting the development of Nature Tourism at the Ramsar Sites for 
preserving and enhancing the local cultural and natural resources. The focus is to shift the 
high-volume tourism at these fragile wetlands  to high -value nature tourism, directly 
supporting conservation action, local communities and economies. Amongst the 16 identified 
Ramsar sites, 5 sites have been taken up as a pilot project for skill development of the 
facilitators, tourism service provid ers, stakeholders in and around these sites. The ‘Nature - 
tourism and Wet component of this initiative is being implemented jointly by MoT and 
MoEFCC with an aim to enhance livelihood opportunities for  local communities through 
harnessing the nature -tourism potential of the Ramsar Sites across the country. Training 
programs at Sultanpur National Park in Haryana, YashwantSagar and Sirpur in Madhya 
Pradesh have been successfully completed. At Bhitarkanika and Chilika in Odisha and the 
training programs are nearing the stage of completion. 
  
Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, and Exhibitions (Mice) & Wedding Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
9.        The Committee observes that as per the National Strategy document on MICE, India’s 
core MICE infrastructure and amenities are at par with most of the developed countries. The 
main reasons for the poor performance of India in MICE tourism    is   lack   of   focussed 
approach   on   MICE   tourism, absence of system for capturing information about various 
national and international MICE events and preparing for winning the bids, high tax 
structure and costs and lack of stand ardization of processes and services. Besides, most of 
the successful international cities have their convention bureaus to market and provide 
support to the organisations and associations hosting events whereas there are no city 
convention bureaus in India. Singapore, Thailand, UAE, China, Macau and Malaysia are 
already preferred destinations for MICE events in the region and India faces tough 
competition from these countries. 
. 
(Para 51) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1      The Ministry of Tourism has launched a dedicated brand ‘Meet in India’ for 
promoting India as a premier MICE destination. Ministry has worked out a model for setting 
up City level MICE Promotion Bureau at important MICE destinations for facilitating and 
promoting the city as a MICE destination. The aim of setting up of City MICE Promotion 
Bureau is to act as an official nodal agency for facilitating, promoting and developing MICE 
industry in the city.   Further to the consultation with the State Governments and industry 
stakeholders, Ministry has formulated the City MICE Bureaus guidelines and State 

18 
 
Governments have been requested to take actions for setting up MICE Bureau in their 
respective States / UT.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10.      The Committee observes that the Convention industry can enhance a city’s reputation 
and visibility. Creating a marketing body to get more events will help, nurture and market the 
MICE investments in the city. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may make all 
efforts to ensure that such MICE Promotion Bureaus may be set up in the six identified cities 
within a targeted time schedule to market and showcase the respective destinations as a 
favourable location for hosting business events and activities. 
(Para 53) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1    Ministry has worked out a model for setting up City level MICE Promotion Bureau at 
important MICE destinations for facilitating and promoting the city as a M ICE destination. 
The aim of setting up of City MICE Promotion Bureau is to act as an official nodal agency 
for facilitating, promoting and developing MICE industry in the city.  
Recommendation/Observation 
11.      The Committee observes that there are abou t 80,000, 04 star and 05star hotel rooms 
in approved hotels, which for a country of the size of India, is quite insignificant (Annexure – 
II). The total number of rooms in the city of Bangkok is nearly three times than that of India. 
Adequacy of quality ho tels can  enhance   the   reputation   of   a destination as a suitable 
location for hosting MICE events, thus contributing to satisfaction of participants, repeat 
business besides word -of-mouth recommendation. Therefore, adequate four and five star 
categories hotel rooms would have to be increased, for realising the goals of MICE tourism. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may assess the number of Convention Centres 
in the 04 and 05 star hotels of international standards in the country and determine  the 
shortfall that would be required to host the targeted MICE events. 
.(Para 54) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1    The Ministry of Tourism under its voluntary scheme of classification, accords STAR 
classification to Hotels through its NIDHI+ portal upon app lication by the hotels, depending 
on the criteria. Therefore, it is not under the purview of the Ministry to increase the no. of 4 
& 5 STAR classified hotel rooms.  For assessment of the no. of Convention Centres in the 4 
& 5 STAR Hotels, the Ministry has w ritten to the hotel industry associations for necessary 
data.. 
  

19 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee also observes that connectivity, especially by air, is one of the 
important aspects that promotes MICE tourism. Since good international air connectivity 
reduces travel time and logistical challenges, the Ministry should coordinate with the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation to ensure that the identified cities of MICE destinations are well 
connected for international flights. 
(Para 55) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1    56 cities have been chosen/selected as the MICE destinations. Many amongst all these 
destinations are already in commencement under the RCS - UDAN. For introduction of 
flights to the new destinations, it may be proposed to Ministry of Civil A viation. An OM in 
regards to the same has been sent to Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
  
Wedding Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
13.      The Committee has been informed that one crore weddings take place in India every 
year and the number is bound to incr ease in the coming years. The Committee observes that 
Destination Weddings with events and celebrations spread out over many days can offer 
several benefits to the local economy and local ecosystem. But, India’s huge potential for 
wedding tourism has not been exploited. The Committee appreciates that Kerala Tourism has 
launched a music video, “Shubha  Mangalyam” in collaboration with a Youtuber and singer, 
for promotion of wedding tourism in Kerala which has garnered much popularity. The 
Committee recommends that similar efforts may be made by other states to promote 
destination wedding tourism.. 
(Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1    Ministry of Tourism promotes India as a holistic destination, including Wedding 
promotion. Aggressive social media promotions  are being undertaken to showcase the 
potential of the country as a wedding tourism destination through its social media handles. 
  
13.2 To explore the underexplored avenues in Tourism, the Ministry of Tourism has 
launched a campaign to promote wedding tou rism in India. The campaign aims to position 
India as the ‘incredible match’ for diverse wedding aspirations of the world and highlights 
India’s potential as a global hub of wedding tourism, backed by its global appeal as a 
tourism destination. The campaig n showcases spectacular and diverse locales, heritage, 
ethnic diversity, profound rituals, connectivity; well established wedding ecosystem, 
delectable cuisines and heart warming hospitality, to invite both domestic and international 
clientele to create lasting memories. 

20 
 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
14.      The Committee also observes that the Cruise Shipping Policy was first formulated by 
the Ministry in 2008 when the industry was in its infancy in India. The Policy aimed, inter - 
alia, to increase the number of cruise passengers by 10 lakh by the year 2010, well developed 
rail, road and air connectivity and promotion of cruise vessels. Customs duty on bunkering 
for cruise and coastal ships, then at 33%,  was   cited   as   a   factor towards making cruise 
operations uncompetitive. As part of conducive fiscal regime measures this issue was 
resolved by the Department of Revenue vide Notification No. 31/2014 dated November 11, 
2014 by exempting Customs and Excise duty leviable on bunker fuels. Some progress has  
definitely been made in cruise tourism inasmuch as India now has its own luxury cruise 
liners. The first International Cruise Vessel from Chennai to Sri Lanka has recently been 
flagged off in June, 2023. India is, however, still way behind achieving the t arget of 10 lakh 
passengers as even in 2023, not even half the target has been achieved. The statistics on 
cruise vessels at some of the Major Ports provided by the Ministry show that cruise tourism 
has a long way to go to catch up with the pre -Covid numbers. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should endeavour to calibrate the strategy for Cruise tourism by addressing 
the challenges like inadequate infrastructure, lack of proper facilities at ports, environmental 
concerns due to waste disposal and p ollution, etc. in a time - bound manner, besides giving 
incentives to cruise companies to come to Indian ports. 
. 
(Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry         
14.1    Ministry of Tourism has drafted a National Strategy for Cruise Tourism. Following 
strategic pillars have been identified as part of the integrated cruise tourism policy: - 
  
i. Infrastructure & Circuit Enablement 
ii. Market Development 
iii. Ease of Doing Business for Cruise Tourism 
iv. Integrated    Tourism    around   cruise terminals 
v. Fiscal Support 
vi. Investment Facilitation and Promotion 
vii. Skilling    Development    for   Cruise Tourism 
viii. Institutional Structure and Governance 
  

21 
 
As regards to providing funds to Ports assistance have been provided under the Scheme of 
Assistance to Central Agency for Tourism Infrastructur e Development. The Details are at 
Annexure-I. 
 
 Medical And Wellness Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
15.      The Committee also observes that till now, no significant efforts or investments have 
been made to build an ecosystem around hospitals. Guestho uses and patient specific hotels 
need to be built around hospitals. 
(Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1    Ministry of Tourism in collaboration with Invest India DPIIT and other Trade 
Organisation is regularly exploring the feasibility of Investments in m edical tourism in 
various Tourism Investment Summit organised by Government of India and State 
Government. India allows 100% FDI in Hotel sector on automated basis. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
16.      The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may e xplore the opportunities in 
cross border telemedicine as India has sufficient skilled personnel to become a global hub in 
this regard. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may promote the traditional 
medicines of India like Ayurveda on an equal footing. 
(Para 74) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1    The Ministry of Tourism is actively engaged in promoting India as a holistic 
destination within key tourism markets, aiming to enhance the global appeal of various Indian 
tourism products and destinations. T o achieve these objectives, the Ministry employs an 
integrated marketing and promotional strategy, collaborating closely with the Travel Trade, 
State Governments, and Indian Missions. Continuous engagement with industry experts and 
stakeholders ensures tha t their valuable suggestions and feedback contribute to the effective 
promotion of India's varied tourism products. Thematic promotions in target source markets 
are a key component, emphasizing diverse themes including wellness. 
 Since telemedicine does no t involve movement of people it does not fall under the purview 
of Ministry of Tourism. Hence, the matter has been referred to Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare.  
 
Film Tourism 

22 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17.      The Committee observes that films can h ave a massive impact on destination 
marketing as visitors are often inspired to visit filming locations featured in popular films. 
The impact is such that the annual tourist influx is said to have increased by 40% in New 
Zealand, the site of the movie tril ogy of “Lord of the Rings” after the release of the films. In 
India, the release of the film "3 Idiots" led to a significant increase in tourist arrivals in 
Ladakh to visit the Pangong Lake featured in the film. India produces the highest number of 
films in the world and film tourism has significant potential for growth in India. Many Indian 
films, especially those regarding period dramas, showcase historical places and characters 
and can be useful to highlight the history behind the tourist places. The Tam il movie 
“PonniyinSelvan” based on one of the greatest novels in Tamil literature, is a fictional 
account of the historical character of Raja RajaChola, the Chola king who built the 
Brihadeeswarar Temple in Thanjavur, one of the biggest temples of India. T he Chola dynasty 
was famous for building temples, many of which are now World Heritage Sites. The 
Committee notes that the Tamil Nadu Tourism Development Corporation has announced a 
“Chola Tourism Circuit” covering the Chola Temples and the Veeranam Lake, also built by 
the Cholas. Tourism potential of such historical and religious sites can be harnessed through 
the medium of films. The Committee feels that while India has the advantage of producing the 
highest number of films in the world which also in a wa y depict the innate historical 
significance of the places of tourism interests, the Ministry has not paid adequate attention to 
the great potential of films to showcase India. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should endeavour to devise the strategy to fully tap into the benefits of film tourism. 
(Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1    Under the Hospitality Scheme, Ministry of Tourism has a provision of supporting the 
visits of TV teams for undertaking shooting at tourism destinations of India, on the basis of 
proposals received from Indian Missions & Stakeholders. 
 17.2 In order to leverage the power of Film Tourism to promote destinations, an event on 
“Promoting Incredible India through Film Tourism” was organized on 22 ndMay 2023 on the 
side lines  of third Tourism Working Group meeting held at Srinagar. During the meeting 
draft National Strategy for Film Tourism was unveiled. 
  
Golf Tourism 
Recommendation/Observation 
18.      The Committee observes that Golf was introduced to India by the British a nd in 1829, 
the first golfing establishment, the Royal Calcutta Golf Club, was established. In contrast, 
Thailand’s first   professional golf was established only in 1924. Yet Thailand has emerged 
as the world’s top golfing destination while golf tourism i s yet to take shape in India. In fact, 
many Indians visit Thailand as golf tourists. The Committee observes that India has much of 

23 
 
the same landscapes and climatological conditions as Thailand, like a sunny climate all year 
around in most places which make s winter golf possible. Yet, India has not taken any special 
initiative to attract both domestic and international golf enthusiasts. Thailand has promoted 
a Thai Golf Pass which is a unique loyalty programme exclusive to Thailand providing a 
seamless golf experience. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should come up with 
initiatives such as developing world -class golf infrastructure, promoting tournaments, and 
providing holistic tourism experience to the visiting golfers in the country. 
 
(Para 80) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1    The development of tourism infrastructure is primarily undertaken by the State 
Governments. However, the Ministry of Tourism through its SwadeshDarshan scheme 
provides financial assistance under the scheme for developing touris m infrastructure and 
projects. Under this scheme, the Ministry of Tourism has developed a golf course at 
Thenzawl, Mizoram for Rs.64.48 Cr. the responsibility of maintaining and operating the same 
is that of the concerned State Government.  Ministry of Tour ism is also in the process of 
revising its guidelines for extending financial support for promotion of Golf Tourism. 
  
 Recommendation/Observation 
19.      The Committee observes that the Ministry is yet to take significant action on Golf 
Tourism, Eco-tourism, Film Tourism, and Wedding Tourism while taking some measures to 
promote Sustainable Tourism, Rural Tourism, MICE and Medical Tourism, and Cruise 
Tourism. A plethora of wildlife sanctuaries and tiger reserves exist in India yet not much 
attention seems  to have been paid to Wildlife Tourism. Kerala has shown the way for 
Caravan Tourism  with the establishment of one Caravan Park and proposal for 3 new 
Caravan Parks, 10 Caravans and subsidy of Rs. 7.5 lakhs for Caravan owners. Despite the 
successful effort s of Kerala towards promotion of Caravan Tourism, the Ministry has not 
endeavored to replicate the same in other states. The Committee also appreciates the efforts 
of Kerala Tourism to develop the “Muziris Heritage Circuit”, the largest Heritage 
Conservation Project in India which would reinstate the historical and cultural significance 
of the legendary port of Muziris and also the Alappuzha Heritage Circuit which includes the 
development of the defunct port of Alappuzha into a marina. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may explore the potential of Casino Tourism, Culinary Tourism, and Polo 
tourism, the last being believed to have originated in Manipur. The Committee also observes 
that in the aftermath of the pandemic “Remote Working” has gained trac tion. Due to the rise 
in online work, workers often move to locations even in other countries which offer a lower 
cost of living or scenic locations, etc. and continue to stay for a long period of time. India 
offers all modern facilities required for such remote working, like good internet facilities, a 
low cost of living compared to Western countries and many serene and beautiful places for 

24 
 
living. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibilities of such 
niche tourism experience. 
 (Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1    Ministry of Tourism promotes tourism destinations and products of the country, 
including niche tourism products. In order to promote the niche tourism experiences and 
products, Ministry had developed a series of thema tic brand films on MICE, Wellness, 
Heritage, Adventure and Arts and Crafts. These films have also been dubbed into different 
foreign languages along with in English for promotional purposes in various source markets.  
Ministry of Tourism has released Nation al Strategies for Sustainable Tourism, Rural 
Tourism, MICE, Adventure Tourism and Medical & Wellness Tourism. It has also drafted 
National Strategy for Film tourism and National Strategy for Cruise Tourism.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20.      The Committee observes that while the Ministry’s tourism policies stress the 
importance of attracting private    investment and developing Public Private Partnerships for 
development of tourist infrastructure and facilities, the Ministry has not given any 
information on PPP projects in any scheme, be it niche tourism, thematic circuits or 
destination tourism. The National Strategy on Eco - Tourism has PPP partnerships as one of 
its strategic components. The Committee has come to know from the website of the 
Department of   Economic Affairs regarding PPP projects that Eco -tourism projects have 
been proposed in Andaman & Nicobar Islands by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). The 
Committee desires to know the status of these projects and whether the Ministry of Tourism 
proposes to develop similar projects under Eco -tourism and other niche tourism areas and 
SwadeshDarshan 2.0 on PPP basis. The Committee directs the Ministry to submit details of 
PPP projects taken in the various schemes so far. The Committee observes that private  
participation in product development or marketing and promotion in tourism can be valuable 
and recommends that the Ministry may endeavour to bring in private investments in its 
various tourism products and schemes. 
(Para 84) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1    While State governments primarily spearhead tourism infrastructure development, the 
Ministry of Tourism also extends financial support through its SwadeshDarshan scheme for 
the implementation of tourism projects and infrastructure enhancements across the c ountry. 
This support is extended through financial grants and technical assistance for creation of 
tourism infrastructure and experiences. As far as operation & maintenance of the projects 
and creating PPP opportunities is concerned, the same is undertaken  by the concerned State 
Governments /UT Administrations. However, the Ministry of Tourism in order to facilitate 

25 
 
investment in tourism sector and public private partnerships has constituted a steering 
Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary (Tourism). 
 20.2 The PRASHAD Scheme is entirely funded by the central government (a central 
sector scheme), and the State government is mainly responsible for operating and 
maintaining any site because the project is carried out by the State or Union Territory 
government.   
20.3 The Ministry of Tourism has instituted a steering Committee for investments and 
public private participation in tourism and hospitality sector. The Committee has 
representation from key line Ministries, Industry Associations and Invest India . Ministry of 
Tourism has sought details of the projects proposed in Andaman & Nicobar Island from 
Island Development Authority, NITI Aayog. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
21.      The Committee observes that most of the tourists in India come from four sour ce 
countries of US, Canada, Bangladesh and UK which account for nearly 60% of the inbound 
tourists. India has only a small percentage of tourists from Europe, Africa, Central and South 
Americas. The tourist inflow from West Asian countries is also very low though the number of 
outbound tourists from India to these countries is much higher. The Ministry has informed 
the Committee that improving connectivity with other regions especially direct flight 
connectivity, tapping the potential of medical tourism, pr omoting India as a hub for MICE 
tourism, especially after the inauguration of world -class convention centre  at Pragati  
Maidan, creating better infrastructure for eco -tourism ,adventure tourism, religious tourism 
circuits, emphasizing on cleanliness and security, etc. are some of the steps that can be taken 
to increase inbound tourism in India. The Committee acknowledges that synergy among the 
various Central Sector Schemes of different Ministries is essential for promotion of tourism. 
To achieve this, inter -Ministerial coordination is of crucial importance. The Committee has 
been informed by the stakeholders that consultations between the Ministry of Tourism, other 
Ministries and the associations take place in a fragmented manner and there is no proper 
coordination and consultations among Ministries involving matters of tourism in the country. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may step up efforts for coordination 
with other concerned Ministries   for tourism promotion.. 
(Para 85) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1    The Ministry of Tourism works in close collaboration with various stakeholders for 
the development of tourism in the country. Different mechanisms to seek synergy and 
convergence with stakeholders are: 
  

26 
 
i. National Conference of State To urism Ministers and Regional Tourism Ministers 
Conference which are held to discuss various issues related to the development of the 
tourism sector in the country. 
ii. National Tourism Advisory Council which serves as a ‘Think Tank’ of experts in the 
field of tourism and advises the Ministry on various tourism -related issues. It 
includes representatives of various Union Ministries, Trade and Industry 
Associations and Individual Experts in the field of travel and tourism management. 
iii. The Inter -Ministerial Coordin ation Committee on Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) 
facilitates the resolution of Inter -Ministerial issues involved in the development of 
tourism in the country. 
iv. A Tourism Taskforce has been constituted under the chairmanship of the Secretary 
(Tourism) with MHA, M/ o Culture, ASI, MoCA, AAI, MoRTH, M/o Railways, 
IRCTC etc. as members. The meeting of the Tourism Task Force is convened from 
time to time and individual meetings also take place based on the requirements. 
v. SwadeshDarshan and PRASHAD Schemes have the provis ion of participation from 
other line Ministries in the National Steering Committee (NSC), Central Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) and Mission Directorate (MD). 
vi. Meetings / Consultations /Webinars are held from time to time to take 
suggestions/inputs from stakeholders in the tourism sector for the development and 
promotion of tourism in the country. 
vii. Under the SwadeshDarshan scheme, the Ministry of Tourism has constituted a 
National Steering Committee (NSC) under the chairmanship of Minister (Tourism) in 
order to provide overall vision and guidance for the scheme and comprises of 
members from line Ministries. In addition, the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee (CSMC) has also been broadened and now includes participation from 
various line Ministries and industry partners. The Ministry of Tourism also proposes 
to map its projects on Gati Shakti in order to synergize its efforts with the endeavours 
of various other Ministries and stakeholders. 
 
21.2 As regards to inter - Ministerial coordinati on, it is submitted that there are already 
mechanisms in place. These are: 
 
i. Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee for Tourism Sector(IMCCTS) under 
the chairpersonship of Cabinet Secretary has been formed to facilitate resolution of 
Inter- Ministerial/ D epartmental issues involving the development of tourism and 
better connectivity to tourist destinations within the country. Various ministries such 
as: Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Ministry of DONER, M inistry of Railways, Ministry of Road Transport and 

27 
 
Highway, Ministry of Culture/Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Indian Railway 
Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) etc. are members therein. 
ii. Tourism Task Force under   the chairpersonship of S ecretary (Tourism), 
Government of India and other line Ministries has also been constituted to address various 
issues related to connectivity of tourism destinations and other issues related to tourism. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
22.      The Committee stresses that connectivity to places especially to places of niche 
tourism which are often in far flung areas is of utmost importance in the direction of 
promoting tourism in the country. The Committee has been informed by stakeholders that 
even places like  Aurangabad, which as part of the Golden Triangle, used to be well 
connected to as many as eight cities is now connected to only two places. The Committee 
desires to know from the Ministry, the reason behind this drastic measure. The Committee 
further reco mmends that the Ministry may pay special attention to the air connectivity of 
tourist places being promoted as also of the existing popular places of tourism interest. 
(Para 86) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
22.1    Ministry of Tourism is working very closely wit h Ministry of Civil Aviation for 
improving the air connectivity to important tourist destination and to lesser known/new 
destinations with high potential. It has coordinated with Ministry of Civil Aviation under 
their Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS - Udan) and sharing the Viability Gap Funding 
(VGF) amount for 53 tourism routes identified for this purpose. As in regards to 
Aurangabad, which as part of the Golden Triangle, we may write to Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. An OM in regards to the same is sent to Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
  
 Recommendation/Observation 
23.      The Committee further observes that creation of hotel infrastructure would involve a 
mammoth capital investment. The Committee has been informed that as return on investment 
in the hospital ity sector takes at least 15 years, availability of long term loans becomes a 
problem. The Committee recommends that grant of infrastructure status to the hotel industry 
may be examined on priority as loans with longer repayment schedule and suitable inter est 
rates would be available for creation of hotel infrastructure. The Committee has been 
informed that though industry status has been accorded to hotels by many state Governments, 
but the incentives and privileges associated with the industry status have  not been conferred 
to the hospitality sector. Granting Industry status to the tourism and hospitality  sector would 
entitle the sector across all states to pay various taxes and tariffs on industrial rates instead 
of on commercial rates presently. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider 
grant of Industry status to the tourism and hospitality sector by way of a uniform central 
notification as it would enhance the overall competitiveness of the tourism industry. 

28 
 
(Para 89) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1    As per the D.O. letter of Hon’ble Minster of Finance and Corporate Affairs, 
Government of India No. 13/02/2023 -PPU dated 05 July 2023, regarding revision in the 
definition of infrastructure status to hotels and convention centres, the Ministry of Tourism 
has been informed that in accordance with Para 49 of the Union Budget for FY 23 -24, an 
expert Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Bibek  Debroy, 
Chairman of EAC to PM, with the objective to undertake a comprehensive assessm ent of the 
characteristics/parameters defining infrastructure and the financing framework for 
AmritKaal. The said proposal regarding infrastructure status to hotels and convention centres 
has been forwarded to the Committee for their consideration. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
24.      The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders that Tourist transport vehicles 
are treated on par with trucks and other commercial vehicles due to which the speed limit is 
restricted for tourist vehicles whereas private cars have higher speed limits and faster 
movement. In areas of niche tourism like MICE and luxury tourism, high -end tourists do not 
enjoy the rides especially in long road journeys and as such, the speed restrictions cause 
avoidable annoyance in the touris t experience. The Committee has learnt from the media 
reports that the Government is planning to review the speed limits and recommends that the 
Tourist transport vehicles may not be treated in the same category as other commercial 
vehicles and the speed l imits may suitably be revised/  increased. Another minor but 
significant point raised by the stakeholders was that curtains should be allowed in tourist 
buses as tourists, especially the foreigners, are not used to tropical weather, especially the 
heat of I ndian summers. The Committee observes that tourism promotion is as much about 
the whole some journey experience as it is about  the destinations and recommends that the 
Ministry may consider the issue. 
(Para 90) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1    The matter in r egards to the same have already been taken up with Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways. We have again written to them again following up on the course of 
action taken by the Ministry/Department. An OM in regards to the same has been sent to 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
25.      The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders that high tax rates in India in 
comparison to neighbouring countries (Annexure – III) is affecting tourists‟ arrival in India. 
The Committee observes that in 2019, the GST rates had been reduced for hotel room from 
28% to 18% for hotel rooms with tariffs of Rs. 7500/ - and above, 18% to 12% for tariffs of 

29 
 
less than Rs. 7500/- and none for tariffs of less than Rs. 1000. The Committee appreciates the 
initiative of the Ministry of Finance and recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may 
examine the impact of the 2019 reduction in GST on tourist arrivals and appropriately take 
up with the Ministry of Finance for further reduction in GST, if need be, for the targeted 
growth of tourism sector. 
(Para 91) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1    It may be stated here that the reduction of taxes has helped the entire tourism industry 
to increase the overall revenue. The significant effect of the reduction in GST for the hotel 
industry was that it resulted in competitive pricing of hotel accommodation and services 
thereby placing India in  competition with countries such as Thailand, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, 
etc. for tourism.   Travelling within India has been more econo mical in comparison to 
international destinations. As a result of the reduction in GST, domestic and inbound tourism 
has increased and there has been a significant growth in the local economy throughout the 
country. F&S may submit a ToR in due course to Re search and Analytics Division to 
conduct study on the market and explore further reduction in the tax rates.   
  
Recommendation/Observation 
26.      The Committee observes that under the Service Exports from India Scheme (SEIS), the 
Government offered dome stic exports duty credit scrips in the range of 5% to 7% of the net 
foreign exchange earned depending upon the nature of services. These SEIS scrips could be 
used to pay import duty or can be encashed by selling it to any importer. The SEIS Scheme 
had not been extended beyond 2019 -20. While examining the Demand for Grants 2023 -24, 
the Committee had recommended that the Ministry take up the SEIS issue with the Ministry of 
Commerce to increase the rate  of SEIS benefits to 10% and extend the scheme for a furth er 
period of 2 -3 years. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation as even after 02 
years after the pandemic, the tourism sector is yet to redeem its pre-pandemic position.. 
(Para 92) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1    The Ministry of Tourism has forwa rded the recommendations of the Committee to 
Ministry of Commerce to take a view for extending the SEIS scheme for further period of 3 
years and also to increase the rate of SEIS scheme benefits to 10% for the growth of tourism. 
The matter was taken up aga in with Ministry of Finance. Hon’ble Minister of Tourism 
recommended the proposal for restoration of SEIS scheme for Tourism stakeholders, but the 
same has not been found favourable by Ministry of Finance.The proposal has been rejected 
and it has been conveyed that” support under the said scheme has not been continued beyond 
the FY 2019 -20 and currently there is no active proposal to extend the SEIS further. 
However, the Government stands committed to provide support to the export of services by 

30 
 
improved ma rket access through free trade agreements (FTAs) and other trade promotion 
efforts.’.   
 
Spiritual Tourism 
 Recommendation/Observation 
27.      The Committee notes that the Buddhist circuit has been fully developed but as can be 
seen from    the    Tourism    Statistics2022, the numbers of foreign tourists from 
predominantly Buddhist countries has not shown any significant uptick. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may focus on promotion of Buddhist Circuit in these countries 
and desires to know the number of events conducted by the Indian Missions there, 
showcasing India’s Buddhist circuit. The Committee recommends Audio- Visual Guides that 
offer information about Buddhist sites and monuments are trained by a proper agency. 
(Para 96) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1    Ministry of Tourism promotes India as a holistic tourist destination including 
Buddhist tourism. Ministry participates in overseas travel exhibitions to promote various 
tourism products and destination of the country globally including in Bud dhist Tourism 
generating markets. During 2023, Ministry of Tourism also participated in a Travel seminar 
in Vietnam to promote India as a Buddhist destination in that country.  Ministry is actively 
engaged in promotion of the Buddhist Circuit in predominant ly Buddhist countries. In order 
to tap the potential Buddhist tourists from specific Buddhist tourism generating markets, a 
series of 08 promotional films have been developed on Buddhist pilgrimage sites. 
 27.2 The Ministry of Tourism has revamped the Swad eshDarshan scheme as 
SwadeshDarshan 2.0d with the objective to develop sustainable and responsible tourism 
destinations. For this purpose, the Ministry of Tourism has also notified 55 destinations in 
the country for development under the scheme which inclu des development of Gaya and 
Nalanda in Bihar. The scheme focuses on development of softer aspects at select 
destinations..   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
28.      The Committee has been informed that Bodh Gaya, one of the most important sites in 
the Buddhis t circuit, does not have good connectivity with the rest of the places in the 
Buddhist circuit. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to examine the connectivity issue of 
Bodh Gaya and focus on improving the overall connectivity of all the Spiritual Circui ts 
forincreasing tourist footfall.. 
(Para 97) 
Reply of the Ministry 

31 
 
28.1    The matter has been taken up with Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India. 
An OM in regards to the same is sent to Ministry of Civil Aviation.   
 
Prashad Scheme  
 Recommendation/Observation 
29.      The Committee observes that at the time of the Demands for Grants, 2023 -24, the 
Committee had been informed that 20 out of45 projects under this scheme had been 
completed, 09 projects were ongoing and 16 projects were yet to be d eveloped.   The 
Committee observes that the status remains almost the same as only 21 projects have been 
completed. Most of the reasons for delay given by the Ministry earlier were due to lack of 
approvals from the ASI, temple authorities, forest clearance, etc. 
(Para 99) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1    As mentioned before, the Ministry is constantly making efforts to handle issues tied 
to religious beliefs and the concerns of local stakeholders to reduce delays and make sure the 
project progresses smoothly. Consequently, apart from 21 projects, four projects have 
progressed beyond 90% completion, and three more projects are beyond 80% completion.   
 
Promotion of Swadesh Darshan Schemes 
Recommendation/Observation 
30.      The Ministry of Tourism promotes touri st destinations including theme -based tourist 
The Committee notes that at the time of the Demand for Grants 2023 -24, the Ministry had 
informed that 17 projects of Swadesh  Darshan 1.0 were pending for completion. Four more 
projects have been completed and now 13 projects are targeted for completion by December, 
2023. The Committee notes that out of the remaining 13 projects, only 04 are showing some 
progress and the rest are still at the same stage as they were in March, 2023. The Committee 
further notes tha t 02 projects are delayed due to court case/arbitration, 04 due to lack of 
clearance from forest/temple authorities and the remaining 03 due to delays in procurement 
of cruise boats and floating restaurants, contractor    issues and inclement weather and 
difficult terrain (in case of J&K). The Committee feels that the lack of progress in these 
projects in the past few months does not augur well for their timely completion    by 
December, 2023. The Committee also notes that most of these projects began in 2016- 17 and 
are already much behind their schedule. The Committee also notes that the four projects 
which are delayed due to lack of clearances from forest or temple authorities are at the final 
stage of completion. The Committee desires to know why the clear ances have not been 
obtained   at   the   time   of   the finalisation of the DPR and are pending even at the 
culmination of the project. The Committee recommends the Ministry to make every effort to 
complete the remaining 13 projects by December 2023 as t he projects have already been 
considerably delayed. The Committee also desires the Ministry to monitor the real time 

32 
 
progress of the projects at the level of a senior functionary and ensure their completion 
without any further delay.. 
(Para 114) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30 .1    The Ministry of Tourism has taken multiple actions to expedite progress of the 
projects which primarily include the following:- 
  
i. Regular review meetings are held at senior level to monitor progress of the projects. 
ii. States/ Implementing Agencies have to regularly update progress of the project on 
the scheme dashboard. 
iii. The Ministry of Tourism has fixed completion timelines to all the States/UTs to 
complete the projects. 
iv. The Ministry of Tourism has issued directions that             all th e State 
Governments/UT Administrations / Implementing Agencies must complete the 
projects sanctioned under SwadeshDarshan scheme within the approved timelines. If 
the sanctioned components are not completed in the given timeframe, expenditure 
incurred on t he works undertaken beyond the completion timelines will have to be 
borne by the respective State Governments/ UT Administrations / Implementing 
Agencies. 
v. The Ministry of Tourism has issued instructions to the States / UTs that the Ministry 
of Tourism will not sanction new projects under SwadeshDarshan scheme 2.0 to the 
States/UTs, which fail in successful completion of the already sanctioned projects 
and adhere to the instructions issued by the Government of India from time to time. 
vi. The Ministry has fixed the timeline of completion of the pending projects as 
31.12.2023 
Also under SD2.0, the Ministry has directed all the States/UTs Implementing Agencies to 
obtain all permissions & NOCs in advance and it should be part of the DPR.   
 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
Recommendation/Observation 
31.      When enquired by the Committee on the criteria of selection of 55 destinations under 
SwadeshDarshan Scheme 2.0, the Ministry informed that the States had been consulted on 
the same and a format had been circulated to the Stat es for preparing the State Perspective 
Plan. The Ministry further informed that there are two principles involved in selection of a 
destination that states which have not been represented should find a place in the list and 
places with immense potential sh ould also be included. The Committee recommended that a 

33 
 
wide consultation process should be initiated before the selection of any such destinations as 
they have a great impact on the local economy.. 
(Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1 It is further submitted that the following steps are involved in selection of destinations 
under SwadeshDarshan 2.0 scheme:- 
  
1. The states are to prepare and submit the State Perspective Plan highlighting the 
tourism potential, major offerings, attractions and themes of the State. The perspective 
plan is to be based on the key principles of the Scheme and should analyse various 
destinations based on the following parameters: 
 
i. Major tourism attractions, offerings and themes 
ii. Connectivity by Air, Rail and Road including local travel 
iii. Connectivity to any tourist circuit,  
iv. Current tourism eco system 
v. Future tourism potential 
 
31.2 The States / UTs can propose 5 destinations for development in the SPP 
  
2. Thereafter the SPP is analysed by the National Programme Management Unit 
(NPMU). 
3. The destinations are thereafter recommended for selection by the Mission Directorate 
(MD) and Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC). These 
Committees include members participating from line Ministries, industry partners, 
State Government etc. for wider consultation and inputs. 
4. The State will also set up a Destination Management Committee (DMC) under SD2.0 
scheme at the district level under the Chairmanship of District Collector and 
comprising members from concerned line departments and industry partners. The 
DMC will bring synergy in the efforts of various departments and organizations 
towards promotion of the tourism 
 
 Recommendation/Observation 
32.      Upon observation of the Committee that 50 destinations had also been announced in 
the Union budget speech, 2023, the Ministry confirmed that these 50 destinations were over 

34 
 
and above the 55 destinations under the SwadeshDarshan 2.0 and would be selected in 
challenge mode. Both the State Governments and the Stakeholders       at           the 
ChintanShivir meeting had been asked for feedback and the selection process would be fairly 
competitive. The Committee emphasised that selection of destinations should be a 
consultative process so that there is an equitable distribution of destinations in the c ountry 
across sectors.. 
(Para 121) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1    The Ministry of Tourism has issued guidelines for ‘Challenge Based Destination 
Development’, a sub - scheme under SwadeshDarshan 2.0. The objective of the scheme is 
holistic development of the  destination to enhance tourist experience across all points of the 
tourist value chain. The scheme aligns with five key tourism priorities, convergence with 
Central Government flagship programmes, Travel for Life programmes, innovation and 
janbhagidari. Destination Management Organizations (DMOs) interested to participate in the 
scheme can submit proposals through the State Government under the scheme. Various 
thematic category for submission of proposal includes: 
  
(i) Spiritual Tourism  
(ii) Culture & Heritage 
(iii)Vibrant Village Program 
(iv) Ecotourism and AmritDharohar Sites.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
33.      The Committee observes that there does not appear to be a clear cut distinction 
between the two phases of the SwadeshDarshan Scheme as the same theme based str ategy 
seems to have guided the implementation of the second phase also. The Committee is also not 
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that all themes evolved in future will fall in one of the 
major themes as the basic idea of niche tourism is that it provides a particular experience 
which cannot be obtained in other forms of tourism. Regarding benchmarks and standards, 
the Committee fails to understand why the same were not provided in the earlier phase of the 
scheme. The Committee feels that the Minis try has in the past decade alternated between 
theme-based tourism and destination based tourism and has endeavoured to incorporate 
elements of both in all the programmes that it has formulated. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may ensure that the  guidelines issued to the states are unambiguous in the 
kind of destinations and themes to be developed. 
(Para 124) 
Reply of the Ministry 

35 
 
33.1    SwadeshDarshan 1.0 was focused on development thematic circuits, the 
SwadeshDarshan 2.0 aims at development of  sustainable and responsible tourism 
destinations. Infrastructure development in the tourism sector can exist as a standalone 
activity and is not inherently confined to the concept of theme -based development. Thematic 
circuits, do not necessarily dictate t he nature of infrastructure projects. Independently 
developed destinations may naturally align with multiple themes, showcasing the versatility 
and adaptability of tourism infrastructure to diverse traveler preferences and interests. This 
flexibility allow s destinations to cater to a broad range of visitor experiences, enhancing 
their overall appeal. 
  
33.2 The Ministry of Tourism is also promoting "Travel for Life", a sectoral programme 
under mission LiFE, which signifies a commitment to fostering sustaina ble and responsible 
tourism practices. In alignment with this ethos, destination development under 
SwadeshDarshan 2.0 is approached with a focus on ensuring long -term environmental, 
social, and economic sustainability. It involves implementing measures tha t preserve natural 
resources, support local communities, and minimize the ecological footprint, thereby 
creating destinations that not only attract visitors but also contribute positively to the well -
being of the environment and communities in the long run . The emphasis on sustainability 
reflects a holistic approach that aims to balance the economic benefits of tourism with the 
preservation of cultural and natural heritage for future generations. 
 
33.3 The scheme guidelines of SwadeshDarshan 2.0 are thus in tricately detailed, 
effectively conveying the concept of destination management. They provide clear and 
comprehensive directives, aligning with the overarching goal of destination management in a 
thoughtful and strategic manner. The guidelines adequately t hus emphasis to ensure 
sustainable development, community engagement, and the preservation of the destination's 
unique attribute 
Recommendation/Observation 
34.      The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry to prepare a skilled 
workforce for catering to the increasing demands of the tourism industry for its anticipated 
growth. The Committee desires to know the number of students in the tourism courses at 
IITTM, the number of trained guides and whether the numbers would be adequate to m eet 
future demand. 
(Para 129) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1    The Ministry of Tourism has also initiated Incredible India Tourist Facilitator (IITF) 
Certification Program to provide online training and accreditation of the Tour Facilitators 
through a central ized PAN India e -learning module. The institution of tourist facilitators 
would be a basic component of the infrastructural requirement both for International and 

36 
 
Domestic tourism. The training and certification to be provided at many level i.e. Basic, 
Advanced (Heritage &Adventure), Refresher course (initially for Regional Level Guides and 
subsequently for all Candidates completing basic / advance courses) and Specialization in 
spoken foreign language. The programme is for the youth of age between 18 -40 years with 
10+2 qualification. 
More than 5000 candidates are already certified under this programme. 
The Ministry has introduced various 6week language courses i.e. Dutch, German, French, 
Japanese, Chinese, Burmese etc. to train Guides/Tourist Facilitators and other service 
providers under the scheme of ‘Capacity Building for Service Providers’. The basic 
objective of this Linguistic Tourist Facilitators (LTF) is to create trained manpower in 
different foreign languages to facilitate tourist visiting India from different countries. 
The details of persons certified under LTF program are as under:- 
 
S. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Course
s 
2018- 
19 
201
9 
-20 
2021
- 
22 
2022
- 
23 
Total 
1 Chines
e - 
LTF 
26 106 60 60 252 
2 Thai     
   - 
LTF 
111 97 120 90 418 
3 Japane
se - 
LTF 
78 72 90 60 300 
4 Vietna
me 
se - 
LTF 
- 35 0 30 65 
  Total 215 310 270 240 1035 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

37 
 
35.      The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has taken the digital initiative of the 
Incredible India Tourist Facilitator (IITF) Online Programme to enable people to learn 
about tourism at their pace, earn Certificates as Facilitators, and become part of the tourism 
industry. The Committee has been informed that the Facilitators certified under the IITF 
scheme are not allowed to enter the monuments as a result of which their employment 
prospects are affected. Tour    Operators hesitate to employ Facilitators as they would also 
have to separately employ guides to go into the Monuments with the tourists. The Committee 
desires to be informed of the statu s in this regard and recommends that the Tourist 
Facilitators may be imparted training in all aspects of tourism so that they may act as Guides 
inside the monuments as well. The Committee also observes   that   in   places like Serengeti 
National Park in Tanzania, the drivers of the Safari Vehicles are well trained to act as guides 
to the Park. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of 
multi-skilling of the Tourist Facilitators so that they may also perform the roles of Drive rs 
and Guides, depending on the requirements.. 
(Para 130) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1    Ministry of Tourism launched the online certification programme for Tourist 
Facilitators under the name of Incredible India Tourist Facilitator (IITF) Certification 
Programme- a digital initiative that aims at creating an Online learning platform with an 
objective of creating a pool of well trained and professional Tourist Facilitators across the 
country. 
 The system provides the following courses: 
  
(i) IITF (basic), 
(ii) IITG (Advance - Heritage and Adventure), 
(iii)Spoken Foreign Language, and 
(iv) Refresher course 
  
35.2 The candidates can pursue these online courses from anywhere at any time and at 
their own pace. The online courses can be accessed from different digital devices. On 
successful completion of the course, the candidate would be a professionally certified tourist 
facilitator who would support tourists by disseminating information, eliciting interest in 
them about the country and providing experiential tourism. 
  
35.3 The Course contents of the programme of Incredible India Tourist Facilitation (IITF) 
is different from those of Incredible India Tourist Guide (IITG). It is submitted that the 
candidates who complete the course of IITG would be doing  the guiding work within the 
premises of ASI Protected monuments explaining the specific details of the Indian 

38 
 
Architecture, monuments iconography etc. They would be needed to have a different 
approach from Tourist Facilitators who are not allowed to do the guiding work within the 
ASI monuments.As regards their area of work, it is submitted that IITFC Basic imparts 
knowledge of complexities of Indian Art, Culture, Tradition and Society up to an average 
level of understanding as the entry level qualification for the Facilitator is Class -12th and 
10th.Similarly, the practical input given to IITFC Basic level participants are limited to 
communication, personality development and destination information only. Their training is 
also confined to an average level course purview / assignment pu rview is also limited to 
monuments and attractions protected under the State Archaeology Department only, 
provided the concerned State Govt/ UT Administration has no objection regarding that. 
  
35.4 There is clear cut distinction between Facilitator and To urist Guide, as the Tourist 
Guide or IITG’s (formerly known as RLG’s) have already been given intensive offline 
training of 640 hours’ theory and 10 weeks practical on art, culture, tradition, faith, value 
system, society, history, geography, topography an d biodiversity. They have been 
specifically trained on interpretive planning and design, sequential interpretation, time and 
space and its importance on destination, intricacies on iconography, architectural plan and 
design, recreate and reconstructive int erpretation etc. From the industry perspective also the 
expectation from IITG in terms of product knowledge is much higher than IITFC because of 
in-depth know -how on history, geography, topography, iconography, art and architecture, 
space and time sense, t hey have been allowed to interpret World Heritage Site. It is relevant 
to submit here that tourism is no longer confined to only ASI protected monuments, Heritage 
Sites etc. but, its horizon has been widened and is beyond that. IITFs have been inducted to 
do the facilitation work for the tourists during their visits related to nature trails, cuisine, art 
& craft, fairs, festivals,  heritage walks, rural tourism, ecotourism, etc. IITFs job is to make 
tourist spot appealing by explaining intricate stories of h istory, mythology, tradition, culture, 
practices being followed in the region etc.  Guiding within the premises of ASI protected 
monuments and heritage sites requires in -depth knowledge of history, culture, heritage, 
monuments, architecture, geography, topo graphy, iconography, philosophy, etc. The IITGs 
with their qualification, training and experience in the field are capable to give the 
impression/know- how of rich and diverse culture and archaeological marvels of Indian 
history. Therefore, only IITGs have been allowed to do the guiding work within the premises 
of ASI protected monuments and heritage sites on pan - India basis. As in regards to guides 
in National Park, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change have their ow n set of 
guides and naturalists.   
 
Promotion of Tourism Abroad By Indian Missions 
Recommendation/Observation 
36.      The Committee observes that there were 10.93 million Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
(FTAs) in India during pre -pandemic year 2019, but the current FTA numbers are still well 
below the pre -pandemic levels. In one of the studies by the National Council of Applied 

39 
 
Economic Research (NCAER), it is estimated that tourism in India would not regain its pre - 
pandemic levels till 2026. In this scenario, promotion and marketing of tourist destinations 
and products, especially by the Indian Missions    abroad, assumes importance if India is to 
regain its pre-pandemic tourism number. 
(Para 146) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1    Ministry of Tourism has designated 20 Indian Missions abroad a nd Ministry of 
Tourism is continuously engaging with them for taking various promotional activity in those 
regions further assistance is also given in the form of tourism  promotional material to 
various missions on the basis of request received from them. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
37.      The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may settle the matters 
expeditiously so that the MEA would have both the funds and the programme to go ahead 
with the work relating to tourism promotion. Exclusion o f India from tourism brochure is a 
major issue in the absence of which the visibility of Indian tourism places would be difficult 
to maintain. 
(Para 152) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1    “The Overseas Promotion and Publicity (OPP) Scheme, under which funding for 
overseas promotion activities take place, is under review.   Ministry of Tourism is currently 
seeking the approval of Department of Expenditure on a case to case basis for each of the 
tourism promotion activities.   The Ministry is also working closely w ith the respective 
Mission for impactful and holistic tourism promotion, till the Scheme under consideration is 
approved.”. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
38.      Upon query by the Committee regarding the institutional linkages between the 
Ministry of Touris m and the MEA for meaningful coordination to ensure that inbound and 
outbound tourists are not put to any inconvenience, it was informed that the MEA regularly 
interacts with the Ministry of Tourism on all tourism related matters. The Joint Secretary 
(Economic Diplomacy) is represented as the MEA nominee on boards of many tourism -
related Committees formed by the Ministry of Tourism like the National Board for Adventure 
Tourism, Medical Value Travel Services and Wellness Services Sectional Committee, India 
MICE Board, etc. The Ministry of Tourism organises various meetings from time to time with 
the MEA and Tourism Officers designated by the MEA in Indian Missions regarding 
enhancing foreign tourist arrivals to the country and to chalk out action plan for 
popularizing India as a Favourite Tourist Destination for enhanced foreign tourist arrivals. 

40 
 
(Para 153) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1    Ministry of Tourism is in continuous discussion and consultation with Ministry of 
External Affairs (MEA) and India Missions for achieving the desired objectives. 
 
Visa facilitation by Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
Recommendation/Observation 
39.      Upon enquiry by the Committee whether sluggishness    in issuance of visas by the 
MEA was adversely affecting tourism  as alleged by some stakeholders, the representatives of 
the MEA  submitted that the MEA responds  very quickly to any difficulty in the ease of 
obtaining visas. They further clarified that due to the onset of Covid, visa regime was 
suspended and then after consultation wit h the Ministries of Home Affairs and Health, the 
same was gradually restored, first the regular visa in certain categories, later e -visa and at 
last, the tourist visa. 
(Para 158) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1    At present there are following seven sub-categories of e-visa:- 
  
i. e-Tourist Visa, 
ii. e-Business Visa, 
iii. e-Medical Visa, 
iv. e-Conference Visa and 
v. e-Medical Attendant Visa 
vi. e-Ayush Visa 
vii. e-Ayush Attendant Visa 
  
e-Visa scheme is now available to the nationals of 167 countries. e -Visa is valid for entry 
through 30 designated Airports (i.e. Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Bagdogra, Bengaluru, Calicut, 
Chennai, Chandigarh, Cochin, Coimbatore, Delhi, Gaya, Goa, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, 
Kolkata, Lucknow, Mangalore, Mumbai, Nagpur, Pune, Tiruchirapalli, Trivandrum, 
Varanasi, Vi shakhapatnam, Madurai, Bhubaneswar, Port Blair, Kannur and Mopa) and 5 
designated seaports (i.e. Mumbai, Cochin, Mormugao, Chennai and New Mangalore). 
  
Recommendation/Observation 

41 
 
40.      On 15th October, 2021, the Government announced that to promote tou rism, the first 
five lakh foreign tourists will be given visas on gratis basis. Till 31 st March, 2022 this was 
implemented. The Committee accepts the submissions of the MEA but cautions that all efforts 
may be taken for expeditious issuance of visas and to  ensure that tourists are not put to any 
avoidable inconvenience in obtaining visas, especially the medical visas. 
(Para 159) 
41.      The Committee observes that China issues Stapled Visas to the people of J&K, 
Arunachal Pradesh and Ladakh, etc. but trave l under such visas is not allowed by the 
Government even in cases of sportsmen selected for various international sporting events. 
The Committee recommends that the MEA may look into the issue with due seriousness in the 
interest   of   finding   a   durable solution to this vexatious problem. 
(Para 160) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
41.1    Since the matter pertains to VISA, we may take  up the matter with Ministry of 
External Affairs, Government of India. An OM in regards to the same is sent to Ministry of 
External Affairs. 
 
Outsourcing of Visa Issue Functions 
Recommendation/Observation 
42.      In its meeting with the representatives of the MEA, the Committee had raised the 
matter of the poor quality of services being provided by the Visa Facilitation Services (V FS) 
at New Delhi and enquired about the selection process of such companies and the steps taken 
to ensure that such companies provide seamless travel to tourists, both Indian and foreign 
and their adherence to the laws of the land they are operating from. The representatives of 
the MEA informed that VFS is hired by Missions abroad and the Government  is not involved 
in the process. 
(Para 162) 
 
43.      The Committee is not satisfied by the reply as the deficient services rendered by such 
companies reflects poorly on India both inside the country and abroad. The Committee asked 
the MEA for a written reply on this issue. 
(Para 163) 
 
44.      The Committee reiterates its stand that the poor quality of services rendered by visa 
issuing companies reflects on India’s image as a tourist destination. The first interaction of a 
foreign tourist before arrival in India lies with the Visa issuing authorities and he gets his 

42 
 
first impression of the country from that interaction. Poor quality of services, serpentine 
queues, long waiting times, harassment inside the Visa office, all portray a negative 
impression of the destination country. The situation is no better for the Indian tourists who 
are made to run from pillar to post to be able to get the visa. The Committee also disagrees 
with the MEA’s view that OSPs are not a concern of the Indian Government as they are 
selected by foreign Embassies in India and by Indian Missions abroad. The Committee 
stresses that in India, all companies are obliged to obey Indian laws and the  concerned 
Ministry has to monitor the situation to ensure that visa services, both in India and abroad, 
are being rendered smoothly for it substantially affects the inbound tourists. 
. 
(Para 164) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
44.1    Since the matter pertains to  VISA, we may take  up the matter with Ministry of 
External Affairs, Government of India. An OM in regards to the same is sent to Ministry of 
External Affairs. 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
  
Rural Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
1.        The Committee observes that in  a predominantly agrarian and rural economy like 
India, rural tourism has immense potential for boosting employment a nd income for villagers 
while offering opportunities to the city dwellers to take a break from the hectic pace of urban 
life to experience nature and local culture at a much slower pace. India is home to a diverse 
range of unique villages, each with its own cultural, architectural and historical significance. 
Unique villages such as ‘Mattur’ in Karnataka where all the residents speak only Sanskrit 
and many others offer a glimpse into India’s rich traditions and culture. The Committee, 
however, observes that the Rural Tourism website does not provide details as to how to travel 
to the unique villages nor details regarding rural home  stays for most of the villages. Even 
the Khonoma village page does not provide any useful details for the tourists. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the Rural Tourism website has all details of 
rural homestays, travel connectivity and tourist spots in respect of every village featured for 
the convenience of the tourists. 
. 
 (Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1      The Rural Tourism India website is integrated with the NIDHI+ portal and the content 
and the details related to the home stays are directly fetched from www.nidhi.tourism.gov.in 
Also the website is continuously upgrading the content on it. However, due to the excessive 
amount of data the time taken to upload the data varies. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 


44 
 
1.2      The Committee appreciates the Ministry's ongoing efforts to integrate the Rural 
Tourism India website with the NIDHI+ portal and its commitment to upgrading the 
website's content.  
1.3 The Committee recommends for the implementation of regular content audits to 
ensure that the information on the Rural Tourism website is accurate, up -to-date, and 
user-friendly.  
1.4 The Ministry should create a schedule for these audits, prioritizing villages that 
are likely to attract a significant number of tourists. 
 
1.5 While recognizing the challenge s of handling large volumes of data, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry to explore more efficient methods for uploading 
and integrating data from the NIDHI+ Portal. This may include technological upgrades 
or the use of advanced data management tools to minimize delays and ensure that the 
latest information is easily accessible to tourists. 
 
1.6 The Committee recommends that the Ministry collaborate  and work  closely with 
local authorities and tourism boards in the featured villages  to ensure the accuracy and 
comprehensiveness of the information provided . T his collaboration will help capture 
and present all relevant details, including lesser -known travel routes and homestay 
options, accurately on the website. 
 
Adventure Tourism  
 Recommendation/Observation 
2.        The Committee notes that there have been a n increasing number of accidents in 
Adventure sports, especially in paragliding, which has claimed the lives of a number of 
tourists in the last few years. As per media reports, even “soft adventure” sports like trekking 
have led to casualties in certain situations. The Committee has been informed by stakeholders 
that 3 Gs - Guidelines, Guides and Gears – are critical in risk mitigation. The Committee has 
also been informed that the Ministry has released guidelines for safety and quality norms for 15 Land B ased, 07 
Air Based and 07 Water Based adventure tourism activities, which cover the entire range of thrilling activities. 
Besides, some States have also adopted various regulatory measures and safety protocols to address the 
inherent concerns of adventure tourism. ISO 21101:2014 and BIS have laid down safety management standards 
for compliance by adventure activities service providers that act as benchmarks for safe adventure activities. 
The Committee desires to know about the impact of such safety guidelin es    on    reduction    of accidents in 
adventure tourism. The Ministry may give data on the number of accidents as also the casualties which have 
taken place in adventure tourism in the country in the last five years. The Committee has also been informed  
that while testing and certification of PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) kits is necessary, it is difficult for 
small Indian manufacturing enterprises to obtain the universally accepted international certifications like UIAA 
(French) (International Cli mbing and Mountaineering Federation). The Committee recommends that testing 
labs where certification is done by the BIS may help small enterprises in this field.  
. 

45 
 
(Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1      The Ministry is committed to continuous improvement  and enhancement of safety standards in 
adventure tourism. In order to provide impetus to the development of adventure tourism in the country, the 
Ministry of Tourism has notified a National Strategy for adventure tourism. The Strategy focuses on 
developing adventure destinations, promoting safety in adventure tourism, skill development, capacity building 
and marketing.  
2.2 As part of implementation process of the aforesaid strategy document, Ministry of Tourism has 
drafted a “Model Adventure Tourism Safet y Law” after consultations with States, Line Ministries and various 
industry stakeholders. The final draft of the “Model Adventure Tourism Safety Law” has been circulated to 
Stakeholders and State/UT’s Governments for inputs.  
   
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.3      The Committee acknowledges the reply of the Ministry but reiterates its request for detailed data 
on the number of accidents and casualties in adventure tourism over the last ﬁve years. This information 
is essential for evaluating the e ﬀectiveness of the safety guidelines and standards in mitigating risks 
associated with adventure sports. The Committee urges the Ministry to provide this data at the earliest, 
including a breakdown by speciﬁc activities (e.g., paragliding, trekking) and th e locations where these 
incidents occurred. The Ministry address the Committee's identified safety gaps.  
  
Recommendation/Observation 
3.        The Committee feels that strict adherence to safety guidelines and implementation of safety protocols can 
be possible only if responsible and licensed/ certified adventure tour operators handle the activities. Licensed 
tour operators play an important role in promotion of adventure tourism as they conduct thorough risk 
assessments, implement safety measures, and pro vide high quality safety gears, besides engaging experienced 
and professional guides to handle emergency situations. The Committee has been informed that presently, 
adventure tour operators‟ licenses are issued by either the Centre or the States and there are still a lot of 
unlicensed tour operators in the country’s adventure tourism sector who operate without requisite permits, 
certifications and regulatory approvals to meet the requirements of safety,quality and also the law in thefield. 
The Committee desires to know what action has been taken or is proposed to be taken by the Ministry on the 
unlicensed adventure tour operators. The Committee has also been informed that the Ministry has circulated a 
draft model adventure tourism law to all the States/UTs f or feedback. The Committee stresses that high risk 
adventure sports cannot be regulated only by guidelines and recommends that the Ministry may make all efforts 
to come out with laws soon so that only licensed and responsible operators who adhere to the la id down safety 
norms remain in business to provide adventure tourism services. 
. 
 (Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1      The Ministry of Tourism under its voluntary scheme only accords approval/recognition to Tour 
Operators, including Adventure Tour Oper ators, under the category of Tourism Service Providers, through 
NIDHI+ portal. It is not under the purview of the Ministry to issue licenses to Adventure Tour Operators or to 
maintain the list of license holders. However, during application, in order to ob tain recognition from the 
Ministry, Adventure tour operators are required to specify the specialization of activity like trekking, water 
sports, aero sports, scuba diving, safaris, etc. The field staff must obtain an Adventure Certificate from 
specialized organizations including State Govt. Institutes like NIM (Uttarkashi), JIM (J&K), AB Institute of 

46 
 
Mountaineering (Manali), HMI (Darjeeling), SonamGyasto Institute (Sikkim), NIMAS (Arunachal Pradesh) etc. 
for Mountaineering and NIWS (Goa) for Water/Aero Sports. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.2      The Committee observes that the Ministry's approval/recognition scheme is voluntary and does 
not enforce compliance with safety regulations or mandatory certification. This approach is inadequate 
for manag ing high -risk activities, as it does not ensure that all operators adhere to necessary safety 
protocols, thereby leaving tourists vulnerable. The Committee recommends that the Ministry implements 
centralized licensing framework for Adventure Tour Operators    at the national level. Despite the 
jurisdictional complexities, the Committee believes that a uniform licensing system is crucial for ensuring 
that all operators adhere to the required safety, quality and regulatory standards. The Ministry should 
collaborate with State/UT Governments to develop this framework, making licensing a mandatory 
requirement for operating in the adventure tourism sector. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4.  Regarding the standardization of safety gears, the Committee ha sbeen    informed   that   presently, 
there is no single system of certification of adventure equipments in our country. The Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) is working towards setting standards for adventure equipments that can demonstrate proven 
track record of reliab ility to help ensure a safe adventure experience. The Committee expresses its displeasure 
that India does not have standardized safety gears even for high risk adventure sports and recommends that the 
Ministry may expeditiously implement a uniform standard  across the country for all adventure tourism 
verticals, prepared by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS).. 
(Para 36) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
4.1      Recognizing the importance of ensuring safety in high -risk adventure sports, particularly  through 
standardized equipment, the Ministry is actively working towards developing a framework.    
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.2      The Committee seeks an update on  the progress made in develop ing a framework that emphasizes 
the importance of ensuring safety in h igh-risk adventure sports, particularly  through the use of 
standardized equipment.  
           
  
Golf Tourism  
Recommendation/Observation 
5.      During its Study Tour in Kerala, the Committee had been informed that an amount of Rs. 2464.99 lakh 
had been sanctioned to Sports Authority of India under the Scheme Assistance  to Central Agencies for Tourism 
Infrastructure Development” in Kerala for upgradation of the Golf Course at the 165  year old SAI Trivandrum 
Golf Club under the Sports Authority. The Committee observes that the project was sanctioned in 2016 - 17 but 
as per media reports, the upgradation seems to have been taken up only in 2020 -21. The Committee further 
observes that only half the sanctioned amount has been released and the status of the proje ct is stated to be 
“Project Closed”. The Committee desires to know the reasons behind this when in reality,  the project  is not 
completed. The Committee also desires to know whether other Golf clubs in the country have been given similar 
assistance under the Scheme. 

47 
 
(Para 81) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1  Due to huge delay and unsatisfactory progress the sanctioning Committee in the review meeting held 
under the chairmanship of Secretary(T) on 06.04.2023 took the decision to close the project and the same has 
been conveyed to the implementing agency vide letter dated 11.05.2023 with the direction to refund the parked 
funds. The unutilized amount is yet to be returned by Sports Authority of India (SAI) and the Ministry is 
regularly taking up the matter with SAI to return the unspent balance along with interest.  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.2    The Committee desires that the Ministry provide the speciﬁc reasons for the delays and 
unsatisfactory progress in the Trivandrum Golf Club project. 
5.3    Further, it is recommended that the Ministry establish a more robust monitoring mechanism to 
oversee the implementation of projects funded under this scheme. The Ministry should ensure that future 
projects are completed on schedule, with regular progress reports and transparent communication 
among all stakeholders to prevent situations similar to those en countered with the Trivandrum Golf Club 
project.  The Committee also desires to  know  whether  other  Golf clubs in the country have been given 
similar  assistance  under  the Scheme.  
 
   
Recommendation/Observation 
6.      The Committee has been informed by the stakeholders that the present level of training and skilling is not 
adequate as niche tourism demands high level of training and skilling to meet the specific requirements and 
expectations of the tourists pertaining to that sector of niche tourism.  The Committee recommends that the 
tourism sector needs to undertake reskilling and upscaling of its manpower by way of imparting them skill 
upgradation capacity building training in different niche areas from time to time.  
(Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1    Ministry of Tourism conducts various short terms skilling and re -skilling training program under its 
scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers (CBSP) in Tourism and Hospitality Sectors . 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.2    The Committee observes that current initiatives may not fully address the increasing demand for 
specialized skills in niche tourism sectors, which often require advanced and continuous training. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may broaden its training pr ograms to include more specialized 
and advanced courses tailored to speciﬁc niche tourism sectors, such as adventure tourism, eco -tourism, 
wellness tourism, cultural tourism, and others. 
6.3 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry introduce cont inuous skill development 
programs, rather than focusing solely on short -term courses. This could include periodic refresher 
courses, advanced certiﬁcations, and  on -the- job training opportunities to ensure that the workforce 
stays current with the latest trends and best practices in their fields. 
  
Recommendation/Observation 
7.      The Committee observes that out of the 1,291 approved hotels in India only 565 hotels belong to Three 
Star and below categories and out of the 1,00,980 hotels rooms only 18,225  rooms belong to these categories 

48 
 
which is grossly inadequate to meet the tourism numbers targeted by the Ministry. The Committee also observes 
that tourists, especially in niche tourism, come from all strata of society and the hotel accommodation should 
cater to all categories of tourists. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should incentivise those in the 
hospitality business to make concerted efforts to ensure the availability of sufficient number of hotel rooms of all 
categories for the optimal growth of tourism sector. 
. 
(Para 88) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
7.1    Incentivising and providing benefits to the hospitality business is connected according to industry status to 
the tourism and hospitality sector, which is under the purview  of State Governm ents/UT Administrations. The 
Ministry has been following up on the position of all the States/UTs in according industry status to tourism and 
hospitality sector from time to time. 
.  
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.2    The Committee desires an upd ate on the progress in granting industry status to the tourism and 
hospitality sector under the jurisdiction of State Governments and UT administrations. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry intensify its e ﬀorts to advocate this industry status to the tourism and 
hospitality sector across all States and UTs. Such status is essential for providing incentives such as tax 
beneﬁts, utility subsidies, and improved access to ﬁnancing, which can encourage the devel opment of 
more hotels in the Three Star and below categories. 
 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0  
Recommendation/Observation 
8.      The Committee observes the differences (Annexure – VIII) in funding pattern, disbursal of funds and 
receipt of Utilisation Certificates i n the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 Scheme, and appreciates the new features of 
Impact Assessment of the projects under the Scheme and monitoring     of     the     Scheme through a   
 Comprehensive Portal. The Committee, however, observes that all the themes of the S wadesh Darshan 1.0 
Scheme have been repeated in the 2.0 Scheme with no new additions. The claim of the Ministry to focus on 
fewer destinations in the second phase of the Scheme has also been diluted by the addition of 50 more 
destinations.. 
(Para 122) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 While the SwadeshDarshan 1.0 was focused on development thematic circuits, the SwadeshDarshan2.0 
aims at development of sustainable and responsible tourism destinations. This involves adequate development of 
softer aspects as well at the identified destinations. Under SwadeshDarshan 2.0, a destination can be developed 
in one or more themes.  
 The Ministry of Tourism has now issued guidelines for ‘Challenge Based Destination Development’, a 
sub-scheme under SwadeshDarshan 2.0. The objec tive of the scheme is holistic development of the destination 
to enhance tourist experience across all points of the tourist value chain. The expenditure on the destinations 
proposed to be developed under this sub -scheme will be made from the budget alloca ted under the 
SwadeshDarshan scheme, by managing overall allocation on account of SD2.0 destinations and envisaged 
savings from SD1.0 scheme.. 

49 
 
  
 Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.2    The Committee desires from the Ministry a detailed explanation on h ow the additional 50 
destinations align with the scheme’s objectives of promoting sustainable and responsible tourism. The 
Ministry should conduct and present an impact analysis to illustrate how this increase in the number of 
destinations will inﬂuence the overall  eﬀectiveness  and  success of the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 scheme. This 
analysis may include a comparative assessment with Swadesh Darshan 1.0 to evaluate any differences in 
outcomes. 
  
Promotion of Tourism Abroad By Indian Missions 
Recommendation/Observation 
9.        The Committee notes the events and programmes organised by the Indian Missions abroad to promote 
tourism and the budgets for the same. The Committee has been informed that the Tourism Officers posted in 
Indian Missions have tourism prom otion as additional charge. The Committee recommends that as 
responsibility for tourism promotion abroad now rests solely with the Indian Missions in all countries, the 
Tourism Officers may be given sole charge as far as possible as it is necessary for the  transitional change from 
the Overseas Tourist Offices to the Missions in many countries and to create confidence among the stakeholders 
that the Missions are attaching top priority to tourism promotion.    The Tourism Officers were designated by 
MEA in Oct ober, 2021. The Committee has been informed that since then the Tourism Officers have had only 
one meeting with  the Indian stakeholders a year back and desires to know how many meetings have been held 
with them as also the foreign tourism agents and B2B players since their appointment. 
(Para 149) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
9.1    5 meetings were held between Indian Missions and Ministry of Tourism officials for 
discussions relating to promotional activities for promotion of India as a preferred tourist 
destination and promotional activities including fairs and exhibitions. 
  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
9.2    The Committee is concerned  about the limited number of meetings held by the 
Tourism Officers with Indian stakeholders and foreign tourism agents/B2 B players 
since their appointment. The Ministry should ensure that regular and frequent 
meetings are scheduled to foster better communication and collaboration. 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 

50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
  
-Nil- 
  
***** 
  
  

51 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Rural Tourism  
The Committee appreciates the Ministry's ongoing efforts to integrate the Rural 
Tourism India website with the NIDHI+ portal and its commitment to upgrading the 
website's content.  
(Para 1.2) 
 
The Committee recommends for the implementation of regular content audits to ensure 
that the information on the Rural Tourism website is accurate, up -to-date, and user -
friendly.  
(Para 1.3) 
 
The Ministry should create a schedule for these audits, prioritizing villages that are 
likely to attract a significant number of tourists. 
(Para 1.4) 
 
 
While recognizing the challenge s of handling large volumes of data, the Committee 
recommends the Ministry to explore more efficient methods for uploading and 
integrating data from the NIDHI+ Portal. This may include technological upgrades or 
the use of advanced data management tools to minimize delays and ensure that the 
latest information is easily accessible to tourists. 
(Para 1.5) 
 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry collaborate  and work closely with local 
authorities and tourism boa rds in the featured villages  to ensure the accuracy and 
comprehensiveness of the information provided . This collaboration will help capture 
and present all relevant details, including lesser -known travel routes and homestay 
options, accurately on the website. 
(Para 1.6) 

52 
 
Adventure Tourism  
The Committee acknowledges the reply of the Ministry but reiterates its request for 
detailed data on the number of accidents and casualties in adventure tourism over the 
last ﬁve years. This information is essential for evaluating the e ﬀectiveness of the safety 
guidelines and standa rds in mitigating risks associated with adventure sports. The 
Committee urges the Ministry to provide this data at the earliest, including a 
breakdown by speciﬁc activities (e.g., paragliding, trekking) and the locations where 
these incidents occurred. The Ministry address the Committee's identified safety gaps. 
(Para 2.3) 
The Committee observes that the Ministry's approval/recognition scheme is voluntary 
and does not enforce compliance with safety regulations or mandatory certification. 
This approach is inadequate for managing high-risk activities, as it does not ensure that 
all operators adhere to necessary safety protocols, thereby leaving tourists vulnerable. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry implements centralized licensing 
framework for Advent ure Tour Operators   at the national level. Despite the 
jurisdictional complexities, the Committee believes that a uniform licensing system is 
crucial for ensuring that all operators adhere to the required safety, quality and 
regulatory standards. The Mini stry should collaborate with State/UT Governments to 
develop this framework, making licensing a mandatory requirement for operating in 
the adventure tourism sector. 
(Para 3.2) 
The Committee seeks an update on  the progress made in developing a framework tha t 
emphasizes the importance of ensuring safety in high -risk adventure sports, 
particularly through the use of standardized equipment.  
(Para 4.2) 
Golf Tourism  
The Committee desires that the Ministry provide the speciﬁc reasons for the delays and 
unsatisfactory progress in the Trivandrum Golf Club project. 
(Para 5.2) 
 
Further, it is recommended that the Ministry establish a more robust monitoring 
mechanism to oversee the implementation of projects funded under this scheme. The 
Ministry should ensure that fu ture projects are completed on schedule, with regular 
progress reports and transparent communication among all stakeholders to prevent 
situations similar to those encountered with the Trivandrum Golf Club project.  The 
Committee also desires to  know  whet her  other  Golf clubs in the country have been 
given similar  assistance  under  the Scheme.  
(Para 5.3) 

53 
 
The Committee observes that current initiatives may not fully address the increasing 
demand for specialized skills in niche tourism sectors, which oft en require advanced 
and continuous training. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may broaden 
its training programs to include more specialized and advanced courses tailored to 
speciﬁc niche tourism sectors, such as adventure tourism, eco-tourism, wellness tourism, 
cultural tourism, and others. 
(Para 6.2) 
 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry introduce continuous skill 
development programs, rather than focusing solely on short -term courses. This could 
include periodic refresher courses, advanced certiﬁcations, and  on -the- job training 
opportunities to ensure that the workforce stays current with the latest trends and best 
practices in their fields. 
(Para 6.3) 
The Committee desires an update on the progress in granting industry status to the 
tourism and hospitality sector under the jurisdiction of State Governments and UT 
administrations. The Committee recommends that the Ministry intensify its e ﬀorts to 
advocate this industry status to the tourism and hospitality sector across all States and 
UTs. Such status is essential for providing incentives such as tax beneﬁts, utility 
subsidies, and improved access to ﬁnancing, which can encourage the development of 
more hotels in the Three Star and below categories. 
(Para 7.2) 
Swadesh Darshan 2.0  
The Committee desires from the Ministry a detailed explanation on how the additional 
50 destinations align with the scheme’s objectives of promoting sustainable and 
responsible tourism. The Ministry should conduct and present an impact analysis to 
illustrate how this increase in the number of destinations will inﬂuence the overall  
eﬀectiveness  and  success of the Swadesh Darshan 2.0 scheme. This analysis may 
include a comparative assessment with Swadesh Darshan 1.0 to evaluate any differences 
in outcomes. 
(Para 8.2) 
Promotion of Tourism Abroad By Indian Missions 
The Committee is concerned about the limited number of meetings held by the Tourism 
Officers with Indian stakeholders and foreign tourism agents/B2B players since their 
appointment. The Ministry sho uld ensure that regular and frequent meetings are 
scheduled to foster better communication and collaboration. 
(Para 9.2) 
 

54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 

1 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
List of Projects Sanctioned under the Scheme Assistance to Central Agencies for development 
of Cruise Terminals and related infrastructure 
(Rs. in Lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Name of 
State 
Name of Project Agency Amount 
sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
1 2012
-13 
Tamil Nadu  Cruise Passenger Facilities 
Centre in the existing 
Passenger Terminal at 
Chennai Port.  
Chennai 
Port Trust  
1724.66 1724.66 
2 2014
-15 
Goa Cruise Terminal Building 
at Mormugao Port Trust 
Mormugao 
Port trust  
879.04 767.187 
3 2016
-17 
Kerala Development of a 
Walkway/Promenade on 
Willingdon Island, Cochin, 
Kerala 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
901.00 826.59 
4 2016
-17 
Kerala Central Financial 
Assistance for upgrading 
of Births & Backup area of 
Ernakulam Wharf  
Cochin Port 
Trust 
2141.00 1912.80 
5 2016
-17 
Maharashtra Central Financial 
Assistance to Mumbai Port 
Trust for Development of 
Kanoji Angre Lighthouse 
as a tourist Destination 
Mumbai 
Port trust 
1500.00 1500.00 
6 2017
-18 
Maharashtra Up-
gradation/modernization 
to International Cruise 
terminal at Indira Dock, 
Mumbai.   
Mumbai 
Port Trust   
1250.00 1250.00 
7 2018
-19 
Goa  Improvement of 
immigration facility and 
deepening of existing 
cruise berth at Mormugao   
Mormugao 
Port trust  
1316.40 658.20 
8 2018
-19 
Kerala  
 
Developing infrastructure 
at Cochin Port Cruise 
Terminal. 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
120. 79 114.17 
9 2018
-19 
Kerala  
 
Creation of additional 
tourism facilities at the 
Cochin north Trust 
Walkway 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
466.47    466.47 
55

2 
 
10 2018
-19 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
Construction of Cruise 
Berth at Channel Berth in 
outer Harbour of patnam 
Port   
 
Visakhapatn
am Port  
Trust  
3850.00 2991.00 
11 2019
-20 
Kerala CFA for Development of 
Additional infrastructure 
in the new Cochin Port 
Trust Terminal 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
1029.70 888.62 
12 2019
-20 
Uttar Pradesh 
(Varanasi & 
Allahabad-I, 
Allahabad-II ), 
Bihar 
(Bhagalpur), 
West Bengal 
(Kolkata) & 
Assam 
(Neamati, 
Pandu, 
Jogighopa & 
Biswanathgha
t) 
CFA for Development of 
Jetties at nine (09) main 
points of 
embarkation/disembarkati
on of River Cruise on 
National Water ways No. 
1& 2 
 
Ministry of Tourism 
accorded approval for 
continuation of the 
development of 4 nos 
jetties in NW -2 
(Brahmaputra) 
IWAI 
 
 
 
 
 
2803.05 700.76 
 
13 2021
-22 
Goa Creation of facilities for 
International and Domestic 
Cruise Vessels at 
Mormugao Port, Goa by 
Mormugao Port Trust 
(MPT) 
Mormugao 
Port Trust 
5000.00 4000.00 
14 2021
-22 
Maharashtra  Upgradation/Modernizatio
n to International Cruise 
Terminal at Indira Dock, 
Mumbai Port Trust 
Mumbai 
Port Trust 
3750.00 3600.00 
 
******** 
 
  
 
56

1 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
List of Projects Sanctioned under the Scheme Assistance to Central Agencies for development 
of Cruise Terminals and related infrastructure 
(Rs. in Lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Name of 
State 
Name of Project Agency Amount 
sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
1 2012
-13 
Tamil Nadu  Cruise Passenger Facilities 
Centre in the existing 
Passenger Terminal at 
Chennai Port.  
Chennai 
Port Trust  
1724.66 1724.66 
2 2014
-15 
Goa Cruise Terminal Building 
at Mormugao Port Trust 
Mormugao 
Port trust  
879.04 767.187 
3 2016
-17 
Kerala Development of a 
Walkway/Promenade on 
Willingdon Island, Cochin, 
Kerala 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
901.00 826.59 
4 2016
-17 
Kerala Central Financial 
Assistance for upgrading 
of Births & Backup area of 
Ernakulam Wharf  
Cochin Port 
Trust 
2141.00 1912.80 
5 2016
-17 
Maharashtra Central Financial 
Assistance to Mumbai Port 
Trust for Development of 
Kanoji Angre Lighthouse 
as a tourist Destination 
Mumbai 
Port trust 
1500.00 1500.00 
6 2017
-18 
Maharashtra Up-
gradation/modernization 
to International Cruise 
terminal at Indira Dock, 
Mumbai.   
Mumbai 
Port Trust   
1250.00 1250.00 
7 2018
-19 
Goa  Improvement of 
immigration facility and 
deepening of existing 
cruise berth at Mormugao   
Mormugao 
Port trust  
1316.40 658.20 
8 2018
-19 
Kerala  
 
Developing infrastructure 
at Cochin Port Cruise 
Terminal. 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
120. 79 114.17 
9 2018
-19 
Kerala  
 
Creation of additional 
tourism facilities at the 
Cochin north Trust 
Walkway 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
466.47    466.47 
57

2 
 
10 2018
-19 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
Construction of Cruise 
Berth at Channel Berth in 
outer Harbour of patnam 
Port   
 
Visakhapatn
am Port  
Trust  
3850.00 2991.00 
11 2019
-20 
Kerala CFA for Development of 
Additional infrastructure 
in the new Cochin Port 
Trust Terminal 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
1029.70 888.62 
12 2019
-20 
Uttar Pradesh 
(Varanasi & 
Allahabad-I, 
Allahabad-II ), 
Bihar 
(Bhagalpur), 
West Bengal 
(Kolkata) & 
Assam 
(Neamati, 
Pandu, 
Jogighopa & 
Biswanathgha
t) 
CFA for Development of 
Jetties at nine (09) main 
points of 
embarkation/disembarkati
on of River Cruise on 
National Water ways No. 
1& 2 
 
Ministry of Tourism 
accorded approval for 
continuation of the 
development of 4 nos 
jetties in NW -2 
(Brahmaputra) 
IWAI 
 
 
 
 
 
2803.05 700.76 
 
13 2021
-22 
Goa Creation of facilities for 
International and Domestic 
Cruise Vessels at 
Mormugao Port, Goa by 
Mormugao Port Trust 
(MPT) 
Mormugao 
Port Trust 
5000.00 4000.00 
14 2021
-22 
Maharashtra  Upgradation/Modernizatio
n to International Cruise 
Terminal at Indira Dock, 
Mumbai Port Trust 
Mumbai 
Port Trust 
3750.00 3600.00 
 
******** 
 
58

3 
 
List of Projects Sanctioned for Coastal Circuit and Cruise Project under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme 
 
COASTAL CIRCUIT 
                                                                                                                                                 
(Amount in ₹ crore) 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Year Project Name Amount 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
(2014-15) Development of Circuit at 
Kakinada - Hope Island - 
Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary - 
Passarlapudi - Aduru - S 
Yanam - Kotipally 
67.83 67.83 
2. Andhra 
Pradesh 
(2015-16) Development of Nellore, 
Pulikat Lake, Ubblamadugu 
water falls, Nelapattu  Bird 
Sanctuary, Mypadu Beach, 
Ramatheertham 
49.55 49.55 
3. Puducherry (2015-16) Development of Dubrayapet 
– Arikamedu – 
Veerampattinam – 
Chunnambar - 
Nallavadu/Narambai - 
Manapet- Kalapet -   
Puducherry - Yanam 
58.44 58.44 
4. West Bengal (2015-16) 
 
Development of Beach 
Circuit: Udaipur - Digha- 
Shankarpur- Tajpur- 
Mandarmani- Fraserganj-
Bakkhlai-Henry Island 
67.99 65.07 
5. Maharashtra (2015-16) Development of Sindhudurg 
Coastal Circuit (Shiroda 
Beach, Sagareshwar, 
Tarkarli, Vijaydurg (Beach & 
Creek), Devgad (Fort & 
Beach), Mitbhav, Tondavali, 
Mocehmad and Nivati Fort). 
19.06 18.10 
6. Goa (2016-17) Development of Sinquerim-
Baga, Anjuna-Vagator, 
Morjim-Keri, Aguada Fort 
and Aguada Jail.   
97.65 97.65 
7. Odisha 
 
(2016-17) Development of Gopalpur, 
Barkul, Satapada and 
Tampara. 
70.82 
 
67.28 
8. Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands 
(201617) Development of Long Island-
Ross Smith Island - Neil 
Island- Havelock Island - 
Baratang Island-Port Blair. 
27.57 22.13 
9. Tamil Nadu (2016-17) Development of Chennai - 
Mamamallapuram – 
73.13 71.03 
59

4 
 
Rameshwaram – 
Kulasekaranpattinam – 
Kanyakumari 
10. Goa  (2017-18) Development of Rua De 
Orum Creek - Don Paula -
Colva - Benaulim 
99.35 99.35 
   Total 631.39 616.43 
 
********** 
 
 
 
 
 
60

61 
 
MINUTES 
  

62 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TR ANSPORT, 
TOURISM & CULTURE (2024-25) 
VI 
SIXTH  MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Monday, the 16th December, 2024 
in Committee Room-“B”, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   -  Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
 
Lok Sabha  
8. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
9. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
10. Shrimati June Maliah  
11. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
12. Shri K. E. Prakash  
13. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
  
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Monica Baa,  Director  
Shri T. Kennedy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary 
  

63 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of 
the Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and 
adopt the following draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: - 
(i)     XXXXXi 
 
(ii)    XXXXX 
 
(iii)    Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained 
in its Three Hundred Fifty -Seventh (357 th) Report on 
‘Development of Niche Tourism (including Spiritual 
Tourism), Theme-based Tourist Circuits and Potential Touri st 
Spots’; 
 
(iv) XXXXX 
 
(v)    XXXXX 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Reports, 
one by one. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid five 
draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman and in his  absence 
Shri Neeraj  Dangi, MP  or Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  to present the aforesaid 
Reports in Rajya Sabha on 19 th December, 2024. Additionally, the Committee 
authorized Shri Vishweshwar  Hegde Kageri, MP and in his absence Shri Rajiv 
Pratap Rudy, MP to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same 
date. 
4. XXXXX 
5. XXXXX 
The meeting adjourned at 10:40 A.M. 
 
Monica Baa 
Director 
New Delhi, 
16th December, 2024 
 
                                                             
i  Relates to other matters 