 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024 / Magha 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
367 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT  
‘Operation and Maintenance of National Highways and 
Management of Toll Plazas’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08th February, 2024) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT  
‘Operation and Maintenance of National Highways and 
Management of Toll Plazas’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  08th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  08th February, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024 / Magha 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-28 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   29-38 
6. ANNEXURES         39-45 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
46-62

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 (Constituted on 23rd September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
 
Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D S Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Raj Kamal Singh, Committee Officer  
 
 

ii 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Operation and Maintenance of 
National Highways and Management of Toll Plazas’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways and  National Highways Authority of India ( NHAI), on the subject, 
in its meeting held on 5th October, 2023. The Committee discussed the subject with the 
representatives of two private companies Oriental Structural Engineers Pvt. Ltd (Delhi based) 
PNC Infratech Pvt. Ltd. (Agra based) in its meeting held on 14 th December, 2023. The 
Committee also heard the views of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; NHAI; 
NHIDCL; BRO and the State Governments of Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh during its 
Study Visit to Gangtok, Guwahati and Tawang on 9th and 11th January, 2024. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways, NHAI, NHIDCL, BRO, State Governments of Sikkim and 
Arunachal Pradesh, Oriental Structural Engineers Pvt. Ltd and PNC Infratech Pvt. Ltd.  for 
placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in connection with the 
subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members.   
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  6th 
February, 2024.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
February 06 , 2024                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 17, 1945 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
ANPR Automatic Number Plate Recognition 
BOT Build, Operate, Transfer 
BRO Border Roads Organization 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
COS Cost of Service 
Cr Crore  
DLP Defect Liability Period 
DISHA 
District Development Coordination and 
Monitoring Committee 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EPC Engineering, Procurement, Construction 
ETC Electronic Toll Collection 
FASTag 
Fast and Secure Tag (RFID-based electronic toll 
collection system) 
FY Financial Year 
GLOF Glacial Lake Outburst Flood 
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HAM Hybrid Annuity Model 
IHMCL 
Indian Highways Management Company 
Limited 
IECV Independent Engineer's Certifying Valuation 
IMS Incident Management Services 
InvIT Infrastructure Investment Trusts 
M&R Maintenance and Repair 
MoEFCC 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
NCRPB National Capital Region Planning Board 
NETC National Electronic Toll Collection 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHIDCL 
National Highways and Infrastructure 
Development Corporation 
NITI Aayog 
National Institution for Transforming India 
Aayog 
NPCI National Payments Corporation of India 
O&M Operation and Maintenance 
OMT Operate, Maintenance and Transfer 
PBMC Performance Based Maintenance Contract 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PWD Public Works Department 
RFID Radio-Frequency Identification 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RSCE Road Safety and Capacity Enhancement 
SOP Standard Operating Procedures 
SP Standards and Practices 
STMC Short Term Maintenance Contract 
TOT Toll-Operate-Transfer 
UT Union Territory 
 

1 
 
Report 
          Operation and Maintenance of National Highways and Management of Toll 
Plazas 
   
      National Highways  serve as critical arteries of a country's transportation infrastructure, facilitating 
the efficient movement of goods and people across regions. The operation and maintenance of these 
highways, coupled with the management of toll plazas, are essential com ponents to ensure their 
sustainability, safety, and optimal functionality. It forms the backbone of transportation networks, providing 
essential links between cities, towns, rural areas , and various economic centres. Well maintained National 
Highways reduce travel time, enhance accessibility, and open up new growth opportunities for individuals 
and communities. Today, India has over 1.3 million km of roads. National highways constitute less than 2 
per cent of the road length of the country but carry a bout 40 % of the road based traffic. This is a testament 
to their importance in facilitating the movement of goods, people and services, both within states and across 
state boundaries. Additionally, well-designed and well -maintained Highways play a cru cial role in public  
safety and emergency response . They enable timely access to emergency services, such as ambulances, fire 
trucks, and law enforcement, potentially saving lives and minimizing damages during critical situations. 
2. Since t oll collection is a key revenue source for the maintenance and improvement of National 
Highways, effective management of toll plazas become the mainstay . Ensuring the smooth flow of vehicles 
through toll plazas is crucial to prevent congestion and delays. This requires effici ent toll booth designing, 
staffing, and utilization of modern toll collection methods. 
3. The Committee during its study visit to Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram and Bekal in Kerala during 4 th to 
8th September, 2023 observed that toll prices widely vary from one toll to the other. Also, there are instances 
of toll collection in perpetuity beyond the break - even point. Further, the Committee noted that the provision 
of 60 km spacing between two adjacent toll plazas as provided in the National Highways Fee (Determination 
of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008, was followed more in breach than in observance. 
4. Cognizant of these facts, the Committee decided to take up the subject „ Operation and Maintenance  
of National Highways and Management of Toll Plazas‟  for detailed examination . The Ministry of Road, 
Transport and Highways  (MoRTH), its attached office of the National Highways Authorities of India 
(NHAI) and National Highways and Infrastructure Developme nt Corporation (NHIDCL)  are the nodal 
organizations concerned with the Operation and Maintenance of National Highways and Management of Toll 
Plazas. During the course of examination , the Committee heard the MoRTH; NHAI and NHIDCL in its 
meetings held on 5th October, 2023. The Committee also discussed the subject  with the representatives of 

2 
 
two private companies Oriental Structural Engineers Pvt. Ltd (Delhi based) PNC Infratech Pvt. Ltd. (Agra 
based) in its meeting held on 14 th December, 2023. The Committee also heard the views of MoRTH; NHAI; 
NHIDCL; BRO and the State Government s of Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh  during its Study Visit to 
Gangtok, Guwahati and Tawang on 9th and 11th January, 2024, respectively. 
I 
Operation and Maintenance of National Highways 
Status of NHs in the country 
5.      The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed that the length of India‟s NH network 
expanded ~1.6x, from 91,287 km in April, 2014 to 1,46,145 km at present . Further, the length of 4 -lane and 
above NHs has increased ~2.4x from 18,371 km (20% of total) to 44,654 km (31% of total) between 2014-15 
and 2022 -23. Similarly, the length of 2 -lane/2-lane with paved shoulder  NHs has increased ~1.8x from 
45,399 km (50% of total) to 83,941 km (58% of total) . However, the length of Single- and Intermediate-lane 
NHs ha s declined ~0.6x from 27,517 km (30% of total) to 16,645 km (11% of total) . The Ministry also 
informed that it not only focuses on increasing the coverage of NH , but also on enhancing the lane 
configuration of existing as well as new roads. 
             
Expansion of National Highway                                                          Courtesy: Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
 
 
 
 


3 
 
6. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
6.1. The Committee notes that the completion of hundreds of NHs is running behind the schedule . The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should expedite the construction process and focus on 
timely completion of all the NHs.  
6.2. The Committee would also like to k now the manner in which the Ministry is planning to dispose of the 
Single and Intermediate-lane NHs. 
 
7. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways apprised the Committee about the year-wise  
awarding and construction of NHs in the country which is depicted in the following graph: 
Courtesy: Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
 
8. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
The Committee notes that the construction and expansion of National Highways till November end, the first 
nine months of current financial is around 10 per cent more than the corresponding period of 2011 -23. 
However, the award of new projects for construction fell by almost 52 per cent during this year. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should match up with targets set up and strive hard to achieve the 
declared targets 
 
 
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Award (km) 7,972 10,098 15,948 17,055 5,493 8,948 10,964 12,731 12,376
Construction (km) 4,410 6,061 8,231 9,828 10,855 10,237 13,327 10,456 10,331
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000

4 
 
Operation, Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of National Highways (NHs) Network:- 
 
9. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed that t he M&R of NH stretches are carried out for the 
stretches which are  not covered under any programme or for completed stretches where there are no liabilities of 
contractors to maintain such stretches. M&R works are undertaken on NHs in a systematic manner as under:- 
 
i. State Governments undertake various types of M&R works on NHs, which are as follows: 
 Ordinary Repairs (OR) involves routine maintenance, such as maintenance of culverts, patch/ pot -hole 
repairs, crack sealing, roadside drainage, repairing of shoulders, etc. 
 Periodic Renewal (PR) involves provision of renewal coat to the wearing surface at a predetermined 
frequency. This is done to safeguard the road crust and at the same time giving pavement a better riding 
surface. 
 Special Repairs (SR) works are urgent works of original nature, such as repairs to culverts, bridges, etc. 
 Emergent / Flood Damage Repair (FDR) works are immediate repairs to roads affected by heavy rains/ 
flood, cyclone, landslides, sand dunes, etc. to restore traffic. 
ii. For the NH stretches develop ed on EPC mode (Engineering, Procurement, Construction), the Contractor is 
responsible for remedying the defects and concurrent maintenance of project highway during the defect 
liability period after completion of the work. 
iii. For NH stretches developed on BOT / HAM mode, the Concessionaire is responsible for the maintenance of 
the project highway during the concession period. 
iv. For NH stretches with NHAI, maintenance works are carried out largely through contract maintenance. 
v. For some of the NH stretches deve loped through public funding,  maintenance contracts have been taken up 
for a deﬁnite time period (4 to 9 years) on Operate, Maintenance and Transfer (OMT) basis by NHAI. The 
maintenance of the project highway under OMT contracts is the responsibility of the Concessionaire. 
vi. For some of the developed NH Stretches through public funding,  maintenance contracts have been 
taken up for a longer period of 20-30 years under Monetisation of NHs. 
vii. Strategic and border roads entrusted with Border Roads organisation were executed through 
departmental mode being uniqueness of maintenance requirement in such areas. 
 
Mode of 
Development 
Responsibility  Concession/Contract period  
EPC Contractor  5/10 years post completion  
BOT  Concessionaire  20/25/30 years  
HAM  Concessionaire  15 years  
OMT Contractor - OMT basis  10 to 15 years  
Other Stretches with NHAI – Contractor 
through contract maintenance  
As per contract period  
Stretches with BRO – Departmental 
mode  
 
Repair of other NHs   
 
 

5 
 
10. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
The Committee notes that the Committee on Revisiting and Revitalising the PPP Model of 
Infrastructure Development (2015) recommended setting up an independent regulator for the roads 
sector to encourage private participation and regulate their activity. It had also noted that service 
delivery, such as constructing roads meant for citizens is the responsibility of the government, and 
should not be evaded through PPPs. The Committee would like to know the action taken by the 
Ministry in this regard. 
 
Systematic improvement in Policy / Approach for M&R of NH Network:- 
 
11. The Ministry submitted that although the existing mechanism of Maintenance and Repair of NHs was 
largely catering for maintenance need of NHs . However, some NH stretches remained left out for 
maintenance as entire system was reactive and need based. The Ministry also informed that the utilisation of 
funds for NH stretches under maintenance through State government under Ordinary Repair and Flood 
Damage Repair remained a challenge.  
12. The Ministry informed that following steps have been taken for improvement in Policy/approach for 
M&R of NH network: 
(i) Optimal utilisation of the funds released to State Governments for maintenance of NHs stretches entrusted 
to them under OR by spreading the maintenance works in subsequent years. 
(ii) For adequately addressing the issue of funds under Maintenance and Repair, expenditure for 
renewal/improvement of rising quality works are allowed under Capital head. This leads  to augmented 
availability of resources for M&R works. 
(iii) NHAI also give s the stretches on Toll Operate and Transfer Mode / Through Investment Trust Mode 
serving dual purpose of monetisation and maintenance of NHs. 
(iv) The Ministry also introduced contract maintenance in 2021 for stretches being maintained through State 
PWD. 
(v) Further, in order to tackle the challenges under M&R which always remained a need based maintenance 
system and making the entire NH system to a Pot Hole free system, the Ministry has dec ided that, from 
2023-24 onwards: 
 All NHs stretches are to be invariably covered either under ongoing works of development or 
maintenance or Defect Liability P eriod (DLP) / Concession Period, with the responsibility of 
maintenance of such NHs stretch lying with the concerned Contractor/Concessionaire. 
 All maintenance works on NHs shall be carried out through contract based maintenance i.e. 
i. Performance based Maintenance Contract (PBMC) and  
ii. Short Term Maintenance Contract (STMC). 

6 
 
 No NH stretch shall remain unattended for want of M&R intervention. 
 To phase out Need Based Maintenance through Ordinary Repair and Flood Damage Repair.  
 
13. The Ministry also explained about the difference between PBMC and STMC, provided below in tabular format: 
Short Term Maintenance Contract (STMC) 
 
Performance Based Maintenance Contract 
(PBMC) 
 
Projects where DPR has been completed/in advance 
stage of completion/not required and development 
work is likely to commence shortly. 
   Projects where DLP of 
Contractor/Concessionaire has been expired 
after development    work and no further 
expansion has been planned Development work 
is likely to start after 3-4 years. 
Contract period is generally 1-2 years     Contract period is for 5-7 years. 
Maintenance work to be executed against the defined 
maintenance parameters and quantities 
    Payment linked to the output deliverables as per 
desired service levels. 
    Provision for deductions in payment of routine 
maintenance services for non -fulfilment of 
desired service levels. 
 
14. The Ministry also submitted year-wise details of expenditure under  Maintenance and Repair (M&R) during the  last 
three years and the current year as placed below: - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
The Committee notes that the amount of funds allocated for maintaining NHs is miniscule, given the vast length of 
highways across the country. Several committees, including NITI Aayog, have recommended that maintaining existing 
roads should be prioritised over constructing new NHs.  In 2023-24, the Mi nistry has been allocated Rs 2,600 crore for 
maintaining highways (1% of the Ministry‟s budget). The Committee recommends that the expenditure on O&M should 
be increased in view of the huge toll tax collected by the authorities from the road users.  
 
 
 
 
Sl. No. Year Expenditure (In crore) 
1 2020-21 5,922 
2 2021-22 5,091 
3 2022-23 5,374 
4 2023-24 1662* (Upto August) 

7 
 
II 
Management of Toll Plazas 
16. The Ministry informed that there are a total of 929 fee plazas operational on National Highways as 
on date. The National Highways Act, 1956 was enacted to provide for the declaration of certain highways 
to be national highways  and for matters connected therewith. Section -7 of the Act empowered the 
Government to levy fees for services or benefits rendered on National Highways and Section 9 of the 
National Highways Act, 1956 empowers the Central Government to make rules in this regard. 
17. With reference to the private partnership in the highway construction , Government decided to bring 
in the amendment in the National Highways Act, 1956 in 1995 and incorporated Section 8A, which states 
that “notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may enter into an agreement 
with any person in relation to the development and maintenance of th e whole or any part of a National 
Highway. The person will be entitled to collect and retain fees at such rate, for services or benefits rendered 
by him as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify having regard to the 
expenditure involved in building, maintenance, management and operation of the whole or part of such 
national highway, interest on the capital invested, reasonable return, the volume of traffic and the period of 
such agreement”. 
 
National Highways (Fee for the Use of National Highways Section and Permanent Bridge – 
Public Funded Project) Rules, 1997 
18. The Ministry informed that these rules were published in the Gazette of India vide G.S.R. 490 (E) 
dated 27th August, 1997 and came into force on the date of their publication in the official Gazette.  Rate of 
fee levied and paid to the executing authority on behalf of the Government of India on mechanical vehicles 
for use of National Highways section or Permanent Bridge or Both at the rates notified by the Cen tral 
Government, in the official Gazette in respect of such National Highways section or Permanent Bridge or 
Both. 
 
National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008 – Background 
and Salient Features 
19. In view of the experience ga ined from tolling of various stretches/bridges in NHDP under Public 
funded and BOT projects as well as with an increasing length of the National Highways under NHDP 
coming under tolling, a need was felt to review the existing toll policy to have a toll reg ime that provides 
more predictability, transparency and certainty for pri vate investors. Some critical issues necessitating 

8 
 
review of Toll Policy were: 
i. Concept of continuous corridors instead of standalone sections/bridges. 
ii. Synchronization between BOT and public funded projects to avoid variations in rates, 
concessions and exemptions. 
iii. Demand from local/frequent users for more appropriate concessions. 
iv. Adoption of a standard category of vehicles and a fee structure. 
v. Miscellaneous other issues arising out of e xperience with the present toll policy such as 
rationalisation and indexing of fee rates, vehicle categories, distance between two toll plazas 
and toll on slow moving vehicles etc. 
20. It was, therefore, decided  by the Ministry  to review the user fee frame work. The need for a 
comprehensive user fee policy had also assumed greater significance in the context of an expanded 
National Highway Development Programme (NHDP) which envisaged bulk of the investment from Public 
Private Partnerships (PPPs) where user f ee revenues constituted the mainstay of financial viability. The 
Comparison between previous fee rules of 1997 and extant fee rule of 2008 is given in Annexure-I. The 
list of exemption from payment of toll fee as listed in Section 11 of the Rules is also attached as Annexure-
II. 
 
21. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
21.1. The Committee notes that currently, the Annual revision of the user fee is done w.e.f. 1 st April 
and the fee is to be rounded off to the nearest Rs 5 as per the new user fee rules. However, some roads 
built before 2008 are governed by old rules where the fee is rounded off to Re 1 only. The Committee 
recommends streamlining and bringing uniformity to the revision of Toll Plaza fees.  
21.2. Further, the Ministry and other organisations should consult local representatives during the 
DISHA meetings along with local/frequent road users before fee revision.  
 
National Electronic Toll Collection (NETC) Program 
22. The Ministry informed that the National Electronic Toll Collection (NETC) programme, the 
flagship initiative of MoRTH and NHAI, has been implemented on pan India basis in order to remove 
bottlenecks and ensure seamless movement of traffic by allowing electronic payment of toll fees on 
National Highways through a RFID -based tag called FASTag, usable across all toll plazas on National 
Highways and selected State toll plazas.  The NETC  Payment System consists of these stakeholders 
depicted in the picture below- 

9 
 
 
FASTag Coverage and its benefits: 
23. The Ministry apprised the Committee that the FASTag is acceptable at all fee plazas on National 
Highways. More than 7.65 Crore FASTags have been issued till date. There are 40 issuer Member Banks 
live under NETC programme who issu e FASTag to the customers through various channels. Average  
Daily collection via FASTag on NH fee plaza is more than Rs 163.09 Cr in FY 23 -24 (Till September 23). 
ETC transaction count – and Number of average daily ETC transaction on NH fee plaza is more than 94.67 
Lakhs in FY 23-24 (September 2023). ETC penetration is approximately 98.5 per cent of the total user fee 
collection on NHAI fee plaza is through FASTag.  Government has mandated all lan es of fee plazas on 
National Highways as FASTag Lane of the fee plaza w.e.f. midnight of 15th/16th February 2021. 
24.    It was also informed that 46.3 crore hours vehicle travel time per year has been saved which is 
equivalent to the economic value of Rs.  34,000 crore.   This has led to 47 seconds less waiting time 
average from the previous 714 seconds in the manual collection, and has resulted in fuel savings.  Toll 
revenue has increased to 29 per cent and the number of vehicle trips has increased and pilf erage stopped. 
Also, a significant reduction in carbon emissions has been witnessed. He submitted that the Ministry has 
issued around 7.65 crore FASTags.  
 
25. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
The Committee is hopeful that the coverage of FASTag will penetrate more in the remote areas. 
However, the Committee notes that there are multiple cases of faulty FASTags, which hamper 
the movement of vehicles. The road users also face trouble and have to pay double the toll 
charges. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must take the issue of faulty 


10 
 
FASTags seriously. Since the onus lies on the concerned agencies, they must be penalised for 
such negligence instead of the road users.  
 
  Revenue increase after  FASTag implementation 
26. As per the study carried out by consultant on National Electronic Toll Collection Impact Assessment, it has 
been found that the one -time revenue increase amounting to more than 6100 Crore Rupees has happened  due to 
implementation of FASTag system on account of following reason; 
(i) Reduced travel time resulting in more trips. 
(ii) Reduced revenue leakage due to digitalisation and other related factor. 
27. The above increase is in addition to normal annual increase due  to annual rate revision  and traffic growth. 
The detail of the total user fee collected through fee plazas on National Highways during the last four financial 
years is depicted in the graph below: 
 
 
 
28. The Ministry vide Unstarred Question No. 1529 dt. 02/08/2023 informed that currently the following entities 
are paid the following fees under National Electronic Toll Collection (NETC) program:  
 
 
 
 
 
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23
Collection (in crores) 27654.84 27923.22 33907.71 48028.19
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Entity Program Management fee (% of ETC 
Transaction value) excl. GST 
Issuer Bank 1 
Acquirer Bank 0.13 
National Payments Corporation of 
India (NPCI) 
0.15 
Indian Highways Management 
Company Limited (IHMCL) 
0.25 

11 
 
 
 
 
29. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
The Committee appreciates the rise witnessed in revenue collection after the implementation of 
FASTag. However, the Committee recommends that the revenue collected from toll plazas should 
also be shared with the respective States. 
 
 
III 
Challenges 
Issue of encroachment: 
30. The Committee notes that t here are cases of encroachment of right way, potholes, blockage of 
roadside drains, dumping o f waste materials which can be observed on the stretches of NHs . The 
encroachment on the road hinders the Right of Way and becomes the prominent reasons for accidents on 
NHs. 
31. As regards encroachments, the Ministry submitted that the  removal of encroachments is done as per 
the Control of National Highways (Land and Traffic ) Act, 2002. Under this Act, M oRTH has notif ied 
Highway Administrators for various section of NHs and empowered them to take action again st any 
encroachment of NH RoW as per this Act. Accordingly, the highway administrators issue notices and take 
necessary action for removal of encroachment on NH RoW in consultation with the District Administration. 
State Government also plays a crucial role in removal and restricting the encroachment of NH Right of Way 
(ROW). Periodic drives are undertaken to remove all sorts of encroachments from NH land as per the  
aforementioned Act. Thus, removal of encroachment on NHs is a continuous process, which is b eing done 
throughout the year to ensure seamless movement of traffic on NHs. Further, in order to give more emphasis 
on output (condition of road as set) rather than input (materials/manpower), new mode for O&M of NHs has 
been recently adopted by MoRTH viz., Performance based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC), he performance 
of the PBMC contractors will be assessed based on compliance of the service levels specified in the contract. 
32. The Ministry informed that the potholes, blockage of roadside drains, dumping of waste materials are 
assessed through regular inspection and also through NSV survey. Action is taken by concerned fi eld units 
and it is also monitored on Check App. 
33. It was also  informed about the Highway administrator concept wherein one NHAI officer is 

12 
 
appointed as the administrator with powers to issue notices. However, he does not possess the magisterial 
powers. 
 
34. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
34.1. The Committee recommends the Ministry to conduct a thorough survey and mapping of National 
Highways to identify and document all instances of encroachments. Utilize modern technology, such as 
satellite imagery and GIS mapping, for accurate data collection. Introduce stricter penalties  for 
encroachment violations, and streamline the legal process for swift resolution. 
34.2. The Committee suggests that a State Government officer with magisterial authority could be 
appointed as the nodal officer for an area. The Project Director (PD) of N HAI and the Magistrate can 
manage and exercise their powers to eradicate problems like encroachment and unauthorized median, etc. 
34.3. The Ministry should launch awareness campaigns to inform the public about the importance of 
maintaining clear Rights -of-Way on National Highways. Use various media channels, including radio, 
television, social media, and community events, to educate citizens on the adverse effects of 
encroachments. 
34.4. The Ministry should strive to introduce positive reinforcement mechanisms such as tax incentives or 
recognition, for individuals and businesses complying with the regulations and maintaining clear Rights -
of-Way. 
34.5. The Committee feels that there is a need to engage local communities in the protection and 
maintenance of National Highways. The Ministry must encourage community participation through 
volunteer programs, neighbourhood watch initiatives, and partnerships with local civic groups. 
 
 
Excess Toll collection 
35. The Committee notes that 28 crore excess fee has been collected by three toll plazas in Nathavalasa 
(Andhra Pradesh), C halageri (Karnataka) and Hebbal u (Karnataka) as noted by CAG during the delayed 
period of construction. This was in violation of rules stating tha t no user fee shall be levied fo r the delayed 
period, leading to higher toll collection from commuters.  
36. The Committee also notes that a bogus toll plaza built on private land in Gujarat ‟s Morbi district on 
the Bamanbore-Kutch National Highway, went unnoticed for more than a year. The Committee feels that it is 
a case of sheer negligence by the officials of the Ministry.   

13 
 
 
37. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
37.1. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should conduct regular and independent audits of toll 
collection operations to ensure transparency and accuracy. Implement an oversight mechanism that 
reviews toll collection records and financial transactions to identify any discrepancies. 
37.2. The Ministry should establish stringent penalties for toll plaza operators found guilty of intentional 
or repeated excess toll collection. Such operators should not be allowed to participate for bidding process 
in the future. 
37.3. To ensure against building of fake toll plazas in the country, the Ministry must conduct an all-India 
survey for identifying such bogus toll plazas and take strict actions against the culprits. The Ministry must 
also impose stringent penalties on officials of the Ministry for the dereliction of their duties. 
 
Congestion at Toll Plazas 
38. The Committee n otes that c ongestion at toll plazas is a common issue that can lead to delays, 
increased travel time, and frustration for road users. Effectively managing and mitigating congestion at toll 
plazas is crucial for maintaining smooth traffic flow. During peak hours, even in 2023, long queues can be 
seen on NHs across the country. 
 
39. The Ministry apprised that the issue of c ongestion on the User Fee Plazas has been addressed and 
now it has been reduced to a large extent but time lapse is generally observed beca use of human behaviour 
at the User fee Plaza due to reasons such as discussion on the ID card; sorting out the issue of blacklisted 
FASTag and sometimes malfunctioning of the equipment . The malfunctioning of equipment has been taken 
care of by setting Toll  Management Command Centre and continuously monitoring the status of all 
equipment at the User fee plazas for its active working, However, steps have been taken to regulate the 
traffic on a faster pace as far as possible by deploying additional staff to fa cilitate the convenience of the 
road users. Efforts are being made by regul ar monitoring, implementation of  ICD 2.5 for real time  
transaction processing, implementation of Manual Transaction Policy to decongest the toll Plazas. To ensure 
seamless transit o n the National H ighways, continuous monitoring of the equipment and deployment of 
trained staff is being done. However, the technologies of user fee collection through ANPR and GPS based 
tolling is under exploration to attempt in future. 
 

14 
 
40. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
40.1. The Committee notes that in our country, number plates are hallmarked and can be recognized by 
high-resolution cameras so that the amount can be deducted from bank accounts linked to the vehicle 
number. Hence, the Committee recommends that where there is congestion at toll plazas, Closed Tolling 
System can be implemented through the installation of Automated Number Plate Readers (ANPR) 
cameras. 
 
40.2. Meanwhile, till the installation on ANPR, the Committee suggests that a measure should be adopte d 
whereby if one is unable to pay at that point of time, the vehicle should be relieved and moved out of the 
lane so that there is no blockage of traffic. Later, a text message should be sent on the mobile number 
linked to the vehicle number for payment of toll tax. If the person deliberately evades the toll tax, an FIR 
or challan may be issued against the driver based on his/her vehicle number and picture of the vehicle. 
 
40.3. The Ministry must evaluate the capacity of exis ting toll plazas and, where feasible, consider 
expanding or building redundant toll facilities to distribute traffic more evenly and reduce congestion. The 
Ministry can also introduce express toll lanes exclusively for registered users or frequent commuter s who 
can pre-register for faster access through dedicated lanes. 
 
40.4. The Ministry and toll plaza officials should develop and communicate clear emergency response 
plans for toll plazas to address breakdowns, accidents, or other unexpected events promptly and minimize 
disruptions. 
 
Damages due to natural calamities 
41. The Committee notes that n atural calamities pose significant challenges to the operation and 
maintenance of NHs. It has been observed recently that hilly states like Uttarakhand, Hi machal Pradesh and 
Sikkim are prone to natural disasters like earthquakes, floods, cloudbursts, etc, which cause a severe damage 
to highway infrastructure, including roads, bri dges, and toll plaza facilities that leads Disruption of traffic 
flow, closure of highways.  
42. NHAI informed that it is a dopting sustainable and environmentally friendly processes while 
constructing highways in hilly roads by fulfilling all the statutory conditions of MoEFCC & other agencies, 
such as proposing tunnel/ via  ducts wherever feasible instead of hill cutting/filling, slope stabilisation etc. 
NHAI has taken many new eco -friendly initiatives such as cut & cover tunnel, usage of geopolymer 
technology, hydroseeding for natural development of plants & shrubs on slope surfac e. During the recent 
unprecedented heavy ra infall in the sta te of Himachal Pradesh, NHAI ensured that the NHs are opened for 
traffic in minimum possible time. The stretch between Kullu -Manali which was damaged completely by  

15 
 
heavy floods at several locati ons was opened to all types of traffic in mini mum possible lime. Si milarly the 
stretch between Sh imla and Parwanoo was also damaged and blocked due to landslides at several locations 
and the traffic on the same has been made operational through at least 2 lanes in minimum possible time. 
Total 68 nos. of tunnels (Under Construction/Under DPR) have been proposed in the State of Hi machal 
Pradesh by NHAI. These tunnels will not only prevent the seasonal blocking of roads due to landslides bu t is 
also an environment friendly method of road construction which involves lesser tree cutt ing and less damage 
to environment as compared to the conventional method of road construction in hilly area. 
43. With reference to recent floods in Sikkim, it was informed by the Ministry that  on the night of 
October 3, 2023, the South Lhonak Lake in North Sikkim breached, causing a Glacial Lake o utburst Flood 
(GLOF). Teesta III dam producing 1,200 MW electricity, the biggest hydropower project in Sikkim, located 
approximately 60 kilometres downstream of the lake, in Chungthang town of Mangan district, was decimated 
by the GLOF, The GLOF also unleashed devastation on downstream areas of the dam. The flood has caused 
severe damages to NHs in the State of Sikkim, The severely affected  NHs are some portion of NH -10 and 
NH-310A and NH-310AG: 
 NH-10: From km 0 to km 52 of NH -10 lies in the State of West Bengal, while the road suffered damage at 
23 locations, section from km 25.80 to km 28.00 was completely washed out, Restoration of this 2.2 km 
washed out section was taken from PW(R)D, West Bengal and was assigned to NHIDCL. The NHIDCL has 
restored traffic on this washed out section by 19.10.2023. Temporary restoration of the damaged portion on 
remaining stretch completed by PW(R)D of West Bengal.  
During the Study Visit of the Committee to Gangtok, it was informed by the Ministry that NH-10 from 
Rangpo (Km 52) to Ranipool (km 80) is open for two -way traffic movement. The stretch of NH -10 from 
ranipool (80 km) to gangtok (92 km) having length 12 km is open to traffic. NH-710 from Melli via Manpur- 
Namchi- Damthang to Tarku of length 64 km is also opened to traffic. The 250 m long damaged portion near 
Singtam Hospital area is also restored.  
NH-310A: from km 81.50 to km 84.60 having length of 3.1 km between Mangan to Chungthan have been 
washed out, fresh road alignment of approx. 3 km is under construction by BRO, Toong bridge at km 84.60 
has been temporarily restored. 700 m approach road to Theng tun nel at 86.90 and 200 m at other side of 
tunnel has been damaged. At km 92, 500 m road washed out, out of which 350 m length of road has been 
restored. It was informed that the Chungthang Bridge at km 95.43 was restored by constructing 190 ft Bailey 
bridge on 17.11.2023. Fresh road alignment of approx. 2 km is under construction by BRO, Toong bridge at 
km 84.60 is to be restored by constructing Bailey Steel Bridge for which the work is ongoing. 
NH-310AG: Around 15.4 km from km 0 to km 0.4, km 2.2 to km 6.5, km 8 to km 13.5, km 17 to km 18.5 km 27 to 
km 30, km 39 to km 44 in stretch of Chungthang -Lachen-Zeema-Kalep washed out.  The temporary restoration by 
constructing foot track is completed between Chungthang and Munshithang . 5 bridges at km 3.43, km 4.31, km  6.10, 
km 9.95, km 41 stated to be restored by 30.7.2024. 

16 
 
 
44. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
44.1. The Committee appreciates the restoration work carried out by the respective organisations. 
However, it is delete also suggested that the Ministry should establish a rigorous schedule for regular 
maintenance and inspections of roads. The Ministry must identify vulnerable sections and prioritize 
them for preventive measures, repairs, or upgrades.   
44.2. The Committee suggests incorporating resilient design principles when planning and 
constructing roads. This includes using durable materials, proper drainage systems, and considering 
the local climate and geological conditions. 
44.3. The Committee recommends that the Road Safety  Audit must be carried out at every stage of 
the DPR preparation i.e. feasibility Stage, Preliminary Design Stage and Final Stage to ensure that 
the safety is not compromised at any stage.  
44.4. The Ministry must develop and regularly update emergency response plans specifically tailored 
for road-related disasters. Ensure that these plans are well -communicated and understood by relevant 
authorities, first responders, and the public. 
44.5. The Committee notes that recently, 41 workers were trapped under the  debris of the collapsed 
section of Uttarkashi‟s Silkyara tunnel, which forms a crucial segment of the Brahmakhal -Yamunotri 
section of the National Highway, a part of the government‟s Char Dham road scheme. Unfortunately, 
the very structure meant to enhanc e connectivity through an extensive 889 -kilometer road network, 
has become a site of tragedy. The Government must implement a stringent maintenance schedule, 
including inspections for structural integrity, drainage systems, and ventilation  to identify and rectify 
issues promptly. Employ  sensors and monitoring technologies to continuously assess structural 
health, detecting any potential weaknesses or anomalies early. 
44.6. There is also a need for Training personnel in  tunnel management and emergency respon se 
procedures so that such incidents do not occur in the future. 
 
Violation of distance rule between adjacent toll plazas 
45.  The Committee notes that the Fee Rules 2008  specifies that the spacing between two adjacen t toll 
plazas should be 60 km to ensure the availability of a long line of sight for acceleration and deceleration zone 
and optimisation of revenue potential. As per the observation of the Committee, this rule is followed more in 
breach than in observance. Deviations are being legitimized through executive notifications.  
46.  The Ministry in this context reproduced the extant guidelines for location of fee plaza under Rule 8 of 

17 
 
NH Fee Rules, 2008, which are given below: 
" (1) ........ 
 (2) Any other fee plaza on the same section of national highway and in the same direction shall not be 
established within a distance of sixty kilometres;  
Provided that where the executing authority deems necessary, it may for reasons to be recorded in wr iting, 
establish or allow the concessionaire to establish another fee plaza within a distance of sixty kilometres; 
Provided further that a fee plaza may be established within a distance o f sixty kilometres from another fee 
plaza if such fee plaza is for collection of fee for a permanent bridge, bypass or tunnel. "  
47.  The Ministry further submitted that the distance criteria for establishment of a fee plaza have come to 
existence after NH Fee Rules 2008 and there was no such rule in earlier NH Fee Rules, 1997. Fee plaza not 
complying with 60 km distance criteria have been established with the approval of MoRTH with recording 
justifiable reasons such as non -availability of land, forest area, for curbing of revenue leakage, municipa lity 
limits etc. Each fee plaza is assigned with some influence length of highway for which User fee is fixed as 
per NH Fee Rules 2008.  Therefore, 60 km or more distance between two User fee plazas may not be 
economical to the user public specifically small distance users. 
 
48. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
48.1. The Committee would like to know about the details of all the toll plazas, which are located within a 
distance of 60 kms.  
48.2. The Committee would also like to know about the reasons accorded for each of the toll plaza which 
is an exception to the Distance clause of NH Fee Rules, 2008. 
 
Delay in the procurement of construction for Core Infrastructure Projects 
49. The Committee notes that there are currently 599 national highways in India. The National Highways 
Authority of India (NHAI) is anticipated to construct around 4,000 to 4,500 kilometres (equivalent to 2,796.2 
miles) of new roads annually over the next thre e years. In this context, local administration becomes very 
critical for smooth tolling.  The Committee analysed that the major factors causing delays in procurement 
during the construction phase of infrastructure projects are - Non-availability of land for construction, delay 
in approval of Utility Shifting from the concerned utility owners impacting efficient & unhindered 
construction of highway. Non -inclusion of local needs/ demands of service roads/structure in DPR, other 
demands like additional underpass es/flyovers by local public during constru ction also act as an impediment. 

18 
 
Further, delay/non-availability of mining permissions for sand/earth/stone aggregates awaiting state support. 
 
50. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
50.1. The Committee recommends that the timely availability of unencumbered land must be ensured 
before the construction of any project.  
50.2. The Committee also recommends that timely approvals/permissions for earth/stone quarries 
should be assured by the State Governments.  
50.3. It is observed that some of the genuine problems of local people are neglected, for example, 
mini-trucks (locally known as Chhota Hathi) carry many people for commutation purposes but are 
charged as commercial vehicles .  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the demands of local 
public should also be taken into due consideration before finalisation of Detailed Project Report. 
 
 
Challenges in the bidding stage of Toll Plazas 
51. The Committee notes that t he Ministry of Road Transport & Highway s is currently handling 202 
National Highway projects covering a total length of 6,270 kilometres with an estimated cost of Rs.79,789 
crore. Out of these projects, 42 NH projects, spanning 474 kilometres and valued at Rs.10,992 crore, are in 
the bidding stage.  
52. The Ministry informed that the b ids are evaluated using a two -stage evaluation procedure, first stage 
is the Technical Evaluation wherein the bidder proves that it has the required technical experience to 
undertake the O&M of the Highway stretches and the required net worth/Asset under Management to infuse 
funds in the projects. Second stage is the Financial Evaluation wherein f inancial bids of the bidders who are 
found to be technic ally responsive are opened.  Value of the underlying asset is assessed by the Authority. 
The financial quotes that are more than the expectation (IECV) of the Authority are accepted and the H1 is  
declared. If no quote matches the IECV, then that particular bundle is annulled. The IECV for the stre tches is 
finalized by a Standing IECV Committee headed by the AS&FA, MoRTH. 
53. The Committee also pointed out that  there is an uncertainty in Bid Due Dates, which has serious 
ramifications on the development of projects and to the Highway developers.  The tenders invited by NHAI 
as mentioned in Annexure-III, are pending for a period ranging from 9 to 14 months. The approximate value 
of these tenders is about 50,000 crores. Correspondingly, the total bid security for these amounts to 
approximately Rs. 500 C rore. Assuming an average participation of the bidders for these tenders, a 
cumulative amount of Rs. 7500 crore is currently blocked for this purpose. The impact of allocating funds 

19 
 
towards Performance security and financial closures easily translates into  about Rs. 25,000 crores of blocked 
capital. The Committee found that the Concessionaires have been incurring significant recurring 
expenditures due to these postponements of bid date, the tenders themselves continue to be postponed, with 
announcement made just one working day prior to the Bid Submission date. 
 
54. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
54.1. The Committee recommends that the NHAI must establish fixed and definite timelines for bids 
and their respective awards. NHAI must provide a comprehensive tender calendar that indicates the 
upcoming bids and their target bidding and award projects.  
54.2. NHAI should consider the validity requirement of the bid security based on the first due date. 
Specifically, as the RFP provisions validity of the bid up to 120 days from the first Bid Due Date, 
and the validity of the bid security upto 180 days from the f irst Bid Due Date . In the event if the 
validity of the bid security remain s valid upto 150 days i.e. Bid Due Date is extended by 30 day, 
from the Extended Bid Due Date , this should be taken into consideration and NHAI should not ask 
the bidder to increase the validity of the bid security. Instead, the lowest bidder may extend the 
validity period of the bid security as per the authority's requirement at a later stage. This adjustment 
will benefit all bidders as it will eliminate the need for frequent extensions of the bid security 
validity. 
54.3. The Scope of Work should be finalised after Detailed Project Report as per site requirement 
and after consultation with local public. The prior approval of Utility Shifting from  concerned 
department through the DPR consultant should also be done. 
54.4. The acquisition and possession of minimum 95% of the continuous stretch of land required for 
construction works should be completed at the time of bidding. 
 
Violence at Toll Plazas 
55. The Committee notes that the t oll plazas usually encounter road users who start altercation with staff 
due to various reasons, including FASTag issues or unwillingness to pay toll. Often, such altercations lead to 
heated debates between road users and toll plaza staff, which in some cases turn into physical violence from 
both sides. The Committee discovered that i n 2011, a 22 -year-old worker at the Kherki Daula toll plaza on 
National Highway 48 near Manesar in Haryana was shot dead, allegedly by a c ar driver who refused to pay 
the toll of Rs 27. 
56. The Committee appreciates that , NHAI has issued Standard Operating Procedures (SoP) to curb 

20 
 
altercation incidents and strengthen security at National Highway Toll Plazas  in order to safeguard interests 
of both the commuters and toll operators. The detailed Standard Operating Procedure include guidelines for 
NHAI field offices to ensure strict implementation and adherence by toll collecting agencies to manage staff 
and road users. In addition to this, „Toll par Calm‟ a special drive has been initiated by NHAI at Toll Plazas. 
Under this initiative, NHAI has collaborated with professional Psychologists for anger management and 
customer delight training to Toll Plaza staff. The first training session was conducted at Murthal Toll plaza in 
Haryana, and more training will be conducted on other toll plazas across the country. 
 
57. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
57.1. The Committee appreciates the „Toll par calm‟ initiative taken by the authorities. However, it 
recommends that it must be implemented at all the toll plazas in the country as early as possible. 
Further, panic alarm systems should be installed at toll booths that can be activated in case of 
emergencies. These systems s hould alert nearby law enforcement agencies for a swift response to 
any violent incidents. 
57.2. Public awareness campaigns should be launched to educate road users about the consequences 
of violence at toll plazas. Promote a culture of respect and cooperation, emphasizing that toll plaza 
personnel are there to assist and ensure a smooth traffic flow. 
57.3. Proper training should be provided  to toll plaza staff in conflict resolution and de -escalation 
techniques. Equipping them with the skills to han dle challenging situations diplomatically can help 
prevent violence. 
57.4. The authorities must collaborate with local communities to establish community policing 
initiatives around toll plazas. Engage the community in reporting suspicious activities and 
maintaining a safe environment. 
57.5. The Committee suggests that the VIP culture associated with the evasion/non -payment of toll 
tax should be done away with. It has been observed that most of the mishaps take place due to non -
payment of toll taxes. 
 
Black spots and Accidents 
58. The Committee notes that  the total number of road accidents and fatalities in the country during the 
Year 2022 were reported as 4,61,312 and 1,68,491 respectively.  The Committee took a note of the first -aid 
and medical facilities available to the road users and victims. 
59. The Committee appreciates that citizens are now empowered to report road quality data, accidents, 

21 
 
and potholes which provides users with real-time data through the electronic Deta iled Accident Report (e -
DAR) Project. 
60. The Ministry informed that the E-DAR Project has been rolled out in all 36 States and UTs for data 
entry related to road accidents by Police, Transport, Health and Highways Authorities. However, to empower 
citizens to report road quality data, accidents, and potholes etc on National Highways while also offering an 
efficient complaint redressal system, NHAI has launched 'Rajmargyatra,' a citizen centric unif ied mobile 
application. Ministry vide circular No. RW/NH' 29013 /01/2020-S&R dated 09th November 2020 has issued 
Guidelines/SOP for monitoring of and compliance of all safety and suggested procedures to be followed for 
preparation of proposal for rectification of black spots . Further, Ministry vide letter No.RW/NH -
29011/01/2021-S&R (P&B) RSCE dated 9th September 2021 has also issued guidelines for taking advance 
action for removal of accident spots on NHs as per Police reports without waiting for converting them into 
black spots after accidents/fatalities.  Ministry vide letter No. RT-25035/l04/2022 dated 13 thJanuary 2023 has 
issued guidelines for Road Safety Action Plan for road engineering interventions on National Highways vide 
which it is mentio ned that stretch having high  number of black spots shall be identified and developed as 
Model safe road and Model construction zone. So far 196 stretches of national highways have been identified 
for development as Model Safe Roads under the Min istry. 166 project stretches of NH have  been identified 
for development as Model Safe Construction Zone under the Ministry. 
61. The Ministry vide Unstarred Question 3771 dt 05.04.2023 informed the Rajya Sabha that the NHAI 
has envisaged a cashless treatment facility on all four arms of Golden Quadrilateral stretch i.e. Delhi -
Mumbai, Mumbai-Chennai, Chennai-Kolkata and Kolkata -Delhi to provide Hospitalization Insurance cover 
to the immediate road Accident Victims (includ ing Drivers, Passengers, Pedestrians/Cyclist). The proposed 
scheme is to take care of the immediate needs of the hospitalization of the victims for the first 48 hours from 
the time of hospitalization or providing necessary treatment up to a cost of Rs. 30, 000/, whichever occurs 
earlier. For this scheme NHAI has invited bids and technical bids of the tender are under evaluation. As a 
part of incident management, there is a provision of ambulances and Tow -Away vehicles/cranes, in the 
respective contract/concession agreements, which are stationed near the fee plazas to cater to any emergency 
on the National Highways under the jurisdiction of NHAI. Further, the ambulances projects were sanctioned 
for the entire Country and State -wise separate funds were not allo cated. In this regard, NHAI has sanctioned 
funds of Rs. 395.89 Crore in the last five years for deployment of ambulances through centralised agencies. 
 
62. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
62.1. The Committee would like to know the current status of the hospitalization insurance 
scheme. The Committee may also be apprised about the number of ambulances and other medical 

22 
 
facilities available on each NH across the country.  
62.2. With reference to identification and rectification of black spots on NH, the Committee would 
like to know the about the time taken to rectify a black spot after its identification. The Ministry 
must work upon to reduce the time taken to rectify a black spot.   
62.3. The Minis try should conduct road safety audits for regular monitoring and evaluation of 
implemented measures. This involves ongoing data collection, site inspections, and collaboration 
with law enforcement to assess the effectiveness of intervention. Implement engi neering solutions 
to address identified issues. This may include road realignment, installation of traffic calming 
measures, upgrading signage and markings, improving lighting, and addressing visibility concerns. 
The Ministry should also provide a report t o the Committee indicating time interval between two 
continuous road safety audits on each NH. 
 
IV 
Way Forward 
Monetisation of National Highways 
63. The Committee notes that u nder the declared monetization plan, the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways will offer projects under Toll -Operate-Transfer contracts and Infrastructure Investment Trusts 
(InvITs) to be offered by the NHAI. Inv ITs are assets where investors put in money and income gen erated 
from such asset s is paid as dividends. The ove rall monetization target was Rs 45,000 crore, of which Rs 
30,000 crore would be raised by TOT or Toll-Operate-Transfer model and the remaining Rs 15,000 crore via 
InvITs. 
64.  The Ministry informed that CCEA in its meeting held on 20.11.2019 has amended inter alia the 
stipulation of "at least two years operations after Commercial Operation date ( COD)" to " at least one year 
operations" i.e. collecting toll for at least one year after COD. The Concession Fe e realized from 
monetization of NHs during 2021-22 and 2022-23 is as under: 
 
Year/Mode TOT (In Crores) INVIT (In Crores) Securitization 
(DME) 
2021-22 1,011 7,350 14,006 
2022-23 10,662 2,850 10,139 
 

23 
 
 
65. The Ministry has taken the following major steps to incentivise the inv estors for bidding the TOT 
bundles: 
a) Periodic meetings are being held with Bidders/investors to understand and address their TOT bidding 
related concerns;  
b) Initially when the TOT Programme had started, the packages/bundles offered were in large sizes. Now, the 
size and value of bundles have been reduced so that more bidders can participate in the Bidding process;  
c) In order to get the fair value of the  Asset, i.e. operational National Highways Project having potential 
tolling re cord and affording the bidders to assess the value by its own assessment, Initial Estimated 
Concession Value (IECV) is now determined after receipt of technical bids but before opening of financial 
bid;  
d) List of Assets likely to be monetized during the FY 2022-23 & 2023 -24 along with the macroeconomic 
assumptions adopted by NHAI for determining IECV by NHAI were published in public domain for 
information and guidance for due diligence by the prospective bidders; 
e) One-to-one meeting convened with fund h ouses, banks, LIC, EPFO and SBI MF to address the financing 
issues associated with Asset Monetization Programme;  
 
f) Recently a meeting was convened on 29.09.2023 with the Highways Operators Association of India 
(HOAI) and other bidders as to address their TOT related concerns, 
 
g) NHAI is targeting to offer two bundles of TOT protects every quarter. This would include bundles of: -  
 
 Medium-large size (Rs. 4000 to Rs. 7000 Cr each) consisting of 5-6 roads  
 
 Smaller bundles (Rs. 1500 Cr) consisting of 2-3 roads  
 
 Overall, NHAI targets to generate approx. Rs. 10,000 - 15,000 Cr  through TOT this year and 
Rs.15000 Cr for next fiscal. (FY25) 
 
 
66. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
66.1. The Committee notes that the NHAI‟s debt has gone up 14 times since 2014 -15 to stand at Rs 
3,47,685 crore, as of March 22, 2022. 1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry  
should expand the scope of monetisation of road assets to reduce the debt.  
66.2. The Committee observes that in the last three years, NHAI has been able to monetise assets 
                                                           
1 https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/story/nhais-debt-rose-14-times-since-2014-to-rs-347-lakh-cr-govt-327955-2022-03-30 

24 
 
through (Toll Operate Transfer (TOT) and InvIT routes – 22 stretches monetised through TOT 
(aggregate length of 1,612 km) and 8 stretches monetised through InvIT (aggregate lengt h of 632 
km). However, bidding intensity for the assets remain relatively weak owing to high operational 
risks that private contractors need to take on, pertaining to traffic movement, toll collection 
efficiency, O&M, etc.  
66.3. The Committee analyses tha t only 15 per cent of the National Monetisation Pipeline targets 
have been achieved in the last two years. It is, therefore, recommended that the pace of 
monetisation should be increased to cope up with rising debts.  Faster pace of monetisation would 
help NHAI control leverage on its balance sheet, and thereby enable awarding of more projects 
through HAM / EPC route in future. 
66.4. The Committee observes that under the current model, entirety of the traffic and toll collection 
risks are passed on to the pr ivate concessionaire which has resulted in dwindling interest for some 
of the riskier assets. Hybrid structures, where part of the traffic risk is borne by the authorities and 
assured minimum annualised payments are made to concessionaires, could alleviate  some of the 
challenges with the existing TOT model. 
66.5. The Committee feels that there is a need for clarity in the objectives of road monetization, 
whether it is revenue generation, infrastructure development, or maintenance funding. There is also 
a need for concerted efforts between investors and organisation to overcome the gap. 
 
Satellite/ANPR based toll collection 
 
67. The Committee notes that the GPS based toll collection system reduces travel time significantly. An automatic 
number plate recognition system through cameras additionally enables automated toll collection w ithout stopping 
vehicles. This would achieve a free flow of traffic on toll booths and a system to charge vehicle owners for the exact 
distance of cars driven on the tolled highways. 
 
68. The Ministry informed that the G PS based toll collection technology and Automatic Number Plate 
Recognition (ANPR) is being explored to attempt in future. At present, there is no plan to make FASTag 
redundant and to remove the user fee plaza o n National Highways . ANPR cameras and RFID Reader have 
been installed at few plazas to explore for the possibility of user fee collection, but this  system is facing the 
challenges of deduction at high speed and enforcement, so check toll plazas are be ing used with ANPR 
system. Realizing the need to upgrade to barrier -less free flow tolling system, the Government has appointed 
a consultant through tendering process to provide advisory services on implementation  of new technology 
like Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) based tolling. Above attempt is being made and further it is 
also being explored to integrate GNSS based toll ing along with ANPR in order to reduce congest ion and 
increase the efficiency. 
 

25 
 
69. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
69.1. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should seek assistance from foreign countries 
like Germany, Belgium, Bulgaria, etc who have adopted GPS based tolling system. Once installed, 
the GPS -based system can also be used for other applications such as in  parking. However, the 
Committee is also apprehensive that such step might reduce the employment opportunities, which 
are presently available to people.  
69.2. The Committee is apprehensive of the fact that certain organisations can acquire the GPS 
coordinates of moving vehicles using the GPS -based Toll Collection System and continuously 
track them, posing privacy concerns.   It is, therefore, recommended that cyber security issues 
should be taken into consideration before implementation of GPS-based Toll Collection System. 
 
Expansion of Incident Management Services 
 
70. The Committee notes that t he Ministry of Road Transport and Highways had drafted a request for 
proposal for the supply, operation and maintenance of Incident Management Services  (IMS) for the entire 
highway network in this country to minimise the impact of accidents. This was previously only limited to 
the 65,000 km of NHS managed by NHAI, excluding the 7,000 km managed by NHIDCL (Nationa l 
Highways Infrastructure Development Corporatio n Ltd.) and the 66,000 km managed by the Roads wing of 
the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways. 
 
71. The Ministry informed that IMS (i.e. Ambulances, Cranes, Patrolling Vehicles) on NHAI stretches 
are being  provided by the contractor/concessionaire during DLP/O&M period on 24x7 basis. Further, on 
stretches wherein the DLP/O&M period has expired, NHAI has deployed over 300 Ambulances through 
Centralized Ambulance Contractors and 100 Additional Ambulances can be also be deployed in future based 
on requirement from the field  units through the balance COS provisions o f the Ambulance Contracts. The 
1033 Helpline Call Centre of NHAI dispatches the on -road units of IMS (i .e. Ambulances, Cranes, and 
Patrolling Veh icles) and mainta ins coordination between on r oad units and road users. Further, the 1033 
Helpline Number is being integrated with 1 08/172 of various state Governm ents for better utilization of 
resources and co-ordination with State Agencies. The Specifications of Ambulances and Patrolling Vehicles 
have been recently mod ified (2019) in IRC SP:  84/87 Codes for 4/6 Laning and no further upgradation is 
being planned. 
 

26 
 
72. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
The Committee recommends that the Incident Management Services should be extended to all the  
States and UTs in the country. It is, further, suggested that specifications for ambulances, police 
vehicles, and rescue cranes be standardised to maintain uniformity and eliminate ambiguity. 
Additionally, as a rescue team, patrol vehicles and ambulances can work together and combine their 
activities for swift response. 
 
 
User-friendly Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
73. The Ministry informed that for this purpose , Rajmargyatra, a citizen centric mobile app has been 
developed for  highway users through which they can register thei r complaints pertaining to following 
parameters and also upload geo-tagged photos and videos:- 
 FASTAG Facility/Lane  
 Highway/ Toll Plaza Operation Complaint 
 Toilet/Public Convenience 
 Poor workmanship on construction 
 Potholes and other maintenance issues 
 Safety hazards 
  
74. Highlighting the process involved in addressing the complaint, the Ministry informed that e ach 
complaint on Rajmargyatra app is provided with a unique ticket number. The citizens will be able to view the 
progress of their complaint on the mobile app and can also give their feedback in the form of rating. At the 
back-end there is a web portal to redress the received complaints. The concerned officers (Toll Plaza 
Manager, PIU, RO, etc.) will have to redress the complaints. The registered complaints are sent to the 
concerned highway authority from the nearest toll plaza as per their jurisdiction. After taking necessary 
action, the status of the complaints are updated such as “In-progress ” or “closed” or “escalated to next level” 
and the updated information is received by the complainant on the app itself.  Citizens will be able to get 
information about various other services such as "Know Your Highway", nearest toll plaza, petrol pump, 
hospital, hotels, etc. through this app. 
 
 

27 
 
75. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
75.1. The Committee appreciates the features of Rajmargyatra app. However, the Committee feels 
that there is a need for promotion of this app on a mass scale. The road  users are hardly aware of this 
app. The Ministry must promote the app through Youtube ads, FM radio channels, hoardings at the 
NH and through other social media platforms. 
75.2. The Committee observes that Indian Railways authorities actively use social m edia platforms 
to engage with the public, address concerns, and provide real -time updates. It is, therefore, 
recommended to establish and maintain an active presence on popular social media platforms to 
address grievances, share important information, and foster a sense of community engagement on the 
lines of Indian Railways. 
 
 
Need for Legislative amendment 
76. The Committee notes that the well-framed legislation in the context of roads and highways in India is 
crucial for several reasons. Effective laws contribute to the development and maintenance of a robust and 
sustainable transportation infrastructure. Legislation helps establish and enforce safety standards, planning, 
funding, and executing infrastructure projects, environmental sustainability, fundi ng, and integrating 
technology among others. 
 
77.  The Committee was informed that presently, the toll collecting agency approaches State Government 
administration through NHAI officials for enforcement actions required for operation of highways and 
maintenance of toll plazas.  
 
78. Committee’s observations/recommendations 
 
78.1.The Committee recommends that Competent Authority, having enforcement powers, from 
State Government may be associated with NHAI for taking enforcement actions for smooth 
operations and  maintenance of Highways. They should be empowered to penalise the persons 
involved in encroachments, toll evasion, unsafe driving (high speed, wrong side driving) and 
vandalizing toll plazas.  
78.2. The Committee notes that the evasion of toll fee is not punishable as per law. In this regard, 

28 
 
the Committee recommends making a legislation to link the bank accounts of vehicle owners to 
charge the toll fee along-with defined penalty in case of toll fee evasion, faulty FASTags or having 
FASTags with insufficient FASTag balance etc but allowing them to pass through the toll plaza 
without stopping 
  
Safety of women on National Highways                                            
79. Miscellaneous recommendation 
 
79.1.The Committee  notes that the number of women travelling alone on national highways is 
increasing in the country. The Committee therefore recommends that resting rooms may be 
constructed for women at toll plazas on National Highways, keeping their safety and convenience 
at the forefront.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 

29 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
Status of NHs in the country 
The Committee notes that the completion of hundreds of NHs is running behind the 
schedule. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should expedite the 
construction process and focus on timely completion of all the NHs.  
(Para 6.1) 
The Committee would also like to know the manner in which the Ministry is planning 
to dispose of the Single and Intermediate-lane NHs. 
(Para 6.2) 
The Committee notes that the construction and expansion of National Highways till 
November end, the first nine months of  current financial is around 10 per cent more than the 
corresponding period of 2011 -23. However, the award of new projects for construction fell by 
almost 52 per cent during this year. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
match up with targets set up and strive hard to achieve the declared targets 
(Para 8) 
Operation, Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of National Highways (NHs) Network 
 
The Committee notes that the Committee on Revisiting and Revitalising the PPP Model 
of Infrastructure Development (2015) recommended setting up an independent regulator for 
the roads sector to encourage private participation and regulate their activity. It had also 
noted that service delivery, such as constructing roads meant for citizens is the responsibility 
of the government, and should not be evaded through PPPs. The Committee would like to 
know the action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
(Para 10) 
Systematic improvement in Policy / Approach for M&R of NH Network:- 
 
The Committee notes that the amount of funds  allocated for maintaining NHs is 
miniscule, given the vast length of highways across the country. Several committees, including 
NITI Aayog, have recommended that maintaining existing roads should be prioritised over 
constructing new NHs. In 2023 -24, the M inistry has been allocated Rs 2,600 crore for 
maintaining highways (1% of the Ministry’s budget). The Committee recommends that the 
expenditure on O&M should be increased in view of the huge toll tax collected by the 
authorities from the road users. 
(Para 15) 
 

30 
 
 
National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008 – 
Background and Salient Features 
The Committee notes that currently, the Annual revision of the user fee is done w.e.f. 
1st April and the fee is to be rounded off to the neare st Rs 5 as per the new user fee rules. 
However, some roads built before 2008 are governed by old rules where the fee is rounded off 
to Re 1 only. The Committee recommends streamlining and bringing uniformity to the 
revision of Toll Plaza fees.  
(Para 21.1) 
Further, the Ministry and other organisations should consult local representatives 
during the DISHA meetings along with local/frequent road users before fee revision. 
(Para 21.2) 
FASTag Coverage and its benefits: 
The Committee is hopeful that the coverage of FASTag will penetrate more in the 
remote areas. However, the Committee notes that there are multiple cases of faulty 
FASTags, which hamper the movement of vehicles. The road users also face trouble and 
have to pay double the toll charges. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry must take the issue of faulty FASTags seriously. Since the onus lies on the 
concerned agencies, they must be penalised for such negligence instead of the road users.  
(Para 25) 
Revenue increase after FASTag implementation 
         The Committee appreciates the rise witnessed in revenue collection after the 
implementation of FASTag. However, the Committee recommends that the revenue 
collected from toll plazas should also be shared with the respective States. 
(Para 29) 
Issue of encroachment: 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to conduct a thorough survey and mapping of 
National Highways to identify and document all instances of encroachments. Utilize modern 
technology, such as satellite imagery and GIS mapping, for accurate data collection. Introduce 
stricter penalties for encroachment violations, and streamline the legal process for swift 
resolution. 
(Para 34.1) 
The Committee suggests that a State Government officer with mag isterial authority could be 
appointed as the nodal officer for an area. The Project Director (PD) of NHAI and the 

31 
 
Magistrate can manage and exercise their powers to eradicate problems like encroachment 
and unauthorized median, etc. 
(Para 34.2) 
          The Ministry should launch awareness campaigns to inform the public about the 
importance of maintaining clear Rights -of-Way on National Highways. Use various media 
channels, including radio, television, social media, and community events, to educ ate citizens 
on the adverse effects of encroachments. 
(Para 34.3) 
        The Ministry should strive to introduce positive reinforcement mechanisms such as tax 
incentives or recognition, for individuals and businesses complying with the regulations and 
maintaining clear Rights-of-Way. 
(Para 34.4) 
         The Committee feels that there is a need to engage local communities in the protection 
and maintenance of National Highways. The Ministry must encourage community 
participation through volunteer programs, neighbourhood watch initiatives, and partnerships 
with local civic groups. 
(Para 34.5) 
 
Excess Toll collection 
         The Committee recommends that the Ministry should conduct regular and independent 
audits of toll collection operations to ensure transpa rency and accuracy. Implement an 
oversight mechanism that reviews toll collection records and financial transactions to identify 
any discrepancies. 
(Para 37.1) 
            The Ministry should establish stringent penalties for toll plaza operators found gui lty of 
intentional or repeated excess toll collection. Such operators should not be allowed to 
participate for bidding process in the future. 
(Para 37.2) 
          To ensure against building of fake toll plazas in the country, the Ministry must conduct 
an all-India survey for identifying such bogus toll plazas and take strict actions against the 
culprits. The Ministry must also impose stringent penalties on officials of the Ministry for the 
dereliction of their duties. 
(Para 37.3) 
 
Congestion at Toll Plazas 

32 
 
         The Committee notes that in our country, number plates are hallmarked and can be 
recognized by high -resolution cameras so that the amount can be deducted from bank 
accounts linked to the vehicle number. Hence, the Committee recommends that where there is 
congestion at toll plazas, Closed Tolling System can be implemented through the installation 
of Automated Number Plate Readers (ANPR) cameras. 
(Para 40.1) 
 
Meanwhile, till the installation on ANPR, the Committee suggests that a measure should be 
adopted whereby if one is unable to pay at that point of time, the vehicle should be relieved 
and moved out of the lane so that there is no blockage of traffic. Later, a text message should 
be sent on the mobile number linked to the vehicle number for payme nt of toll tax. If the 
person deliberately evades the toll tax, an FIR or challan may be issued against the driver 
based on his/her vehicle number and picture of the vehicle. 
(Para 40.2) 
 
       The Ministry must evaluate the capacity of existing toll plazas and, where feasible, 
consider expanding or building redundant toll facilities to distribute traffic more evenly and 
reduce congestion. The Ministry can also introduce express toll lanes  exclusively for registered 
users or frequent commuters who can pre-register for faster access through dedicated lanes. 
(Para 40.3) 
 
           The Ministry and toll plaza officials should develop and communicate clear emergency 
response plans for toll pla zas to address breakdowns, accidents, or other unexpected events 
promptly and minimize disruptions. 
(Para 40.4) 
Damages due to natural calamities 
          The Committee appreciates the restoration work carried out by the respective 
organisations. However, it is delete also suggested that the Ministry should establish a rigorous 
schedule for regular maintenance and inspections of roads. The Ministry must identify 
vulnerable sections and prioritize them for preventive measures, repairs, or upgrades.   
(Para 44.1) 
            
The Committee suggests incorporating resilient design principles when planning and 
constructing roads. This includes using durable materials, proper drainage systems, and 
considering the local climate and geological conditions. 
(Para 44.2) 
            The Committee recommends that the Road Safety Audit must be carried out at every 
stage of the DPR preparation i.e. feasibility Stage, Preliminary Design Stage and Final Stage to 
ensure that the safety is not compromised at any stage.  

33 
 
(Para 44.3) 
            The Ministry must develop and regularly update emergency response plans specifically 
tailored for road -related disasters. Ensure that these plans are well -communicated and 
understood by relevant authorities, first responders, and the public. 
(Para 44.4)  
             The Committee notes that recently, 41 workers were trapped under the debris of the 
collapsed section of Uttarkashi’s Silkyara tunnel, which forms a crucial segment of the 
Brahmakhal-Yamunotri section of the National Highway, a part of the government’s Char 
Dham road scheme. Unfortunately, the very structure meant to enhance connectivity through 
an extensive 889-kilometer road network, has become a site of tragedy. The Government must 
implement a stringent maintenance schedule, i ncluding inspections for structural integrity, 
drainage systems, and ventilation  to identify and rectify issues promptly. Employ  sensors and 
monitoring technologies to continuously assess structural health,  detecting any potential 
weaknesses or anomalies early. 
(Para 44.5) 
           There is also a need for Training personnel in  tunnel management and emergency 
response procedures so that such incidents do not occur in the future. 
(Para 44.6) 
        The Committee would like to know about the details of all  the toll plazas, which are 
located within a distance of 60 kms.  
 
Violation of distance rule between adjacent toll plazas 
(Para 48.1) 
         The Committee would also like to know about the reasons accorded for each of the toll 
plaza which is an exception to the Distance clause of NH Fee Rules, 2008. 
(Para 48.2) 
          The Committee recommends that the timely availability of unencumb ered land must be 
ensured before the construction of any project.  
 
Delay in the procurement of construction for Core Infrastructure Projects 
The Committee recommends that the timely availability of unencumbered land must be 
ensured before the construction of any project. 
(Para 50.1) 
          The Committee also recommends that timely approvals/permissions for earth/stone 
quarries should be assured by the State Governments.  
(Para 50.2) 

34 
 
          It is observed that some of the genuine problems of local people are neglected, for 
example, mini -trucks (locally known as Chhota Hathi) carry many people for commutation 
purposes but are charged as commercial vehicles.  The Committee, therefore,  recommends 
that the demands of local public should also be taken into due consideration before finalisation 
of Detailed Project Report. 
(Para 50.3) 
Challenges in the bidding stage of Toll Plazas 
         The Committee recommends that the NHAI must establi sh fixed and definite timelines 
for bids and their respective awards. NHAI must provide a comprehensive tender calendar 
that indicates the upcoming bids and their target bidding and award projects.  
(Para 54.1) 
        NHAI should consider the validity req uirement of the bid security based on the first due 
date. Specifically, as the RFP provisions validity of the bid up to 120 days from the first Bid 
Due Date, and the validity of the bid security upto 180 days from the first Bid Due Date. In the 
event if th e validity of the bid security remains valid upto 150 days i.e. Bid Due Date is 
extended by 30 day, from the Extended Bid Due Date, this should be taken into consideration 
and NHAI should not ask the bidder to increase the validity of the bid security. Ins tead, the 
lowest bidder may extend the validity period of the bid security as per the authority's 
requirement at a later stage. This adjustment will benefit all bidders as it will eliminate the 
need for frequent extensions of the bid security validity. 
(Para 54.2) 
             The Scope of Work should be finalised after Detailed Project Report as per site 
requirement and after consultation with local public. The prior approval of Utility Shifting 
from concerned department through the DPR consultant should also be done. 
(Para 54.3) 
The acquisition and possession of minimum 95% of the continuous stretch of land required for 
construction works should be completed at the time of bidding. 
(Para 54.4) 
Violence at Toll Plazas 
        The Committee appreciates the ‘ Toll par calm’ initiative taken by the authorities. 
However, it recommends that it must be implemented at all the toll plazas in the country as 
early as possible. Further, panic alarm systems should be installed at toll booths that can be 
activated in case  of emergencies. These systems should alert nearby law enforcement agencies 
for a swift response to any violent incidents. 
(Para 57.1) 
 
         Public awareness campaigns should be launched to educate road users about the 

35 
 
consequences of violence at toll plazas. Promote a culture of respect and cooperation, 
emphasizing that toll plaza personnel are there to assist and ensure a smooth traffic flow. 
(Para 57.2) 
         
       Proper training should be provided to toll plaza staff in conflict resolution and de -
escalation techniques. Equipping them with the skills to handle challenging situations 
diplomatically can help prevent violence. 
(Para 57.3) 
       The authorities must collaborate with local communities to establish community policing 
initiatives around toll plazas. Engage the community in reporting suspicious activities and 
maintaining a safe environment. 
(Para 57.4) 
           The Committee suggests that the VIP culture associated with the evasion/non -payment 
of toll tax should be done away with. It has been observed that most of the mishaps take place 
due to non-payment of toll taxes. 
(Para 57.5) 
Black spots and Accidents 
      The C ommittee would like to know the current status of the hospitalization insurance 
scheme. The Committee may also be apprised about the number of ambulances and other 
medical facilities available on each NH across the country.  
(Para 62.1) 
          With reference to identification and rectification of black spots on NH, the Committee 
would like to know the about the time taken to rectify a black spot after its identification. The 
Ministry must work upon to reduce the time taken to rectify a black spot.   
(Para 62.2) 
             The Ministry should conduct road safety audits for regular monitoring and evaluation 
of implemented measures. This involves ongoing data collection, site inspections, and 
collaboration with law enforcement to assess the effectiveness o f intervention. Implement 
engineering solutions to address identified issues. This may include road realignment, 
installation of traffic calming measures, upgrading signage and markings, improving lighting, 
and addressing visibility concerns. The Ministry should also provide a report to the Committee 
indicating time interval between two continuous road safety audits on each NH. 
(Para 62.3) 
Monetisation of National Highways 
           The Committee notes that the NHAI’s debt has gone up 14 times since 2014 -15 to stand 
at Rs 3,47,685 crore, as of March 22, 2022. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 

36 
 
Ministry should expand the scope of monetisation of road assets to reduce the debt.  
(Para 66.1) 
        The Committee observes that in the last three year s, NHAI has been able to monetise 
assets through (Toll Operate Transfer (TOT) and InvIT routes – 22 stretches monetised 
through TOT (aggregate length of 1,612 km) and 8 stretches monetised through InvIT 
(aggregate length of 632 km). However, bidding intens ity for the assets remain relatively weak 
owing to high operational risks that private contractors need to take on, pertaining to traffic 
movement, toll collection efficiency, O&M, etc.  
(Para 66.2) 
            The Committee analyses that only 15 per cent of the National Monetisation Pipeline 
targets have been achieved in the last two years. It is, therefore, recommended that the pace of 
monetisation should be increased to cope up with rising debts. Faster pace of monetisation 
would help NHAI control levera ge on its balance sheet, and thereby enable awarding of more 
projects through HAM / EPC route in future. 
(Para 66.3) 
            The Committee observes that under the current model, entirety of the traffic and toll 
collection risks are passed on to the private concessionaire which has resulted in dwindling 
interest for some of the riskier assets. Hybrid structures, where  part of the traffic risk is borne 
by the authorities and assured minimum annualised payments are made to concessionaires, 
could alleviate some of the challenges with the existing TOT model. 
(Para 66.4) 
           The Committee feels that there is a need f or clarity in the objectives of road 
monetization, whether it is revenue generation, infrastructure development, or maintenance 
funding. There is also a need for concerted efforts between investors and organisation to 
overcome the gap. 
(Para 66.5) 
Satellite/ANPR based toll collection 
           The Committee recommends that the Ministry should seek assistance from foreign 
countries like Germany, Belgium, Bulgaria, etc who have adopted GPS based tolling system. 
Once installed, the GPS -based system ca n also be used for other applications such as in 
parking. However, the Committee is also apprehensive that such step might reduce the 
employment opportunities, which are presently available to people.  
(Para 69.1) 
          The Committee is apprehensive of  the fact that certain organizations can acquire the 
GPS coordinates of moving vehicles using the GPS -based Toll Collection System and 
continuously track them, posing privacy concerns. It is, therefore, recommended that cyber 
security issues should be take n into consideration before implementation of GPS -based Toll 
Collection System. 

37 
 
(Para 69.2) 
Expansion of Incident Management Services 
             The Committee recommends that the Incident Management Services should be 
extended to all the States and UTs i n the country. It is, further, suggested that specifications 
for ambulances, police vehicles, and rescue cranes be standardised to maintain uniformity and 
eliminate ambiguity. Additionally, as a rescue team, patrol vehicles and ambulances can work 
together and combine their activities for swift response. 
(Para 72) 
 
User-friendly Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
           The Committee appreciates the features of Rajmargyatra app. However, the Committee 
feels that there is a need for promotion of this app on a  mass scale. The road users are hardly 
aware of this app. The Ministry must promote the app through Youtube ads, FM radio 
channels, hoardings at the NH and through other social media platforms. 
(Para 75.1) 
                The Committee observes that Indian  Railways authorities actively use social media 
platforms to engage with the public, address concerns, and provide real -time updates. It is, 
therefore, recommended to establish and maintain an active presence on popular social media 
platforms to address gr ievances, share important information, and foster a sense of 
community engagement on the lines of Indian Railways. 
(Para 75.2) 
 
Need for Legislative amendment 
               The Committee recommends that Competent Authority, having enforcement powers, 
from State Government may be associated with NHAI for taking enforcement actions for 
smooth operations and maintenance of Highways. They should be empowered to penalise the 
persons involved in encroachments, toll evasion, unsafe driving (high speed, wrong side  
driving) and vandalizing toll plazas.  
(Para 78.1) 
                 The Committee notes that the evasion of toll fee is not punishable as per law. In this 
regard, the Committee recommends making a legislation to link the bank accounts of vehicle 
owners to charge the toll fee along -with defined penalty in c ase of toll fee evasion, faulty 
FASTags or having FASTags with insufficient FASTag balance etc but allowing them to pass 
through the toll plaza without stopping 
(Para 78.2) 
 

38 
 
Safety of women on National Highways        
Miscellaneous recommendation 
 
     The Committee notes that the number of women travelling alone on national highways 
is increasing in the country. The Committee therefore recommends that resting rooms may be 
constructed for women at toll plazas on National Highways, keeping their safety an d 
convenience at the forefront. 
(Para 79.1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 

40 
 
 
 
  Annexure-I 
Comparison of previous fee rules of 1997 and extant fee rule of 2008  
 
S.No. PARTICULAR
S 
1997 RULES 2008 RULES AS 
AMENDED 
i. Classification of 
vehicles 
Car /Jeep /Van 
LCV 
Truck/Bus 
HCM/EME 
(MAV is charged 
under truck /bus 
category) 
Car/Jeep/Van/LMV 
LCV, Light Goods Vehicle or Mini Bus 
Truck/Bus (two axles) Three Axle 
Commercial Vehicles 
Heavy Construction Machinery (HCM) 
or Earth Moving Equipment (EME) or 
Multi Axle Vehicle (MAV) (four to six 
axle) 
vi. Oversized vehicle (7 or more axles) 
ii. Comparison of rate 
of fee rules 
The user fee for projects 
involving conversion 
into four-lanes of 
existing two-lane of 
National Highways shall 
not 
exceed the capping rates 
given below at June 
The rate of fee for use of a 
section of National Highway of four or 
more lanes shall, for the base year 2007-
08, be the product of the length of such 
section multiplied by the following rates 
  1997 prices,   
Type of Vehicle 
Base rate 
of fee per km (in 
Rupees)  
Type of 
Vehicle 
Base 
rate of 
fee per 
km (in 
Rupees) 
Car, Jeep, Van 
or Light Motor 
Vehicle 
0.65 
Car or Jeep 
or Van 0.40 Light 
Commercial 
Vehicle,  Light 
Goods Vehicle 
or Mini Bus 
 
1.05 
Light 
Commercial 
Vehicles 
0.70 
Truck or Bus 1.40 Bus or Truck 
(Two Axles)* 2.20 
Heavy 
construction 
machinery and 
earthmoving 
equipment 
 
 
3.00 
Three-axle 
commercial 
vehicles* 
2.40 
Heavy 
Construction 
 
  

41 
 
Machinery(HCM) 
or Earth Moving 
Equipment (EME)
 or Multi 
Axle  Vehicle 
(MAV)  (four to 
six axles)* 
 
3.45 
Oversized 
Vehicles (seven or 
more axles) 
4.20 
 
iii. Revision of rates Public Funded 
Projects – after five 
years 
BOT- as per 
concession agreement 
(annually- date as per 
agreement) 
Every year w.e.f. 1st April. 
iv. Method of Revision 100% change in WPI 3% fixed + 40% of change in WPI 
v. Applicability of Rule Separate rules for public 
funded and BOT projects 
Same rule for both public funded 
and BOT project 
vi. Discounts Provision exists for 
frequent users. One and 
Local non-commercial vehicle – 
Monthly pass for Rs.150/ at 
  half  times  of  single 
journey rates for any 
number of journeys 
within a day.  30 times of 
single journey rates for 
any number of journeys 
within a month.  No 
discount in Rule for BOT 
Project. 
2007–08 WPI 
Commercial vehicle registered within 
the District- 50% of the Fee rate (Toll 
plazas within District) 
Return journey within 24 hours on 
payment of 1.5 times of single 
journey and monthly passes for 50 
journeys @ 2/3rd of Fee rate. 
vii. Restriction of use of 
highway by slow 
moving vehicles 
No such restriction. If service road /alternative road is 
Available slow-moving vehicles are not 
allowed on the highway. 
viii. Rates  for  two  lane 
highway with paved 
shoulder 
No rates provided 60% of rates provided for four 
lane highway. 
ix. Distance between 
two fee plazas and 
location of fee plazas 
No such provision Distance between two fee plazas 
is 60 kms. Further, fee plaza  is to be 
located beyond 10 kms from municipal or 
local town area limits with some 
relaxation. 

42 
 
x. Fee  for  overloaded 
vehicles 
No provision. To pay the user fee at the rates 2 
times for 0-20% overloading, 4 
times for >20% to 40%, 6 times 
for >40% to 60%, 8 times for 
>60% to 80% and 10 times for 
>80% applicable for that category of 
vehicle and oﬀ load the excesses load 
xi. Unauthorized 
collection 
No provision Excess amount plus Penalty @ 
25% of the excess amount. 
xii. Period of levying 
user fee 
Perpetuity In case of Public Funded 
Projects - After recovery of capital 
cost, to be tolled at 40% of the fee 
rates. 
In case of BOT projects – After 
concession period at 40% of the fee 
rates. 
xiii. Tolling  of  bypasses 
being part of NH 
section 
To be tolled as part of the 
section. 
1.5 times of the Base rates of 
road section as provided, if the cost of the 
bypass is above Rs.10.00 Crore on 2007 -
08 prices. 
xiv. Fee for structure 
forming  part  of  the 
To be tolled as part of the 
section. Separate table 
By converting length of the 
structure into an equivalent length 
 section. for bridges. of highway/ expressway by 
multiplying by a factor of ten. 
Provided that structure of 60 meters 
of length or less, on a linear 
highway/expressway will be considered 
as part of the normal length of 
highways/expressways for calculation of 
fee. 
xv. Transitional Plan No such Plan exists On  transition  from  NH  Fee 
Rules, 1997 to NH Fee Rules, 2008 the 
annual increase in the user fee shall in no 
case be more than 25% of the rate 
applicable in the immediately preceding  
year. 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
Annexure-II 
Exemption from payment of fee has been listed out in Section 11 of the Rules below:- 
No fee shall be levied and collected from a mechanical vehicle: 
(a) transporting and accompanying: 
(i) the President of India 
(ii) the Vice president of India 
(iii) the Prime Minister of India 
(iv) the Governor of a State 
(v) the Chief Justice of India 
(vi) the Speaker of the House of People 
(vii) the Cabinet Minister of the Union 
(viii) the Chief Minister of a State 
(ix) the Judge of the Supreme Court 
(x) the Minister of State of Union 
(xi) the Lieutenant governor of a Union territory 
(xii) the chief of Staff holding the rank of full General or equivalent rank 
(xiii) the Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State 
(xiv) the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a state 
(xv) the Chief Justice of a High Court 
(xvi) the Judge of a High court 
(xvii) the Member of Parliament 
(xviii) the Army Commander or Vice-Chief of Army Staff and equivalent in other services 
(xix) the Chief Secretary to a state Government within concerned State 
(xx) the Secretary to the Government of India 
(xxi) the Secretary, Council of States 
(xxii) the Secretary, House of People 
(xxiii) the Foreign Dignitary on State visit 
(xxiv) the Member of Legislative Assembly of a State and the Member of Legislative Council of a State 

44 
 
within their respective State, if he or she produces his or her identity card issued by the concerned 
Legislature of the State 
(xxv) the awardee of Param Vir Chakra, Ashok Chakra, Maha Vir Chakra, Kirti Chakra, Vir Chakra and 
Shaurya Chakra, if such awardee produces his or her photo identity car d duly authenticated by the 
appropriate or competent authority for such award 
(b) Used for official purposes by: 
(i) The Ministry of Defence including those which are eligible for exemption in accordance with the 
provisions of the India Toll (Army and Air Force) A ct. 1901 and rules made thereunder, as extended 
to Navy also. 
(ii) the Central and State armed forces in uniform including para military forces and police 
(iii) an executive Magistrate 
(iv) the fire-fighting Department or organization 
(v) The National Highways Authority of In dia or any other Government organization using such vehicle 
for inspection, survey, construction or operation of national highways and maintenance thereof. 
(c) used as ambulance and 
(d) used as funeral van. 
(e) specially designed and constructed for use of a person su ﬀering from some physical defect or 
disability or registered with Ownership type as „DIVYANGJAN‟ under the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988 (59 of 1988) and the rules made there under. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
Annexure-III 
 
 
 


46 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

47 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING  
  
The Committee met at 02.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 5 th October, 2023 in 
Committee Room D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
In the Chair- Shri C.M. Ramesh 
Rajya Sabha 
1. Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak  
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj  
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh  
4. Smt. Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
5. Shri A. A. Rahim  
 
Lok Sabha 
6. Shri Bharat Ram Margani 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Dushyant Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways (MoRTH) 
Shri Anurag Jain, Secretary, MoRTH. 
Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh, Additional. Secretary, MoRTH. 
Shri P.P. Singh, Joint Secretary, MoRTH. 
Shri Soman Prasad, Joint Secretary (Toll), MoRTH. 
Shri NRVVMK Rajendra Kumar, Member (Finance) and MD, IHMCL. 
Shri Atul Kumar, Director, NHIDCL. 
(Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure) 
  
2.        At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them that the 
Committee has taken up the subject “Operation and Maintenance of National Highways and 

48 
 
Management of Toll Plazas”. Now,  the Committee has  invited the Ministry of Road, 
Transport and Highways and representatives of the National Highways Authority of India 
(NHAI) to deliberate on the said subject. 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
3.      The Chairman initiated the deliberations by citing the importance of the road network 
and enquired from the Ministry about the infrastructural and technological developments 
made in Highways expansion in the country. Secretary, MoRTH informed that due to the 
clashing of two meetings, the Ministry ha s prepared a short presentation and sought the 
Committee’s permission to attend the other meeting at 3:30 PM.  The Chairman acceded to 
this request.   Thereafter, Additional Secretary, MoRTH made a presentation.   He informed 
that the nation has witnessed an  overall 1.6 times increase in National Highways’ (NHs) 
 since 2014 with a two -and-a-half times increase in four -lane and above roads and 1.8 times 
increase in two-lane including two-lane with paved shoulder.  Also, for the single lane or the 
intermediate lane, the green portion has been reduced by 2.6 times as compared to the 2014 
level. 
4.    Additional Secretary, MoRTH informed that various organizations are involved in road 
construction.  Out  of the total of 1,46,415 Kms,  65,610 Km is entrusted to NHA I; 62,000 
Km to various State Public Works Departments (PWDs); 7,696 kms to NHIDCL; 3586 km to 
BRO and 905 km is with MoRTH.    Each State has its own PWD Division and National 
Highways (NH) Division. The border roads are looked after by the Border Road Organization 
(BRO) under the Ministry of Defence.  905 km stretch has been retained by the Road Wing of 
the MoRTH.  Apart from this, some length still remains and is in the process of entrustment. 
 He explained that all formalities are completed when highways  are taken over from the 
States.  These are then entrusted to different agencies. 
5.     He also informed about the capital expenditure of the Ministry.   He stated that    the 
Ministry’s capital expenditure has risen significantly from Rs. 51,204 crore in 1 913-14 to 
Rs.2,39,821 crore in 2022 -23.  In the current financial year, i.e. 2023 -24, the Ministry has 
proposed a target of Rs.3,13,600 crore capital expenditure.   This will help increase its 
infrastructure. In addition, significant funds are also allocate d for the maintenance and repair 
of the roads. 
6.   Additional Secretary explained the maintenance and repair works responsibility matrix 
which is as follows. 

49 
 
 For the Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC) projects, the contractor 
does the mainte nance.   Earlier, the maintenance period was for five years which has 
now been increased post -completion to 10 years. This period is called the Defects 
Liability Period.   
 For the Build -Operate-Transfer (BOT) projects, there is a concessionaire, the PPP 
partner, who has to maintain the project for 20 years, 25 years or 30 years depending 
on the different concessions that have been given over the years.   
 For the Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM), there is a concessionaire for a standard period 
of 15 years.   For the operation and maintenance, with tolling contract, the project is 
given to the contractor who does it for 10 to 15 years. 
        Out of the total length of 146,145 km, the total length with the concessionaire under 
EPC/ HAM/ BOT mode is around 54,000 kms ;  29,000 kms is under the maintenance 
contract of NHAI; 10000 kms is under the ongoing construction development programmes 
under the Bharatmala/ Annual Plan of the Ministry.  23,400 kms post-completion is under the 
Defects Liability Period, for five or te n years.  This left a balance of 29,800 kms length of 
road. 
7.      He informed about the following initiatives/ systemic improvements in policy/ approach 
for M&R of NHs which have been taken up for the remaining length of 29,800 kms: 
i. Earlier, the Ministry released funds to States’ PWD for maintenance of NHs stretches 
entrusted to them with the direction to finish the work by 31 st March i.e. end of the 
financial year.  Now, for optimal utilization of funds and better maintenance, 
maintenance work has been a llowed to spread into subsequent years in case fund is 
not spent and the repair work is still ongoing. 
ii. Secondly, State Governments issue the budget again after 31 st March, which takes 
time.  In order to avoid the usual process of release of funds followed in State 
Governments, which generally takes time, the Ministry has directed the States to take 
clearance for projects and implement them in project mode.   
iii. The third major initiative is that under the toll, operate and transfer (TOT) mode. The 
Ministry giv es stretches of NHs to the highway operators for maintenance only to 
reputed companies.  This is to ensure high maintenance standards.   Similarly, in the 
NHAI-InvIT, the maintenance is being looked after by the investors, who have set up 
an NH Management Project Company which is entrusted with the maintenance work. 

50 
 
8.     Additional Secretary also informed about the Ministry’s maintenance plan for 2023 -24.  
The plan targets for improving the O& M for 23,000 kms. Out of this total length, 14,360 km 
will be done by the Roads Wing; 6,600 km by NHAI;  706 km by NHIDCL; and 2,000 km by 
BRO.  The Ministry plans to make all NH stretches pothole free by December, 2023. 
 Secretary, MoRTH added that at cer tain places roads were not under permanent contract for 
maintenance. Presently, the policy which is followed is that first the road condition should 
deteriorate and then improvement work is undertaken.   Now, the Ministry has created two 
systems, namely, pe rformance-based and short -term maintenance contracts.   If a project is 
taken up only for one year, or is to be taken up in the near future, Ministry prefers a short -
term contract.  A five-year contract is preferred where the contractor will always be there  and 
the Ministry will supervise and ensure that the contractor does his duty.  
9.  The Secretary further informed that a system for feedback and grievance redressal has 
been established. The Ministry gets feedback from all the newspapers and TV channels 
wherever problems have been reported on the NHs.   Also, through the Rajmargyatra App, 
launched by NHAI, anyone travelling by road can report a problem.  On an average, the 
Ministry receives about 20 -30 reports daily and the Ministry takes action on each cas e. 
 Further, the directors of roads have the responsibility to travel, at least twice a month, on 
every part of their network, to ensure that the contractors or concessionaires perform their 
duties. 
10. Thereafter, JS, MoRTH briefed the Committee about tol l management and provisions 
relating to user fee under the National Highways Act, 1956.   He informed that Section 7 
empowers Central Government to levy fees for services or benefits provided on NHs. Section 
8A deals with the provision for entering into agreements for development and maintenance of 
NH.  Section 9 gives power to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the NH Act, 1956. 
He also briefed about Extant Rules and Amendments -the National Highways Fee 
(Determination of Rates & Collection) Rules,  2008.  All NHs built/commenced construction 
on or after 5 th December, 2008.   The public -funded and BOT (Annuity) projects transited 
from Fees Rules, 1997 to Fees Rules, 2008 vide a 2011 amendment.   BOT (Toll) projects 
under the previous NH Fee Rules, 1997  will continue up to the concession period.  He also 
explained the procedure for collection of toll fees. For public -funded and HAM projects, the 
Ministry appoints collection agencies through competitive bidding.   Concessionaires are 
authorized to collect and retain user fees as per provisions of the Act. The BOT (Toll), TOT, 
OMT and InvIT are covered under that. 

51 
 
11.  The Joint Secretary also highlighted the electronic toll collection system, which is 
presently being done through RFID -based FASTag.   Earlier, a manual provision was in 
practice.  From 2016 onwards, the Ministry has moved to RFID.   Then from 16 th February, 
2021, all lanes on the toll plaza have been made FASTag lanes.   This has improved traffic 
flow, resulting in increased number of vehicle trip s, and ultimately increased toll fees 
collection.  It has also resulted in increased levels of transparency, reduced pilferage and 
minimum cash handling.   The FASTag system being maintenance -free has a long lifespan 
and with no battery issues runs longer.  
12. The Chairman raised a query as to why even after adopting FASTag, every vehicle 
has to slow down or stop at the toll gate. He suggested that the sensor should automatically 
read it so that there is no need for the vehicle to slow down or stop. The Secretary replied that 
the Ministry is looking into the latest technology. Regarding closure of toll gates at some 
locations, he informed that such situations occur where the operator is operating fewer tolls 
even though it is a four or six -lane highway.  Also, at certain places, just before the tolls, the 
police authorities put barricades for checking, etc., which reduces the traffic speed.   He 
assured to take up the issue with the District administration.   He also ensured to take up with 
the toll concessiona ires so that all toll lanes are operated continuously.  In some cases, the 
vehicle has to slow down because the FASTag has to be read and informed about the Global 
navigation satellite system  (GNSS) technology wherein the vehicle's movement will be read 
by the satellite.    This would, however, require every vehicle to have an On Board Unit 
(OBU), which can be read by the satellite.    The moment one accesses any of the NHs, 
tracking is activated and the moment he/ she leaves the highway, tracking stops. 
13.     Highlighting upon the benefits of FASTag implementation, JS informed that 46.3 crore 
hours vehicle travel time per year has been saved which is equivalent to the economic value 
of Rs. 34,000 cro re.  This has led to 47 seconds less waiting time average from the previous 
714 seconds in the manual collection, and has resulted in fuel savings.  Toll revenue has 
increased to 29 per cent and the number of vehicle trips has increased and pilferage stopp ed. 
Also, a significant reduction in carbon emissions has been witnessed. He submitted that the 
Ministry has issued around 7.65 crore FASTags.   There are 40 issuer member banks under 
the NETC programme and 929 fee plazas are operational on NHs. The average  daily 
collection through FASTag is Rs. 163 crore.  Significantly, about 98 per cent of the collection 
is happening through FASTag. 
14.      Thereafter, Members raised queries on the following issues: 

52 
 
 Delay in construction of the stretch from the city of Baran to Chhabra to Aklera on 
NH-90 
 Pending construction of 18 kms of road towards the city of Bhawani Mandi. 
 Maintenance work undertaken alongside Kota but absence of such works in Baran to 
Shivpuri sector at the south of Kota- Chittaur; Kota-Shivpuri on the way to Jhansi. 
 Need for training of staff working in the night. 
 Details of the Indore Economic Corridor passing via Ujjain to Jhalawar connecting 
Mumbai Corridor. 
 Issue of violence and mishaps at toll plazas. 
 Movement of slow speed vehicles like 3 -wheelers, scooty, etc on NH despite 
provision of service road for such vehicles in NH-8 in Gurugram. 
 Absence of signboards prohibiting slowspeed vehicles on NH-8. 
 Traffic jam due to entry of trucks in the city to avoid the toll fee. 
 Steps taken or schemes evol ved to address encroachment on NHs along with the 
output of such measures.    
 Details of steps taken to spread awareness regarding streetlights and stray animals on 
NHs. 
 Need for medical care, mobile hospitals and immediate relief on NHs including 
 details of trauma centres and medical aid within a kilometer on NHs. 
 Closure of few gates at toll plazas which creates ruckus and traffic issues. 
 Extraction of extra toll fee from truck drivers due to overweight and overload. 
 Delay in starting of work on NH -77 co nnecting Muzaffarpur -Sitamarhi-Sonbarsa 
even after completion of land acquisition.   Also,  timeline for completion of the 
construction. 
 Timeline for starting work of Muzaffarpur bypass. 
 Neglect of Bihar in road development. 
 Details on the washing away of h ighways in hilly regions of Sikkim and Himachal 
Pradesh. 

53 
 
 Cause of higher number of accidents on Samriddhi Mahamarg in Maharashtra. 
 Pathetic condition of Namtola to Mon stretch on NH 702 
 Issues related to encroachment of NHs.  
 Steps taken to reduce Man to Man intervention on NHs and R&D in this regard. 
 Status regarding achieving complete modernization of toll plaza 
 Details of steps taken to provide or enhance facilities like she -toilets, baby feeding 
room, etc. for women travelers  
 Involvement of local communities in road development and policy formulation.  
 Issue of high gradient at ghat roads and need to build tunnels at such places. 
 Issue of frequent transfers of project directors within a short span of time.  
 Need to adopt a mechanism to regularize and strengthen the Land acquisition process 
along with the fixing of timelines. 
 Existence of a house/ structure in the centre of the road on the way from Tirupati to 
Bangalore and the resultant traffic jam causing 10 minutes delay  in the  small stretch 
of 10 meters. 
 Pathetic condition of NH-40 connecting Kadapa-Kurnool. 
 Details of HAM projects- tenders issued and the status of their closure. 
 Issue of Controlled Access Projects like Bengalure-Chennai, Bengaluru- Amravati.  
15.    The Committee wished to be apprised of the damage caused due to natural calamity in 
Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu Kashmir and the measures taken to bring the situation 
under control.  Secretary informed that global warming has led to devastatio n at many places 
in the country. The kind of rains this year was unprecedented.  The river changed its course in 
Himachal Pradesh.   Most of the highways were restored for traffic within 24 to 48 hours, 
maximum 72 hours, except for the Kullu -Manali stretch which took about a month. This was 
because almost seven to eight km of road and almost the whole township was washed away.   
With the Ministry’s/NHAI’s support another route of PWD was worked out and provided to 
the State agencies. The assistance provided b y NHAI was acknowledged even by the Hon'ble 
Chief Minister of Himachal Pradesh.   Such assistance was also extended in Jammu and 
Kashmir.  In Sikkim, the problem is more complex.  The incident occurred because of a cloud 

54 
 
burst, due to global warming.   As a result, the original area of the lake which was about 160 
hectares got reduced to 60 hectare resulting in 100 hectares of water getting drained into the 
river within a span of 15 -20 minutes.  This brought in huge floods across the Teesta River 
overtopping the Teesta-III power plant and damaging the Teesta-V gates. This has effectively 
affected almost 1200 megawatts of power generation.  He added that a meeting in this regard 
was held with the Cabinet Secretary yesterday, i.e. 4th October.  
16. The Secretary also informed that the main highway connecting West Bengal to 
Sikkim has been affected. The West Bengal - Sikkim road is stretched across 92 km.   A 
complete assessment could not be undertaken till yesterday, i.e. 4th October as certain parts of 
the road we re still under water.   Out of the 92 km length, 52 km is with the West Bengal 
PWD; 28 km with NHIDCL; and another 12 km with the Sikkim PWD.   Landslides on the 
Sikkim PWD side and landslides on the 28 km stretch being maintained by NHIDCL, which 
was affect ed by landslides at three places, would have been removed by today, i.e. 5 th 
October.  Thus, some connectivity had been restored from the Sikkim side on the first 40 km. 
The real problem is between Kalimpong and Rangpo.  As per the Ministry’s understanding , 
prima facie  road has been washed away in three stretches making the approach difficult. 
However, road on the other side is still intact and IRCON personnel alongwith certain plant 
and machinery is present there. IRCON was contacted and a meeting with all  concerned took 
place yesterday and today, i.e. 5 th October PWD, West Bengal will give their assessment.   In 
addition, the Ministry is meeting daily with all the concerned agencies to assess the situation 
on day -to-day basis.   He added that money is not an  issue and assured that fund shortage 
would not come in the way of repair and restoration works.   He also briefed on the roads 
managed by BRO and stated that eight BRO bridges have been washed away. After the 
regions in West Bengal, the BRO roads were wors t affected.  To restore connectivity, BRO 
has ordered bailey bridges (temporary iron bridges) which will be put up at all the eight 
places in the next ten to fifteen days.   Thus, the whole system is trying to respond in the best 
possible way.  The first pr iority is to safely evacuate the stranded tourists and restore 
electricity, telecommunication network and other basic provisions.  All the Government 
departments are working as one unit and the Government is doing the best that is possible. 
17.      The Ministry responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took note of 
the suggestions made by the Members, and also assured to give the details in writing on the 
issues which could not be answered at that point of time. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 

55 
 
18.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
19.       The meeting adjourned at 03.52 PM. 
  
  
 New Delhi,                                                                                                        Monica Baa 
5th October, 2023                                                                                 Additional Director 
  

56 
 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING  
  
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 14 th December, 2023 in 
Committee Room 2, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
In the Chair- Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
Rajya Sabha 
1. Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak  
2. Smt. Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
3. Shri A. A. Rahim  
4. Shri Zala Kesr idevsinhji 
 
Lok Sabha 
5. Shri Anto Antony 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D.S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
  
WITNESSES 
  
PNC Infratech Ltd. 
Mr. Anguluri Satyanarayana, GM & Head 
Mr. Anurag Jain, DGM 
Oriental Structural Engineers Pvt. Ltd. (OSE) 
Mr. Jitendra Kumar, CEO 
Mr. Gishnu Karthik Sridharan, Lead Marketing 
Mr. Narinder Singh, Vice President 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
  

57 
 
2.        The Chairman extended greetings t o the Members and representatives of Oriental 
Structural Engineers Pvt. Ltd. and PNC Infratech Ltd. The Chairman initiated the 
deliberations by citing the importance of the road network and enquired about the gaps, 
challenges, and areas for improvement in the road sector. He inquired about the use of 
emerging technologies such as the Internet of Things, Artificial Intelligence, and Data 
Analytics. He also enquired about the existing strategies for ensuring the financial 
sustainability of toll plazas and the ir management. For effective collaboration and a 
holistic approach to highway management, he sought information about successful 
international models of public -private partnerships (PPPs) for highway management that 
could be replicated in the country. He a lso highlighted the challenges created by the 
exempted category provisions, which remain an ongoing problem. 
3.        The CEO, Oriental Structural Engineers Pvt. Ltd. (OSE) informed the Committee 
that their company is maintaining the toll plazas and highw ays for seven projects in the 
country. He apprised the Committee about the highway management and informed about 
the administrative issues like the closure of unauthorized median, unauthorized 
connections to the project highway and removal of encroachments . He, further, informed 
about the highway administrator concept wherein one NHAI officer is appointed as the 
administrator with powers to issue notices. However, he does not possess the magisterial 
powers. The CEO submitted that a State Government officer with magisterial authority 
could be appointed as the nodal officer for that area. The Project Director (PD) of NHAI 
and the Magistrate can manage and exercise their powers to eradicate problems like 
encroachment and unauthorized median, etc. 
4.        He shed some light on the issue of over -speeding of vehicles, stating that NHAI 
has installed speed cameras on expressways like the Delhi-Meerut Expressway, which are 
directly connected to the traffic control room from where the e -challans are issued.   He 
submitted that such cameras can also be installed on other highways in order to reduce 
accidents. The issue of vandalization of toll plazas was also discussed, and it was 
suggested that a policy revision is needed to reduce such incidents. The CEO, OSE also 
apprised the Committee about the gap between the expectation of the road users regarding 
the discount in toll prices and the concession agreement provisions.   He submitted that 
some of the genuine problems of local people are neglected, for example, trucks (locally 

58 
 
known as Chhota Hathi) carry many people for commutation purposes but are charged as 
commercial vehicles. Lastly, it was submitted that the concessionaire, being a commercial 
entity, should not be penalized, and their demands should be considered during the 
consultation process for new contracts. 
5.        Thereafter, the Chairman asked the representatives of the second organization, 
PNC Infratech, to present their views whereupon the General Manager, PNC, informed 
that most of their suggestions we re the same. Upon being informed that the Chairman of 
the Agra -based company is Mr. Pradeep Kumar Jain and the Company was being 
represented by its GM and DGM, the Chairman expressed his unhappiness on the lack of 
protocol in sending officials of the compa ny to depose before the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee. On the consensus of the Committee, it was unanimously decided that the 
evidence of PNC Infratech would not be taken on record and that the Chairman of the 
Company may be called to depose before the Committee. 
6.        A Member raised a query regarding progress made in FASTag installation and also 
sought suggestions from the stakeholders to handle mishaps at Toll Plazas. He also 
enquired about the usage of Artificial Intelligence and other technologi es at toll plazas. 
The CEO, OSE, in this regard, informed that currently FASTag penetration in the country 
is around 98-99 per cent.  However, in foreign countries, vehicles are not required to stop 
at the toll plaza. They keep moving at the normal speed, a nd cameras capture the number 
plate. Similarly, in our country, number plates are hallmarked and can be recognized by 
high-resolution cameras so that the amount can be deducted from bank accounts linked to 
the vehicle number. 
7.        The Chairman then enquired about the manual collection of toll tax during glitches 
in collection by FASTag. The CEO apprised that this problem occurs due to two reasons, 
firstly, when the system is not up to date.   In this regard, he added that all the 
concessioners have upgraded the system or are in  the process of upgradation. Secondly, it 
occurs due to the wrong placement of tags or dirty glass surface. The Chairman suggested 
that a measure should be adopted that if one is unable to pay at that point of time, the 
vehicle sho uld be relieved and moved out of the lane so that there is no blockage of 
traffic. Later, if the person deliberately evades the toll tax, an FIR or challan may be 
issued against the driver based on car number and picture of the car. 

59 
 
8.        Members also raised queries on the following issues: 
 Special amenities for women at the toll plazas. 
 Deplorable conditions of toilets at toll plazas. 
 Excess collection of 28 crore rupees as toll fees by three toll plazas- Nathavalasa, 
Changeri and Hebbalu in South India for delayed period of construction. 
 Steps taken for prevention of over-collection at toll plazas. 
 Facility and management of ambulances, cranes and patrolling vehicles on 
highways. 
 Issue of bypassing of toll plaza and steps taken to tackle it. 
 Rectification of black spots. 
9.        The stakeholders responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took 
note of the suggestions made by the Members, and also assured to give the details in 
writing on the issues which could not be answered at that point of time. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
10.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11.       The meeting adjourned at 03.53 PM. 
  
  New Delhi,                                                                                       Monica Baa 
 14th December, 2023                                                                          Director 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 

60 
 
Annexure 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
2:30 P.M. 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
S. No. Name Designation E-mail 
1 Shri Anurag Jain Secretary secy-road@nic.in 
2 Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh Additional Secretary as-highways@nic.in 
3 Shri Kamlesh Chaturvedi Joint Secretary k.chaturvedi@gov.in  
4 Shri S. P. Singh Joint Secretary js-logistics@gov.in  
5 Shri B. K. Sinha Additional Director General bk.sinha@nic.in 
6 Shri Rajeev Singh Chief Engineer amirajsingh@gmail.com 
7 Shri Aditya Prakash Chief Engineer aditya.morth@gmail.com 
8 Shri Shashi Bhushan Superintending Engineer shashi.81@gov.in  
9 Shri Rajesh Kumar Superintending Engineer rajeshmorth@gmail.com 
10 Shri U.C. Joshi Superintending Engineer uc.joshi@nic.in 
National Highways Authority of India 
S. No. Name Designation E-mail 
1 Shri NRVVMK Rajendra 
Kumar 
Member (Finance) & MD, 
IHMCL memberfinance@nhai.org 
2 Shri K. Venkata Ramana Member (PPP) kvenkataramana@nhai.org 
3 Shri V. K. Rajawat Member (Project) memberproject@nhai.org 
4 Shri Prashant Gawasane CGM, Commercial Operation   
5 Shri Vivek Jaiswal COO, IHMCL coo@ihmcl.com 
National Highways and Infrastructure Development 
S. No. Name Designation E-mail 
1 Shri Atul Kumar Director  technicaldirector@nhidcl.com  
  
***  
  
  

61 
 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Wednesday, the 6th February, 2024 in 
Committee Room -2, First F loor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
  
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
  
 Lok Sabha 
  
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
14. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
  
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider a nd adopt 
the following draft Reports of the Committee: - 
1) *** 

62 
 
2) ***1 
3) *** 
4) Operation and Maintenance of National Highways and Management of Toll Plazas 
5) *** 
6) *** 
2.        The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one. After a 
brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid six draft Reports and authorized the 
Chairman to carry out minor modifications o f typographical and factual errors and 
formatting, if needed in all the Reports. 
3.       The Committee authorized Dr. C. M. Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A. A. 
Rahim, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 8 th February, 2024. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Anto Antony, M.P. and in his absence, Shri K. 
Muraleedharan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
4.        *** 
5.        A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6.       The Meeting adjourned at 10:35 A.M. 
                                                                                                                                      
New Delhi,                                                                                      D. S. Prasanna Kumar 
6th February, 2024                                                                                    Joint Secretary 
 
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 