 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
335
_ 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY FIFTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY FIFTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
4. REPORT                                1-41 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   42-43 
    6. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
44-46


i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Smt. Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Thirty Fifth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of Ministry of Ports, Shipping 
and Waterways. 
2. The Three Hundred  Sixteenth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  14th March, 
2022 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred  Sixteenth Report were received from the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways on 20th June, 2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  15th 
December, 2022.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 15, 2022                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 25, 1944 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
A&N Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
ALHW Andaman Lakshadweep Harbour Works 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
B.E. Budget Estimate 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs (erstwhile CBEC) 
CCA Chief Controller of Accounts 
CCEA  Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CPP Central Public Procurement Portal  
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CRIF Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (erstwhile CRF) 
CRZ Coastal Regulation Zone 
CSL Cochin Shipyard Limited 
CZMP Coastal Zone Management Plan 
DG (S) Directorate General (Shipping) 
DGLL Directorate General of Light Houses and Light Ships 
DPIIT The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EAP Externally Aided Project 
EBR Extra Budgetary Resources 
EC Environmental Clearance 
EoI Expression of Interest 
ETV Emergency Towing Vessel 
EXIM Export Import 
FSs Feasibility Studies 
F.Y. Financial Year 
GBS Gross Budgetary Support 
GoI Government of India 
IA Impact Assessment 
ICG Indian Coast Guard 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IMU Indian Maritime University 
IPA Indian Ports Association 
ISRF International Ship Repair Facility 
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
JMVP Jal Marg Vikas Project 
LRIT Long Range Identification Tracking 
MbPT Mumbai Port Trust 
MCA Model Concession Agreement  
MIV Maritime India Vision  
MMB Maharashtra Maritime Board 
MMT Million Metric Tonnes 

iv 
 
MMTPA Million Metric Tonnes Per Annum 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MOEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
MoPS&W Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPA Major Ports Authority Act 
MRO Maintenance Repair and Overhaul  
MSDC Maritime Shipping Development Council 
NCSCM National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management  
NER North Eastern Region 
NGT National Green Tribunal 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHLML National Highways Logistics Management Limited 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NIOT National Institute of Ocean Technology 
NOSDCP National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan  
NSB National Shipping Board 
NW National Waterways 
OM Office Memorandum 
PAO Pay & Accounts Officer 
PCS Port Community System 
PFMS  Public Financial Management System 
PMMSY Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
R&D Research & Development 
RCS – 
UDAN Regional Connectivity Scheme – Ude Desh ka Aam Nagarik 
R.E. Revised Estimates 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RoFR  Right of First Refusal 
RO-RO Roll on - Roll off Passenger 
SDCL Sagarmala Development Company Limited 
SBFAP Ship Building Financial Assistance Policy  
SFC-II State Finance Commission 
SMPK  Shyama Prasad Mookerjee Port, Kolkata 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
SSR Standard Schedule Of Rates 
TAMP Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UT Union Territory 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Por ts, 
Shipping & Waterways on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three 
Hundred and Sixteenth Report on „Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways ‟ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 14th 
March, 2022. 
 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 20th June, 202 2 in 
respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report. The replies ha ve 
been categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.:  6, 10, 14, 20, 29, 35, 55, 56, 62, 64, 71 
Total: 11 
 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which t he Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Ministry: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 8, 11, 16, 18, 25, 31, 32, 34, 41, 44, 47, 52, 58, 59, 65, 70 
Total: 16 
 
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry h ave not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
 
Paragraph Nos.: 7, 13, 23, 37, 40, 50, 68 
Total: 7 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: 
 
Paragraph Nos.:  Nil. 
Total: Nil.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes a significant gap in the overall budgetary allocation of the 
Ministry in the Financial Year ( F.Y.) 2022 -23 as compared to its projected requirements. 
Against the proposed demand for Rs. 2542.43 Crores in B.E. 2022 -23, only Rs. 1709.50 
Crores have been allocated, registering a shortfall of Rs. 832.93 Crores i.e. 32.76% of the 
overall budgetary requirement of the Ministry for the F.Y. 22-23, and is certain to have an 
adverse bearing on the implementation of various port projects of the Ministry. The 
Committee observes that under several crucial heads such as Sagarmala Development 
Company, Indian Maritime University, Kolkata Port Trust, Inland Water Transport etc., 
significantly lesser allocation/no allocation has been made against the projected demand of 
the Ministry. The Committee desires to be apprised of the different schemes/projects under its 
ambit which will be adversely affected because of the shortfall in B.E. 2022-23 along with the 
course of action planned by the Ministry to deal with this shortfall. The Committee observes 
that the growth of In dia‟s maritime sector is of paramount importance and needs to be 
accelerated to strengthen our position of eminence in the global maritime sector. Since the 
Ministry has to play a vital role in shaping India‟s maritime prowess into an engine of 
economic development, availability of adequate financial resources is a prerequisite towards 
propelling India to the forefront of the global maritime sector. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure a good pace of utilization of allocated funds in 
initial quarters of F.Y. 2022-23, deploy their resources in a more efficient way and request 
the Ministry of Finance to enhance budgetary allocation at the R.E. 2022-23 stage so that the 
various programmes and projects that the Ministry has planned for F.Y. 22-23 can stay on 
course. 
(Para 6) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. Under Sagarmala Scheme funds have been allocated for development of projects 
which are aligned with the objectives of „Sagarmala Programme.‟ Funds allocated in the F.Y. 
2022-23 will be utilized efficiently and as per the requirement additional funds will be sought 
in Revised Estimate/Supplementary Demand Stage. 

3 
 
1.2. In respect of Inland Water Transport, as per detailed Demand for Grants of Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping and Waterways for 2022 -23 (Grant No.78), Budget to IWAI has been 
allocated under the following Budgetary Heads:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Major/Minor/Sub/ 
Detailed Head of Account Description B.E. 2022-
23 
Revenue Section 
3056.00.190.11.00.45 
Discharging interest liability on EBRs/Bonds for 
IWAI for development of Inland Waterways and 
Shipping Infrastructure - Interest  76.50 
Capital Section 
4552.00.314.01.00.54 
Capital outlay on North Eastern Area (Major Head) 
Inland Water Transport – Assistance to Public Sector 
& other Undertakings (Minor Head) Inland 
Waterways Authority of India – Investment. 
99.80 
5056.00.190.01.00.54 
Capital Outlay on Inland Water Transport (Major 
Head) 
Investments in Public Sector and other undertakings 
(Minor Head) 
Inland Waterways Authority of India – Investment. 
444.51 
 
1.3. Total – Revenue & Capital Section: - 76.50 + 99.80 + 444.51 = Rs. 620.81 crore.  
Apart from above, the shortage of funds, if any, assessed during the course of year 2022 -23 
shall be sought at R.E. 2022-23 stage. 
 
1.4. So far as Indian Maritime University is concerned:- 
 
a) Net fund balances of Indian Maritime University (IMU) after setting aside for its 
current liabilities, committed liabilities and for six months expenditure requirements is 
Rs. 108.45 Crore as on 31.03.2022 (estimated). 
 
b) This Net fund balances of Rs. 108.45 is proposed to be utilised during the SFC II period 
(2022-23 to 2026-27) as per the table given below: 
 
 Rs. in Crores Rs. in Crores % 
A. REVENUE 
Projected Gross Revenue Expenditure for the 
period from 2022-23 to 2026-2 
  
902.09 
 
 
 
 
780.50 
 
 
121.59 
 
100.00% 
 
 
 
 
 
86.52% 
 
13.48% 
IMU's own revenue projected for the SFC period 672.05 
Revenue Deficit that will be met out of IMU's 
fund balances 
108.45 
Total Revenue Expenditure met from IMU's own 
Resources + Funds balances 
 
Remaining deficit is sought through the SFC II 
funding proposal 2022 – 23 to 2026-27 from GoI 
 

4 
 
towards Grants in Aid Salary 
B. CAPITAL 
IMU‟s Fund Requirement for the period from 
2022-23 to 2026-27 towards its Capital needs 
 373.68  
C. TOTAL 
Total Funding Request submitted for the next 5 
years 
 495.27  
  
1.5. The SFC-II proposal of IMU is under consideration of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways. Once, approvals are obtained within the Ministry, SFC-II proposal will be placed 
before SFC for the appraisal. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee takes note of  the various important schemes/ projects outlined by the 
Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may closely monitor the progress of 
these projects so as to maintain a good pace of fund utilization and to avoid time and cost 
overruns as well.   
(Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance with due diligence to 
closely monitor the progress of these projects so as to maintain a good pace of fund 
utilization and to avoid time and cost overruns as well.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee notes that till 7 th February, 2022, under Revenue head, Rs. 726.92 
crores have been spent, i.e., about 74.4% vis -à-vis the R.E. 2021-22 of Rs. 976.57 crore 
under Revenue head. Under the capital head, the total expenditure incurred by the M inistry 
till 7 th February, 2022 is even lower with figures of 69.5% vis -à-vis the overall Capital 
allocation of Rs. 608.8 crores at R.E. 2021 -22 stage. The Committee feels that at the current 
pace of expenditure, the Ministry will not be able to fully util ize its R.E. 2021-22 of Rs. 
1585.4 crores unless urgent corrective measures are taken. The Committee is concerned to 
note that the expenditure incurred by the Ministry during F.Y. 2021-22 under several crucial 
heads such as Assistance to Ship Building, Res earch and Development, Grants to Inland 
Water Transport Authority of India (NER), Traffic Authority for Major Ports, Indian 
Maritime University, IWAI Projects - EAP Component and Programme Component, 
Investment in IWAI etc., till 7 th February, 2022 is going on at a pace slower than the desired 

5 
 
pace that could result in under -utilization of funds allocated to the Ministry, which witnessed 
a reduction of Rs. 117 crores at R.E. 2021-22 stage. The expenditure incurred till 7 th 
February, 2022 under the head „Directorate General of Shipping‟ is a mere 45 percent of 
R.E. 2021-22, with Capital expenditure under the head at just 10.64 percent (Rs. 2.66 crores 
spent out of R.E. 2021-22 allocation of Rs. 25 crores). It is evident that the Ministr y will end 
up with a significant amount of unutilized funds under these crucial heads at the end of the 
F.Y. 2021-22. The Ministry already faces budgetary shortfall in terms of its projected 
requirement and actual allocation made. Failure to utilize even t he reduced allocation will 
severely stifle the pace of growth of the Indian Shipping sector at large. This trend is also 
indicative of serious shortcomings in formulating the Budget Estimates as well as 
ineffectiveness in monitoring utilization of the budg eted funds for implementing various 
schemes and programmes of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may look into the reasons behind this under-utilization of funds seriously and ensure 
that suitable remedial measures are tak en to arrest this trend of inappropriate projection of 
fund requirements and as also to ensure that the earmarked funds are utilized optimally 
during F.Y. 2022-23 to avoid reduction of allocation at R.E. 2022-23 stage. The Ministry may 
apprise the Committe e about the reasons behind the under -utilization of funds during F.Y. 
2021-22 and the measures being taken to ensure more efficient utilization of funds in future. 
(Para 14) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. Comments of MT Division:-  
(i) Ministry of Ports, Shipping  and Waterways has spent Rs 1  crore i.e. 100% vis-à-vis 
the R.E. 2021-22 of Rs. 1 crore under Indian Maritime University Scheme. 
(ii) Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has spent Rs 97,  26, 487, i.e. 97.265% 
vis-à-vis the R.E. 2021-22 of Rs. 1 crore unde r R&D (Shipbuilding) Scheme. Rs 2, 
73, 513 under this scheme are surrendered. 
 
3.2. Comments of MA Division: 
(i) Under Ship Building Subsidy (Revenue Expenditure) budget allocated to DG  (S) is 
Rs. 64.24 crores which has been fully utilized. 
(ii) Under Capital Expenditure allocation under Information technology was Rs. 7.29 
crores for New e-Governance project and LRIT. For LRIT Rs. 4.18 crores have been 
utilized s o far as per new e -Gov project approval of the MoPS&W receive d vide 
letter dated 29.11.2021. As per the payment terms no payment is due for current 
financial year and hence allocation of Rs. 3.11 has been surrendered well in advance 

6 
 
vide letter dated 15th Februaru, 2022 and again vide letter dated 10th March, 2022. So 
far as building works out of allocation of Rs. 17.71 crores, Letter of Authorization 
has been issued by the Office of Pr.  CCA for Rs. 13.36 crores towards building 
works. During this year due to COVID-19 pandemic less ac tivities carried out and 
hence the  remaining fund of Rs, 4.35 crores has been surrendered vide this 
Directorate‟s letter dated 15th February, 2022 and again vide letter dated 10 th March, 
2022. Expenditure booked by the CPWD as per data available in the PFMS is Rs. 
2.89 crores 
(iii) As regards revenue expenditure out of initial allocation of Rs.116.65 crores (DGS 
and NSB) under B.E. 2021-22, which was reduced to Rs. 106.31 crores under R.E. 
2021-22. Out of this, the expenditure incurred as on date is Rs. 95.77 crores. Thus, 
expenditure incurred with reference to R.E. is 90.08%. Due to COVID–19 pandemic 
less expenses incurred in Travel (Foreign and Domestic), Leave Travel Concession 
etc. Bills towards hiring of ETV not received from the MbPT for current year in 
spite of several request. Hence fund has been surrendered in advance vide letter 
dated 15th February, 2022 and 11th March, 2022. 
(iv) Under Revenue expenditure additional allocation of Rs. 30.65 crores allocated by re-
appropriation of fund in Final R.E. for payment towards Department  of Space (5% 
share) and Pr.  CCA has already issued authorization letter towards transfer of fund 
vide letter dated 7th March 2022. 
 
3.3. The delay in quarterly achievements was  due to effect of pandemic COVID -19 
lockdown in first quarter and later restrictions imposed by respective state Governments for 
transportation of goods and labour movement which also affected availability of construction 
material. 
 
3.4. In respect of IWAI Projects - EAP Component, the fund allocation under R.E. 2021-
22 for Jal Marg Vikas Project is Rs. 218 crore. As on 17.3.2022, expenditure of Rs. 185 crore 
has already been achieved and for balance expenditure of Rs. 33 cr ore, the work is under 
progress for which invoices are expected by 31.3.2022. Therefore, 100% achievement will be 
attained under Jal Marg Vikas Project. 
 
3.5. Allocation under R.E. 2021-22 was Rs. 100  crore for financial assistance policy for 
shipbuilding. Out of Rs. 100 Cr ore, an amount of subsidy of Rs. 35 Cr ore has been released 
under settlement of subsidy claims under the shipbuilding subsidy scheme, 2002-2007. 

7 
 
3.6 Further, an amount of subsidy of Rs. 35 Cr has been released under financial 
assistance policy (2016 -26). Bills of Rs. 30Cr have been sent by DG  (S) to PAO for release 
of subsidy which will be released shortly. 
 
PERFORMANCE OF PORTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee observes that the cargo handling capacity of Major Ports in the 
country has increased by about 79 percent between the years 2014-15 and 2020-21 (ignoring 
the incomplete data for the year 2021 -22 since it is yet to be finalized), which is an 
annualized growth rate of about 10.2 percent. As compared to this, the gross cargo handling 
capacity of Non -Major Ports has increased by on ly about 52 percent, with an annualized 
growth rate of just 7.2 percent. In terms of Traffic handled, however, Non -Major Ports 
registered a growth of about 30 percent ( ∼6.7 percent annualized) between the years 2015 -
16 and 2019 -20 (excluding the COVID affected year 2020 -21 and ongoing year 2021 -22) 
whereas Major Ports in the country only managed a minor increase of about 16 percent 
(∼3.8 percent annualized) during the same period. This data points to the fact that while 
Major Ports across the country ha ve managed to increase their capacity at a satisfactory 
pace, which is higher than that of Non -Major Ports, the statistics pertaining to traffic 
handled at ports across the country do not portray a robust picture for the Major Ports in the 
country. While N on-Major Ports have managed to increase the volume of traffic handled at 
nearly the same pace at which their capacity is increasing, Major Ports paint a contrasting 
picture with annual growth in traffic handled at a mere 3.8 percent as against the capacity  
growth rate of about 10.2 percent. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
review the possible reasons behind the comparative stagnancy in the volume growth of traffic 
handled at Major Ports in the country. The Ministry may also come up with an effective plan 
of action to further improve the growth rate of cargo handling capacity of Non -Major Ports 
in the country. The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in 
this regard. 
(Para 20) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. The government has already given a strong push to port modernization, 
mechanization and digitalization, with a number of ease of doing business initiatives. Port 
modernization includes the introduction of web -based e -forms and direct port delivery, 

8 
 
installation of container scanners and radio frequency identification -based systems for gate 
automation, digitalization of land records, the launch of a single -window interface for 
facilitating trade, and integration of more seaports with the PCS.   
 
4.2. The „Sagarmala Programme, ‟ the flagship programme of the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways lays great emphasis on modernization and mechanization. Ports are 
looking at setting up specialized high capacity berths, supported by state-of-the-art equipment 
and skilled and trained manpower.  A roadmap has been prepared for increasing the Indian 
port capacity to 3300+ MMTPA by 2025 to cater to the Indian Ports traffic. 
 
4.3. With the objective of propelling India to the forefront of the Global Maritime Sector,  
the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has formulated Maritime India Vision 2030 
(MIV 2030), a blueprint to ensure coordinated and accelerated growth of India‟s maritime 
sector in the next decade.  MIV 2030 identifies over 150 initiatives across 10 themes covering 
all the facets of the Indian maritime sector and is a comprehensive effort to define and meet 
national maritime objectives. 
 
4.4. Since 1997, cargo-handling terminals run by government -owned ports themselves as 
well as private operators at  major ports have been required to take clearance from the tariff 
regulator (TAMP) before fixing and revising tariffs, once in two -three years, for the services 
rendered at their berths and terminals. On the other hand, Non -Major Ports are having 
operational and regulatory freedom, including the freedom to set their own tariffs, which 
gives a distinct advantage to them for attracting cargo. They also attract private investment by 
giving concession contracts, offering incentives, granting exclusivity rights,  and ensuring 
land acquisition. 
 
4.5. However, after the enactment of the MPA Act, 2021, all the Major Port Trusts are 
converted into Port Authority, except Kamarajar Port (Ennore), which will continue to 
function as a major port  under the Companies Act 20 13. This will empower the Major Ports 
to perform with greater efficiency on account of full autonomy in decision making and by 
modernizing the institut ional framework of Major Ports.  The Board of Port Authority will 
comprise 11 to 13 Members representing v arious interests. A compact Board with 
professional independent Members will strengthen decision-making and strategic planning. In 
the new Act, the Port Authority has been given powers to fix tariffs which will act as a 
reference tariff for purposes of bid ding for PPP projects. PPP operators will be free to fix 
tariffs - based on market conditions. The move to do away with the TAMP‟s tariff regulations 
will now make way for a market -driven pricing environment for PPP operators calling for a 

9 
 
level playing fi eld with their counterparts at Non -Major Ports locations. The Board of Port 
Authority has been delegated the power to fix the scale of rates for other port services and 
assets including land.  The Boards of Port Authority have been delegated full powers to  enter 
into contracts, planning and development, fixing of tariff except in national interest, security 
and emergency arising out of inaction and default.  All the above initiatives will boost cargo 
growth at the Major Ports in the coming years. 
 
4.6. Major ports are under the jurisdiction of the Government of India and governed by the 
MPA Act, 2021. Non-Major Ports comes under the jurisdiction of the respective State 
Government‟s Port Department or Maritime Boards.  At present, State Governments have the 
power to plan, develop and regulate the Non -Major Ports in the country. The improvement in 
the growth rate of cargo handling capacity of Non -Major Ports is looked after by the 
respective State Governments. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee is co nstrained to note that the Ministry had only been allocated Rs. 
301 crores i.e. 60% of its projected demand for the F.Y. 21-22, and even this low allocation 
was further reduced at the R.E. 21-22 stage by another 17 percent, to Rs. 250 crores. The 
Committee notes that the ambitious „Sagarmala Programme‟  of the Ministry has been 
allocated Rs. 412.79 Crores in the B.E. 2022 -23 against the projected demand of Rs. 500 
Crores, which is about 17% less than the projected demand. The ambitious programme aims 
to promote port -led development in the country and reduce logistics cost for both domestic 
and EXIM cargo. The Committee, therefore, recommends that more financial  resources need 
to be allocated for Sagarmala at R.E. 2022-23 stage so that the vision of increasing 
competitiveness of Indian exports and improving the overall efficiency of the economy could 
be translated into reality. 
(Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The Sagarmala Projects intends to achieve the broad objectives of enhancing the 
capacity of major and non-major ports and modernizing them to make them efficient, thereby 
enabling them to become drivers of port led economic development. Non -major ports ar e 
under the jurisdiction of respective State Maritime Boards/State Governments. However, 
under „Sagarmala Programme ,‟ the Ministry  provides financial assistance to State 
Government port infrastructure projects, coastal berth projects, road &  rail projects, fishery 

10 
 
harbours, skill development projects, Coastal community development, International standard 
cruise terminal and unique and innovative projects such as Ro-Pax ferry services etc. 
 
5.2 Projects have been identified based on the milestones and target for assistance in the 
F.Y. 2022-23. From the beginning of the financial year, funds will be optimally utilized and 
based on the need of the projects additional funds will be sought at R.E./Supplementary 
Stage.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should put in place a rigorous 
monitoring mechanism for the ongoing projects under the head „Sagarmala‟ and ensure that 
the scarce resources available with the Ministry for the given year are utilized efficiently and 
optimally. This would also ensure that the R.E. 2022-23 allocation of the Ministry would not 
face any cuts under this head which is of utmost importance given its crucial significance for 
the overall growth of the Port and Shipping sector in the countr y through port -led 
development. 
(Para 35) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The recommendation has been noted and will be swiftly act upon in the F.Y. 2022-23. 
 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSE AND LIGHTSHIPS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes that out of the R.E. 2021-22 allocation of Rs. 410 crores under 
the head „Directorate General of Lighthouse and Lightships‟, the Ministry has only been able 
to spend Rs. 280 crores, i.e., about 68 percent of the total allocation, till 7 th February, 2022. 
The Committee feels that this slow pace of expenditure will certainly lead to time and cost 
overruns and will have an adverse impact on the various projects carried out under this 
head. Given the important role played by Lighthouses in meeting the commercial and security 
needs of the country, the timely execution of projects related to development and maintenance 
of Lighthouses is extremely important. The Committee therefore recommends that the 
Directorate General of Lighthouses and Lightships may look into the reasons behind the slow 
progress of its projects/schemes and take necessary remedial measures at the earliest. 

11 
 
(Para 55) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. The accounts of the Directorate General of Lighthouses & Lightship (DGLL) are 
maintained in commercial form and its expenditure is met out of its own internal resources 
mainly from light dues levied on foreign-going ships.  The entire revenue receipt is treated as 
expenditure to the general revenues and surplus over the revenue expenditu re is transferred to 
General Reserve Fund.  The Plan expenditure of DGLL is met out of the funds available in 
General Reserve fund.   
 
7.2. The expenditure till date is detailed hereunder: - 
 (Rs. In crores) 
Year 
Revenue Account 3051 
Budget 
Estimate 
(B.E.) 
Revised 
Estimate 
(R.E.) 
Actual 
Expendit
ure 
Remarks 
2021-22 340.00 360.00 
277 
(As on 
15.03.20
22) 
1. The revenue expenditure of DGLL is met from the 
Light dues  collected during the year. As on 
15.3.2022, the Light dues  collection is Rs. 335 
crores. 
2. Proposed in the Third Supplementary for booking of 
Rs. 60 Crores under GRF in the revenue head. 
Hence, the total expenditure will be about Rs. 340 
Crores, which will be about 95% of R.E.    
 
Year 
Capital Account 5051 
Budget 
Estimate 
(B.E.) 
Revised 
Estimate 
(R.E.) 
Actual 
Expenditur
e 
Remarks 
2021-22 75.00 50.00 
29.00  
(As on 
15.03.2022
) 
1. The Capital expenditure of DGLL is met from the 
Reserve Funds.  
2. Due to restrictions due to COVID -19 in Q1 and 
Q2, progress of Capital works is delayed.  
3. Proposed in the Third Supplementary for revision 
of Budget to Rs. 39.00. The capital expenditure as 
per third supplementary will be utilized 100%.    
 
7.3. The Total revised allocation as per third supplementary will be Rs. 399 Crores and 
respective expenditure will be Rs. 379 Crores.  
 
7.4. The recommendations of the Committee are duly noted for compliance by DGLL.  
 

12 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee, while welcoming the initiative of the Ministry to promote Lighthouses 
as tourist destinations, observes that tourism is a multi -sector activity. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a formal link should be developed between all stakeholders  so 
that Lighthouses could be promoted as attractive tourist destinations. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may come up with innovative plans to promote tourism at 
Lighthouses in coordination with Ministry of Tourism and State Tourism Dep artments and 
provisions for tourist amenities and proper connectivity should be ensured.  
(Para 56) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. The Directorate General of Lighthouses & Lightships (DGLL) has earmarked 75 
Lighthouses for the project of Promotion of Tourism at Lighthouses. The current status is as 
under:- 
A. In-House Development: 08 Lighthouses under In-house development 
(i) Development works at 03 Lighthouses at Gopnath, Veravel and Dwarka in the state of 
Gujarat have been undertaken departmentally; the works at Gopnath Lighthouse is 
completed and works Veraval and Dwarka Lighthouses in progress and schedule to be 
completed by September 2022. 
(ii) 05 more Lighthouses are identified for in -house development for promotion of 
tourism at Umargaon (Gujarat), Kelshi (Maharas htra), Kundapur (Karnataka), 
Voderevu and   Pudimadaka (Andhra Pradesh). Finalization of project components is 
in progress. It is scheduled to obtain the statutory clearances by September 2022.  
  
B. Development of Tourism at 67 Lighthouses on Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis 
(i) All statutory clearances have been obtained for 03 Lighthouses at Mahabalipuram, 
Kadalur Point and Muttom Point for development of tourism at these Lighthouses on 
PPP mode. The RFP for these projects has been invited through CPP Portal. The 
concession agreement is expected to be signed by August 2022 and works will be 
commenced in March 2023. 
(ii) Project components for development of tourism at 64 lighthouses on PPP mode have 
been envisaged based on the EoI submitted by prospective de velopers. The National 
Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM) of MoEF&CC entrusted for 
preparation of CRZ maps for 55 Lighthouses (9 lighthouses does not fall under CRZ). 

13 
 
Field survey of CRZ mapping at all the lighthouses are completed and submi ssion of 
final CRZ maps in progress. 
 
8.2. The envisaged project components at 55 lighthouses are being optimized based on the 
CRZ mapping, in accordance with CRZ regulations, DGLL is obtaining clearances from 
Town Planning Authority and other local statutory clearances which are under progress.  
 
8.3. The recommendations of the Committee are duly noted for compliance by DGLL.  
 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
DRAUGHT-RELATED ISSUES AT KOLKATA PORT AND OTHER PORTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee notes with serious concerns that even though PIB had approved an 
amount of Rs. 256 crores for dredging subsidy to SMPK during F.Y. 2022-23, a 24% lower 
allocation of Rs. 195.10 crore has been made for the same in B.E. 2022-23. The Committee 
recommends that the subsidy amount may be reviewed at the R.E. stage in order to ensure 
that dredging operations at SMPK can achieve sufficient draft, so that the port can function 
as per its targets for the F.Y. 22-23. 
(Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. SMPK being a riverine port and situated a long distance away from the Bay of Bengal 
suffers from draft limitations however, the port manages to bring in cargo through ingenious 
methods such as literage whereby the mother ship is partially relieved of its cargo onto barges 
before entering the river channel to increase its buoyancy and help it to navigate the channel 
with lesser draft. This is done with the help of floating cranes at the Sandheads. 
 
9.2. The expenditure of the SMPK to wards dredging of the river channels is audited at the 
end of the financial year. Based on the amount spent on dredging activities for a particular 
year as certified by audit, dredging subsidy is released in the next financial year. Although 
rupees 256.00 Cr was proposed for B.E.2022-23 as per the approved figure of PIB minutes 
dated 10.02.2021, allocation of rupees 195.10 Cr has been made for the same. However, the 
recommendation of the Committee for reviewing the subsidy amount at the R.E. stage is 
noted to ensure that dredging operations at SMPK for achieving sufficient draft continue 
unhampered. 

14 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake a detailed exercise 
about the dredging requirements of all the major ports along with cost -benefit analysis for 
the investment required to ensure improved draft levels at the ports. The Ministry may 
analyze the viability of monetizing the sand and other raw materials of any potential value, 
that are obtained as an outcome of dredging at ports and utilizing this amount for funding 
more dredging projects at seaports as well as riverine ports. If found f easible, this would 
finance enhanced dredging efforts which in turn would permit the ports to handle vessels of 
much bigger size and boost the growth potential of the India‟s maritime sector at large. It 
would also put a check on the illegal mining of sand  that is presently taking place at sea and 
river basins. The Committee, therefore, recommends that sufficient funds may be allocated by 
the Ministry for carrying out research into this area in a time -bound manner and if possible, 
a policy may be brought out in this regard. 
(Para 64) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1. Noted. 
 
CLEARANCE TIME AT CUSTOMS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee commends the decrease in the turnaround time of containers at ports 
across the country. However, the Committee feels that the time taken for customs clearance 
at the ports should be further reduced in order to minimize traffic congestion at the ports as 
well as to further reduce the overall transportation time of goods. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Minis try may take up the issue of customs clearance may be taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance so that the process of customs clearance becomes hassle -free 
and streamlined and the time taken for the same is reduced. 
(Para 71) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1. Noted Please. 
 
 
 

15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that against the projected demand of Rs. 128.59 crore (Rs. 
75.70 crore under the revenue account and Rs. 52.789 crores under the capital account) of 
the Ministry under the head – „Development of Minor Ports‟ for F.Y. 2022 -23, an allocation 
of Rs. 52.79 crores has been made and the head - „Development of Minor Ports‟ has  been 
subsumed under the head – Sagarmala. However, the Committee finds no explanation for 
there being no budgetary allocation for the revenue head „Development of Minor Ports‟ at 
B.E. 2022-23 stage, even though the Ministry had projected a demand of Rs. 7 5.70 crores for 
the same. The Committee is well aware that the private ports have been more successful in 
attracting higher private investment because they are perceived to be more business oriented, 
customer-friendly, cheaper and in general more efficient .  However, the minor ports owned 
by State Governments or State Maritime Boards are facing stiff competition from the private 
minor ports which are on a different growth trajectory due to superior infrastructure.  The 
allocation of Rs. 52.789 crore under A LHW for Development of Minor ports against the 
proposed B.E. 2022 -23 of Rs. 128.49 crore appears quite insufficient for the upgradation of 
infrastructure to face the challenges from private players. The Committee, therefore, desires 
to be apprised of the reasons behind no allocation under the revenue head of the former-head 
„Development of Minor Ports‟ at B.E. 2022 -23 stage and how the Ministry plans to offset the 
impact of this shortfall. 
(Para 8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. ALHW under the MoPS&W projected for Rs 75.65 Crore under Central revenue head 
and Rs 52.79 Crore under Central Capital Head and also Rs 10.76 Crore under Sagarmala in 
budget estimate for the year 2022 -23. Accordingly demands for grants of MoPS&W for the 
year 2022-23 provides Rs 75.65 Cro re under Central revenue head and Rs 340.798 Crore has 
been provided under grants for creation of capital assets under Sagarmala head of 01.04.35 
which includes the ALHW‟s projection of Rs 63.54 Crore (Rs 52.79 Cr under Central capital 
+10.76 Cr under Saga rmala) as all the ongoing and sanctioned projects has been merged 
under Sagarmala scheme. Therefore there may be no shortfall of funds. 

16 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee may be apprised of the various activities/programmes that were 
planned by the Ministry under the revenue head „Development of Minor Ports‟ for the F.Y. 
2021-22 and F.Y. 2022-23, along with reasons for no allocation under the same at B.E. 2022-
23. 
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. ALHW projected the required funds under the Ce ntral, Capital and Revenue heads 
and „Sagarmala‟ heads separately. However, the Scheme of „Development of Minor Ports‟ 
has been merged with the „Sagarmala‟ Scheme. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee is distressed to note that excluding the year 2018 -19, there has been a 
clear pattern of lack of proper utilization of funds by the Ministry which is evident from the 
substantial cuts faced by the Ministry each year at R.E. stage. This calls for a serious 
introspection by the Ministry. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may apprise the 
Committee of the reasons behind this trend of substantial decrease in allocation at R.E. 
stage. The Committee also recommends that there is an imperativ e need for the Ministry to 
exercise due diligence in budget formulation and observe fiscal norms and discipline so that 
huge mismatch between the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and the actual expenditure 
is minimized. Non-utilization of funds should be a rare occurrence instead of being a regular 
feature as witnessed now. 
(Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. Under Sagarmala Scheme, funds allocated at B.E. stage are being fully utilized. 
Further, Additional funds have been sought at final estimate stages. 
 
3.2. Besides above, In respect of IWAI, the major interventions under Jal Marg Vikas 
Project (JMVP) like construction of Multi -Modal Terminals at Varanas i & Sahibganj were 
completed in 2018 & 2019 after land acquisitions and work of MMT Haldia and new 
Navigation Lock was also commence recording more expenditure in 2018 -19. Thereafter, 
progress of the following projects was affected due to outbreak of COVID-19. 
 
(i) The construction works of New Navigational lock at Farakka (West Bengal) was 
affected during the Lock -down for containment of COVID -19 as the work was 

17 
 
completely stopped, no movement of good, men and material was allowed, 
movement of construction material was restricted. 
(ii) The construction works of site at Haldia MMT (West Bengal) was affected during 
the Lock-down for containment of COVID -19 as the work was completely stopped, 
no movement of good, men and material was allowed, movement of constructio n 
material was restricted. 
 
3.3. Further, the Arth Ganga (under JMVP -II) component are in DPR Stage, which 
reduced the expenditure during 2019 -20 and 2020 -21. Similarly, expenditure on other 
operation & maintenance works on other NWs were also restricted r esulting in lesser 
expenditure in view of other financial guidelines issued by the Government time to time.  
 
 
UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES (UCs) 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee is deeply concerned to note that several projects which got sanctioned 
as early as in 2018 are still awaiting Environmental Clearance  (EC). Several other projects 
that got sanctioned in 2016 and 2017 could only begin to progress in 2021, presumably 
because of delays in EC. The Ministry should have completed all pre -project activities 
including EC. Evidently, the Ministry has lagged behind on this issue. The Committee desires 
to be apprised of the reasons which are causing such enormous delays in obtaining ECs for 
infrastructure projects at ports. It goes without saying that timely completion of these 
projects is crucial to tackle the bottlenecks being faced by the various ports in registering a 
higher pace of growth. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may urgently w ork 
upon a mechanism to streamline the process for obtaining ECs so that any objections raised 
by the concerned authorities regarding the issuance of ECs may be sorted out without delay. 
(Para 18)  
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. CRZ clearance of port projects got delayed due to an NGT order imposing Blanket 
ban on fresh approvals in states whose CZMP (state coastal management plans) had not been 
approved. However, as on date no project is pending for environment and CRZ clearance. 
 
4.2. The Ministry  has put in a monitoring mechanism for projects under Sagarmala 
through its MIS. Further, regular meetings are held at the Ministry level with Implementing 
Agencies and other line Ministries to sort out the issues pertaining to the Central Government 

18 
 
including Environmental clearance, ASI Clearance etc. Efforts are being made in close 
association with M/o Environment, Forests & Climate C hange for early EC of the projects to 
tackle the delays. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee notes that revised cost of one of the projects with cost overruns has 
increased by as much as 154% as compared to the original cost. The Ministry may apprise 
the Committee about what part of these cost overruns is due to revision in SSR rates , change 
in scope of work and how much of the increase has been caused due to delay in completion of 
these projects. The Committee suggests that the Ministry take adequate measures to minimize 
cost escalation and time overruns by urgently addressing delays  in execution and closely 
monitor the progress of these projects under the MMB.  
(Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Projects which are received in the Ministry under „Sagarmala Programme‟ are 
promptly acted upon so that timely in – principle approvals are  conveyed to the IA. Due to 
steep increase in prices of cement and steel in recent times, some of the projects have 
witnessed revision in cost.   
 
5.2. The Ministry regularly monitors the concerns of the IAs and wherever necessary 
revised approvals are given timely.  
 
5.3. Since Majority of the works are taken up in states, the Ministry regularly writes to the 
State to act within the time frame of the projects as drawn in the DPR to avoid cost overrun.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee is unable to understand that no allocations have been made in the 
B.E. 2022-23 under the heads „Sagarmala Development Company (SDCL)‟ and „Transfer to 
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF)‟ against the projected demand of Rs. 190.00 
Crores each. Shipping sector has a huge role to play in the economic growth of India in the 
coming years and the Sagarmala Development Company as well as CRIF funds are both 
crucial to the timely completion of the objectives envisaged under the „Sagarmala 
programme.‟ The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasoning, if any, provided by the 

19 
 
Ministry of Finance for effecting these cuts and recommends that the Ministry may make a 
strong case for budgetary allocation under these heads at the R.E. 2022-23 stage. 
(Para 31) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. As per Cabinet decision, Sagarmala Development Company Limited (SDCL) was 
incorporated on 31 st August, 2016 with an initial authorized capital of Rs. 1,000 Crore with 
budget allocation of Rs. 250 Crore each year. The paid up capital of SDCL as on date is Rs. 
810 Crore Till date, SDCL has made investment of Rs. 541.00 Crore. 
 
6.2. Funds under Capital Section under Sagarmala are  allocated for in vestment under 
SDCL. Till date total budgetary support provid ed by the Ministry of Shipping towards paid 
up capital of SDCL is only Rs. 810 Crore. As per cabinet mandate, the Ministry of Finance 
was projected remaining allocation of Rs. 190 cr. However, while considering the Ministry‟s 
demand, the Ministry of Finance decided that no further provision may be kept for B.E. 2022-
23 for SDCL. 
 
6.3. SDCL will invest from the unspent capital available with it and based on further 
requirement during the year funds will be projected to The Ministry of Finance at R.E. 2022-
23/Supplementary Demand stages.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee also desires to know the amount of unspent capital available with 
SDCL for investment in maritime sector infrastructure development projects. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. Detailed as above in reply to recommendation No. 31. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee may be apprised of the reasons behind the 23.9% reduction in the 
allocation for ALHW under capital head at R.E. 2021-22 stage, as compared to the 
allocation made in B.E. 2021-22.  
(Para 34) 
 
 

20 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. Due to nationwide lockdown and restriction on movement of men and materials by 
the Central and UT Govt. of A&N administrations due to COVID-19 and non- receipt of 
Environmental Clearance for the project of extension of jetty at Campbell bay, the progress 
of ongoing projects was adversely affected. Hence ALHW could not achieve the physical and 
financial targets. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee also notes the initiation of the new „Landlord Model‟ through PPP 
mode. The Committee feels that since Port Development and Modernization is highly capital 
intensive, efforts of both the Public and Private sector are the need of the hour. In this 
direction, PPP mode should be encouraged by the Ministry as the Private sector has the 
requisite capital and has already shown competence in setting up modern ports. The 
Committee also desires to know the details of the proposed „Landlord Model‟ and h ow it will 
prove to be more advantageous in port development vis -à-vis the existing system.  While 
appreciating the major initiatives taken to improve private sector participation in the port 
sector, the Committee suggests that the example of the aviation sector where private players 
have changed the face of the aviation industry may be studied and impetus may be provided 
for more PPP p rojects in the seaports. The Committee also desires to know the details 
regarding ongoing/proposed PPP projects at Major ports for the year 2022-23. 
(Para 41) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 As part of MIV 2030, Major Ports need to undertake 423 MTPA capacity additions by 
2030. Out of this, approximately 95% capacity expansion is likely to be planned under Public 
Private Partnership (PPP)/Captive mode by Major Ports. . Also, at present around 28% of 
berths across Major Ports are under PPP/Captive Mode. MIV 2030 further identifies existing 
39 berths for landlord adoption in phase I and re -evaluation of remaining berths pote ntial for 
landlord model in Phase 2, so as to facilitate the movement towards landlord model at Major 
Ports. 
9.2. The important measures taken recently that will facilitate the private participation in 
Major Ports are as follows: 

21 
 
 Major Port Authorities Act 2021: the MPA Act 2021, enacted by the parliament in 
February 2021, will provide more autonomy to ports and help them take decisions faster with 
respect to infrastructure development and changing market conditions. It is expected  to usher 
in a new era for administration of Major Ports in India in which the Major Ports will 
contribute significantly to the economic growth and provide world -class port infrastructure 
by adopting Landlord Model of development. 
(i) The Major Ports shall gai n autonomy on many key matters including tariffs, 
development of port assets, master planning of infrastructure within port limits and 
powers to make regulations for operations of the Major Ports.  
(ii) Also, the role of Tariff Authority for Major Ports (TAMP) for fixation of the tariff has 
been done away in the new MPA Act as a tariff regulator and ports would be free to 
set their tariff based on market forces. The impact of the changes in Tariff fixation 
will be enormous as it will create inter port competitio n and also once the ports are 
empowered for tariff fixation, they will be in better position to take on markets with 
nearby non major ports handling similar cargo.  
(iii) The Act also provides for formulation of an Adjudicatory Board that will adjudicate 
disputes among Major Ports, Public Private Partnership concessionaires and captive 
users. MPA Act 2021 will have enormous impact on overall maritime trade as focus 
would be on meeting the market demand and providing high level of services to the 
customers, leading to adoption of high-tech in overall port operations. 
 Model Concession Agreement (MCA 2021): A new MCA 2021 has been notified 
after revising the existing M CA 2018, considering the change in policy environment due to 
enactment of MPA Act,  2021 and explorin g provision of further flexibility to respond to 
dynamic market and regulatory conditions, many provisions have been provided or modified 
to cater to changing environment and develop a conducive atmosphere around PPP to boost 
investment. 
 
 Tariff Policy (20 21): New Tariff Guidelines, 2021, for framing of Scale of Rates for 
PPP projects under bidding stage and all future concession agreements to be entered by Major 
Ports as per MPA Act , 2021 has been notified on 21st Dec, 2021. PPP Concessionaires for 
projects after commencement of the MPA Act , 2021 are free to fix the tariff based on market 
conditions and on such other conditions as may be notified by the Government.  
 
9.3 The MPA Act 2021 aims to develop the Major Ports in the „Landlord Model‟ as 
against the present „Service Model‟. Under the Landlord Model the ports would offer the 
basic available infrastructure for further development and operation by concessionaires 

22 
 
through PPP  Mode for fixed duration with clear cut revenue sharing understanding as per 
Concession Agreement. The PPP Concessionaires would be responsible for mechanization 
and development of the port facilities, handle assured cargo as per the Concession Agreement 
and generate revenue for the Major Ports without the burden of adding additional manpower 
by the Government. The PPP partners would bring in the latest technology and trained 
manpower would be responsible for marketing the facilities in order to attract mor e and more 
traffic. Since they have been empowered to fix their own tariffs under the Major Ports 
Authorities Act, 2021 it is expected that they would bring in healthy competition and right 
attitude to compete with the best in the world. The ports would no t be required to pump in 
more and more of their own resources for the development of their facilities. Employment of 
skilled manpower would be met by the PPP Concessionaires. 
 
MARITIME RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee notes with concern about the meager allocation of Rs. 1 crore which 
had been allocated both at B.E. and R.E.2021-22 and again it was allocated the same amount 
of Rs. 1 crore at B.E. 2022 -23, without any significant increase. Besides, the gran ts for 
research projects have been given to only three R&D Projects and that too only to three 
technical institutes. The Committee is aware that India has a vast coastline and an Exclusive 
Economic Zone, which assumes great significance in the growth of ou r economy. Research 
and innovation are a vital component of the Maritime Sector worldwide. In order to become 
a leader in Maritime Sector, India needs to enhance maritime research & development and 
education in marine geology, environmental science, etc. H ence, the Ministry should plan 
towards increasing research and development capacities and also increase the number of 
institutes involved in research on maritime sciences as new technology can propel the growth 
of the upcoming maritime sector in the countr y and help in the advancement of career of 
many maritime researchers as well.  
(Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1. Ministry of Shipping has been implementing a Research scheme for port sector with 
objective to take up research for development of Infrastructure for Port Sector coming under 
Port thrust areas viz . Generation of basic data for the coastal area in India, Erosion and 
siltation, Pollution control and abatement, designs of coastal structures, new materials for 
construction and use in ports and harbours, off shore structures. 

23 
 
 
10.2. The Research Projects are carried out by Research Institutions, IITs and also Major 
Ports in order to benefit the Maritime Sector in general and the solution to Maritime problems 
in particulars. The Ministry has  provided assistance to more than 20 projects for study and 
Research Project by various IITs, NITs, Ports and other Research Institutes. At present, 4 
projects are ongoing with IIT Roorkee, IIT Bombay and NIT Suratkal undertaking the project 
and 01 project of NIT Suratkal is under consideration in the Ministry.  
 
10.3. The Research Committee has been constituted under Chairmanship of Additional 
Secretary (PSW) with members from NITI Aayog, NIOT, Department of Science and 
Technology, Inland Waterways Authori ty of India, DGLL, DG (Shipping), MoPS&W and 
Major Ports to evaluate and approve the Research proposals received from Research 
Institutes. 
 
10.4. Research & Development Scheme in port Sector is necessary to carryout Research 
study in the Port and Harbour Sector to find solution for field problems in formulation, design 
and execution of Port and Harbour Projects and to bring in new technology in Sector. 
 
 
RESPONSE TO OIL SPILL HAZARDS  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee appreciates that a specialized agency viz., National Oil Spill Disaster 
Contingency Plan (NOSDCP) has been established to prevent oil spill, which coordinates 
with ports, state governments and the Indian Coast Guard and  that the Ministry is 
implementing sufficient measures to prevent oil spill hazards and their impact on marine 
species. The Committee desires to know the fin ancial allocation provided to NO SDCP and 
whether it is sufficient to provide for purchasing oil spill prevention equipments of 
international standards. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the recent oil spill 
incidents and whether the response of the NOSDCP was found to be adequate to address 
such disaster. 
(Para 47) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1. NOSDCP is under purview of ICG. The financial all ocation to NOSDCP may be 
taken from ICG, as MoPS&W do not provide any financial allocation to NOSDCP . Hence 
exact input on Para 47 may be invited from ICG. 
 

24 
 
11.2. Comments of MA Division: 
 The National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan (NOSDCP) is a plan.  By an Office 
Memorandum of the Ministry of Defence dated 07 March 1986 and further, by 
amendment to the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 vide 
Gazette notification dated 12 th December, 2002, the Indian Coast Guard has been 
designated as the Central Coordinating Authority for combating oil spills in Indian 
waters and undertaking oil spill prevention and control. The National Oil Spill 
Disaster Contingency P lan or NOS DCP for short, together with the allocation of 
functional responsibil ities to the various Ministries and Departments of the 
Government of India for oil spill response in the maritime zones of India was 
approved by a Committee of Secretaries to the Government of India on 04 th 
November, 1993. 
 
11.3. Role & Responsibilities of Implementing NOSDCP: 
 The Ministry of Defence with administrative responsibility for the Coast Guard 
organisation is the Ministry responsible for central coordination of oil spills of 
national significance in coastal and marine environment of various marit ime zones. 
The Indian Coast Guard (ICG) is responsible for maintaining and implementing the 
National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan. The Indian Coast Guard is also 
responsible for acting as the Central Coordinating Agency for combating of oil 
pollution in various maritime zones, except in the waters of ports and within five 
hundred meters of offshore exploration and production platforms, coastal refineries, 
and associated facilities such as single buoy mooring, crude oil terminal and pipelines. 
As the Central Coordinating Authority for combating oil pollution, the Coast Guard 
will additionally:- 
a. Review the progress reports submitted by the State Crisis Management Groups; 
b. Respond to queries addressed to it by the State Crisis Management Groups and the 
District Crisis Management Groups; and 
c. Publish State -wise list of experts and officials who are concerned” with the 
handling of oil pollution incidents. 
 
11.4. MINISTRIES AND DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA: An 
executive decision of the Committee of  Secretaries on 04 th November, 1993 serves as the 
reference for obligations of the various Ministries and Departments of the Government  of 
India in support of the NOSDCP. 
 

25 
 
11.5. STATE GOVERNMENTS: The State Governments of coastal states are responsible 
for coordinating the district and local administration and operation of the National Plan for 
shore line response and as per the provisions of the National Disaster Management Act, 2005. 
The State and District Authorities will provide a wide range of site -specific information and 
resources, either in relation to environmental impacts, or response activities through 
authorities, such as Transport, Conservation and Resource Management Departments, 
Environmental Protection Authorities, emergency services, port/harbour authorities, and local 
conservation groups. 
 
11.6. SUPPORT AGENCIES: The responsibilities allocated to various support agencies for 
implementation of the National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan are described below. The 
Navy/coastal state authorities/ port authorities will make their communication/operation 
centres facilities available to receive and disseminate reports of marine pollution accidents. 
The Indian Navy and the Indian Air Force will provide fixed wing aircrafts or helicopters t o 
conduct aerial surveillance or provide logistic support in movement of men and materials to 
the incident site. They will also provide ground to air communication link at the site for use 
by the on scene Commander. The Port Authority will provide tugs and  pollution control 
equipment at the incident site within port limits. The Ministry of Shipping, and Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas will provide tankers or tank barges for storage of recovered oil or 
oil in water emulsions, and will arrange for stora ge and eventual disposal of recovered oil. 
The Director General of Shipping, Ministry of Shipping, will be responsible for all 
negotiations with the vessel, cargo owners, and insurers and will also conduct all negotiations 
regarding compensations and indem nification. The MoEF&CC and Ministry of Agriculture 
will provide scientific advice regarding species at risk, shore -line sensitivity, restriction of 
fishing activities, use of dispersant chemicals, beach cleaning methods, etc. The Ministry of 
Finance will provide authorization for expenditure and funds for initial response and ensure 
adequate financial records are  maintained. Coastal state authorities/ district administration/ 
departments/ public works/ civil defense corps will provide personnel and equipme nt, as 
required, for shoreline clean -up and ensure safety and protection of the local population and 
resources. 
 
SHIPBUILDING AND ITS POTENTIAL IN INDIA 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes that Shipbuilding has been identified as one of the key sectors 
under the “Make in India” Programme of the GOI. The Committee notes that though the 

26 
 
existing shipbuilding industry comprises both Central and State PSUs, and also 14 privat e 
sector shipyards, India‟s share in the global shipbuilding market is very less. The Committee 
is of the opinion that shipbuilding is a manufacturing industry and a core sector with one of 
the highest job multipliers and therefore, there is a huge potenti al for the growth of the 
shipbuilding industry in India, which can also generate growth in employment. Though the 
Indian Shipbuilding industry comprising both the Public and Private sectors have been in 
existence since a long time, however, due to the glob al competition, global downturn in the 
shipbuilding industry and the unavailability of skilled workforce and state -of-the-art 
technology, Indian shipbuilding industry has lagged behind in its prospective growth. In this 
direction, the Committee appreciates  the „Atmanirbhar Bharat‟ initiative, which lays 
emphasis on the indigenization of shipbuilding. The Committee recommends that detailed and 
futuristic planning should be made for growth of the industry in all the identified segments of 
shipbuilding and an effort should be made to develop India as a shipbuilding hub. 
(Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. The Ministry has taken following steps to develop India as a shipbuilding hub: 
1.  RoFR for Indian built ships through amendments to guidelines for chartering of 
vessels done through tender process for all types of requirement. 
 
2.  Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy (SFAP) (2016) for Indian shipyards: 
 Provision of Rs. 4,000 crore has been made for ten-year period, viz. 2016-2026 
 Up to 20% of the lowest of “Contract Price” or the “Fair Price” or “actual payments 
received”, of the vessel to be provided as subsidy. 
  
3.  The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  (CCEA) in its meeting held on 
09.10.2019 has approved this Ministry‟s proposal regard ing settlement of subsidy 
claims for executed shipbuilding contracts under the shipbuilding subsidy 
scheme,  2002-2007 wherein CCEA has approved extension of timeline and budgetary 
support beyond 31.03.2014 for release of committed liability of shipbuildin g subsidy 
through budgetary support of approx. Rs.  153 crores for a total number of 51 vessels, 
including retained subsidy for 47 vessels and full subsidy for 4 vessels. Subsidy 
claims of 50 out of 51 vessels have been settled. One case was not found to be  
eligible. 
4.  Promulgation of SOP for procurement/charter of Tugs by Major Ports in India: As per 
SOP, Tugs required for services of all Major Ports shall be built in Indian 
Shipyards as per standardized designs published by the IPA. 

27 
 
5.  Promulgation of  SOP for Procurement of Deep -Sea Fishing Vessels:  This Ministry 
has issued  Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on for Procurement of Deep -Sea 
Fishing Vessels to assist the state fisheries departments in expeditious implementation 
of PMMSY. Nodal Authority has submitted the designs which are being worked upon 
by Department of Fisheries 
6.  Infrastructure status for Indian Shipyards: 
 Government of India has notified „shipyards‟ in the Harmonized Master List of 
Infrastructure Sub-Sectors from April 2016. 
 With infrastructure status, shipyards will be able to avail flexible structuring of long 
term project loans, long term funding from Infrastructure Funds at lower rates of 
interest and for a longer tenure equivalent to the economic life of their assets 
7.  Right of First Refusal (RoFR) policy (2015): 
 Government Departments/ PSUs, procuring/ repairing vessels for governmental or for 
own purposes shall henceforth, till 2025, grant RoFR to Indian shipyards 
 It would enable Indian shipyards to match the lowest rate offered by foreign bidder. 
8.  The revised Make in India order i ssued by the DPIIT in September  2020 stipulates 
that for public procurement of all goods and services with estimated value of 
purchases less than Rs 200 crores, Global tender enquiries shall not be issued and this 
can increase the demand for the complete ecosystem. 
12.2. Further, following steps/policies are under consideration/examination to develop India 
as a shipbuilding hub: 
(i) To promulgate SOP for indigenizing dredger construction 
(ii) To promulgate SOP for indigenizing offshore/research vessel construction 
(iii) To Reduce costs of designing by providing 'design as service‟ 
(iv) CSL is setting up new ISRF facility at Kochi Shipping MRO Cluster. CSL  has 
commenced operation of the Ship repair facility in MbPT. Consultancy tender has 
been floated by CSL to prepare initial feasibility report. The same sha ll be submitted 
by CSL to MoPS&W for further action with the involvement of other concerned 
Ministries & stakeholders. 
(v) The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has recently published an all - 
encompassing Maritime India Vision 2030 document. 
 
 
 

28 
 
INLAND WATERWAYS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee is concerned to note that only about 63 percent of the funds allocated 
under the head – „Capital outlay on Inland Water Transport‟ for F.Y. 2021-22, have been 
spent till 7 th February, 2022. The Committee feels that it might not be possible to utilize the 
entire amount of funds available with it under this head for F.Y. 2021-22 and therefore, 
desires to be apprised of the actions being taken by the Ministry in order to improve  the 
expenditure pattern under this head. 
(Para 58) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1. Approved R.E. for IWAI for F.Y. 2020 -21 is Rs. 560.30 crore Rs. 465.99 crore has 
been released to IWAI. An amount of Rs. 16 crore is anticipated saving under the budget 
head - G rants for Creation of Capital Assets (NW-I, III, IV, V & other new NWs during F.Y. 
2021-22. Slow pace of expenditure is due to impact of 3rd wave of COVID-19 on the progress 
of works during the year. Now, the progress of works has regained its momentum t o achieve 
the revised targets. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee desires to know from the Ministry regarding the process being 
followed to develop Inland Waterways across the country and whether any consultants are 
appointed for preparation of DPR of the projects. The Committee strongly recommends that 
the Ministry may follow due procedure and well -established norms for the development of 
inland waterways across the country with a long -term vision in mind, since waterways is a 
cost-effective, environment-friendly mode of transportation which can decrease the existing 
load on roads in the country. The Committee further desires that the Ministry may coordinate 
with the State Governments for development of inland waterways since the State 
Governments may not be having the necessary expertise for the same. Close coordination 
may also be established with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and State Public 
Works Departments to ensure that the road bridges constructed over waterways do not 
obstruct the passage of ships and boats, as far as possible. 
(Para 59) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1. Subsequent to declaration of 106 new inland waterways as National Waterways 
(NWs) in addition to 5 pre -existing NWs through National Waterways Act, 2016 by the 

29 
 
Government, 1st stage Feasibility Studies (FSs) were completed for new 106 NWs and based 
on the outcomes of FSs, 2 nd stage studies as Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of selected 
NWs have also been completed through engagement of consultants by IWAI. 
 
14.2. On the outcome of above DPR studies, contour of development of 21 new NWs have 
been finalized in addition to the 5 NWs, thus total 26 NWs in the country are identified for 
development. Works on 13 NWs have been initiated by IWAI with Govt. Budgetary Support.  
National Waterways are mainly developed for shipping & navigation by developing 
following 4 components of each waterway- 
 
1.  Fairway of adequate width of 32 to 45 m with 2 to 3m depth for inland navigation by 
river training measures like channel marking, bandalling and maintenance dredging, 
2.  Terminals- Establishment of permanent and floating terminals along the NWs like river 
stations for berthing of vessels for cargo loading/unloading, 
3.  Navigational Aids- The river alignment changes every f lood season so close monitoring 
of deeper navigation channel is done by every fortnight/month by hydrographic surveys 
which is provided with day navigation marks in the entire route and night navigation 
with lights in selected stretches of national waterways and 
4.  Vessels- Suitable inland vessels are also requirement for sailing on waterways which are 
basically provided by private sector participation. However, Government has also 
provided vessels for promotional sailing. 
 
14.3. Long term vision for devel opment of NWs in the country has been outlined in the 
Maritime India Vision 2030 prepared by the Government in Feb, 2021. Once seamlessly 
integrated with other means of transport, specifically merging with the coastal, IWT can 
provide significant relief to  congestion on the road and rail infrastructure. It can act not only 
as a supplementing means of transportation, but has significant potential in river and canal 
tourism which is yet to be tapped to its potential. 
 
14.4. In order to accelerate cargo and pa ssenger movement through IWs, four focus areas 
have been identified as per MIV 2030: 
1. Enhancement and development of infrastructure at 23 priority NWs 
2.  Regional Connectivity with Bangladesh, Nepal, Myanmar and Bhutan 
3.  Development of terminal infrastructure for RO-RO and Ferry Services 
4. Policy interventions to incentivize development of the IWs. 
 
14.5. Accordingly, action plan has been prepared for development of NWs in the country. 
 

30 
 
14.6. IWAI is taking all steps for development of NWs in close co -ordination with 
concerned State Governments. The classification of NWs has also been notified by the 
Government to maintain required horizontal and vertical clearances to be provided under the 
bridges built/proposed to be built across NWs so as to provide safe passage of vessels. 
 
 
BUCKINGHAM CANAL 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee notes that a canal route namely, the Buckingham Canal in Andhra 
Pradesh, existed in the past and was used for travel/ transport from Visakhapatnam to 
Chennai during British period, which seems to have been completely forgotten and not being 
used in the present times. The Committee is aware that the Ministry is going in for Canal 
Transport System and would like  to be apprised whether feasibility of revival of this 
historical Buckingham canal route, possibly with private partnership, has been looked into by 
the Ministry, and if not, the reasons for not exploring the same. 
(Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1. Buckingham Canal from Kakinada to Puducherry has already been declared as a part 
of National Waterway - 4 along with Godavari & Krishna rivers in 2008. Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) has also been completed. As per the findings of Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
of stretch of Buckingham Canal has many low level bridges, defunct structures and subjected 
to encroachments and hence not found suitable for development.  
 
15.2. In view of above and with the development of road and rail network parallel to the 
Buckingham Canal which is in the vicinity of East Coast, there is no proposal to develop 
Buckingham Canal from Pedaganjam to Chennai at present. Further, the canal is sev erely 
encroached by residents in its various portions for which concerned State Governments were 
also requested but any reply in this regard is yet to be received by Inland Waterways 
Authority of India (IWAI). 
 
SEAPLANES  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee notes that 78 Seaplane routes have been introduced in UDAN 4.1 and 
desires to know how many of these routes are operational at present. The Committee feels 

31 
 
that seaplanes can play an important role in promotion of tourism and enhancing 
connectivity in the country, and therefore recommends that the Ministry may work towards 
operationalization of more seaplane routes across the country. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may take steps to increase participation of the private sector in 
this regard. 
 (Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways ( MoPS&W) has signed a MoU with 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) for development of Non Scheduled/Scheduled 
operation of Sea Plane Services within territorial jurisdiction of India under Regional 
Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) scheme.  RCS - UDAN 
scheme was launched by The Ministry of Civil Aviation on 21-10-2016 to facilitate/stimulate 
regional air connectivity and make air travel affordable to the masses. It is a demand -driven 
scheme, wherein airline operators assess the feasibility of operation on a particul ar route and 
bid under the scheme.  
 
16.2. There are two existing water -aerodromes in the country - at Sardar Sarovar Dam 
(Statue of Unity) and Sabarmati Riverfront, Ahmedabad in Gujarat. The first seaplane 
operations commenced on 31 st October, 2020 between Sabarmati River Front in Ahmedabad 
and Statue of Unity in Kevadia. In addition to two existing water -aerodromes mentioned 
above, many other sites for water aerodromes have been identified in the States/UTs of 
Gujarat, Assam, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, And aman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep 
Islands. Further, MoCA is continuously engaging with the concerned stakeholders for making 
seaplane operations viable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the Ministry had projected a total requirement of Rs. 690 
crores under the broad head „Sagarmala‟ against which an allocation of Rs. 412.79 crores 
has been made under the head. It is pertinent to mention here that this allocation o f Rs. 
412.79 crore includes the allocation of Rs. 52.789 crores for ALHW, allocation for which 
was demanded by the Ministry under a separate head. This means that effectively, against 
projected demand of Rs. 690 crores, the allocation made under the head „ Sagarmala‟ is 
merely 360 crores i.e., 52.17 percent of its projected requirement. The Committee is 
disappointed to note this huge mismatch between the projected requirement of the Ministry 
and B.E. 2022-23 for this major programme and fails to understand h ow the Ministry would 
be able to make the progress it planned to make under this head given this significant 
shortfall. Sagarmala is the flagship programme of the Ministry to promote port -led 
development in the country and therefore, reduced allocation und er the same is certain to 
have a direct impact on the pace of growth of the maritime sector in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may approach the Ministry of Finance 
for higher allocation under this head at the R.E. stage so that the progress envisaged by the 
Ministry under the „Sagarmala Programme‟  for the F.Y. 2022-23 can be achieved as per 
targets. 
(Para 7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. Sagarmala is the flagship programme of the Ministry to promote port led development 
in the country. Under Sagarmala projects have been identified for assistance in the F.Y. 2022-
23. Based on the project milestones and funding guidelines, funds will be rele ased to the 
Implementing Agencies and based on the utilization , additional funds based will be sought 
from the Ministry of Finance at R.E./Supplementary Stages.  
 
 
 
 

33 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
1.2. The Committee is concerned to note the huge mismatch between the projected 
requirement of funds under the ‘Sagarmala’ head a nd the actual allocation made . The 
Committee would like the Ministry to enlist the specific action/concrete steps taken to 
address the mismatch and also desires to know whether the implementation of projects 
under ‘Sagarmala’ has been hampered, and the details of the same, if any. 
 
ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes that there has been a substantial reduction of about Rs. 117 
crores in the GBS at R.E. 2021 -22 stage. The Committee feels that this reduction indicates 
the poor utilization of allocated funds by the Ministry, during the initial quarters  of F.Y. 
2021-22. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the reasons for this 
reduction as well as the measures taken/proposed to be taken to reverse this pernicious trend 
of under-utilization of budgeted funds. 
(Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. Under Sagarmala Scheme, funds allocated at B.E. stage are being fully utilized. 
Further, Additional funds have been sought at final estimate stages. 
 
2.2. Final R.E. 2021 -22 allocation for IWAI as intimated by Budget Section of the 
Ministry vide OM dated 02.03.2022 is as under:- 
(Rs. in Crore) 
 
S.No. Numeric Code Final R.E.2021-22 
1 2 3 
Revenue Section 
1 Inland Water Transport – Discharging Interest liability on EBRs/ 
Bonds for IWAI – Interest (3056.00.190.11.00.45)  76.50 
  Total Revenue Section 76.50 
CAPITAL SECTION 
2 4552-Capital outlay on North Eastern Area  -IWAI-Investment ( 
4552.00.314.01.00.54) 84.80 
3 5056-Capital outlay on Inland Water Transport  -IWAI-
Investment (5056.00.190.01.00.54) 383.00 
4 Total Capital Section( 2+3) 467.80 
5 Total Revenue Section & Capital Section 544.30 

34 
 
 
2.3. Above allocation of R.E. 2021-22 are as per rationalized requirement 
anticipated/projected by IWAI at R.E. 2021-22 stage. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.4. The Committee desires that the Ministry provide details of the reasons behind 
the reduction made at the R.E. 2021 –22 stage and measures taken by it to tackle the 
recurring underutilization of budgetary funds to the Committee. 
 
SAGARMALA SCHEMES AND PROGRAMMES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee observes that out of the 44 Sagarmala projects under various stages 
of development, no funds have been released for as many as 31 projects, which points to the 
lack of any substantial progress having been made for those projects. In order to be 
competitive with other leading maritime nations, the creation of best -in-class Port 
infrastructure and capacity augmentation are of utmost importance. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may analyze the diffic ulties being faced in the execution of 
these projects and take necessary remedial action to tackle the same so as to complete the 
projects on time without cost escalation and enable India to upgrade its port infrastructure to 
increase its market share. 
(Para 23) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. The Ministry under the „Sagarmala Programme‟ release assistance to Maritime States, 
UT and Major Ports for development of infrastructure projects. In terms of funding 
guidelines, funds are released to the IA upon award of tender to avoid parking of funds. In 
some of the cased project s struck due to delay in ECs/ASI Clearance , and Local resistance 
etc. the Ministry regularly follows up with IAs to iron out the difficulties and make efforts for 
timely release and execution of projects.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2. The Ministry in its reply hasn’t indicated the amount of funds released and the 
status of  progress of  31 projects out of the total 44 projects under ‘Sagarmala.’ The  

35 
 
Committee desires to be apprised of the status of the funds released for 31 projects. 
DPRs indicating progress and future  requirements of these projects may also be shared 
with the Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee feels that having a Special Purpose Vehicle to improve the road and 
rail connectivity to Ports across the country would be very effective in addressing the 
bottleneck of poor connectivity that is faced by almost all Ports, stifling their throughput. 
Having robust rail and r oad connectivity at ports is crucial to ease congestion of cargo 
coming in and out of ports. The Committee may be apprised of the progress being made with 
regard to the creation of this proposed SPV. The proposed SPV may recruit officials having 
prior expe rience in execution of rail and road projects as well as in coordination with 
concerned agencies for this purpose. 
(Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. The Ministry in 18 th Maritime State Development Council (MSDC) meeting held on 
24th June 2021 discussed options for implementing the road connectivity projects by forming 
SPV with the NHLML, a company formed under NHAI to take up first/ last mile connectivity 
road projects. All states and major ports were advised to coordinate with NHLML  for 
forming SPV, for executing the project on cost recovery mechanism. 
 
4.2. As of now, The Ministry has not received any proposals from state/major ports for 
forming SPV for executing road and rail connectivity.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.3. The Committee notes that MSDC meeting was held on 24 th June, 2021 and 
almost one year has elapsed since then but no response/proposal from State/Major Ports 
for forming SPV  for executing road and rail connectivity has ensued. The Committee 
therefore recommends that fresh initiatives/meeting s with the concerned stakeholders 
should be taken for speeding up the project for forming SPV. 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF PORTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee welcomes the enactment of MPA Act, 2021 in addition to the Policy 
Guidelines, 2014, to regulate land allotment of Major Ports. It is of the opinion that it will 
give a new direction to the regulation, operation and planning of Major Ports in India.  The 
Committee also notes that the Policy guidelines for Land/Township area management to set 
up port-based industries, is under consideration with the Government. The Committee urges 
the Ministry to expedite the framing of the policy guidelines for land Management/township 
area Management to set up port-based industries. The Committee is of the firm opinion that 
integrating the port -based and other ancillary industries in the township areas of the Major 
ports will boost the employment potential and economy of the areas near the ports. 
(Para 40) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. The MoPS&W is keen on finalizing the Policy Guidelines for Land Management and 
Policy Guidelines for Land Management in Township Areas of Major Ports in order to attract 
port-based industries and other ancillary industries in order to monetize the locked assets and 
generate revenue for the Major Ports as well as boost employment potential through 
industrialization in the areas near the Major Ports.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
5.2. The Committee desires to be apprised of the guidelines formulated/policies 
framed and finalized for setting up Land Management in Township Areas at Major 
Ports.  
 
INSTALLATION OF HIGH TECH EQUIPMENTS AT PORTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee observes that earlier CBIC was handling the matter of installation of 
container scanners at Major Ports. Thereafter, as per the decision of the Committee of 
Secretaries, the responsibility of procuring scanners was shifted to the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways in December, 2015. However, now the responsibility has again been 
shifted back to CBIC. The Committee deplores this frequent shifting of responsibility of the 
important security aspect, such as the installation of scanners, betw een the CBIC and the 
Ministry and feels that there has been no long term planning on this crucial issue. The 

37 
 
Committee desires to know the reasons for this frequent change of responsibility and 
recommends that immediate steps may be taken to resolve this i ssue. It also recommends that 
the Ministry should explore the best technical equipments available and installed at 
international ports abroad and install the same at all ports in the country. As regards 
installation of Drive through Road and Rail Scanners,  the Committee recommends that all 
the procedural and operational issues may be resolved, so that the concerned ports can 
benefit at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that a long term policy should be 
framed for installation of high tech security  apparatus at all ports in the country, in view of 
the increased security threats faced by the country. 
(Para 50) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. Indian Customs are mandated to regulate imports and exports of goods and collects 
duties on the imported goods besi des discharging duties required under various Acts/rules to 
check smuggling of contrabands. This involves: (a) assessing duty based on the document 
submitted by the importer/exporter; and (b) examine the goods to verify the actual content 
match manifest de claration by the importer/exporter. Simultaneously, the Customs also 
checks that contraband goods of any kind do not enter the country.  
 
6.2. Need for container scanning arises from the fact that: (i) significant increase in import 
and export through cont ainers, (ii) raise in cases of contraband seizures, (iii) increased 
concern for safety and security, requiring higher percentage of examinations, (iv) physical 
examination of containers - time consuming and also result in hold up at Ports, (v) need for 
faster and non-invasive inspection of containers, etc. Hence, CBIC is primarily responsible to 
acquire, install and operate the container scanners and Ports are required to provide 
infrastructure support (like space) to the Customs in this activity. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
6.3. Proper planning and supervision is necessary to handle Security matters 
pertaining to the safety of passengers and cargo. The Committee desires to be apprised 
of the long –term policy measures framed by the Ministry for inst allation of Scanners 
and other security equipments at port and port terminals as well as the steps taken by 
the Ministry to resolve operational issues  hindering the installation process of such 
equipments. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should ensure that a 
suitable coordination mechanism exists between the CBIC  and itself on matters relating 
to infrastructure necessary for scanning of containers at ports. 

38 
 
CRUISE TOURISM 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Ministry to promote cruise tourism 
in the country. Now that the COVID pandemic restrictions are slowly easing across the 
country, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up with a detailed plan o f 
action to develop ocean, coastal and island cruise hub in India by undertaking development 
of world -class cruise terminals at various ports in the country. The Ministry may hold 
discussions with the private players in the cruise tourism industry in order  to understand 
their needs and chalk out a plan to address their requirements. The Committee desires the 
Ministry to work in close co -ordination with the Ministry of Tourism and relevant State 
Government Departments to address various issues pertaining to cruise shipping and 
formulate a cohesive cruise tourism promotion policy across the country. 
(Para 68) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. India has enhanced its focus on Cruise sector with the Ministry of Tourism and 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways actively promoting cruise tourism for its vast 
economic impact, the potential for job creation and for earning foreign exchange. 
7.2. As per the MIV 2030 report, in order to promote India as a global destination for 
Cruise Tourism, interventions are required across following three areas: 
I) Oceanic and Coastal Cruise 
II) Island and Infrastructure Development 
III) River and Inland Cruise 
 
7.3. In 2017, Mumbai Port embarked on a Study for an Action Plan for Development of 
Cruise Tourism in India. The potential of Cruise Shipping in India vis -a-vis Mumbai Port is 
shown below: 
 
 2016 India‟s Potential Potential of Mumbai 
Number of Passengers 0.2 million 4 million 3.2 million 
Number of Passenger ships 166 955 700 
Passengers per ship 1200 4100 4570 
Economic Potential INR 712 Crores INR 35500 Crores INR 28400 Crores 
Employment Potential 500 250000 200000 
DRIVERS OF GROWTH 
 Fastest growing economy- More disposable income 5.3 million household > 55K USD 
 Large domestic and international Tourist base (14 million inbound and 23 million outbound) 
As per B & A report appointed by IPA 

39 
 
7.4. The upcoming International Cruise Terminal at the cost of Rs. 495 Crores is being 
developed to assist in speedy clearances and transit for passengers. As the number of Cruise 
ship calls increase, additional berths will be identified for handling of Cruise operations in a 
phased manner. 
 
7.5. Mumbai Port already has a projection to achieve 3.2 million annual cruise passengers 
(moderate scenario) by 2041 as per the Bermello Ajamil Report. 
 
7.6. For the development of tourism destinations, Mumbai Port is already developing the 
Kanhoji Angre Islan d and Lighthouse on PPP Basis. Fish tourism destinations are being 
developed at Sassoon Dock and Mallet Bunder. For nature lovers, the Eco Park which will 
include a board walk amongst the rich ecology of mangroves will be developed for improving 
connectivity to local attractions.  Mumbai Port is already developing urban water transport 
circuits. In addition, the Elephanta Sewree Ropeway project to connect passengers to the 
Elephanta caves from Sewree in approx. 15 min utes. Going forward, aerial connectivity 
through Seaplanes and Helicopters may be developed once Mumbai Port crosses the 
milestone of one million cruise passengers. 
 
7.7. Further, International Cruise Conference is being organized by MoPS&W and 
Mumbai Port Authority on 14 th and 15th May, 2022 at Mumbai to promote Cruise Tourism. 
The aim of Conference is as under: 
 To disseminate the information about India's preparedness for developing the Cruise 
Tourism sector. 
 To present to the Cruise Lines and Operators an overview of the many and varied 
facilities and attraction, India has to offer. 
 To showcase the region as a desirable destination for cruise passengers. 
 To encourage the additional deployment of cruise vessel to India on a long term basis 
and to maximize the amount of cruise related revenue. 
 To create an environment where cruise lines can exchange views with the government 
authorities on their challenges operating in the region. 
 To sensitize and prepare the various stakeholders to develop policies, procedures, 
processes to encourage cruise tourism 
 
7.8. Various stakeholders from Ocean Cruises, River and Inland Cruise are expected to 
participate in the Conference with a view to have a fruitful discussion on various issues 
pertaining to promotion of cruise shipping and formulate a cohesive cruise promotion policy 
across the country. 

40 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation: 
7.9. The Committee is not happy with the growth of Cruise Tourism up till now in 
India consid ering its vast potential . The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
cohesive policy measures undertaken/formulated for the promotion of Cruise Tourism 
in India. Mumbai alone has been identified as the State with potential of generating 3.2 
million passenger traffic out of the overall potential of 4 million passenger traffic in 
Indian Cruise Shipping Industry.  The Committee would also like to be apprised 
whether the potential of other Indian States in generating passenger traffic has been 
examined and whether any  Action Plan has  been created/formulated as regards the 
potential of other Indian States in increasing the passenger traffic and promotion of 
Cruise Shipping in India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
–Nil- 
 
* * * * * 
 
  

42 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
The Committee is concerned to note the huge mismatch between the projected 
requirement of funds under the ‘Sagarmala’ head and the actual allocation made. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to  enlist the specific action/concrete steps taken to 
address the mismatch and also desires t o know whether the implementation of projects 
under ‘Sagarmala’ has been hampered, and the details of the same, if any. 
(Para 1.2) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry provide details of the reasons behind 
the reduction made at the R.E. 2021 –22 stage and measures taken by it to tackle the 
recurring underutilization of budgetary funds to the Committee  
(Para 2.4) 
SAGARMALA SCHEMES AND PROGRAMMES 
The Ministry in its reply hasn’t indicated the amount of funds released and the 
status of progress of 31 projects out of the total 44 projects under ‘Sagarmala.’ The 
Committee desires to be apprised of the status of the funds released for 31 projects. 
DPRs indicating progress and future requirements of these projects may also be shared 
with the Committee. 
(Para 3.2) 
SAGARMALA SCHEMES AND PROGRAMMES 
The Committee notes that MSDC meeting was held on 24 th June, 2021 and 
almost one year has elapsed since then but no response/proposal from State/Major Ports 
for forming SPV for executing road and rail connectivity has ensued. The Committee 
therefore recommends that fresh initiatives/meetings with the concerned stakeholders 
should be taken for speeding up the project for forming SPV. 
(Para 4.3) 

43 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF PORTS 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the guidelines formulated/policies 
framed and finalized for setting up Land Management in Township Areas at Major 
Ports. 
 (Para 5.2) 
Proper planning a nd supervision is necessary to handle Security matters 
pertaining to the safety of passengers and cargo. The Committee desires to be apprised 
of the long –term policy measures framed by the Ministry for installation of Scanners 
and other security equipments  at port and port terminals as well as the steps taken by 
the Ministry to resolve operational issues hindering the installation process of such 
equipments. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should ensure that a 
suitable coordination mechanism exists between the CBIC and itself on matters relating 
to infrastructure necessary for scanning of containers at ports. 
(Para 6.3) 
CRUISE TOURISM 
The Committee is not happy with the growth of Cruise Tourism up till now in 
India considering its vast pot ential.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
cohesive policy measures undertaken/formulated for the promotion of Cruise Tourism 
in India. Mumbai alone has been identified as the State with potential of generating 3.2 
million passenger traffic ou t of the overall potential of 4 million passenger traffic in 
Indian Cruise Shipping Industry. The Committee would also like to be apprised 
whether the potential of other Indian States in generating passenger traffic has been 
examined and whether any Action  Plan has been created/formulated as regards the 
potential of other Indian States in increasing the passenger traffic and promotion of 
Cruise Shipping in, India. 
(Para 7.9) 
 
* * * * * 
 
 
 

1 
 
_________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________ 
 
  
44

2 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15 th December, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V.Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A.Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
12. Shri Tapir Gao 
13. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
14. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
15. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
17. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
18. Shri Prince Raj 
19. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
20. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
21. Shri Dushyant Singh 
22. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
23. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
24.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
25. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
45

3 
 
  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members  of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e.,  
 
(i) to consider and adopt the various Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its following Reports;  
a) xxx xxx xxx 
b) xxx xxx xxx 
c) 316th Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
 Waterways; and 
d) xxx xxx xxx 
 
(ii)  xxx xxx xxx 
  
2. The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted the 
draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor modifications of 
typographical and factual errors. 
 
3. The Committee also authorized Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
A.A. Rahim, M.P., to present the abovementioned Reports in Raj ya Sabha on 20 th December, 
2022. Shri Ram Margani Bharat, M.P., and in his absence, Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua" 
M.P. were authorized to lay the abovementioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20 th 
December, 2022.  
(After the four draft Reports have been considered and adopted) 
 
Witnesses: - 
   xxx xxx xxx 
4. xxx xxx xxx xxx 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The meeting adjourned at 5:12 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                              Swarabji B.  
15th December, 2022                                                                                                   Director 
 
_______________ 
xxx Relate to other matters. 
46