REPORT NO. 
237 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in its Two Hundred and Thirtieth Report on 
Issues related to Security at Airports in India 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka) 

21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in its Two Hundred and Thirtieth Report on 
Issues related to Security at Airports in India 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 


 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION   OF   THE   COMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv) 
4. REPORT ................................................................................................................................. 1-13 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS –– AT A GLANCE .................................... 14-15 
6. MINUTES ............................................................................................................................... 17-20 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2015-16) 
 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh — Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi 
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
6. Kumari Selja 
7. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
@8. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
$9. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
10. Vacant 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Ram Charitra 
12. Shri Vinod Chavda 
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
14. Km. Arpita Ghosh 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri P. Kumar 
*17. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
18. Yogi Aditya Nath 
19. Shri Kristappa Nimmala 
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
21. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
22. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy 
23. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
24. Shri Prathap Simha 
25. Shri Dushyant Singh 
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
27. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 
@   Nominated on 15th March, 2016. 
$   Nominated on 28th July, 2016. 
* Nominated in place of Shri Mohammed Faizal P.P. w.e.f. 14th March, 2016. 
 
(i) 

(ii) 
 
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two  
Hundred and Thirty Seventh Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Thirtieth Report on Issues related to 
Security at Airports in India”. 
2. The Two Hundred Thirtieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 21st December, 2015 to the Parliament. 
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
Thirtieth Report was received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 21st June, 2016. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 8th August, 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH 
NEW   DELHI; Chairman, 
8, August, 2016  Department-related Parliamentary 
Sravana 17, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AAI : Airports Authority of India 
ADG : Additional Directorate-General 
APS : Airport Security 
APSC : Airport Security Committee 
APSU : Airport Security Unit 
ASG : Aviation Security Group 
BCAS : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
CCTV : Closed-Circuit Television 
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force 
CoS : Committee of Secretaries 
CSIA : Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport 
DCP : Deputy Commissioner of Police 
DG : Director General 
DIAL : Delhi International Airport Limited 
DIG : Deputy Inspector General 
ED : Executive Director 
GoM : Government of Maharashtra 
IB : Intelligence Bureau 
IGI : Indira Gandhi International 
IGIA : Indira Gandhi International Airport 
LWE : Left Wing Extremist 
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs 
MIAL : Mumbai International Airport Limited 
MoCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation 
NSG : National Security Guard 
OMDA : Operation, Management and Development Agreement 
PIDS : Perimeter Intrusion Detection System 
PSF : Passenger Security Fee 
SGSA : State Government Support Agreement 
SHA : Security Hold Area 
(iv) 

1  
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred and Thirtieth Report on “Issues 
related to Security at airports in India” which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 
21st December, 2015. 
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on the 21st June, 2016 in 
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been 
categorized as follows:– 
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Paragraph Nos:- 104, 105 and 110 Total: 3 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government replies: 
Paragraph Nos:-   101, 102, 103, 109 and 111 Total: 5 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos:- Nil Total: Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited. 
Paragraph Nos: 49, 54, 63, 64, 65, 66, 85, 86, 90, 95, 96, 97, 100, 106, 107 and 108 Total: 16 
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations 
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished at the earliest. 
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each 
item of Action Taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee  
contained in the Two Hundred and Thirtieth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and 
recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the  
succeeding paragraphs: 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
5. The Committee condemns the violent incident at Karipur Airport. The Committee demands 
that the Government should ensure that such incidents do not occur in future. The Committee 
notes that six months is more than sufficient time to complete the investigation. The Committee 
recommends that the investigations may be completed at the earliest and the guilty may be 
punished. Findings of investigations may be shared with this Committee as soon as it is submitted. 
(Para 49) 
 
1 

2 
 
Reply of the Government 
6. As regards the incident happened at Karipur Airport, Kozhikode, 13 CISF personnel and 15 
AAI staff were arrested, who are under bail. Four FIRs were registered against AAI staff and CISF  
Personnel. Out of the total 4 cases registered in the matter, investigations in to 2 (two) cases have 
been completed. Investigations in the remaining two cases are near completion. Kerala Police has 
been requested to expedite their investigation and submit the final report to this Ministry, urgently. 
However, the details of the measures taken subsequent to the Kozhikode airport incident are as 
under:- 
➢ ADG/APS held a meeting with Member (Ops), AAI and Director Security, AAI. 
They were assured that Zonal DIGs have been directed to ensure there is smooth 
inter agency co-ordination and functioning of airport operations. Zonal DIGs have 
been asked to visit airport extensively, have meeting with stakeholders, address the 
men and ensure that there is no friction to ensure smooth airport operations. 
➢ Addl. DG, Airport Sector visited Calicut Airport to take stock of the situation and 
also met Addl. DG (Law & Order), Kerala Police. 
➢ During the visit, ADG/APS informed Regional Executive Director, AAI  and Airport  
Director, Kozhikode airport about necessary measures to ensure that there is no 
friction between CISF and the other stake holders during the mandated course of 
duty, so that airport operations are not happened. 
➢ All Chief Airport Security Officers have been directed that it is their bounden duty to 
ensure that there is no source of friction amongst the stake holders and that they 
should take proactive and corrective measures, if there is any problem. 
➢ Supervisory officers have visited all airports with a view to ascertain and resolve inter-
agency friction, if any. 
➢ Instructions have been issued to all formations to be courteous during the mandated 
tasks of security which should be followed in letter and spirit. 
➢ A special drive to have refresher courses in soft skill training for CISF personnel, 
deployed at airports has been initiated. So far, 21, 604 no. of persons have been 
trained from 03.08.2015. 
➢ Motivational tasks are being delivered to the personnel of all ASGs. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
7. The Committee notes that the violent incident in Karipur, Kozhikode airport was a 
serious issue. However, the Government and various security agencies did not take   it  
seriously. Even after a long lapse of time the police agencies failed to complete the 
investigations and bring the guilty to book. The Committee recommends that   the   guilty  
should be punished and the amount of loss occurred due to the rampage by officials should 
be recovered from the salary of concerned officials after conducting an enquiry   in   this  
regard by an appropriate authority. The Committee desires that the investigation in the 
remaining two cases should be expedited and that the final report should be submitted 
without delay. 

3 
 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
8. The Committee noted the suggested co-ordination mechanisms and hope that it will be 
implemented soon to prevent any loopholes in the security apparatus. 
(Para 54) 
Reply of the Government 
9. The following committees are in existence for co-ordination on the matter of security 
aspects at airports:- 
(i) Standing Committee for reviewing security arrangements at airports with   Secretary 
–Home as Chairman with  Secretary MOCA, Director, IB, DG, CISF, Commissioner,  
BCAS Chairman, AAI as members and Addl. Secretary (LWE) as members 
Secretary. To meet on quarterly basis. 
(ii) National level Facilitation Committee chaired by Cabinet Secretary. 
(iii) Facilitation committee at Airport level. 
(iv) Airport Security Committee (APSC) at airport level. 
Zonal level and Sector level committees of CISF are also there. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
10. The Committee  takes  note of the reply  and hopes  that the mechanism  will  
strengthen the security apparatus at the airports. The Committee may be apprised of the 
details of the meetings held by the Co-ordination Committee during   the   last   one   year  
period. 
Recommendations/Observations of   the   Committee 
11. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the grey area and security related 
problems as mentioned by Delhi Police. It is equally appalled to see the existing interface between 
the Delhi Police and DIAL in  respect of security related issues at the Airport. It reflects a lack of 
mutual confidence in one another as well as required co-ordination between the two. Otherwise, 
Delhi Police, instead of taking up these issues with the Parliamentary Committee and DIAL giving point-
wise clarification before it, the two should have mutually resolved them. BCAS and the Ministries of 
Civil Aviation and Home Affairs also appeared to have remained unconcerned in this regard. IGI Airport 
being one of the most sensitive Airport in the existing security scenario, such gaps are sure to lead 
to any disaster at any time. 
(Para 63) 
Reply of the Government 
 
12. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), an attached office of this Ministry formed a 
Facilitation Committee at airport level to resolve the issues between Delhi Police and DIAL. In 
addition, a meeting of Airport Security Committee (APSC) is held on monthly basis. 
13. A meeting was also held to resolve the issues of CISF and airport operator and have better 

4 
 
coordination, in the meeting, it is decided that BCAS should review the requirement of the gadgetry 
and authorize the same. Based on authorization, airport operator will provide gadgetry. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
14. The Committee notes the various concerns expressed by the Delhi Police as regards the 
security at Delhi International Airport. The  committee observes that the issues are very serious and 
need immediate attention of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Home Affairs and various other 
stakeholders involved. The Committee recommends that all the issues need to be considered for 
immediate redressal and status note be submitted to the Committee containing steps taken in these 
regards. 
(Para 64) 
Reply of the Government 
15. ED (Security), DIAL was communicated to resolve the issues raised by Delhi Police. Other 
aspects as mentioned at Para 63 above. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
16. The Committee recently visited the Delhi airport and noticed that the situation 
prevailing earlier has not changed as far as the points raised by the Delhi Police are 
concerned. The Committee notices an element of apathy by the agencies involved such as 
the DIAL, Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Home Affairs as far as the grievances 
of Delhi Police are concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the points 
raised by the Delhi Police should be taken seriously and resolved at the earliest. The 
Committee may be apprised of the specific steps taken to resolve the issues between DIAL 
and the Delhi Police and the outcome thereof. The Committee desires that time bound 
action should be taken to resolve these issues. 
17. During further interaction with all the involved agencies, the Committee could learn 
that the hotels at the aerocity are a potential security threat to the runway and the airport. 
The Committee is of the view that all the hotels in the aerocity should be considered as 
equally important as any other airport asset.   However,   the   Committee   learnt   that   the  
access to the hotels inside the aerocity are being managed by the private security guards. 
The security at these hotels should be given utmost importance because unknown persons 
are accessing such points. Considering the strategic importance of the hotels which are so 
nearby to the functional runway, the Committee recommends that   CISF  should   be   the  
default security agency for all the access points to the   hotels   in   the   aerocity.   The 
Committee also recommends that since the hotels are a separate business, the payments for 
the deployment of CISF security may be borne by the hotels themselves. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
18. As regards payment of rent and electricity charges by Delhi Police to DIAL for space 
occupied by them and signing of License Agreement, the committee recommends that the Ministry 
of Home Affairs may take immediate decision in those matters as the Delhi Police is under that 
Ministry, discharging sovereign function of maintenance of security in and around the IGIA. 
(Para 65) 

5 
 
Reply of the Government 
19. As per Operations, Maintenance and Development Agreement (OMDA) all Government 
agencies, including Delhi Police had to be pay these charges as per the rates fixed. MHA has 
requested DIAL to waive off ` 46.1 lakhs as electricity charges.   DIAL has suggested for signing 
of an agreement by Delhi Police. Matter under consideration. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
20. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Delhi Police is doing the 
sovereign function and they should not be charged for basic facilities provided to them. The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
21. As regards providing space to the Delhi Police in the Delhi International Airport, the 
Committee directs the Ministry of Home Affairs to find out a workable solution in consultation with 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation and BCAS to provide an adequate space to discharge their sovereign 
duty of security in the International Airport at Delhi. 
(Para 66) 
Reply of the Government 
 
22. MHA has Approved during the current plan period a proposal of Delhi Police for 
construction of Police Station and DCP office at IGI Airport at an estimated cost of ` 20.93 crore. 
It has been intimated by Delhi Police that 90% work has been completed and remaining 
construction work is expected to be completed shortly. 
Further Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
23. The Committee takes note of the reply and desires that it may be informed of the 
progress made in this regard. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
24. The Committee finds it pertinent that the issue of encroachment of airport land and 
adjoining hillock by slum dwellers is settled at the earliest. In this regard, the Committee took note 
of the replies furnished by MIAL and the Housing Department Government of Maharashtra on 
various aspects of the encroachment. The Committee observes that the 35 pockets of slums in 
airport and the slums hillock along the Mithi River are potential threat to the aircrafts and the CSIA 
airport. The problems are persisting for the last so many years. The Committee feels that the 
Governmental agencies, both at the Centre and the State level, could not rationally judge the menace 
of slums inside the airport area as a potential security threat. Mumbai is the commercial capital of 
the country. Any breach of security at the airport will have far reaching consequences. The threat 
is perennial and no amount of policing could provide adequate security to the airport if the slums 
are allowed to exist and flourish inside the airport. The committee feels that the Government 
agencies are happily unconcerned about the airport security at CSIA, Mumbai. In Mumbai 
International Airport, a disaster is waiting to happen at any moment in view of these dangerously 
placed encroachments overlapping operational areas, of the Mumbai Airport. The Committee calls 

6 
 
upon all the agencies such as AAI, Ministry of Civil Aviation, BCAS, State Government of 
Maharashtra and MIAL to wake up from their slumber and see the danger looming large on the 
Mumbai Airport. The Committee expresses its serious concern on this and strongly recommends 
that all the slums must be removed and relocated from the airport area. There is no justification for 
allowing encroachers inside the airport area and Committee is of the view that so long as this area 
is occupied by the slum dwellers, the Mumbai airport is sitting on a ticking bomb until it is 
relocated. Therefore, the Committee recommends that MIAL along with   Government   of 
Maharashtra should come forward immediately with adequate proposals to rehabilitate the slums 
taking support of various Government agencies. 
(Para 85) 
25. The Committee understands that MIAL has been pursuing with the Government of 
Maharashtra (GoM) for rehabilitation of hutment dwellers at CSIA since taking over operations of 
CSIA in 2006. The Committee hopes that the Government of Maharashtra will expedite its approval 
for the Airport Specific Slum Rehabilitation Scheme for CSIA, to enable the slum rehabilitation 
process quickly. 
(Para 86) 
Reply of the Government 
 
26. As per the State Government Support Agreement (SGSA), entered into between the State 
Government of Maharashtra and M/s Mumbai International Airport Pvt. Ltd. (MIAL), rehabilitation 
of slums from the airport land shall be carried out in accordance with the applicable slum 
rehabilitation scheme of the State Government. MOCA has written to the State Government for 
preparation of an airport specific slum rehabilitation scheme. The State Government has prepared a 
draft scheme and is in the process of finalizing it. As soon as the slum rehabilitation scheme is in 
place, the rehabilitation process shall be undertaken by MIAL on priority basis in consultation with 
the Airports Authority of India (AAI) and the State Authorities. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
27. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the slums are a threat to the 
Mumbai airport. The slums should be removed from the airport premises. The Committee 
desires that the airport specific slum rehabilitation scheme may be finalized at the earliest 
and that the process of rehabilitation of slums from the airport land at Mumbai may be 
carried out without delay. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
 
28. The Committee compliments the CIAL, CISF and other security agencies for providing 
security to the Cochin Airport. 
(Para 90) 
28.A. The Committee observes that National Security cannot be compromised. Civil Aviation 
Security is a very integral and important element of national security. Airport  complex is a crucial 
infrastructure. Any large scale damage/terrorist attack on the airport complex will be catastrophic 
with far reaching grave implications for the citizens and the economy. Investments flowing into the 
country depend on the state of the security and safety. The Committee further notes that the 
airports have been categorized as hyper-sensitive, sensitive and normal. Operational airports in

7 
 
hyper-sensitive categories are 26 out of which only 18 airports have been provided with CISF 
security cover. Which means that eight hyper-sensitive airports are not provided the security cover 
of CISF. In sensitive category, there are 56 airports, out of which 37 are covered by CISF and 19 
are not covered. In the normal category of 16 airports, only 4 are provided with CISF security and 
12 are not covered. Thus, out of 98 functional airports, only 59 are covered with CISF security 
cover and 39 are not under CISF. Explanations given to the Committee was lack of funds for 
providing CISF security cover at all the 98 airports. 
(Para 95) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
29. Pursuant to the recommendations made by Committee of Secretaries (CoS) and based on 
prioritization of Airports,  CISF has been deployed at 59 airports in India till date. Based on the 
assessment, security cover at all airports has been provided.    Many Airport Operators including 
AAI, have reported shortfall in the collection of Passenger Service Fee (Security Component), 
which are utilised to meet the revenue expenditure on deployment of security agencies such as 
ASG, APSU etc. for security at airports. 
30. The cost of deployment of CISF and other security agencies, mainly State Government at 
the airports is met out of the PSF levied on embarking passengers. PSF is presently charged @ 
` 200/- per ticket, out of which ` 70/- is utilized by the airport operator for passenger facilitation 
and balance ` 130/- for payment to the designated security agency either of Central Government or 
State Government. 
31. The Ministry has also taken certain measures to streamlining the system pertaining to PSF. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation has already taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance to consider the 
security of airport as sovereign function and expenditure be allowed from Consolidated Fund of 
India. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
32. The security must be adequate and in proportion to the threat perception. Funds should not 
come in the way of providing security. The Committee recommends that the security component of 
PSF needs to be enhanced to commensurate with the security expenditure and ensure that security 
is not compromised at all the airports in India and the PSF security component must be deposited 
in the Consolidated Fund of India. 
(Para 96) 
Reply of the Government 
 
33. Ministry of Civil Aviation has already taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance to 
consider the security of airport as sovereign function and expenditure be allowed from Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
34. The Committee is of the view that lack of funds should not be a reason for not 
providing CISF security cover at the airports. The Committee may be apprised of the

8 
 
response of the Ministry of Finance in this regard. The Committee reiterates that the 
security of the airports should be treated as a sovereign function. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
35. The Committee recommends that Airport Security should be absolute. The Committee observes 
that Security of the Airports  is an integral part of national Security and therefore, recommends that 
providing security should be a sovereign function. Adequacy  of PSF Security component collections 
should not be the criteria for providing security. If CISF security cover can be given to the Delhi Metro,  
why cannot all the operational airports be provided with CISF security cover? 
36. The Committee feels that ideally, the CISF security cover should be provided to all the 70 
odd airports which are having normal scheduled operations. But to begin with, the Committee 
recommends that all the Airports rated hyper-sensitive airports. In view of shortages of manpower 
and logistics available with CISF, security of normal airports can continue with State Police for the 
time being. But these airports also be given all modern equipment, training etc. 
(Para 97) 
Reply of the Government 
 
37. Ministry of Civil Aviation has already taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance to 
consider the security of airport as sovereign function and expenditure be allowed from Consolidated 
Fund of India.   Decision on further deployment of CISF shall be taken in accordance with the Civil  
Aviation Policy approved recently by the Cabinet. 
Further Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
38. The Committee may be apprised of the final outcome of the proposal to consider the 
security of airport as sovereign function and expenditure be allowed from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
39. The Committee noted the arguments of Home Secretary and Secretary, Civil Aviation and 
observes that there is no need for a separate Civil Aviation  Force at this juncture and that Airport  
Security can remain with the CISF and Ministry of Home Affairs especially in view of the fact the 
IB, NSG and other Police Forces have a substantial role to play in airport security are also under 
the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
(Para 100) 
Reply of the Government 
40. The proposal is being examined. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
41. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the examination of the proposal. 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
42. The Committee, after examining the papers/documents submitted to it and hearing the 

9 
 
arguments of various stakeholders on the subject, could understand that there are multiple agencies 
involved in providing security at Indian airports. 
(Para 101) 
Reply of the Government 
43. There is a coordination mechanism in various agencies and BCAS is designated agency for 
security at airport to take all steps. 
Further Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
44. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
45. The Committee notes that Bureau of Civil aviation Security responsible for laying down the  
standards for pre-embarkation security and anti-sabotage measures in respect of civil flights and 
ensuring their compliance through regular inspections and security audits.   Commissioner   of  
Security, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security has been empowered to issue Directions under Section 
5A of Aircraft Act, 1934 with respect to civil aviation security matters. 
(Para 102) 
Reply of the Government 
46. BCAS being the designated agency, is already performing these functions. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
47. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
48. The Committee also notes that whereas BCAS frames the rules and regulations for civil 
aviation security, the Central Industrial Security Force which is functioning under the Ministry of 
Home Affairs acts as the implementing agency for the guidelines framed by BCAS. The Intelligence 
Bureau plays an important role in providing intelligence inputs related to civil aviation security. 
National Security Guard (NSG) under the Ministry of Home Affairs is also the primary Contingency  
Response Force for anti-terrorist operations at airports. 
(Para 103) 
Reply of the Government 
49. No comment 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
50. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
51. The Committee was at a loss to find that the post of the Commissioner of Security, BCAS, 
the Appropriate Authority for the development, implementation and maintenance of National Civil 

10 
 
Aviation Security Programme of India, is lying vacant for the last two-and-a-half years. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons for keeping this important and sensitive post vacant for 
more than two years. The Committee may also be apprised on the steps taken to fill up the post on 
priority. 
(Para 104) 
Reply of the Government 
52. Shri Kumar Rajesh Chandra, IPS has assumed the office of Director General, BCAS on 
17.05.2016. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
53. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
54. The Committee finds that the violent incident involving employees of Airports Authority  of 
India and the Central Industrial Security Force at Karipur Airport in Kozhikode on 10th June, 2015 
raises a question mark over the effectiveness of the existing co-ordination mechanism between 
carious agencies involved in providing security at Indian Airports. When the issue was raised during 
the deliberation, both the Home Secretary and Civil Aviation Secretary assured the Committee to 
look into the matter and to address the shortcoming in the system. The Committee hopes that apart 
from conducting various meeting to address the issues related to airport security with agencies 
involved in the process, both the Ministries will have a periodical review of the performance of the  co-
ordination mechanism so that any grey areas identified could be addressed immediately. 
(Para 105) 
Reply of the Government 
55. There is an Airport  Security Committee (APSC) at each airport which meets once in every 
month and security related issues are discussed and addressed in the meeting. BCAS issues 
necessary instructions in accordance with the discussions held in the meeting.       Further,  Ministry 
of Home Affairs have set up a Standing Committee with members from Minist ry of Civil Aviation,  
Intelligence Bureau (IB), CISF, BCAS and AAI,  to review the security arrangements at airports on 
quarterly basis. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
56. The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the existing mechanism would 
strengthen the security apparatus at the airports. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
57. The Committee also feels that the issues of deficiency of security gadgets and installation of 
CCTV cameras of shadow zones at various airports should be taken up on priority so that such 
deficiencies do not become a cause for concern in the Indian airports security system. As it is said 
that the performance in the battlefield is obviously known before hand if we are not fully equipped 
with the modern equipments to fight with the enemy. The Committee, therefore, hopes that PIDS 

11 
 
which is currently operating on pilot basis at Delhi Airport Should be reviewed and efforts should 
be made to remove the flaws found in the system. The Ministry of Civil Aviation should also look 
out for such PIDS technology which could function properly in the Indian conditions. 
(Para 106) 
Reply of the Government 
58. BCAS informed that a Committee has been constituted to study the grey area in the CCTV 
areas and security lapses at IGI airport and the observations of the committee has been 
communicated to DIAL for compliance report. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
59. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by DIAL to comply with the 
observations of the Committee constituted to study the grey areas at the IGI Airport. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
60. The Committee desires that the areas of concern on providing security to Delhi Airport, 
expressed by the Delhi Police should be given due consideration. The Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
Delhi International Airport Limited are urged to look into the problems faced by the Delhi Police on 
the city side as well as within the T-3 terminal building of Delhi Airport. 
(Para 107) 
Reply of the Government 
61. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), an attached office of this Ministry formed a 
Facilitation Committee at airport level to resolve the issues between Delhi Police and DIAL. In 
addition, a meeting of Airport Security Committee (APSC), of which Delhi Police is also member, is 
held on monthly basis. 
62. In addition, ED (Security), DIAL was also communicated to resolve the issues raised by 
Delhi Police. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
63. The Committee may be apprised of the updated status of the issues between DIAL 
and Delhi Police. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
64. The Committee also hopes that the issue of relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers 
from the vicinity of Mumbai International Airport will be settled as soon as possible so that the 
encroachment land is brought within the control of airport operator and the necessary expansion 
works of Mumbai Airport are commenced shortly. Upon that, the present security threat to the 
Mumbai Airport will automatically wither away. The Committee after cross examination of the 
Governments and concerned organizations has come to the conclusions that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, State Government of Maharashtra, Mumbai International Airport Limited and Airport 
Authority of India should sit together to sort out the long pending issues which have presently 
become the major issue of threat to Mumbai airport. The Committee also requests the Ministry of 

12 
 
Civil Aviation and Government of Maharashtra to take a lead in settling the issues with no loss of 
time. 
(Para 108) 
Reply of the Government 
 
65. Removal of the encroachment from Mumbai airport land is a crucial project as the slums 
are not only serious security threat to the airport but also the encroached land is required for 
development of the airport. Therefore, MOCA, Airports Authority of India and MIAL are keen to 
take all the necessary steps for removal of the encroachments from the Airport  Land. MOCA has  
already taken up the issue with the State Government of Maharashtra and has requested them to 
formulate an airports specific slum rehabilitation scheme. The State Government is in the process 
of finalization of the scheme based on which the removal process shall be initiated. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
66. The Committee hopes that the airports specific slum rehabilitation scheme will be 
finalized by the State Government of Maharashtra in a time bound manner and that the 
removal of the encroachments from the airport land at Mumbai will be initiated without 
delay for development of the airport. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
67. The Committee desires that vacant posts in the Aviation  Security Group of CISF which is 
manning the Indian airports through the length and breadth of the country are filled up at the 
earliest so that the existing security apparatus is strengthened. 
(Para 109) 
Reply of the Government 
 
68. The released strength of CISF at 59 airports is 24261 and posted strength is 22904. With 
over 94% posts filled, CISF is able to handle the situation without compromising security or 
causing inconvenience to public.   Recruitment and training of additional personnel, as requirements 
of CISF increase, is an ongoing process. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
69. The Committee is of the view that vacancies cannot be afforded in the vital Aviation  
Security Group of CISF and desires that the vacancies may be filled up at the earliest. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
70. There is an involvement of multiple agencies in providing securities at Indian airports and 
the Committee has found a lack of proper co-ordination between the agencies. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a think tank may be created to bring out a proper co-ordination 
involving all the stakeholders to help the Commissioner of Security, BCAS to perform his duties 
satisfactory. 
(Para 110) 

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
71. There are different security responsibilities such as anti-sabotage checks, screening of hold 
baggage and all items carried in the bally of aircraft, access control to aircraft, carriage of security 
items from SHA etc.  to different agencies i.e. airlines. Airport  operators, Regulated agent, catering 
companies and all these agencies area subject to audit on regular basis  by BCAS teams  to see the  
compliance of the task assigned to them by appropriate authority i.e. DG, BCAS. 
72. Following are some of the arrangements to review the same: 
(i) Standing Committee for reviewing security arrangements at airports with   Secretary 
–Home as Chairman with  Secretary MOCA, Director, IB, DG, CISF, Commissioner,  
BCAS Chairman, AAI as members and Add,. Secretary (LWE) as members 
Secretary. To meet on quarterly basis. 
(ii) National level Facilitation Committee chaired by Cabinet Secretary 
(iii) Facilitation committee at Airport level 
(iv) Airport Security  Committee (APSC)  at airport  level 
73. Zonal level and  Sector level  committees of CISF  are also  there 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
74. The Committee hopes that the existing mechanism will ensure proper co-ordination 
among all the stakeholders involved in airport security. 
Recommendations/Observations   of   the   Committee 
75. The Commissioner finds it quite scary to know that the security of 8 of our hyper-sensitive 
and 19 of our sensitive airports are not covered by the CISF which has now become the only 
specialized force for aviation security; now question is who is then guarding these airports and how 
secure these airports are? In these existing threats perceptions at our airports, the country can ill- 
affords such a situation to continue any more. The Committee finds that aviation security has not 
received the attention and importance that it deserves. The Committee feels that in view of several 
gaps and lack of unified command and control for the multiple agencies involved, there is an urgent 
need for having an Aviation  Security policy in the country for ensuring fool proof security at our 
airports before a major untoward incident takes place in the Country. 
(Para 111) 
Reply of the Government 
76. It is felt that adequate mechanisms already exist to ensure coordination between various 
agencies. Further action on the issue would be taken in accordance with the National Civil Aviation 
Policy approved recently by the Cabinet. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
77. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. 

14 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS ––– AT A GLANCE 
 
The Committee notes that the violent incident in Karipur, Kozhikode airport was a 
serious issue. However, the Government and various security agencies did not take   it  
seriously. Even after a long lapse of time the police agencies failed to complete the 
investigations and bring the guilty to book. The Committee recommends that   the   guilty  
should be punished and the amount of loss occurred due to the rampage by officials should 
be recovered from the salary of the concerned officials after conducting an enquiry in this 
regard by an appropriate authority. The Committee desires that the investigation in the 
remaining two cases should be expedited and that the final report should be submitted 
without delay. (Para 7) 
The Committee  takes  note of the reply  and hopes  that the mechanism  will  
strengthen the security apparatus at the airports. The Committee may be apprised of the 
details of the meetings held by the Co-ordination Committee during   the   last   one   year  
period. (Para 10) 
The Committee recently visited the Delhi airport and noticed that the situation 
prevailing earlier has not changed as far as the points raised by the Delhi Police are 
concerned. The Committee notices an element of apathy by the agencies involved such as 
the DIAL, Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Home Affairs as far as the grievances 
of Delhi Police are concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the points 
raised by the Delhi Police should be taken seriously and resolved at the earliest. The 
Committee may be apprised of the specific steps taken to resolve the issues between DIAL 
and the Delhi Police and the outcome thereof. The Committee desires that time bound 
action should be taken to resolve these issues. (Para 16) 
During further interaction with all the involved agencies, the Committee could learn 
that the hotels at the aerocity are a potential security threat to the runway and the airport. 
The Committee is of the view that all the hotels in the aerocity should be considered as 
equally important as any other airport asset.   However,   the   Committee   learnt   that   the  
access to the hotels inside the aerocity are being managed by the private security guards. 
The security at these hotels should be given utmost importance because unknown persons 
are accessing such points. Considering the strategic importance of the hotels which are so 
nearby to the functional runway, the Committee recommends that   CISF  should   be   the  
default security agency for all the access points to the   hotels   in   the   aerocity.   The 
Committee also recommends that since the hotels are a separate business, the payments for 
the deployment of CISF security may be borne by the hotels themselves. (Para 17) 
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Delhi Police is doing the 
sovereign function and they should not be charged for basic facilities provided to them. The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 20) 
 
14 

15 
 
The Committee takes note of the reply and desires that it may be informed of the 
progress made in this regard. (Para 23) 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the slums are a threat to the 
Mumbai airport. The slums should be removed from the airport premises. The Committee 
desires that the airport specific slum rehabilitation scheme may be finalized at the earliest 
and that the process of rehabilitation of slums from the airport land at Mumbai may be 
carried out without delay. (Para 27) 
The Committee is of the view that lack of funds should not be a reason for not 
providing CISF security cover at the airports. The Committee may be apprised of the 
response of the Ministry of Finance in this regard.    The Committee reiterates that the 
security of the airports should be treated as a sovereign function. (Para 34) 
The Committee may be apprised of the final outcome of the proposal to consider the 
security of airport as sovereign function and expenditure be allowed from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. (Para 38) 
The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the examination of the proposal. 
(Para 41) 
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 44) 
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 47) 
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 50) 
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 53) 
The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that the existing mechanism would 
strengthen the security apparatus at the airports. (Para 56) 
The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by DIAL to comply with the 
observations of the Committee constituted to study the grey areas at the IGI Airport. (Para 59) 
The Committee may be apprised of the updated status of the issues between DIAL 
and Delhi Police. (Para 63) 
The Committee hopes that the airports specific slum rehabilitation scheme will be 
finalized by the State Government of Maharashtra in a time bound manner and that the 
removal of the encroachments from the airport land at Mumbai will be initiated without 
delay for development of the airport. (Para 66) 
The Committee is of the view that vacancies   cannot   be   afforded   in   the   vital  
Aviation Security Group of CISF and desires that the vacancies may be filled up at the 
earliest. (Para 69) 
The Committee hopes that the existing mechanism will ensure proper co-ordination 
among all the stakeholders involved in airport security. (Para 74) 
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 77) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  
 

 

 
 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 8th August, 2016 in Committee Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh — Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Shri Prabhakar Kore 
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
5. Kumari Selja 
6. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
8. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
10. Shri Vinod Chavda 
11. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
12. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
13. Shri Harish Chandra Meena 
14. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant  Director 
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and he also 
welcomed Shri Bhupinder Yadav, a new member to the Committee. After that, the Committee 
considered the following draft reports for adoption: 
(i)         * * *; 
 
***   Relates   to   other   matter. 
19 

20 
 
(ii) Draft report on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/  
recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Thirtieth 
Report on Issues related to Security at Airports in India; and 
(iii) * * *. 
3. The Committee adopted the said reports with certain amendments and decided to present 
the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament on 10th August, 2016. The Committee nominated 
Chairman and in his absence Shri Ritabrata Banerjee, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. 
The Committee also nominated Shri Ram Charitra Nishad, M.P. and in his absence Shri Rahul 
Kaswan, M. P. to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha. 
4. * * *. 
5. * * *. 
6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***   Relate   to   other   matters. 