file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
           
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
 ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
ON
CLOSURE OF BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD AIRPORTS  AND
 MATTERS RELATED THERETO
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5.3.2008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  5.3.2008)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH,  2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
ON

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
CLOSURE OF BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD AIRPORTS  AND
 MATTERS RELATED THERETO
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 5.3.2008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  5.3.2008)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
MARCH, 2008/ PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
PAGES
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                      (i)        
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                (ii)
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                1 - 8                    4           
 OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE         9 - 10    
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                             -                                                                                  
                                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury             - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.   Shri Naresh Gujral
4.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5.
      Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9.      Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.  Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.  Shri Joachim Baxla
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Smt. Priya Dutt
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri P. Karunakaran
21.  *Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
22.  Dr. P.P. Koya
23.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Hemlal Murmu
27.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28.  Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh
30.  Shri Suraj Singh
31.  Shri Prahlad Joshi
32.  **Shri Rakesh Singh
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
  
* Expired on 13.11.2007
** Nominated on 1.12.2007.                                                  
 
INTRODUCTION
              I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been
 authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Thirty First Report on Closure of
 Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports and matters related thereto.
 
2.      The Committee, at its meeting held on the 14 th February, 2008, decided to take up this subject for examination and
 accordingly, heard the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 22nd February, 2008.
 
3.      The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation for placing before the
 Committee the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the
 Members.
 
4.      The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 4
th March, 2008.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI ; SITARAM YECHURY
   Chairman
 
March 4 , 2008
Phalguna 14, 1929 (Saka) 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT
 
            Civil aviation sector in the country has undergone a dramatic change in the recent years.  Air travel has registered
 tremendous growth due to various factors such as higher incomes, more corporate activity, low cost airlines, cheaper fares etc. 
 In order to meet this emerging traffic scenario, the Government has decided to modernize and upgrade some of the existing
 domestic and international airports to world standard.  The Government through its Airport Infrastructure Policy of 1997 has
 decided to set up Greenfield Airports in the country.  As a result thereof necessary permission was granted to construct two
 Greenfield Airports in Bangalore  and Hyderabad on joint venture basis.    The project companies, namely, GMR Hyderabad
 International Airport Ltd. (GHIAL) and Bangalore International Airport Ltd. (BIAL) have entered into Concession Agreement
 with the Government of India for the Development, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of the Airports.  Both these
 Greenfield Airports have been constructed and are now ready for commissioning. 
 
2.         The Concession Agreement for with GHIAL and BIAL inter-alia provides the following:
(a)        The concessionaire is required to intimate to GOI six months prior to the anticipated Airport Opening Date, the
 date it expects Airport opening to occur.
(b)        GOI is to ensure that the existing airport shall not be open or available for use for commercial civil aviation
 operations.

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
(c)        GOI to notify that the existing airports are no longer open or available for commercial civil aviation operations
 and ensure that the international code of the existing airports are transferred to the new Airports subject to the compliance
 of the requisite terms and conditions, if any, by the concerned Airport Operator.
(d)        General aviation services (Other than those relating to commercial aircrafts, charter flights, aircrafts  hired or
 operated under commercial arrangements) may continue to be provided at the existing airports.
 
3.         It was brought to the notice of the Committee vide Airports Authority of India, Hyderabad Airport letter dated the 6
th
 February, 2008, in its meeting held on the 7th February, 2008 the impending closure of the existing Hyderabad Airport by 15th of
 March, 2008 for commercial operations to pave the way for opening of the new Greenfield Airport at Shamshabad, Hyderabad.. 
 The Committee discussed the matter in detail and decided to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the issues
 involved.  In this connection a questionnaire was also sent to the Ministry for written comments.   The Committee in its meeting
 held on the 22 nd February, 2008 heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the subject and expressed its
 displeasure on this issue.  The various aspects of the closure of the existing airports at Bangalore  and Hyderabad as discussed by
 the Committee and the Committee's observations thereon have been brought out in the succeeding paragraphs of the report.
 
    GREENFIELD AIRPORTS AT BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD
4.         The Ministry of Civil Aviation furnished the following brief on the Greenfield airport at Devanahalli near Bangalore:-
   §   Greenfield airport at Devanahalli near Bangalore is being implemented on a Build Own Operate and Transfer (BOOT)
 basis with Public Private Participation.
   §   Government of Karnataka (GoK) through Karnataka State Industrial Investment Development Corporation (KSIIDC)
 and AAI together hold 26% equity and the strategic joint venture partners hold the balance 74%.  AAI's investment in
 the equity is capped at Rs.50 crore.
     § A Memorandum of Understanding to this effect signed on 3
rd May 1999 between AAI and KSIIDC to facilitate further
 action leading to implementation of the project.
     § Based on a Global tendering process initiated in August 1999, a Consortium lead by Siemens, Germany with Unique
 Zurich, Switzerland an Larsen & Toubro India Limited as other members, was chosen as the strategic Joint Venture
 Partner in July 2001.
      A Shareholders Agreement was executed§ amongst AAI, GoK, Siemens, Unique Zurich and Larsen & Toubro in January
 2002.
      In order to address the issue of§ excluding Greenfield airports from the ambit of AAI Act 1994, the amendments proposed
 to the AAI Act was introduced in April-May 2003 session of the Parliament.  The Amendment Bill was passed by Lok
 Sabha on 9th May 2003 and subsequently by Rajya Sabha on 28th July 2003.  A formal notification of the amended Act
 was issued on 1st July 2004.
      The Working Group constituted by the§ Prime Minister Office (PMO) comprising of representatives from the Ministry of
 Civil Aviation, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Law and Government of Karnataka finalized the draft Concession
 Agreement (CA), which was approved by the Cabinet in January 2004/15 th June 2004.  The approved version of the
 CA was signed on 5th July 2004.
     § GoK is extending of Rs.350 crore as State support for which a State Support Agreement is being executed by GoK with
 BIAL.  Further, GoK is providing 4300 acres of land (approximately having the value of Rs.175 crore) on concessional
 rent and a Land Lease Agreement executed.
 
5.         The Committee was further informed that the private investors, selected /based on a Global tendering process, led by
 Siemens, Germany with Unique Zurich, Switzerland and Larsen & Toubro India Limited as other members, hold the balance
 74% with Siemens holding 40% and Unique Zurich and L&T holding 17% each. The total project cost is estimated to be
 Rs.1411 crore (2005 figure) being financed as per the following funding sources:
 
 
 
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
Debt  Rs.735 crore (from lenders)
Equity  Rs.326 crore (includes 85 crore of AAI and Government of
 Karnataka) Rest 240 crore belong to the Private Investors.
 
State Support Rs.350 crore
 
 6.        The debt component of Rs.735 crore was being arranged through ICICI Bank Limited and for this purpose Financing
 Agreements have already been executed between BIAL and ICICI Bank.
7.         The construction of the new airport commenced on the 2 nd July, 2005 and the scheduled date of opening of the airport is
 2nd April, 2008. 
8.         As regards the Greenfield airport at Shamshabad near Hyderabad i.e. Hyderabad International Airport Limited (HIAL) is
 being implemented on a Build Own Operate and Transfer (BOOT) basis with Public Private Participation.  Brief details
 regarding this project are as under:- 
 
§    The Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) have selected a consortium led by M/s. GMR infrastructure Ltd. With
 Malaysian Airport Holding Berhard (MAHB) as the Developer for Greenfield Airport at Shamshabad near Hyderabad. 
§    Government of Andhra Pradesh and AAI together hold 26% equity with AAI's investment in the equity capped at Rs.50
 crore and the strategic joint venture partners, GMR infrastructure Ltd. With Malaysian Airport Holding Berhard
 (MAHB), hold the balance 74% in the Company namely Hyderabad International Airport Ltd. (HIAL) set up to
 implement the project. 
§    A shareholders' Agreement was executed by the parties  viz. M/s. GMR, M/s. MAHB (Sponsors), AAI and GoAP (State
 Promoters) on 30th September 2003. 
§    GoAP has also entered into the State Support Agreement and the Land Lease Agreement with the GMR led Consortium
 on 30th September 2003. 
§    Government of Andhra Pradesh is extending Rs.315 crore as State Support and Rs.107 crore as grant.  Further,
 Government of Andhra Pradesh providing 5000 acres of land on concessional rent. 
§    The concession Agreement between the GoI and HIAL has been executed on 20th December 2004. 
9.         The Committee was further informed that the total project cost, as per the DPR submitted by HIAL, was estimated to be
 Rs.1400 crore (2005 figure). This was being financed by State Support to the extent of Rs.422 crore and rest by way of Debt and
 Equity to the tune of 40% and 60%, respectively.   This project cost was for estimated passenger traffic of 5 million.    However,
 the final cost of the project is Rs.2920 crore for estimated passenger traffic of 12 million.
 
CLOSURE OF BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD AIRPORTS
 
10.       The Committee in its 88 th, 90th, 96 th and 97 th Reports had discussed in detail about these airports and submitted its
 recommendation regarding the closure of existing airports at these places.   The Committee in its above mentioned reports has
 categorically stated that the existing airports should not be closed for commercial operations once the new airports are
 commissioned for operation.
 
11.       The recommendation of the Committee in its 88th Report on the closure of Hyderabad airport is reproduced below:-
 
"The Committee is distressed to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has decided to shut down the existing airport at
 Hyderabad for commercial operations.  The Committee fails to understand as to why such kind of concessional
 agreement was signed when the Ministry itself was of the opinion that the present terminals could be utilized at least for
 one more decade.  The Committee also expresses its doubt as to how the Ministry is planning to compensate with the
 losses to be incurred, in case the existing terminal at Hyderabad is closed, by developing shopping complexes, housing
 etc. on commercial basis.   The Committee is opposed to this move of the Government for closing the existing airport at
 Hyderabad for commercial flights once the new Hyderabad International Airport Limited is operational and urges the
 Government to reconsider this decision."

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
 
12.       When the Committee specifically enquired about the conditions contained in the Agreement for the closure of the existing
 airports at Hyderabad and Bangalore , the Ministry of Civil Aviation has stated that Government of India is to ensure that the
 existing airport shall not be open or available for use for commercial civil aviation operations.  They have also stated that general
 aviation services (other than those relating to commercial aircrafts, charter flights, aircrafts hired or operated under commercial
 arrangements) may continue to be provided at the existing airports.  About the feasibility of retaining the existing Airports at
 Hyderabad and Bangalore  the Ministry submitted in writing to the Committee that there are no difficulties in continuing the
 operations in the existing airports.  However, due to heavy increase in traffic in the recent past, the existing airports at
 Hyderabad and Bangalore have reached saturation.   The capacity of existing airports and the level of traffic during 2007 is as
 follows:
           
                          (in million pax)
                                 Capacity               Traffic
Hyderabad 3.6      6.8      
Bangalore        3.2      9.9
                                                                                           
3.         As far as the legal implications involved, if, the existing airports at Hyderabad and Bangalore are also allowed to operate
 along with the new Greenfield airports, the Ministry has stated that under the Concession Agreement, closure of the existing
 airport is one of the obligations of Government and in case the same is not fulfilled it would imply that Government of India is in
 default of its obligations.  In response to the points raised by the Committee, the Secretary of the Ministry stated that the Central
 Government which has entered into the Concessional  Agreement with those developers would be exposing itself to legal
 complications.  So, this is the position regarding the closure of the two airports.    However, the Secretary further added that
 theoretically, the re- negotiation with the private player is possible but he was not sure that will work or succeed.
14.       Another point brought before the Committee was the connectivity and infrastructure available in and around the new
 Greenfield Airports.  The Ministry stated that the Airport operators and the State Governments concerned are responsible for the
 development and maintenance of the infrastructure around the airports.  On a perusal  of the details submitted to the Committee
 it was found that elevated express highway, at grade road, National Highways, approach road, access road, by-passes, express
 rail connectivity are either at formative stages or under construction in case of both the airports.
15.       The Committee notes that the estimates and projections were made on the basis of the 1999 and 2000 Statistics when the
 civil aviation sector was growing at 6% per annum but today it is growing at 20% per annum.  Actually, it was an underestimate
 of gigantic proportions. If, the present trend continues in a couple of years even the present new airports will not be able to
 handle the rush of passengers and the Government will have to look for other options.  This is clear from the fact that the private
 Greenfield airport at Bangalore is designed to handle passenger traffic of 9 million per year.  As noted above in 2007 itself this
 figure stood at 9.9million.  As far as Hyderabad is concerned, the initial projected capacity is 7 million. In 2007 itself passenger
 traffic was 6.8 million.   Therefore, the Committee recommends that the present airports should be used, given the saturation of
 passenger traffic, in such a way that the private player is making a reasonable profit while the Government discharges its
 responsibilities of maintaining public goods and upholding public interest.
16.       The Committee unanimously feels and recommends that the existing airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad should not be
 closed for commercial operations to make the way for the commissioning of the private Greenfield airports.  The Committee also
 feels that this is the first time in the country that the Government owned airports built on the tax payers’ money are being closed
 for the commissioning of the private Greenfield airports where profit earning is the main motto rather than the service to the
 passengers.  This is contrary to the Government's policy particularly in a situation where both the airports are required in view of
 the changing scenario in passenger traffic.    This is in complete contravention of the 'level playing field' concept.    The
 Committee fails to understand the logic or rationale behind such drastic step of the Government.  The Committee is of the
 opinion that the Government’s reluctance to accept this Committee’s earlier unanimous recommendations presented to the
 Parliament on this subject without giving any reasons negates the very purpose of the Parliamentary Committee system. The
 Government still has the time to re-negotiate the issue with the concessionaire and can modify or scrap the clause which
 facilitates the closure of the existing airports.  The possible revenue implications of such a re-negotiation must not inhibit the
 Government from proceeding on such a course in national interest.    Since the aviation sector is growing in a big way, having
 two airports in a particular city will be a commercially viable option for the operators.
  
 17.      After considering all the facts placed before the Committee and keeping in view the traffic growth in recent years which is
 even more than three times as compared to the year when the projections were made and agreements were signed, the Committee
 strongly recommends unanimously and unequivocally to the Government of India that the existing Hyderabad and Bangalore
 Airports should not be closed for commercial operation.

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
           
USER DEVELOPMENT FEE (UDF)
18.       Yet, another aspect brought before the Committee was the reported move of the private airports at Bangalore  and
 Hyderabad for charging user fee @Rs.700/- per passenger who uses the airport.   The Committee has also learnt that the airport
 operator is considering levying it gradually and in telescopic manner.   Regarding, a specific query how the services/charges and
 tariffs are decided and monitored in the Joint Venture Private Airports in the absence of any regulatory mechanism for that
 purpose  the Ministry replied that till such time the regulatory authority is established, the airport charges are decided in
 accordance with the Schedule 6 as well as Clause 10.2 of the Concession Agreement with the prior approval of Ministry of Civil
 Aviation.  Ministry of Civil Aviation is working towards developing guidelines for fixing tariff pending the constitution of the
 regulator. 
19.       The Committee noted that the average daily passenger throughput at the existing Hyderababd and Bangalore airports is
 currently 18,901 and 27,518 respectively.  This shows that at the Hyderabad and Bangalore private operators will by collecting
 the user fee alone accumulate annually Rs.483 crore and Rs.703 crore respectively. 
20.       The Committee notes that the Airports Authority of India while taking up the major expansion projects at Ahmedabad and
 Trivandrum had envisaged levy of User Development Fee of Rs.300 per passenger as prescribed Initial Rate of Return (IRR)
 was not being achieved.   However, the proposal was turned down by the Government.  The Committee observes that the
 Government which turned down the proposal of Airports Authority of India is happily agreeing to the demands of the private
 operators.  The Committee recommends that the levy of any User Development Fee will give a negative signal to the upward
 growth and overall growth pattern of the aviation sector.
21.       The Committee feels that User Development Fee is illogical and irrational.  The same was not allowed in case of Airports
 Authority of India operated Airports.  The Committee deplores it in unambiguous terms and recommends that the user fee may
 be withdrawn immediately.
 
REVENUES OF AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
22.       Revenue earned by the Airports Authority of India during 2006-07 from Hyderabad and Bangalore airports was Rs.182.93
 and 126.97 crore respectively.    The Committee is very much surprised to note that the  Government by closing these existing
 airports to make way for the Greenfield  airports is putting the  Airports Authority of India  into substantial loss.    When the
 Committee asked about the assessment of the Government regarding the implications on the profits of Airports Authority of
 India due to the handing over of the profit making Airports to private developers, the Ministry in its reply stated that the Airports
 Authority of India may have a decline in its profits due to handing over of the profit-making airports to private developers.
  However, Airports Authority will manage and maintain non-profit making airports from profits/resources generated from other
 airports including share of revenue from Delhi and Mumbai airports.   There is no revenue sharing from the new Hyderabad and
 Bangalore Airports to Airports Authority of India.  The Committee is dissatisfied over the fact that the profit making airports are
 handed over to the private players on a  platter whereas the  Airports Authority of India  is burdened to operate, manage and
 maintain the loss making airports.  Till now, the Airports Authority of India was managing their social obligation of operating
 the loss making airports from the income generated by the profit making airports, however, in the present case, the Government
 is compelling the public sector Airport Authority of India to close its profit making ventures and allowing the private players to
 reap super profits.
23.       The Committee observes the double standard of the Government in dealing with the Airports Authority of India vis-à-vis
 private operators in the development of airports in the country. The Committee is not against private companies making profit
 but at the same time the profit making Public Sector Undertakings should not be handed over to the private players.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should not hand over the profit earning airports to the private sector. 
 The Committee feels that AAI should also be given adequate opportunities and encouragement in modernizing and developing
 of airports in the country. Airports Authority of India should be given all the financial and operating freedom enjoyed by a
 private joint venture company for competing with the private players.
 
EMPLOYEES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
24.       The Committee enquired about the retrenchment/relocation of employees/officers by the Airports Authority of India due
 to the privatization of airports in Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad and Bangalore and the details of the action plan to settle the issues
 of the surplus employees of the Airports Authority of India for which the Ministry has stated that there is no provision in
 Concession Agreement regarding absorption of Airports Authority of India employees at the existing airports at Hyderabad and
 Bangalore.
25.       As regards, Hyderabad Airport out of 382 employees, 93 employees (55 ATC + 38 Communications) will be retained at
 Hyderabad as per Operational requirement and balance 289 employees will be relocated to other establishments/Airports of
 Airports Authority of India.  At Bangalore Airport, out of 183 employees, 64 employees (4 ATC + 60 Communications) will be
 retained at Bangalore as per Operational requirement and balance 119 employees will be relocated to other

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
 establishments/Airports of Airports Authority of India.
26.       When the Committee specifically raised the issue of setting up of Tripartite Committee to look into the issues relating to
 the employees, the Secretary Ministry of Civil Aviation stated:-
“…. the Tripartite Committee has been set up, and it will look at issues in relation to Hyderabad, Bangalore, etc.  But it
 was set up in the larger context of ensuring that post-Mumbai-Delhi privatization, the interests of the employees are not
 jeopardized.  That assurance is very much on the Table at all points in time….”   
27.                          The Committee recommends that the grievances of the employees of the both the airports should be well addressed
 by the Government.   The employees should not be put into any hardship due to the wrong decision of the Government. The
 Committee feels that the Tripartite Committee should meet regularly to remove any uneasiness and settle issues agitating the
 employees of the Airports Authority of India on various issues.
 
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
 
The Committee notes that the estimates and projections were made on the basis of the 1999 and 2000 Statistics
 when the civil aviation sector was growing at 6% per annum but today it is growing at 20% per annum.  Actually, it was
 an underestimate of gigantic proportions. If, the present trend continues in a couple of years even the present new
 airports will not be able to handle the rush of passengers and the Government will have to look for other options.  This is
 clear from the fact that the private Greenfield  airport at Bangalore is designed to handle passenger traffic of 9 million
 per year.  As noted above in 2007 itself this figure stood at 9.9million.   As far as Hyderabad is concerned, the initial
 projected capacity is 7 million. In 2007 itself passenger traffic was 6.8 million.   Therefore, the Committee recommends
 that the present airports should be used, given the saturation of passenger traffic, in such a way that the private player is
 making a reasonable profit while the Government discharges its responsibilities of maintaining public goods and
 upholding public interest.
(Para 15)
The Committee unanimously feels and recommends that the existing airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad should
 not be closed for commercial operations to make the way for the commissioning of the private Greenfield  airports.  The
 Committee also feels that this is the first time in the country that the Government owned airports built on the tax payers’
 money are being closed for the commissioning of the private Greenfield airports where profit earning is the main motto
 rather than the service to the passengers.  This is contrary to the Government's policy particularly in a situation where
 both the airports are required in view of the changing scenario in passenger traffic.    This is in complete contravention of
 the 'level playing field' concept.   The Committee fails to understand the logic or rationale behind such drastic step of the
 Government.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Government’s reluctance to accept this Committee’s earlier
 unanimous recommendations presented to the Parliament on this subject without giving any reasons negates the very
 purpose of the Parliamentary Committee system. The Government still has the time to re-negotiate the issue with the
 concessionaire and can modify or scrap the clause which facilitates the closure of the existing airports.  The possible
 revenue implications of such a re-negotiation must not inhibit the Government from proceeding on such a course in
 national interest.   Since the aviation sector is growing in a big way, having two airports in a particular city will be a
 commercially viable option for the operators.
   (Para 16)
            After considering all the facts placed before the Committee and keeping in view the traffic growth in recent
 years which is even more than three times as compared to the year when the projections were made and agreements were
 signed, the Committee strongly recommends unanimously and unequivocally to the Government of India that the
 existing Hyderabad and Bangalore Airports should not be closed for commercial operation.
            (Para 17)
            The Committee notes that the Airports Authority of India while taking up the major expansion projects at
 Ahmedabad and Trivandrum had envisaged levy of User Development Fee of Rs.300 per passenger as prescribed Initial
 Rate of Return (IRR) was not being achieved.  However, the proposal was turned down by the Government.  The
 Committee observes that the Government which turned down the proposal of Airports Authority of India is happily
 agreeing to the demands of the private operators.  The Committee recommends that the levy of any User Development
 Fee will give a negative signal to the upward growth and overall growth pattern of the aviation sector.
(Para 20)
            The Committee feels that User Development Fee is illogical and irrational.   The same was not allowed in
 case of Airports Authority of India operated Airports.  The Committee deplores it in unambiguous terms and
 recommends that the user fee may be withdrawn immediately.
(Para 21)
            The Committee observes the double standard of the Government in dealing with the Airports Authority of India
 vis-à-vis private operators in the development of airports in the country. The Committee is not against private companies
 making profit at the same time the profit making Public Sector Undertakings should be not be handed over to the private
 players.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should not hand over the profit earning airports
 to the private sector.  The Committee feels that AAI should also be given adequate opportunities and encouragement in
 modernizing and developing of airports in the country. Airports Authority of India should be given all the financial and
 operating freedom enjoyed by a private joint venture company for competing with the private players.
(Para 23)
            The Committee recommends that the grievances of the employees of the both the airports should be well addressed
 by the Government.  The employees should not be put into any hardship due to the wrong decision of the Government.
 The Committee feels that the Tripartite Committee should meet regularly to remove any uneasiness and settle issues

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
 agitating the employees of the Airports Authority of India on various issues.
(Para 27)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES
 
 
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 14 th February, 2008 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
4. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
5. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
6. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
7. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
8. Dr. P.P. Koya
9. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
10. Shri Samik Lahiri
11. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
12. Shri Dushyant Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA :
Dr. K. Ramalingam, Chairman (AAI)
Shri H.S. Bains, Member (P&A)
Shri V.P. Agarwal, Member (Planning)
Shri M.C. Kishore, Company Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT):
 
Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Dr. G.N. Raju, Additional Legislative Counsel
 
 
 
 
           
2.         *                                  *                                  *.  The Committee also sought clarifications from the Chairman, Airports
 Authority of India on the closure of Begumpet Hyderabad Airport. The Members raised queries on the subject and the Chairman,
 AAI explained their position thereon. To some queries raised by the Members, the Chairman, AAI was requested to give written
 replies within a week.
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
4.         The Committee also decided to hear the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the proposed closure of
 Begumpet Airport in Hyderabad and matters related thereto in its next meeting on the 22
nd February, 2008.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
          * Relates to other matters
 
 
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the 22 nd February, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary 
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Janardhana Poojary
5. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
6. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri Joachim Baxla
8. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Shri Samik Lahiri
11. Shri Rakesh Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
           
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION :
Shri Ashok Chawla, Secretary
Shri Raghu Menon, Special Secretary & F.A.
Ms. Anna Roy, Director
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA :
Dr. K. Ramalingam, Chairman (AAI)
Shri S.C. Chhatwal, Member (Finance)
Shri M.C. Kishore, Company Secretary
           
2.         The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the proposed closure of Begumpet


file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
 (Hyderabad) and Bangalore Airports and matters related thereto The Members raised queries on the subject and the Secretary,
 Ministry of Civil Aviation explained the Government's position thereon. The Committee observed that the 20% growth in the
 Civil Aviation sector in the year 2007 compared to the 6% growth in the year 1999/2000 when the Concession Agreements were
 signed may be taken into account while taking any decision on the closure of the existing airports at Hyderabad and Bangalore . 
 The Secretary assured the Committee that he will convey the feelings of the Committee on the closure of above Airports to the
 Government.   To some other queries raised by the Members, the Secretary, was requested to give written replies within a week. 
 The Committee also directed the Secretariat to prepare a draft report on the subject.
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m.
 
 
 
 
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 4th March 2008 in Committee Room 'E', Basement, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5. Shri Janardhana Poojary
6. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
8. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
9. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
10. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
11. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
12. Dr. P.P. Koya
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Prahlad Joshi
SECRETARIAT
           
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer  
 
                       
2.         The Committee considered the draft Report on the 'Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports and matters related
 thereto'.   After some discussion the Committee adopted the Report with some modifications. The Committee also authorized the
 Chairman and Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal to present the said report in Rajya  Sabha and Shri Adhir Chowdhury and Dr. K.
 Dhanaraju to lay the report in Lok Sabha on the 5 th March, 2008.  The Committee also decided to hold a Press Conference
 immediately after the presentation of the Report.
 
3.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.45 p.m.
 
 
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/131.htm[28-08-2018 13:31:18]
           
 
 
 