 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
303
_ 
THREE HUNDRED THIRD REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Ninetieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED THIRD REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Ninetieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2021) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-vii 
 4. REPORT                                 1-65 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   66-73 
    6. 
 7. ANNEXURES        
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
MINUTES
76-81
74-75

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Ninetieth 
Report on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways.  
2. The Two Hundred and Ninetieth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 15th March, 
2021 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Ninetieth Report were received from the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways on 22nd November, 2021. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  8th 
December, 2021.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 8, 2021                                                    Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 17, 1943 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
AE Actual Expenditure  
AIS Automatic Identification System 
ALHW Andaman Lakshadweep Harbour Works 
AMPTPL Adani Mormugao Port Terminal Pvt. Ltd. 
API Application Programming Interface 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ASTDS Approved Standardized Tug Design & Specifications  
BE Budget Estimate 
BER Beyond Economical Repair 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
BOL Bills of Lading 
BOT Build, Operate and Transfer 
CANSRU CSL-Andaman & Nicobar Ship Repair Unit 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CCTV Closed-circuit television 
CDC Continuous Discharge Certificate 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CFA Central Financial Assistance  
CFS Container Freight Station 
CIP Comprehensive Inspection Programme 
CKSRU CSL-Kolkata Ship Repair Unit 
CLC International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 
CMSRU CSL-Mumbai Ship Repair Unit 
CONCOR Container Corporation of India Limited 
CRIF Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
CRIS Carrier Route Information System 
CRZ Coastal Regulation Zone 
CSD Certification Support Document 
CSL Cochin Shipyard Limited 
CSO Central Statistical Office 
CSSC Cargo Ship Safety Construction 
CTCE Centre for Training and Continuing Education 
CTO Cargo Terminal Operator 
CZMP Coastal Zone Management Plan 
DCI Dredging Corporation of India Limited 
DDU-GKY Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana 
DG Directorate General  
DGFT Directorate General of Foreign Trade 
DGLL Directorate of Lighthouse & Lightships 
DGPS Differential Global Positioning System 
DGS Directorate General of Shipping 
DO Delivery Order 
DPD Direct Port Delivery 

iv 
 
DPE Direct Port Entry of Export 
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DPR Detailed Project Report  
DPT Deendayal Port Trust 
DR Dredger 
DWT Deadweight Tonnage 
EAC Expert Appraisal Committee 
EAP Externally Aided Project 
EBR Extra Budgetary Resources 
EBS Enterprise Business System  
EC Environmental Clearance 
EDI Electronic Data Interchange 
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment 
EMRIP Ennore-Manali Road Improvement Project 
EoI Expression of Interest 
EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
EPH Environmental Public Hearing 
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning 
EXIM Export Import  
FA Financial Assistance 
FFO Furnace Fuel Oil 
FIEO Federation of Indian Export Organizations  
FRM Fertilizer Related Material 
FS Fuel Surcharge  
FSI Flag State Inspections 
FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
FY Financial Year 
GBS Gross Budgetary Support 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GIA Grant-In-Aid 
GOI Government of India 
GSPCB Goa State Pollution Control Board 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GT Gross Tonnage 
IALA International Association of Marine Aids to Navigation and 
Lighthouse Authorities 
IBP Indo-Bangladesh Protocol 
IC Independent Charge 
ICEGATE Indian Customs Electronic Gateway 
IEBR Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
IGA Inter-Governmental Agreement 
IHC Inland Haulage Charges 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IMO International Maritime Organization 
IMT Inter-Modal Terminals 

v 
 
IMU Indian Maritime University 
INA International Navigation Association 
INDOS Indian National Database of Seafarers  
IOPC International Oil Pollution Convention 
IOPP International Oil Pollution Prevention  
IPA Indian Ports Association 
IPPTA Indian Private Ports and Terminals Association 
IRPSM Indian Railways Projects Sanctions and Management 
ISRF International Ship Repair Facility 
IT Information Technology 
ITD Italian Thai Development  
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
IWD Irrigation and Waterways Department  
IWT Inland Water Transport 
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
JMVP Jal Marg Vikas Project 
JNPT Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
JS Joint Secretary 
KCI Potassium Chloride 
KPL Kamarajar Port Ltd. 
LC Letter of Credit 
LH Light House  
LLMC Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims 
LLP Limited Liability Partnership 
LNG Liquefied Natural Gas 
LOA Length Overall 
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
MACP Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme 
MARPOL International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships 
MCA Model Concession Agreement 
MH Mumbai Harbour  
MIS Management Information System 
MIV Maritime Indian Vision 
MLT Marine Liquid Terminal 
MMD Mercantile Marine Departments 
MMLP Multi-Modal Logistics Park 
MMT Multi-Modal Terminal 
MMTPA Million Metric Tonne Per Annum 
MOU Memorandum of understanding 
MPRCL Mormugao Port Road Company Limited 
MPT Mormugao Port Trust 
MRCC Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre 
MS Master of Science 
MSDC Maritime States Development Committee 
MT Metric Tonnes 

vi 
 
MTI Maritime Training Institute  
MTPA Million Tonnes Per Annum 
MXCS Mobile X-ray Container Scanning 
NCB Narcotics Control Bureau 
NDC National Data Centre 
NEA North East Area 
NER North Eastern Region 
NGT National Green Tribunal 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NICDC National Industrial Corridor Development Corporation 
NINI National Inland Navigation Institute 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NLP National Logistics Portal 
NM Nautical Miles 
NMHC National Maritime Heritage Complex 
NMP National Master Plan 
NMPT New Mangalore Port Trust 
NOSDCP National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan 
NPP National Perspective Plan 
NSAC National Sagarmala Apex Committee 
NSD Netaji Subhas Dock 
NSSO National Sample Survey Office 
NW National Waterway 
OCMS Online Computerized Monitoring System 
OM Office Memorandum 
OMT Object Modelling Technique 
OOC Out of Charge 
OSBD Output per Ship Berthday 
OSD Oil Spill Dispersant 
PAT Profit After Tax 
PCS Port Community System 
PDMP Port Data Management Portal 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PG Post Graduation 
PGA Partner Government Agency 
PIANC Permanent International Association for Navigational Congress 
PMMSY Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
PMU Project Management Unit 
POL Port of Loading 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PPT Paradip Port Trust 
PSC Port State Control 
PSU Public Sector Undertakings 
PWD Public Works Department 

vii 
 
QC Quality Control 
RE Revised Estimates 
RFID Radio Frequency Identification Device 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RFQ Request for Quote 
RGPPL Ratnagiri Gas and Power Private Limited 
RO Recognized Organization 
ROA Return on Assets 
ROB Road Over Bridge 
ROFR Right Of First Refusal 
SAR Search & Rescue 
SAROD Society for Affordable Redressal of Disputes 
SAT Site Acceptance Test 
SBFA Ship Building Financial Assistance 
SCI Shipping Corporation of India 
SCSC Sagarmala Coordination and Steering Committee 
SDCL Sagarmala Development Company Limited 
SFC Standing Finance Committee 
SIMFC Sagarmala IMO Maritime Foundation Course 
SIOTL Sical Iron Ore Terminals Limited 
SM Sagarmala 
SMP Ship Motion Program 
SMS Short Message Service 
SOP Standard Operation Procedure 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
STCW Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping 
SWPL South West Port Limited 
TAMP Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
TEAP Training Examination Assessment Manual Part 
TEFR Techno-Economic feasibility Report 
TRT Turn-Around Time 
TRW Transport Research Wing 
TSHD Trailer Suction Hopper Dredgers 
TTPS Tuticorin Thermal Power Station 
UG Under Graduation 
USD United States dollar 
UT Union Territory 
VLCC Very Large Crude Carrier 
VLGC Very Large Gas Carrier 
VOC V. O. Chidambaranar 
VOCPT V. O. Chidambaranar Port Trust 
VPT Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
VRC Vessel Related Charges 
VTS Vessel Traffic Service 
WQ West Quay 
 

1 
  
REPORT 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred and 
Ninetieth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (202 1-22) of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways’ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 15th March, 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 22nd November, 2021 in 
respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the 2 90th Report. The replies 
have been categorized as follows:— 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.:     6, 11, 15, 24, 27, 44, 63, 72, 73, 77, 86, 96, 108, 112, 119, 
121, 123, 125, 126, 127 
Total:   20 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:   8, 13, 22, 31, 36, 45, 46, 55, 58, 62, 70, 80, 102, 128                                                                                                
Total:  14 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:   5, 17, 20, 40, 42, 50, 52, 71, 81, 95, 101, 103, 110, 122  
Total:   14 
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.:   Nil  
Total:   Nil 
 
 
  

2 
  
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22) OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee understands that many of the programmes / schemes relating to Port 
modernization, Port infrastructure development, ship building, ship repairing and inland 
waterways transport are lagging behind because of the drastic cuts effected and would 
ultimately lead to both time and cost overruns. The Committee is of the view that if the 
Ministry wants adequate/ substantial budgetary support to complete its projects, the pace of 
implementation of the projects will have to be spruced up and the allocate d funds be 
optimally utilized. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should initiate 
and implement measures for better financial discipline and ensure that the scarce resources do 
not remain locked up and surrendered later on.  
                   (Para 6) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 Noted for necessary compliance. In this connection, necessary instructions in 
compliance of above recommendations/directions of the Hon’ble Committee have been 
issued by IWAI vide O.M. dated 23.08.2021 to all concerned. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure effective coordination among the 
Central Line Ministries, State Governments/ State Maritime Boards and SPVs for 
implementation of projects earmarked under the Sagarmala Programme and constitute a 
Committee to encourage convergence at Central and State level and also to sort out various 
inter-Ministerial issues at the Central level as well as the issues with the States and other 
stakeholders. Since there is a huge difference between the projected demand and all ocated 
funds, the Committee would advise the Ministry to implement effective measures to 

3 
  
optimally utilize the allocated resources instead of keeping a vast chunk of its resources 
locked up and surrender them towards the end of financial year.  
                  (Para 11) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
2.2 It is mentioned that as per Cabinet mandate a National Sagarmala Apex Committee 
(NSAC) has been constituted for overall policy guidance and high level coordinati on, and to 
review various aspects of planning and implementation of the plan and projects. 
2.3 A Sagarmala Coordination and Steering Committee (SCSC) was constituted under the 
chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary with Port, Shipping & Waterways (formally Ministry 
of Shipping), Road Transport and Highways, Tourism, Defence, Home Affairs, Environment, 
Forest & Climate Change, Department of Revenue, Expenditure, Industrial Policy and 
Promotion, Chairman, Railway Board and CEO, NITI Aayog as members. 
2.4 Three meetings conducted under the chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary dated 1 st 
October 2015, 4 th April 2016 and 25 th November 2016. As recommended in 3 rd meeting of 
SCSC, major responsibilities related to projects identified in NPP and Master Planning of 
Major Ports were allocated to MoPSW. 
2.5 It is also informed that Maritime States Development Committee (MSDC) is an apex 
advisory body for the development of the Maritime sector and aims to ensure integrated 
development of Major and non -Major Ports. The MSD C was constituted in May, 1997 to 
assess in consultation with State Governments, the future development of existing and new 
minor ports by the respective maritime States either directly or through captive users and 
private participation. Further, MSDC also  monitor the development of minor ports, captive 
ports and private ports in the Maritime States with a view to ensure their integrated 
development with Major Ports and to assess the requirements of other infrastructure 
requirements like roads/rail/IWT and make suitable recommendations to the concerned 
Ministers. 
2.6 The MSDC is a platform which gives an opportunity for deliberating upon steps and 
measures for creating a synergy between the Major Ports & Minor Ports. Besides, the Major 
Ports, the Non-Major Ports have an essential role to play in the Maritime trade. 

4 
  
ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2020-21 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee after taking note of the variations between Budget Estimates, Revised 
Estimates and Actual Expenditure had, in its 279 th Report on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) 
of Ministry of Shipping, desired the Ministry to be realistic in its projection of fund 
requirements and exercise due diligence in its Budget formulation after proper assessment 
and planning. The Committee, is theref ore, constrained to note the failure of the Ministry to 
fully utilize the budgeted funds under various heads during 2020 -21. For instance, Rs 211.00 
crores were allocated at the stage of BE 2020 -21 under the head “Sagarmala Schemes and 
Projects” which got reduced to Rs 96.69 crores at the RE stage whereas the actual 
expenditure incurred till 05.02.2021 is only Rs 74.92 crores. Similarly, ship building which is 
an essential arm of the Shipping sector witnessed reduction in allocation under the head 
“Assistance to Ship Building, Research and 71 Development” from BE of Rs 151.00 crores 
to Rs.129.30 crores at RE 2020 -21 stage and the actual expenditure till 5th February, 2021 
under the head is only Rs 103.62 crores which accounts for only 75% of allocated sum an d 
roughly 25% has remained unspent. Under the head “Grants to Inland Water Transport 
Authority of India”, a sum of Rs 301.80 crores was proposed in BE 2020 -21, which got 
reduced to Rs 203.20 crores at the RE stage. However, the Ministry was able to spend o nly 
Rs 146.45 crores till 05.02.2021. All this clearly reflects the poor financial management on 
the part of the Ministry. The Committee apprehends the same trend this year also , which will 
hamper the progress of some of the ongoing projects of ship buildi ng sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should regularly track and monitor the progress of 
all the projects under various heads and address the bottlenecks arising during the 
implementation stage to ensure optimum utilization of t he allocated funds. The Committee 
also recommends that the Ministry should put in place a rigorous monitoring mechanism for 
the ongoing projects and ensure that the available resources for 2021 -22 are utilized more 
efficiently and execution of the projects  is done within the approved costs and designated 
timelines. The Committee also implores upon the Ministry to undertake a thorough analysis 
of the persistent underutilization of the funds vis -à-vis the allocated funds and delineate the 
steps taken so far a nd to be taken in future to plug the gaps so as to minimize the variations 
between BE, RE and AE.       
                  (Para 15) 

5 
  
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.                  
3.2 Budgetary Figures are projected to the Ministry of Finance based on the status of the 
projects furnished by the State Government /Major Ports, on the basis of projects where in -
principle approval has been conveyed by the Ministry and keeping in view the expected 
development of projects which are under consideration in the Ministry. 
3.3 For projects under Sagarmala Programme, MoPSW has also developed a new 
Management Information System  (MIS) tool that provides a platform for the proper 
monitoring and implementation of the Sagarma la projects. Phase I & II of MIS tool has gone 
LIVE. The Tool provides the access to nodal officials to create users for their specific 
organizations, provides specific permissions and assign the projects to them.  
3.4 Most of the stakeholders have been given login credentials to the MIS tool and they 
shall be required to update their respective projects directly on the MIS on a monthly basis 
and/or provide “No Update” declaration for projects where there has been no pro gress. An 
escalation matrix has  also been developed in order to maintain veracity of the information 
provided in the system and to ensure timely updation of the projects. 
3.5 Further, to efficiently monitor and track updations, bottlenecks and delays, 
SMS/Email integration has been unde rtaken which sends alerts & notifications seeking 
project proponents and MoPSW users for required information and updation. 
3.6 In addition to above, regular VCs, meeting s are being held with Implementing 
Agencies to track the development. 
3.7 In respect o f Sagarmala funded projects, around 10 projects are facing problems due 
to EC, CRZ, ASI, Forest Clearances etc. On the request of State Government/State Maritime 
Board, UT Administration, the matter is taken up with Central Line Ministries to resolve the 
issue and ensure smooth execution of project.                                                                              
i) Analysis of the under utilization of the funds vis-à-vis the allocated funds: 
The reduction in estimate at RE stage was due to dela ys in vessels construction and 
delivery due to COVID 19. The allocated amount, based on the RE provided in the 
financial year 2020-2021, was utilized to the maximum as detailed here. Para 15 notes 
that Rs. 103.62 crore is actual expenditure till 05 th February 2021. It is submitted that, 

6 
  
in addition to this, during the period between 6.02.21 and 31.03.21, the Directorate 
spent further around Rs. 25.66 Crore under the head “Assistance to Ship Building, 
Research and Development”. Therefore, out of Rs.129. 30 crores allocated under RE 
2020-21, the actual expenditure till 31.03.2021 under the said head comes to around 
Rs.129.28 crores, which accounts for more than 99.98% of the allocated sum in RE 
2020-21 and only about Rs. 2 lakhs had remained unspent. 
It may be noted that the Directorate has spent Rs. 49.98 Crore out of the allotted Rs. 
50 Crore for use by the Directorate towards the new SBFA scheme and the balance 
amount was spent at the Ministry level.  
ii) Steps to be taken in future to plug the gaps so a s to minimize the variations 
between BE, RE and AE: 
A quarterly and half yearly status will be obtained from shipyards towards the 
disbursement and will be provided to the Ministry. The status shall be based on the 
actual status of vessel's construction and the latest schedule for delivery of vessels. 
 
CARGO HANDLING CAPACITY  
Recommendation/Observation 
4.  The Committee is constrained to note that despite introduction of schemes/ 
programmes for the development and modernization of Major Ports, the figures of Cargo 
handling capacity has remained almost stagnant. The Committee apprehends that failure to 
adopt latest technologies from the best Ports of the world could be the reason behind poor 
cargo capacity. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the M inistry should chalk out 
new plans/ policies based on the best practices adopted and applied by the American and 
European Ports in terms of handling cargo with latest technologies.   
(Para 24) 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 The recommendation is noted. MoPSW has been working closely with all the Major 
Ports and taken numerous measures for development and modernization of Major Ports. All 
new terminals being developed on PPP basis are based on latest technologies. Multiple 
initiatives including infrastructural up-gradations, digitization and automation measures have 

7 
  
been at the core of transformation of India’s maritime trade ecosystem, through interventions 
focused on creating the right facilities to promote schemes like Direct Port Entry and Direct 
Port Delive ry, introduction of RFID container tracking system, Port Community System 
(PCS) aimed at seamlessly integrating all maritime trade related stakeholders on a single 
platform, deployment of additional scanners, and other reductions in time and cost and 
procedural simplifications. 
4.2 In a significant development, the Major Port Authorities Bill 2020 was passed in 
Rajya Sabha which will empower Major Ports to function with full autonomy and enable 
them to perform with much greater efficiency. It will also facilitate the modernization of the 
institutional framework of ports. 
4.3 In a notable move to drive India to the forefront of the Global Maritime Sector, 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has formulated Maritime India Vision 2030 (MIV 
2030), a blueprint to ensure coordinated and accelerated growth of India’s maritime sector in 
the next decade. MIV 2030 has been formulated in consultation with over 350+ public and 
private sector stakeholders, comprising ports, shipyards, inland waterways, trade bodi es and 
associations, national and international industry and legal experts. 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee is not convinced with the Ministry’s justification citing COVID -19 
pandemic as reason for decrease in average OSBD, during the last yea r. In fact, the OSBD 
decreased in the year 2019-20 when the situation of pandemic was not there. Needless to say, 
the Ministry/Ports have been failing to take proper measures/steps for increasing average 
output per ship berthday. The Ministry has not even spelt out any roadmap for improving the 
same. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to make serious efforts in the direction of 
improving Average OSBD, which will help not only in saving cost but also enable our 
country to become a cargo hub for nearby countries.  
                (Para 27) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 MoPSW has been working closely with all the Major Ports and taken numerous 
measures in order to facilitate improvement in operational metrics. The above suggestions 
have been duly noted and necessary assessment would be done as far as port -wise OSBD is 

8 
  
concerned, to ascertain the various factors affecting the metric and exercise necessary 
reforms as per requirements. 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts made by the Ministry with regard to 
connectivity projects linking Major Ports. Out of the 54 rail connectivity projects, only 12 
have been completed so far while the rest are in the process of implementation with no fixed 
timelines. The Ministry should impress upon the Ministry of Railways for timely and speedy 
completion of Port connectivity projects. The Committee is of the opinion that the connection 
from Port to corridor to hinterland must be seamless whic h can be achieved through 
integrated planning, with optimal road, water and rail hinterland connectivity with the Port 
area. Transport corridors to the hinterland should be multimodal, containing developed inland 
logistics zones comprising of multimodal hu bs having appropriate warehouses and other 
services. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should emphasize 
upon the upgradation of existing rail networks and insist for timely completion of the 
projects. In order to avoid undue bottl enecks and clearance issues, a site -survey should be 
carried out by the Ministry in coordination with respective Port Authorities keeping in view 
the environment, agricultural lands and urban localities.       
             (Para 44) 
Reply of Ministry  
6.1 There are 91 rail projects under Sagarmala Programme, out of which 54 projects are 
being implemented by Indian Railways/Ministry of Railways, 32 projects are being 
implemented by various Major Ports and 5 projects by other agencies (PPP/State Govt.). 
6.2 Out of 54 projects implemented by Indian railways, 12 projects have been completed 
so far with remaining 42 under implementation. 
6.3 Out of 32 rail projects under Major Ports, 16 projects have been completed, 10 
projects are under implementation and only 6 projects are under development stage. 
6.4 All 5 projects being implemented by PPP and State Govt. are under various stages of 
development. 

9 
  
6.5 Ministry has taken up with Ministry of Railways at the level of Hon’ble Minister to 
expedite the already sanctioned 14 project where execution has been delayed. 
6.6 As suggested by the Committee, MoPSW will coordinate with Ministry of Railways 
on upgrading the existing rail network for timely completion of these projects. 
 
DREDGING ACTIVITIES  
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee notes the absence of a dredging policy, it may be designed after 
encompassing the recommendations made above at the earliest.    
 (Para 63) 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 The Dredging Guidelines for Major Ports have been  formulated and approved by the 
Ministry. 
 
SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee notes that subsidy claims relating to executed shipbuilding contracts 
are pending under the shipbuilding subsidy scheme. A sum of Rs. 153 crores for a total 
number of 51 vessels are to be released in the financial years 2019 -20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 
for which guidelines have been formulated. No details regarding amount of the subsidy 
released so far have been provided to the Committee. The Committee would like the Ministry 
to release the subsidy without any further delay.       
           (Para 72) 
Reply of Ministry  
8.1 Out of the 47 cases of retained subsidy, 46 cases have been settled and 1 case is not 
eligible. All the 4 cases of full subsidy hav e been settled. Total subsidy released is Rs. 143 
crore. 

10 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee notes that the Ministry has modified the guidelines relating to Quay 
Length and non -destructive testing facilities which will benefit both the big and sm all 
Shipyards existing in the country. The Committee may be apprised of the number of 
shipyards who have taken advantage of it.    
              (Para 73) 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 CSL already had such facilities so there has been no impact on CSL. Among private 
shipyards, as per the information available, Larsen & Toubro shipyard has been benefitted. 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF SHIPPING  
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The spread of Covid -19 pandemic in the year 2020 pushed most of the schemes/ 
programmes in almost every sector to the digital mode. The Directorate General of Shipping 
carried out its training programmes such as e -learning and virtual classes in the year 2020 
digitally. Since digital platforms are highly time and cost efficient, the Committee wo uld like 
the Directorate to introduce more such programmes digitally and ensure that the trainees are 
being imparted with latest skills, technologies. The Committee hopes such initiatives will 
continue in future also.         
          (Para 77) 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 The Directorate is developing a new/updated e -governance system to bring all its 
functions/processes, across its entire organizational fold, on an integrated holistic e -mode, 
leading to a footfall -free & completely automated service delivery. It aims at a 
comprehensive process transformation to improve its operational efficiency and effectiveness 
leading to a customer centric service delivery with focus on ease of doing business, and an 
improved stakeholder’s satisfaction. Existing e -Governance system is to be replaced by a 
completely new, updated, state-of-the-art e-Governance.  

11 
  
10.2 Digital initiative for Maritime Training Institutes and Seafarers  
Three-Tier Mechanism of training: 
The Directorate introduced a Three-Tier Mechanism of training leading to issuance of 
a Certificate of Proficiency or a Course Completion Certificate vide DGS Order 20 of 
2020 dated 04.08.2020. 
It was found that each MTI with its own mechanism of assessment of competency 
may result in variation of output quality and i ts resultant impact on Indian seafarers. 
The Directorate devised a Three -Tier Mechanism of Training for achievement or 
maintenance of competency to ensure certain standardization of quality of output 
from all approved MTI. The Three Tiers of this mechanism  for a particular STCW 
Courses comprise of E -Learning course (approved by Directorate) to be completed 
and passed by a seafarer from comfort of his home, a course comprising of practical 
and theoretical component to be completed by each seafarer at an appr oved MTI and 
finally, a seafarer need to pass an on -line exam called EXIT Exam with the issuance 
of the digitally signed certificates. 
E-learning module: 
E-learning platform was developed for the candidates to access study material for the 
certificate of competency examinations for various grades and STCW Modular 
Courses. E -learning material is provided at no cost to the candidates. E -learning 
would help the candidates to improve their learning and performance in the 
examinations, to improve the quality of  officers and ensure their employability. The 
total number of candidates registered for the e-Learning till date is 704761. 
Virtual Classes: 
The DGS has allowed Maritime Training Institutes to conduct Classes for approved 
maritime courses by the use of Dig ital technologies for Virtual Classes/ Live Video 
Sessions during COVID -19 pandemic. The approved Institutes register the qualified 
students for their courses as per STCW requirements and conducts online courses 
without compromising on the course hours req uired for all competencies. Video 
recordings on each class is maintained for record and verification purposes and once 
course is  completed online, students are permitted to appear for the online common 
exit exam.  

12 
  
Online EXIT Exam: 
An online EXIT examination for the STCW modular courses was started to bring out 
a uniform methodology required to carry out assessment of a candidate for the desired 
competency. Total number of seafarers who appeared for online EXIT Exam are 
5,17,383 out of which 4,69,187 passed.  
Digitally signed certificates: 
The Directorate issued guidelines for digitally signed certificates for successfully 
completing maritime courses conducted by Maritime Training Institutes vide the 
Training Circular 21 of 2020 dated 27.05.2020.  
It was fo und that there was a need to have the transparency and uniformity in the 
certificates issued and to make it convenient for the verifying authority to verify them, 
therefore, Directorate introduced the digitally signed certificates. The e -Governance 
system of the Directorate has issued 3,71,655 digital maritime course e-certificates.  
10.3 Emphasis upon improving the quality of training being imparted to the trainees by the 
Maritime Training Institutes. 
i. The Directorate General of Shipping, Mumbai has intr oduced Comprehensive 
Inspection Programme (CIP) which is mandatory for all approved Maritime Training 
Institutes. The MTI has to undergo annual CIP inspection by third party authorized by 
the DG, Shipping as Recognized Organizations. The ROs issue CIP cert ificate to MTI 
with gradings like A1, A2, B1, B2 for Excellent to Good Institute and C1 and C2 for 
poor and very poor performing Institute.  
ii. The Directorate General of Shipping, Mumbai from time to time also direct 
concerned Marine Mercantile Departmen t to carry out comprehensive and surprise 
inspections of the Institute. 
iii. Maritime India Vision 2030 focuses on improving quality of Maritime 
Education and Training for which a number of initiatives are proposed to be taken in 
coming days. 
 
SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA  
 

13 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee is happy to note that SCI has posted a cumulative PAT of Rs. 551.91 
crores in the nine months results of FY 2020 -21 and a consolidated cumulative PAT of Rs. 
610.33 crores in the nine months ended FY 2020 -21. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the details of the investments made by the SCI, and the activities which are being 
carried out by SCI at Major and Minor Ports of the country, with the profit earned. The 
Committee notes from the reply submitted by the Ministry that SCI is contemp lating to 
acquire vessels in the Tanker, Gas, Feeder (container) and Offshore segments, depending on 
market dynamics, and subject to availability of funds. Now that the SCI has posted a good 
and reasonable profit after tax, the Committee desires that actio n may be taken to procure 
tankers used for importing crude oil to meet the energy requirements.   
                 (Para 86) 
 
 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 SCI is a service provider in the business of transporting goods and services and is not 
carrying out any activity in either Major or Minor ports of the country. 
11.2 SCI is pleased to inform the Parliamentary Committee that in line with the vision of 
the Committee, Shipping Corporation of India Ltd., has after requisite approvals from its 
Board, initiated the  process of acquisition of 2 numbers (1 firm + 1 optional) secondhand 
VLGC (Very Large Gas Carrier) and despite the pandemic the company has progressed with 
the tender for vessel acquisition and is in advanced stages of the process which is toward 
supporting the energy requirements of the country. 
 
INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee desires the Ministry to allocate sufficient funds for the Projects. The 
Committee is of the view that if the designed projects ar e completed on time, they will help 
in moving the cargo at reasonable rates and also help control vehicle and air pollution to a 
large extent. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to ensure sustained level of fund 
flow to the inland waterways project. 

14 
  
(Para 96) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 Noted for Compliance. Ministry has allocated necessary funds (BE 2021 -22 Rs. 
610.60 crore) for completion of ongoing projects for Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) on NW -
1. For further development of NW -2, NW -16 & IBP route  during 2021 -22 to 2025 -26, 2 
comprehensive projects have been approved by the Competent Authority and implementation 
has been initiated 
 
MARITIME RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN INDIA  
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee appreciates the efforts of t he Ministry for promoting research & 
development and for providing technical advice on matters relating to the development of 
Major Port projects. The Committee desires that the Ministry should take steps to standardize 
the maritime training programmes all over the country.       
        (Para 108) 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 The Directorate is developing a new/updated e -governance system to bring all its 
functions/processes, across its entire organizational fold, on an integrated holistic e -mode, 
leading to a f ootfall-free & completely automated service delivery. It aims at a 
comprehensive process transformation to improve its operational efficiency and effectiveness 
leading to a customer centric service delivery with focus on ease of doing business, and an 
improved stakeholder’s satisfaction. Existing e -Governance system is to be replaced by a 
completely new, updated, state-of-the-art e-Governance.  
13.2 Digital initiative for Maritime Training Institutes and Seafarers  
Three-Tier Mechanism of training: 
The Directorate introduced a Three -Tier Mechanism of training leading to 
issuance of a Certificate of Proficiency or a Course Completion Certificate 
vide DGS Order 20 of 2020 dated 04.08.2020. 

15 
  
It was found that each MTI with its own mechanism of assessment  of 
competency may result in variation of output quality and its resultant impact 
on Indian seafarers. The Directorate devised a Three -Tier Mechanism of 
Training for achievement or maintenance of competency to ensure certain 
standardization of quality of o utput from all approved MTI. The Three Tiers 
of this mechanism for a particular STCW Courses comprise of E -Learning 
course (approved by Directorate) to be completed and passed by a seafarer 
from comfort of his home, a course comprising of practical and the oretical 
component to be completed by each seafarer at an approved MTI and finally, a 
seafarer needs to pass an online exam called EXIT Exam with the issuance of 
the digitally signed certificates. 
E-learning module: 
E-learning platform was developed for th e candidates to access study material 
for the certificate of competency examinations for various grades and STCW 
Modular Courses. E-learning material is provided at no cost to the candidates. 
E-learning would help the candidates to improve their learning a nd 
performance in the examinations, to improve the quality of officers and ensure 
their employability. The total number of candidates registered for the e -
Learning till date are 704761. 
Virtual Classes: 
The DGS has allowed Maritime Training Institutes to c onduct Classes for 
approved maritime courses by the use of Digital technologies for Virtual 
Classes/ Live Video Sessions during COVID -19 pandemic. The approved 
Institutes register the qualified students for their courses as per STCW 
requirements and conduc ts online courses without compromising on the 
course hours required for all competencies. Video recordings on each class is 
maintained for record and verification purposes and once course is  completed 
online, students are permitted to appear for the online common exit exam. 
Online EXIT Exam: 
An online EXIT examination for the STCW modular courses was started to 
bring a uniform methodology required to carry out assessment of a candidate 

16 
  
for the desired competency. Total number of seafarers who appeared for 
online EXIT Exam are 5,17,383 out of which 4,69,187 passed.  
Digitally signed certificates: 
The Directorate issued guidelines for digitally signed certificates for 
successfully completing maritime courses conducted by Maritime Training 
Institutes vide the Training Circular 21 of 2020 dated 27.05.2020.  
It was found that there was a need to have the transparency and uniformity in 
the certificates issued and to make it convenient for the verifying authority to 
verify them, therefore, Directorate introduced th e digitally signed certificates. 
The e -Governance system of the Directorate has issued 3,71,655 digital 
maritime course e-certificates  
13.3 Emphasis upon improving the quality of training being imparted to the trainees by the 
Maritime Training Institutes 
i. The Directorate General of Shipping, Mumbai has introduced 
Comprehensive Inspection Programme (CIP) which is mandatory for all 
approved Maritime Training Institute. The MTI has to undergo annual CIP 
inspection by third party authorized by the DG, Shippi ng as Recognized 
Organizations. The RO issue CIP certificate to MTI with gradings like A1, 
A2, B1, B2 for Excellent to Good Institute and C1 and C2 for poor and very 
poor performing Institute.  
ii. The Directorate General of Shipping, Mumbai from time to t ime also direct 
concerned Marine Mercantile Department to carry out comprehensive and 
surprise inspections of the Institute. 
iii. The Maritime India Vision 2030 has embodied objective and target to improve the 
quality of Maritime Training for which a numbe r of initiatives are proposed to be 
taken in coming days. 
 
MARITIME TRAINING  
Recommendation/Observation  

17 
  
14. The Ministry should make efforts to design a common training programme and also 
emphasize upon improving the quality of training being imparted to the trainees by the 
Maritime Training Institutes. The Committee is worried over the fact that the violation u nder 
the EXIT exams of seafarers is found to be increasing. The Ministry should find ways to 
address this issue on priority basis.   
               (Para 112) 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 Designing a common training programme: 
The training programme for impartin g the maritime education is common and 
centrally designed based upon the Training Examination Assessment Manual Part 
(TEAP) Manual “A” and “B”. The MTIs approved for the Pre -Sea and Post -Sea 
training courses by the DG, Shipping in India are required to fol low this Common 
Training Programme. 
14.2 Improving the quality of training: 
It is the endeavour of the Directorate to improve the quality of the training imparted to 
the students in the Maritime field. Proper care is taken while giving approval to start 
the Pre -Sea and Post -Sea (Maritime Training Institutes) MTIs. All training courses 
are designed based on International Maritime Organization Model Courses and the 
lesson plans, learning objectives etc. are reviewed during initial approvals. The 
infrastructure including training infrastructure and equipment requirements, 
qualification of Faculties and instructors are also well defined for each course. 
The Directorate has initiated a mechanism called Comprehensive Inspection 
Programme to standardize Maritime Training across India. All MTIs are graded based 
on different attributes during inspection like infrastructure, Quality Management 
System, Faculty, quality of student intake, research work and training standards and 
the findings of the CIP. Un -scheduled insp ections are also carried out to enhance 
quality of training through monitoring.   The grading of the MTIs is displayed on DG 
Shipping website for the reference to the students and making them able, to exercise 
the right choice while taking admission. 
 14.3 Steps to counter 'Violations in EXIT Exam':  

18 
  
It is stated that EXIT Exam is designed with e -proctoring feature based on facial 
recognition of the examinee which is randomly verified during the examination 
process with the profile photo in DGS database. The  exam will be terminated 
automatically if following violations are committed by the students while appearing in 
the EXIT exam. 
       i.         Minimizing the Exam Browser, 
      ii.        Opening the other Window, 
     iii.        Clicking the cursor other than Exam browser, 
     iv.        Multiple person in the Image captured, 
     v.         Person Image not matching with INDOS number, 
     vi.        Any machine connected in parallel. 
Proper instructions are given to the Candidates to avoid such acti vities during 
examination. This is a safety feature which keeps the system secured and avoids any 
malpractices to be adopted by the candidates during the course of online Exit exam. 
 
CRUISE SHIPPING  
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee applauds the efforts of the Ministry regarding promotion and 
development of cruise tourism in the country. The Committee is of view that cruise tourism is 
one of the emerging sectors that needs special focus because it is in nascent stage and  it can 
earn huge revenues for States/ Central Government in the near future. Cruise tourism in India 
is already showing its potential at some of the Major Ports of the country both in terms of 
revenue and employment generation. In this backdrop, the Commi ttee recommends the 
Ministry to evolve simplified immigration process for foreign cruise tourists by ensuring an 
easy customs clearance and development of cruise terminals and related infrastructure at 
every Port. The Committee desires to be updated on the progress made in this regard.  
     
   (Para 119) 
 

19 
  
Reply of Ministry 
15.1 Infrastructure Development at the Ports for Cruise Ships: 
Cruise vessels visit five major ports in India, namely Mumbai Port, Mormugao Port, New 
Mangalore Port, Cochin Port and Chennai Port. The status of construction of terminals at 
these ports is given below:- 
a) Chennai Port Trust has developed Cruise Terminal Facilitation Centre at the existing 
WQ 4 Passenger  Terminal. Terminal has been modernized at an overall cost  of Rs. 
17.21 crores sanctioned by Ministry of Tourism, and the state -of-the-art Cruise 
Terminal facility was inaugurated on 12.10.2018. 
 Cruise Terminal with a very lavish space of 2880 sq. mtrs and can accommodate 1000 
passengers. 
 Two Passenger Lifts, four escalators  and Heat Ventilation Air Conditioning system 
provide hassle –free experience. 
 20 Permanent Immigration counters for faster clearance of Passengers. 
 10 temporary immigration counters and necessary E -Landing counter provided for 
immigration clearance as and when required. 
 High end Security System such as Baggage Scanners (4 Nos.), Handheld Metal 
Detectors, Metal Door Frame Detectors, CCTV coverage and Public Address System. 
 Fire Fighting System with Hydrants, smoke detectors and fire -extinguishers provide a 
safe experience to the passengers. 
 Duty Free Shop for souvenir shopping. 
 Cafeteria for refreshments is available at the cruise terminal. 
 
b) Mormugao Port has constructed state -of-the-art three -storeyed new cruise terminal 
building having the facility for Custom, Immigration, Duty free shops for the 
passengers and it was inaugurated on 22.12.2016.  
 
Mormugao Port Trust also constructed Immigration Centre with 24 counters which 
was inaugurated in February  2020. Mormugao Port Trust is planning for Creation of 
Facilities for International & Domestic Cruise Vessels, Ro -Pax, Ferry and other allied 
activities at MoPT, Goa. 
 

20 
  
c) Mumbai Port has taken initiative to build a new Cruise Terminal by demolishing the 
existing terminal to match the International standard and work has started which will 
cost Rs. 495.3 Crore (EPC : 303.3 Cr PPP : 192 Cr ) approximately and is likely to be 
operational by February 2024. Meanwhile, a transit terminal is operational, which will 
continue to be used till the new terminal is fully functional. 
 
d) Cochin Port has two dedicated cruise terminals and has hosted the largest and most 
luxurious of cruise ships. Cochin Port cruise terminal “Samudrika”, constructed with 
a financial assistance of the Ministry of Tourism (Rs. 27 Crores) was completed in the 
year 2015. This terminal has 1800 sq. m space and is fully equipped with all facilities 
required to handle large cruise ships carrying around 2000 passenger per call. 
Mattancherry channel, where Samudrika Cruise Terminal is located had LOA 
restriction of 260 m for ships, and some of the most prestigious cruise ships calling at 
Cochin had the LOA of 320 m and above, and therefore, berthed at Ernakulam wharf. 
Accordingly, a new International Cruise Terminal “Sagarika” with a facility of 
approximate area 2253 m2 with connected facilities was constructed inside Ernakulam 
Wharf area with the financial assistance of the Ministry of Tourism (Rs. 23.24 Cr.) to 
cater to the Cruise passengers which was inaug urated on 14.02.2021 by the Hon’ble 
Prime Minister of India. 
 
e) Foreseeing the growth in cruise traffic, NMPT has constructed a modern cruise 
passenger lounge near Berth No.4 with an area of 2150sq. mtrs. and put it into 
operation during 2008 with facilities  like money exchange, locker room, medical 
officer room, duty free shops, cafeteria, conference hall etc. In addition, the work of 
providing concrete pavement for cruise berth inside wharf area is under progress with 
an agreement cost of Rs. 1.85 Cr. The p roposal for construction of Cruise Terminal 
Gate, Landscaping from cruise terminal gate to the  gate along with new dedicated 
corridor for cruise passenger movement and taxi hub at Mallya gate is under 
preparation. 
 
15.2 Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Wate rways has provided 65 counters at five ports in 
the immigration halls of the ports to facilitate e -visa (15 each for Mumbai, Cochin and Goa 
and 10 each for Mangalore and Chennai). 
 

21 
  
MARINE SAFETY  
Recommendation/Observation  
16.  The Committee is of the view that oil spill incidents are harmful for the marine 
environment and prove to be disastrous for the aquatic ecosystem. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure that high quality of skimmers, sorbents and 
dispersants are being used to tackle oil spill incidents. The Ministry should analyze the case 
study of the oil spill incident which took place in Mauritius in 2019 and adopt the measures 
implemented by them such as building sugar cane pulp buoys and p lacing them in the water 
in order to absorb and contain the oil which had already spread in the lagoons. The Ministry 
should apprise the Committee of the number of oil spill incidents that took place in the last 
five years along with the details of the steps taken for prevention of the same.   
           (Para 121) 
Reply of Ministry 
16.1 Oil spills are handled as per National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan and Indian 
Coast Guard is custodian of the NOSDCP as well as national coordinating agency for Oil  
Spills in Indian waters.  
 
16.2 All Major Ports and some of non -major ports have procured equipments and 
chemicals as per specification provided by Coast Guard in 2015. Oil spill contingency plans 
in all Major Ports are in place. Oil Dispersant Chemicals,  skimmers, booms etc of required 
specification have been provided. Further, the Ministry is in the process of evolving 
mechanism to create additional reserve stock of quality equipments and chemicals at pre -
identified regional centres, which can be pooled in case of emergency. 
 
16.3 The Ministry takes note of the recommendation of the Committee to assess the Oil 
absorption capacity of sugar cane pulp and utilise, if found feasible. 
 
16.4 There have been a total of five oil leakages in port waters during the  last five years, 
and those have been successfully handled using local resources, except one that happened at 
Kamarajar Port Limited, Ennore on 27 th January, 2017 where shoreline cleanup operations 
were also undertaken. Details of all oil spill in port areas during last five years are as follows: 
 

22 
  
Date 
 
Name Spilled oil 
Type 
Approx Spill 
Quantity 
Clean-
up/recovery 
mechanism 
Quantity of 
recovery (if 
any) 
27 Jan 
17 
MT Dawn 
Kanchipuram, 
Kamarajar 
Port Ltd., 
Ennore 
Heavy 
Fuel Oil 
Approx 
151.45 MT 
(a) Boom and 
skimmers 
(b) Shore line 
cleanup 
operation 
187Tons of 
Oil/sludge, 109 
Kl Oil mixed 
with water and 
81.5 tons of Tar 
Balls 
30 Jan 
18 
MT Jipro 
Neftis, 
Mumbai at 
anchorage 
Heavy 
Fuel Oil 
Approx 400 
Ltrs 
Dispersed using 
OSD 
____ 
18 Nov 
18 
MT Coral Star, 
MLT Berth 
Ennore 
Furnace 
Fuel Oil 
(FFO) 
Approx 2 Ton (a) Sorbent 
boom 
(b) Sorbent 
pads 
16 Kl oil/sludge 
11 Aug 
19 
MT Kalliopi, 
SPM Vizag 
Crude Oil Silvery Sheen 
approximate 
width 202.5 
mtr 
(a) Contained 
by boom 
(b) OSD 
application 
____ 
03 Oct 
19 
MT 
DeshShobha, 
SPM Vizag 
Crude Oil Approx 04 -05 
Tons 
(a) Contained 
by boom 
(b) OSD 
application 
_____ 
 
A.  The number of oil spill incidents that took place in the last five years: 03 (Three). 
B.    The details of the steps taken for prevention of the same: 
 Following are the steps in regards to prevention oil spills from ships: 
a. Annex 1 of MARPOL convention, to which India is party to, deals with Prevention 
of Pollution by Oil. The aforesaid convention, besides mandating the construction and 
operational requirement for ships to prevent pollution by oil, also specifies the 
requirements for emergency response in case of oil spill. Indian ships are surveyed at 
periodic intervals to ensure compliance with the requirement of the MARPOL 
Convention. 
b. In addition, to discourage operati on of sub -standard vessels in Indian water, Flag 
State Inspections (FSI) and Port State Control (PSC) Inspections of ships in Indian 
ports are carried out to ensure compliance of ships with applicable regulation, for 
prevention of pollution by oil. 
c. Nati onal response mechanism to deal with oil spill incidents has been prepared 
(NOS-DCP). 

23 
  
d. Merchant Shipping (Regulations of Entry of Ships into Ports, Anchorages and 
Offshore facilities) Rules, 2012 has provisions that require older vessels to conform to 
the standards of members of the Association of International Classification Societies 
and also all vessels calling at Indian  Ports are required to carry insurance against oil 
spills under Civil Liability    Convention and Limitation of Liability Convention et c, 
so that possibility of oil-spill from such vessel is minimized. 
e. Coast Guard has been designated as the nodal authority to combat oil spills in 
Indian waters. All major ports have also been equipped to handle minor oil spills in 
their waters. 
f. In ad dition, India is a member of International Oil Pollution Convention Funds 
(IOPC Funds) which provides compensation in the event of oil pollution if the amount 
of compensation exceeds the CLC/LLMC limits to deal with compensation matters in 
case of an oil-spill from certain types of oil.  
g. Further, 'Traffic separation scheme' have been promulgated in West coast of India, 
off Cochin and Lakshadweep islands, to avoid collisions of the vessels, which might 
lead to severe oil pollution cases.   
 
Ship Repair 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee feels that there is ample scope for setting up of more such workshops 
in coastal States, which will create huge number of employment opportunities at the local 
level. The Committee desires that some of the bigg er ports should come forward to open new 
ship repair workshops.     
             (Para 123) 
Reply of Ministry 
17.1 Cochin Shipyard Limited in collaboration with the leading Ports in the country is 
implementing the following ship repair units/ship repair workshops: 
a.         International Ship Repair Facility (ISRF) at Cochin Port Trust: 

24 
  
CSL had taken over on 30 years lease the existing ship repair facility of Cochin Port 
Trust (CoPT) located at Willington Island, Kochi and is in the process of developing 
it into a state -of the–art International Ship Repair Facility (ISRF) by installing ship 
lift & transfer system, 6 dry berths & associated facilities at an estimated cost of Rs. 
970 crores. The ISRF includes 6000T shiplift for ships up to 130 x 25 m with six  
workstations and allied facilities. It has a total outfitting berth of 1500 meters 
approximately. The construction works of ISRF project, which commenced in 
November 2017, is progressing despite the setbacks caused by COVID -19 pandemic. 
100% piling work a nd more than 87% of the deck concreting work have been 
completed. The facility is expected to be commissioned in the latter part of the 
calendar year 2022. CSL expects to position Kochi as a major ship repair hub with 
major operations in the present ship r epair dock, coupled with increased capacities 
that would be available when the ISRF is commissioned. 
  
b.         CSL-Mumbai Ship Repair Unit (CMSRU), Mumbai, Maharashtra: 
CSL commenced operations of its Mumbai Ship Repair Unit in October 2018 through 
an agreement with the Mumbai Port Trust to upgrade, operate and manage Ship 
Repair Facility at Hughes dry -dock and berth nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8 of Indira Dock of 
Mumbai Port for a period of 29 years. Subsequent to the execution of the agreement, 
CSL has commenced the ship repair operations in Mumbai. The facility undertakes 
repairs of both Defence and Commercial Ships.  
  
c.         CSL-Kolkata Ship Repair Unit (CKSRU), Kolkata, West Bengal: 
CSL commenced operations of its Kolkata Ship Repair Unit in March 2019 through 
an agreement with Kolkata Port Trust for operations and management of ship repair 
facility at Netaji Subhas Dock (NSD) for a period of 30 years. The new venture is 
being managed by separate unit of CSL known as “CSL -Kolkata Ship Repair Unit 
(CKSRU). The Honourable Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi formally 
inaugurated the CKSRU facility on January 12, 2020. The facility undertakes repair 
of both Defence and commercial ships.  
  
d.         CSL-Andaman & Nicobar Ship Repair Unit (CANSRU), Port Blair, Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands: 

25 
  
CSL commenced operations of its Andaman Unit at Port Blair through an agreement 
with the Andaman & Nicobar (A&N) Administration for ship r epair at the Marine 
Dockyard, a facility that is currently being operated directly by the A&N 
Administration. Under the ambit of this agreement, CANSRU shall assist the 
Administration in developing an overall ship repair ecosystem at Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands. CANSRU shall also assist & associate in augmentation and modernization of 
existing facilities. Focus on skill development in consultation with the Administration 
and technical institutions located in the Islands, is also part of the mandate of the 
agreement. The agreement is for a period of 30 years, during which CSL is expected 
to spruce up the operational efficiency of the dockyard as well as improve the overall 
ship repair ecosystem in the Islands to ensure faster turnaround and minimize 
downtime of the vessels, which are the lifeline for the Islands. 
 
 
 
Tariff Rates  
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee underlines the need of evolving a suitable mechanism to monitor and 
control the markets on these issues.    
            (Para 125) 
Reply of Ministry 
18.1 New Tariff Guidelines have been issued to implement the market driven rates for 
better competition with neighboring ports.  
 
Monetization  
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Committee desires that a detailed Report on the assets that the Mi nistry is 
planning to monetize at each Port along with a Master Plan to use the monetized fund may be 
furnished.  

26 
  
           (Para 126) 
Reply of Ministry 
19.1 The Major ports use their revenue for the expansion, modernization and upgradation 
of infrastruct ure facilities which is an ongoing process to keep the ports abreast with new 
technologies and also to promote trade and cargo. The process inter -alia involves 
construction of new berths and terminals, mechanization of existing berths and terminals, 
capital dredging for deepening of drafts for attracting large vessels in port channels, road and 
rail connectivity etc. 
19.2 The List of 31 Port projects to be offered on PPP basis for asset monetization are 
given in Annexure - B.  
Safety  
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee desires the Ministry to depute an officer of the level of Joint Secretary 
to coordinate on the best international practices followed regarding safety and security in 
Shipping sector.           
        (Para 127)  
Reply of Ministry 
20.1 Joint Secretary (Shipping) is the Officer responsible for coordination of best 
international practices regarding safety and security in shipping sector.  
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
SALIENT FEATURES OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2021-22 
1. The Committee is supportive of the Ministry’s planned e -governance and 
infrastructure projects and observes that without a strong e -governance base and 
infrastructure strengthening, implementation of shipping policy and legislation entrusted to 

27 
  
the Directo rate General of Shipping would be rendered ineffective. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the resource crunch should not be allowed to come in the way of 
implementation of the e -governance project and infrastructure projects of the Directorate 
General of Shipping. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the progress made 
towards implementation of the above projects.   
                   (Para 8) 
Reply of Ministry 
1.1 The progress made towards implementation of a strong e -governance base and 
infrastructure: 
Directorate had engaged a consultant, M/s Ernst & Young LLP, to have a new/updated e -
governance project, to bring all its functions/process completely automated for efficient 
service delivery and ease of doing business. Request for Proposal  (RFP) for New e -
Governance Project for the selection of System Integrator has been prepared and sent to 
the Ministry for seeking Administrative Approval and Financial Sanction of the Competent 
Authority. 
1.2 Other projects are detailed below: 
    •       Conduct of written competence exam through remote proctoring. 
    •       Online Automatic issuance of Watch-keeping Certificates. 
    •       Video-Based Competence Examination Orals. 
   •       Three tier learning mechanism comprising e-learning, online classes/live video 
sessions, online exit examination and 
 •      Issuance of Digitally signed certificates 
Recommendation/Observation: 
2. IWT has now been widely recognized as a fuel efficient, environment friendly and 
cost effective mode, for transporting  bulk goods. The Committee, therefore, desires that the 
progress of implementation of the Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) on NW -I may be closely 
monitored. The Committee hopes the Multi -Modal Terminal (MMT) at Haldia and new 
Navigation Lock at Farakka would be completed within the designated timeframe ( i.e.) 2021 
to reap maximum benefit out of it.  

28 
  
                (Para 13) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 A monitoring mechanism like Project Management Unit (PMU) at Head Office and 
Project Inspection Units (PIUs) at fie ld level are in place for monitoring and supervision of 
the progress of implementation of the Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP), on NW -I. As desired 
by the Committee, efforts are being made to complete both the projects as per schedule. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee is of the view that Port projects being highly capital intensive, require 
continuous funding. Hence, public funding has to be supplemented with private sector 
investment through Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. The Committee would, ther efore, 
like the Ministry to bring in policies to attract investments and ensure good returns on it. 
Being totally dependent on own funds for modernization is not possible for Ports as it may 
depend on the profits earned by them and percentage of profits ea ch one of them would like 
to plough back and particularly in case of minor Ports. The Ministry, therefore, should reason 
it out with the Ministry of Finance to give some kind of budgetary support for the purpose of 
Port modernization, especially for Minor Ports.     
           (Para 22) 
 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 The Port Projects are mostly funded either by private investments (PPP projects) or 
being taken up by the Port through their Own Resources i.e. IEBR. Government Budgetary 
Support (GBS) is not being pro vided for the PPP projects. Major ports are taking up major 
port projects through PPP mode in order to utilize the private sector investment, efficiency 
and modern technology which is there to offer. In this process of modernization, ports instead 
of being totally dependent on own funds for modernization, enter into an agreement with the 

29 
  
private entities, either on the royalty basis or following the revenue share model, thereby 
ensuring sustained revenues. Non - Major Ports fall under the jurisdiction of Sta te 
Governments who plan these activities in accordance with the agreement State Government 
has entered with a particular port developer or concessionaire. 
3.2 Though the Government has been encouraging private sector participation in port 
development since 1996, this decade has witnessed a vast increase in participation of private 
sector in the port projects. This has been mainly on account of various measures taken by the 
Government like standardization of RFQ, RFP and MCA documents aimed at bringing 
uniformity and transparency in the PPP process. Further, a Model Concession Agreement 
which was put in place in 2008 has been subsequently revised in 2018 to enhance confidence 
of investors for implementation of PPP projects in Major Ports. 
3.3 A portfolio of 2 8 projects have been identified to be offered on Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode in the next five years at the major ports. The expected investment in 
these projects is close to USD 2.8 billion. These PPP projects present a wide array of 
opportunities including mechanization of existing berth, development of new berths setting 
up container terminals and development of jetties for handling of liquid cargo. 
TRAFFIC HANDLING AT MAJOR PORTS  
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that two Ports i.e., JNPT and Chennai are handling 60% while 
the rest of the Ports are handling rest of 40%. The Committee wishes to point out that rising 
demand from various sectors, including coal, petroleum, oil and lubricant and con tainers is 
the main driver of the traffic growth at Indian Ports during the last few years. With the 
imposition of lockdown measures during the year 2020, the demand for POL, LPG/LNG, 
Iron Ore, F&FRM (Dry) and coal decreased or was not met from the exports / imports due to 
world-wide restrictions on overall international movement, but now with the lockdown 
measures being slowly eased everywhere the Committee hopes that this trend will be 

30 
  
arrested. The Committee wishes to have details of port-wise capacity and its utilization.  
  
           (Para 31) 
Reply of Ministry 
4.1 JNPT and Chennai are handling 60% and the rest of the 40% are being handled by the 
rest of the Ports in terms of containers only.  In terms of overall cargo handled – comprising 
dry bulk, liquid bulk, break bulk and container – the share of JNPT and Chennai taken 
together is around 16.34%, while the rest of the Major Ports handle the remaining around 
83.66%. 
 
Table 1: The port-wise break-up of volumes handles – in various cargo categories. 
Ports Period 
Dry Bulk 
Liquid 
Bulk 
Break 
Bulk 
Container Total Mechani
cal 
Conventi
onal 
Kolkata 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
- 
- 
4877 
6257 
1284 
1341 
1375 
1019 
9767 
9934 
17303 
18551 
Haldia 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
5696 
5817 
21588 
20741 
14481 
13563 
1882 # 
1951 # 
3033 
3140 
46680 
45212 
Paradip 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
42183 
40618 
29559 
27278 
38970 
39761 
1755 
1424 
222 
194 
112689 
109275 
Visakhapat
nam 
2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
22724 
17791 
19703 
20472 
21050 
18264 
596 
815 
8649 
7959 
72722 
65301 
Kamarajar 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
20266 
25041 
1098 
1058 
5223 
4863 
2636 
2434 
2524 
1101 
31747 
34497 
Chennai 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
- 
- 
2151 
4567 
14833 
14928 
3065 
2254 
26710 
31263 
46759 
53012 
VOCPT 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
10259 
9799 
6218 
6508 
1790 
1607 
1373 
1472 
16436 
14956 
36076 
34342 
Cochin 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
1294 
1118 
186 
299 
23810 
22431 
120 
59 
8628 
8115 
34038 
32022 
NMPT 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
5751 
4842 
5947 
7597 
24867 
27957 
295 
192 
2277 
1920 
39145 
42508 
Mormugao 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
9994 
10206 
3406 
4375 
823 
1150 
1376 
1485 
418 
467 
16017 
17683 
Mumbai 2019 – 2020 - 16031 40055 4320 290 60696 

31 
  
2018 – 2019 - 16079 39233 4947 329 60588 
JNPT 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
- 
- 
1018 
998 
6450 
7563 
41 
31 
60940 
62114 
68449 
70706 
Deendayal 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
6409 
5727 
27929 
30033 
73101 
69208 
8149 
6475 
7018 
3959 
122606 
115402 
All Ports 2019 – 2020 
2018 – 2019 
124584 
120959 
139711 
146262 
266737 
261869 
26983 
24558 
146912 
145451 
704927 
699099 
 
4.2 The port-wise capacity utilization in 2019-20 has been summarised below: 
Table 2:Port-wise capacity utilization in 2018-19 &2019-20 
Ports 
Capacity in MTPA Total 
Traffic in 
2018-19 
Total 
Traffic in 
2019-20 
Capacity 
Utilization 
in 2018-19 
Capacity 
Utilization 
in 2019-20 2018-19 2019-20 
Kolkata 27.30 13.57 18.551 17.303 68% 55% 
Haldia 53.45 51.00 45.212 46.68 85% 92% 
Paradip 233.00 249.00 109.275 112.689 47% 45% 
Visakhapatnam 126.89 134.18 65.301 72.722 51% 54% 
Kamarajar 91.10 91.00 34.497 31.747 38% 35% 
Chennai 133.60 135.00 53.012 46.759 40% 35% 
VOCPT 95.00 111.46 34.342 36.076 36% 32% 
Cochin 73.60 78.60 32.022 34.038 44% 43% 
NMPT 98.40 104.73 42.508 39.145 43% 37% 
Mormugao 62.50 63.40 17.683 16.017 28% 25% 
Mumbai 78.40 79.00 60.588 60.696 77% 77% 
JNPT 118.30 138.87 70.706 68.449 60% 49% 
Deendayal 261.10 267.10 115.402 122.606 44% 46% 
All Ports 1452.64 1534.91 699.099 704.927 - - 
 
PERFORMANCE OF PORTS 
Recommendation/Observation   
5. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry regarding the values of parameters of 
Average Turn-around time and Average Output Per Ship Berthday at Major Ports across the 
country. The Committee is not aware about its competitiveness when compared with oth er 
Ports of the world. The Committee is of the view that the performance of a Port is not solely 
dependent on these parameters but also on other factors such as manpower supply and regular 
supply chain. The Committee would urge the Ministry to develop an e fficient system which 
can address these inadequacies and also support seamless movement of cargo across all 
modes. The Ministry should emphasize all the Major and Minor Ports to enhance the 

32 
  
productivity and infrastructure to the level of best Ports in the world which will enable them 
to compete globally.           
(Para 36) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways have been focussing on interventions 
which would streamline the EXIM process and help in reducing dwell time and transacti on 
costs at the Major Ports. Initiatives such as Direct Port Entry and Direct Port Delivery, and 
the Radio Frequency Identification system and Port Community System (PCS), were all 
aimed at reducing the time and cost of clearance of goods. 
 
5.2 One of the key measures towards EXIM procedure is Direct Port Entry (DPE) and 
Direct Port Delivery (DPD). The percentage of DPD has increased from 5.42% in April -2016 
to 61.19% in March, 2021. The facility of DPE is well received by trade and the percentage 
of containers cleared under DPE is 46.44% in financial year 2020-21. 
 
5.3 As far as the creation of paperless trading environment is concerned, major strides 
have been taken at the Major Ports towards the digitization of key EXIM processes. The PCS 
1x has digitized  processes such as Electronic Invoice (e -Invoice), Electronic Payment (e -
Payment) and Electronic Delivery Order (e -DO) for physical release of cargo by custodians. 
Further, the process of generation of electronic Bill of Lading (e -BL) and enabling the Lett er 
of Credit (LC) process to be conducted digitally have already been implemented in the PCS 
1x. Uploading of documents by the importers and exporters is done on e -SANCHIT (e -
Storage and Computerized Handling of Indirect Tax Documents) launched by CBIC. 
Electronic communication of Out of Charge (OOC), Bill of Entry and gate -pass to 
importers/customs brokers has been enabled in the Indian Customs EDI Gateway 
(ICEGATE). Further, the Radio Frequency Identification Device (RFID) solution has been 
implemented at  all Major Ports to enable seamless movement of traffic across port gates, 
including substantial reductions in documentation checks. All Major Ports have already 
implemented Radio Frequency Identification Device (RFID). Upgradation and integration 
with recent technologies- IoT, Blockchain to ease transaction and real time basis tracking has 
been envisaged in Maritime India Vision 2030. 
5.4 Moreover, to streamline the process of scanning and reduce the time for scanning and 
checking of containers, 8 Mobile X -ray Container Scanners (in addition to existing 4 X -ray 

33 
  
container scanners previously installed by customs) have been installed recently at various 
Major Ports. 
5.5 The aforementioned measures have had considerable positive impact in the trade 
ecosystem. Key operational metrics have displayed overall improvement in 2020 -21 as 
compared to 2019 -20. The overall average pre -berthing time (under port account) has 
reduced from 7.23 hours in April -March 2020 to 5.57 hours in April -March 2021. Further , 
overall average turnaround time (under port account) improved from 49.38 hours in April -
March 2020 to 46.69 hours in April-March 2021. 
 
Initiative Unit 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 
Turnaround Time 
for containers In hrs 41.76 43.4
4 44.64 43.44 40.26 37.81 37.74 
Avg. Pre -berthing 
Time – Port A/c Hrs. 6.91 5.02 3.73 5.77 8.46 5.74 7.23 
Direct Entry (%) 
(Per.) 
Not 
allowe
d 
- - - - 53.28% 46.44% 
Direct Port (%) 
(Per.) 
Not 
allowe
d 
- 4% 30.57% 42.60% 57.77% 61.19% 
*As of 31st March 2021 
 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS  
Recommendation/Observation 
6.  The Committee desires that Secretary level meetings with line Ministries and 
organizations should invariably be held to sort out the issues confronting execution of 
projects by Rail and Road. The Committee may be kept apprise d of the progress made on all 
the port connectivity projects both pertaining to Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways on a regular basis.         
 (Para 45) 
Reply of Ministry 
6.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
6.2  Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways is working in close coordination with 
MoRTH. In this regard, Ministry had requested MoRTH to prioritize 68 road connectivity 
projects of strategic importance for improving the overall freight efficiency of the  country. In 
response, MoRTH had directed NHAI to formulate an umbrella SPV for implementation of 

34 
  
Multi Modal Logistics Parks and connectivity thereof, highway connectivity to Ports and 
other associated works. MoRTH has further informed that for expeditiou s implementation of 
port connectivity projects, a detailed prioritization exercise was undertaken along with 
discussion with respective ROs, PIUs and Port authorities/agencies. 
6.3 It is also mentioned that Ministry has constituted Maritime States Developm ent 
Council (MSDC), an apex advisory body for development of port sector in the country, 
having member in-charge of Ports of Maritime States and Central line Ministries as members. 
In the recently held 18 th Meeting of MSDC on 24/06/2021, one of the agenda points for the 
meeting was review of Ports connectivity projects under Sagarmala. 
6.4 Ministry has recently taken up with Ministry of Railways at the level of Hon’ble 
Minister to expedite the already sanctioned 14 projects where execution has been delayed. 
 
 
SAGARMALA  
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee hopes the Ministry will stick to the deadline to complete the National 
Maritime Heritage Complex.   
(Para 46) 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 Ministry is working to develop National Maritime Heritage Complex as first of its 
kind in the country dedicated to the legacy of Maritime Heritage of India, to showcase India’s 
rich and diverse maritime glory. For developing the project, the land transfer formalities have 
been completed and all land related clearances including environment clearance are in place. 
 
7.2 World Class consultant has been appointed for designing the draft master plan of 
NMHC project. The draft tender documents of NMHC projects are under preparation by the 
Consultant. 
 
7.3 Ministry is putting wh ole hearted effect to stick to the deadline to complete the 
National Maritime Heritage Complex. 

35 
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee is of the view that the Sagarmala project will provide a much -needed 
uptick to maritime logistics trade and position India as a global logistics hub. It has the 
potential to lay the foundations for the setting up of industrial zones and logistics parks 
around the Ports. It also encompasses in its scope the creation of coastal economic zones and 
improvement of em ployment opportunities for coastal communities through education and 
training programme. The project can also fast -pace the development of offshore energy 
projects in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to ensure 
effective coordi nation with the Central Government / State Governments / UTs/ private 
entities so that bottlenecks can be sorted out in the nascent stage which would help prevent 
time and cost overruns at the later stages of implementation of the project.   
  
           (Para 55) 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
8.2 Sagarmala Programme consists of Projects from multiple agencies including Major 
Ports. Mechanism for monitoring projects being implemented by Major Ports was same as 
other projects under Sagarmala through review meetings, VCs, telephonic conversation, etc. 
Periodic report for MoPSW funded projects is being taken from the implementing agencies. 
The Sagarmala MIS also captures the progress of projects, based on updation pro vided by the 
implementing agencies. 
8.3 MoPSW reviews these updates through interaction with implementing agencies as 
well as through MIS updates. MoPSW has taken up for resolution, bottlenecks involving 
other central agencies/ministries. The resolution mechanism involves interaction at different 
levels with appropriate counterparts in other line ministries. The projects are prioritized and 
shared with other line ministries for speedy implementation. 
 
DREDGING CORPORATION OF INDIA  
Recommendation/Observation 

36 
  
9. Dredging is used to remove the deposits percolated underwater for the purpose of 
clearing the water pathway for ships to pass, to create adequate space to construct important 
bridges, dykes and dams and to weed out silt, intoxicants and pollutants f rom the bottom of 
the water. Dredging being an integral part of shipping operations needs to be done on regular 
basis with effective end -results. The Committee appreciates the projects undertaken by the 
Ministry in this direction. Though the DCI is able to  meet around 80% of dredging activities 
of the Ports, i.e. 60 million cubic meters per annum, still there is a shortage of 20% to be met 
for which there is a need for procuring higher hopper capacity quality dredges. The 
Committee, therefore, urges the Min istry to take necessary steps to procure dredgers of 
higher hopper capacity at the earliest. 
         (Para 58) 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 The Dredging Corporation of India (DCI) after studying the capacity of dredgers 
available and assessing the requirement of  additional dredger of higher hopper capacity, had 
decided to go for procurement of 12000m 3 TSHD dredgers to be constructed at Cochin 
Shipyard Limited., a PSU under the Ministry under the Atma Nirbhar Program. In the first 
phase, one dredger TSHD of 12000 cubic meters hooper capacity is planned to be built by 
2022-23, second by 2024 -25 and the procurement of third dredger would be taken up on the 
basis of analysis of performance of 2 dredgers. 
9.2 The Ministry has also approved the proposal of the DCI for p rocurement of 12000 m3 
TSHD dredger under the Atma Nirbhar program to be constructed at Cochin Shipyard 
Limited (CSL) 
 
DREDGING ACTIVITIES  
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee is of the view that Port development requires safe tidal windows for 
navigation, sufficient berthing space and depth and acceptable conditions for operations on 
the berth. The Committee suggests that the Ministry should adopt advanced dredging 
strategies such as maintaining local and regional sediment levels, recharging salt  marsh areas 
with fine grained dredging, beach recharge with sand and fine gravel dredging and habitat 
restoration/creation or ecological enhancement of Port structures. The Committee also wishes 

37 
  
to point out that the cost of maintenance of dredging varies  at each Port while the average 
cost is at around Rs. 10 crores, It is at the highest level at SMP Kolkata, Deendayal and 
JNPT. Suitable measures may be taken to reduce the same at these Ports.    
          (Para 62) 
Reply of Ministry  
10.1 Dredging work is undertaken by the Port based on the littoral drift and sedimentation 
pattern either during pre -monsoon or post -monsoon except SMP Kolkata, Cochin and 
Deendayal Port wherein due to the estuary/riverine port requires continuous dredging is 
required throughout the year. 
10.2 Dredging cost is dependent on the dredging volume and quantities vis-à-vis the 
haulage distance to dumping ground, therefore the dredging project cost varies between ports. 
10.3 The Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port, Kolkata is a riverine  port subjected to heavy 
siltation. The Deendayal Port located in creek is also subjected to heavy siltation by natural 
phenomena. The JNPT is subjected to heavy siltation in the channel due to littoral drift. 
Hence, the maintenance dredging with high volu me is necessary. However, the Ports are 
taking steps to bring down the cost of dredging. 
10.4 Dredging activities are governed by Environment clearance and all the dredging 
projects adhere to preservation of eco-system and ecology. 
10.5 The SMP Kolkata, De endayal Port and Jawaharlal Nehru Port have been adopting 
steps for reducing the dredging cost which are as follows :- 
i. Timely hydrographic survey of the channel, turning circle, basin etc., for 
identifying optimal dredging requirements; 
ii. Undertaking studies on the behavior of the channel for siltation erosion and other 
natural phenomenon; 
iii. Deployment of suitable dredgers with adequate hopper capacity for reducing the 
cost and time for the project; 
iv. To reuse the dredge material for various activities including beach nourishment, 
construction activities etc., where feasible, thus reducing the cost of dredging 
 
 SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY  

38 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee welcomes the steps taken by the Ministry to promote shipbuilding 
industry. Rising glo bal trade and strong replacement demand boosted the prospects of the 
Indian shipbuilding industry in the recent past. It is a matter of satisfaction that from an 
industry dependent on government orders till late 90s, the Indian shipbuilding industry has 
turned export oriented focusing on the niche offshore segment. India is emerging as a major 
destination for the construction of offshore and oil industry ships, such as offshore supply 
vessels and anchor handling tugs. Though our country is able to build shi ps upto the capacity 
of 1 lakh 20 thousand tons, when compared with the global level, where the capacity is in the 
range of two and a half to three lakh tons, our capacity is far behind. This being the case, the 
Committee now feels that the Ministry should  focus on building large ships and chalk out 
policies for it, for, we have a natural advantage in terms of availability of low cost labour and 
skilled people. Moreover, India also enjoys a long coastline of around 8,000 km long with 
several deep water Port s serving as good locations for setting up shipyards. The Committee 
notes that one of the major challenges faced by the Indian Ship Owners/shipyards as 
intimated by the Ministry, is the availability of long -term finance at competitive rates. The 
Committee feels that this hampers the growth of Shipbuilding Industry which, of late, has 
been getting good export orders. The Committee, therefore, desires that this issue may be 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance on an urgent basis which will help in boosting o ur 
‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Programme’. 
                      (Para 70) 
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 Government of India vide Gazette Notification No. 112 dated April 13, 2016 has 
provided infrastructure status to shipyards. Infrastructure status would enable Indian 
shipyards to avail cheaper long -term source of capital and would enable the shipyards to 
reduce their cost disadvantage and invest in capacity expansion, thereby giving a boost to the 
Indian shipbuilding industry. Further, a proposal is under consideration wherein Sagarmala 
Development Company Limited would provide long -term finance at competitive rates to 
shipyards. 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHT SHIPS  
Recommendation/Observation  

39 
  
12. The Committee recognizes the pivotal role played by the Lighthouses as they meet the 
country’s commercial and security needs and their development and maintenance must be 
given top priority. The Committee desires that the Directorate General of Lighthouses and 
Lightships may chalk out an action plan for implementation of above projects in a time bound 
manner in order to avoid both time and cost overruns. D.G. Lighthouses an d Lightships are 
having plans to establish new Lighthouses at different places of the country. The Committee 
finds that only a token provision has been made in the Budget. It implies that no ground work 
to establish the new Lighthouses has been done and it  all remains in paper. The Ministry 
should revisit this issue and come out with a plan of action which may be shared with the 
Committee.                      
(Para 80) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 A statement with regard to schemes being undertaken by Directorat e of Lighthouse & 
Lightships (DGLL) during 2021-22 along with their status/action plan is enclosed. Please see 
Annexure-A. 
 
INDIAN MARITIME UNIVERSITY 
13. IMU is a teaching -cum-affiliating University under the Ministry. The Committee 
appreciates the steps taken by IMU for engaging with industry pro -actively for promoting 
research activities, consulting projects and academic collaborations and for further 
collaboration with the Institute of Marine Engineers, India.       
         (Para 102) 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 Noted. 
 
Miscellaneous 
14. The Committee wishes to point out that every country exports different types of 
products, however some of them has been classified as hazardous internationally like 
bleaching powder, KCI, which are not hazardous. Generally, international ships do not carry 

40 
  
such materials however countries like China through their own ship carry those materials . 
The Committee feels that there is need for clarity on this issue. 
(Para 128) 
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 Transportation   of   goods   internationally   by   shipping   is   as   per international 
norms. If it is dangerous goods, it is governed by the provision of International Maritime 
Dangerous Goods Code (IMDG).  

41 
  
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22) OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee observes that allocation made to the Ministry for FY 2021 -22 is 45 
percent less than the projected demand and the shortfall between the projected demand of Rs. 
3101.34 crore and the Budget Estimates of Rs. 1702.5 for the Ministry of Shipping is to the 
tune of Rs. 1398.95 crore, which is massive by any standards and is certain to have an 
adverse bearing on the implementation of various modernization projects of the Ministry. 
Major reduction has been effected under Sagarmala Schemes and Projects  and other schemes 
under Sagarmala in the Revenue section. The same is the case with Grants to Inland Water 
Transport Authority of India, D.G. Shipping and Kolkata Port Trust. This being the case, the 
Committee is convinced that it would be an insurmountab le task for the Ministry to 
efficiently run a flagship scheme like Sagarmala and other schemes under Sagarmala with 
this limited allocation and achieve goals envisaged under Sagarmala Scheme. The Committee 
further notes a steep cut in allocation to IWAI an d D.G. Shipping, the two important offices 
of the Ministry. The Committee apprehends that the working of these two offices may get 
hampered due to less allocation. The Committee further notes that on the capital expenditure 
of DG Shipping, against a sum of  Rs. 108.4 crore sought, only Rs. 25 crore has been 
allocated. The Ministry submitted that due to this inadequate allocation, the priority project of 
e-Governance will suffer. In this era of digital technology, where the Government has been 
emphasizing for moving towards digitization, less allocation to e -Governance project is not 
acceptable. The Committee observes that India has been emerging as a modern economy and 

42 
  
successive Governments have targeted to increase the economic growth at a high rate in a 
sustained manner. However, the COVID -19 pandemic has had a disruptive impact on the 
Indian economy and almost all the sectors have been adversely affected. The Committee is of 
the view that post -COVID, the economic growth of the country will come through Ind ia’s 
Port and shipping sector because Maritime Transport is a critical infrastructure for the 
economic growth as 95% of the country’s trade by volume and 68% by value is moved 
through Maritime Transport and the ports and shipping sector is, thus, a key dri ver of trade 
for India. Keeping all the above facts  in view, the Committee is of the considered opinion 
that the outlay of Rs. 1702.35 crore would not be sufficient to meet the fund requirements of 
the Ministry during 2021 -22. The Committee, therefore, re commends that the Ministry 
should once again assess its financial requirements realistically and thereafter, move the 
Ministry of Finance for augmentation of financial resources for it for 2021 -22 at RE stage. 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministr y of Finance should have a re -look at the 
allocation made for the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways and revise it upwa rdly at 
the RE 2021-22 stage.   
                    (Para 5) 
Reply of Ministry: 
1.1 Noted for necessary compliance.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.2 Realizing the fact that our ports and s hipping sector is a key driver o f trade for 
our country and that the Sagarmala Programme has been instituted to improve India’s 
maritime transport infrastructure and boost its e xport com petitiveness and 
simultaneously appreciating the fiscal constraints faced by the Government due to 
deceleration in economic growth in  the wake of Covid-19 pandemic induced lockdowns, 
the Committee while making its recommendation in Para 5 of its 290 th Report had 

43 
  
expected the Ministry to exercise more prudence in its budget formulation and move the 
Ministry of Finance for enhancement of funds at the R .E. 2021-22 stage for maritime 
transport infrastructure and e -governance projects by drawing a roadmap with 
detailed explanation. Therefore, merely informing that the Committee’s 
recommendation has been “noted for necessary compliance” is not sufficient. The 
Committee feels that the notable reduction in allocation made at B.E. 2021 -22 stage, in 
comparison to that at the B.E. 2020 -21 stage, coupled with the drastic cut in the 
budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways at the R.E. 
2020-21 stage, must have had a significant adverse impact on the various schemes/plans 
made by the Ministry for the FY 2021 -22. The Committee would , therefore, like to 
know the allocation made to the Ministry at the R.E. 2021 -22 stage. In case no 
significant budgetary enhancement has been made, the Committee may be apprised of 
the reasons, if any, given for the same by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee 
would also like to know the steps taken by the Ministry to exercise due diligence in its 
budget formulation taking into account objectively its needs as well as its capabilities to 
utilize the budgeted funds. 
PORT CAPACITY  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee observes that the increase in capacity is not commensurate to 
increasing demand for movement of cargo through water transport system. Enhancement in 
value of Port - capacity depicts the modernisation level of Port technologies and 
infrastructure. In two year period, mere 42.58 MTPA has been added and that too in respect 
of only Major Ports whereas Minor Ports have been left out. The Committee would also like 
the Ministry to assist Minor Ports to expand at the same pace with which the Major Port s 
have been expanded.   

44 
  
          (Para 17) 
Reply of Ministry 
2.1 Non-Major Ports are under direct control of State Maritime Boards or State 
Governments. Also, majority of these ports have been developed in PPP mode which looks 
for expansion on basis of market opportunities. 
2.2 Apart from Ports being developed in PPP mode, there are several ports which needed 
handholding for upgradation, deepening, construction of berthing facilities, etc. There are 11 
projects funded under Sagarmala which are being implemented on non -major ports. List of 
these projects includes development of port at Cuddalore, Puducherry, Karwar and 
construction of coastal berths at Porbandar, Navlakhi, Kollam, etc. 
Further Recommendation/Observation:  
2.3 The Committee while making its rec ommendation in Para 17  of its 290th Report 
had inter alia intended that the Ministry should pay more attention to improvement of 
port productivity and port operations through modernization of port infrastructure and 
adoption of sophisticated technology. Instead of dwelling upon  the measures taken  in 
this regard, the Ministry seems to have washed its hands off the matter by stating that 
Non-Major Ports are under the control of State Maritime Boards or State 
Governments. The Committee observes that India has not been able to reap the full 
potential of its port and shipping sector which is evident from the fact that the 
contribution of this sector to our GDP is just 1%. The Committee , therefore, desires to 
be apprised of the policy measures initiated to overcome structural and organizational 
impediments to increase port production and productivity. Considering the fact that the 
number of Minor Ports in the country is more than 200 and therefore , their role in the 
overall Shipping sector is indispensible, the  Committee is of the view that the Ministry 

45 
  
of Ports, Shipping and Waterways should encourage the Major Ports across the country 
to lend technical assistance and expertise to the regional Minor  Ports in order to help 
them expand at a faster pace. 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee takes note of the efforts taken by the Ministry in maintaining almost 
the same TRT in the year 2020 despite pandemic. The Committee feels that bottlenecks like 
non-availability of labours, shortage of transport services and increase in averag e parcel size 
still persist, which need to be addressed by the Ministry as these factors lead to delay in 
completion of one Ship -cycle which finally increases the Average TRT. One of the major 
impediments for increase in Average TRT, the Committee wishes t o point out, is that the 
movement of cargo from the Port to the destined place takes time due to lack of connectivity 
between the Port and hinterland. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should focus 
on completion of Port connectivity projects a t the earliest which in turn will ease the 
difficulty in movement of cargo from Ports and thereby improve the TRT in Ports.  
            (Para 20) 
Reply of Ministry 
3.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
3.2 There are 34 rail connectivity project (Rs. 10,393Cr.) which have been completed 
successfully between 2015 to 2021. Further, 46 rail projects (Rs. 62,957Cr.) connecting 
major and non -major ports are currently under implementation by major ports, Indian 
Railways, non -major ports, etc. 14  road projects (Rs. 1839Cr.) have been completed since 
inception of Sagarmala; 20 additional road projects (Rs.20,157Cr) are currently under 
implementation. Implementation of these road and rail projects would support port efficiency 
while increasing TRT of cargo evacuation. 

46 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
3.3 The Committee notes with great concern that a lot of rail and road port 
connectivity projects face huge delays in completion, thus causing significant adverse 
impact on the Average TRT. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should strongly pursue the matter with the concerned Ministries/Departments and hold 
regular meetings with them in this regard to ensure that these connectivity projects are 
completed within a reasonable timeframe. The Committee also desires to know whether 
Ministry of Railways, in coordination with Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways , 
has undertaken any PPP policy measures in Railway infrastructure in order to attract 
private sector participation in rail connectivity projects. 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND MODERNIZATION OF PORTS  
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee notes the various steps taken by the Ministry for development and 
modernization of Ports. Direct Port Delivery has been implemented by the Ministry at 10 
Major Ports except Paradip Port Trust and Bombay Port Trust. The reasons for leaving out  
these two Major Ports may be furnished. The Committee also notes that only 8 mobile x -ray 
container scanners have been installed in 5 Major Ports and in the rest of the Major Ports they 
have not been installed. An essential equipment like X -ray container scanners have not been 
installed in all Major Ports, leave alone their presence at minor Ports. The Committee urges 
the Ministry to advise the Ports to take up this on priority basis.     
            (Para 40) 
Reply of Ministry 

47 
  
4.1 Since the commencement of operations at JNPT, container and container vessels at 
Mumbai Port declined considerably and at present there are no direct container line vessels 
calling at Mumbai Port Trust. However, containers manifested for Mumbai Port, discharged 
at JNPT, are brou ght to Mumbai either by barge or by road for CFS activity. Hence, as and 
when there will be a likelihood of DPD/DPE in Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT) in the future, a 
dedicated storage area - already earmarked for the containers - and other facilities will 
accordingly be rolled out. 
4.2 Regarding Paradip Port Trust (PPT), no DPD container is handled at the same as PPT 
is basically a bulk handling Port and the volume of containers handled at the Port is 
negligible. However, the DPD facility is allowed at PPT and c an be availed by the users as 
per their requirements. 
4.3 Before the installation of aforesaid 8 Mobile X -ray Container Scanners, the Customs 
had installed 4 Mobile X -ray Container Scanners at Major Ports. However, due to the 
concerted efforts of the MoPSW, the 8 Mobile X-ray Container Scanners have been procured 
through IPA (Indian Ports Association) during phase -I and thereby installed at the 6 Major 
Ports. In addition, 4 Drive Through Container Scanners (Road) have also been delivered to 
the Major Ports.  Furthermore, additional 5 Mobile X -ray Container Scanners have been 
proposed to be installed at Major Ports during phase-II. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
4.4 The Committee feels that h aving essential equipments available at the Major 
Ports, along with trained personnel  to operate them , is a precursor to improv e the 
overall efficacy of the service delivery at the respective  Ports and effectively, the output 
of the Shipping sector in our country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
that the Ministry may take concrete action to ensure that essential equipments such as 

48 
  
X-Ray Container Scanners, are made available at all Major Ports without any further 
delay.  
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee would like the Ministry to take up these prioritized lists of 68 road 
connectivity projects for inclusion under Bharatmala Pariyojana. The projects which are 
under the DPR preparation stage may be prepared after taking the views of local Memb er of 
Parliament. The Committee appreciates that a master plan for linkage roads to the ports has 
been prepared and handed over to the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI). The 
Ministry should also include in the master plan the linkage roads for up coming ports. The 
Committee opines that this will facilitate not only stakeholder but will also help the cargo 
movement between the ports and the hinterland without any hurdle.    
        (Para 42) 
Reply of Ministry 
5.1 The recommendation of Committee has been noted. 
5.2 Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways is working in close coordination with 
MoRTH. In this regard, Ministry had requested MoRTH to prioritize 68 road connectivity 
project of strategic importance for improving the overall freight efficie ncy of the country. In 
response, MoRTH had directed NHAI to formulate an umbrella SPV for implementation of 
Multi Modal Logistics Parks and connectivity thereof, highway connectivity to Ports and 
other associated works. MoRTH has further informed that for expeditious implementation of 
port connectivity projects, a detailed prioritization exercise was undertaken along with 
discussion with respective ROs, PIUs and Port authorities/agencies. 

49 
  
5.3 It is also mentioned that Ministry has constituted Maritime State s Development 
Council (MSDC), an apex advisory body for development of port sector in the country, 
having member in-charge of Ports of maritime States and central line Ministries as members. 
In recently held 18 th Meeting of MSDC on 24/06/2021, one of the a genda point for the 
meeting was review of Ports connectivity projects under Sagarmala. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.4 The Committee takes note of the various steps taken by the Ministry to work in 
close coordination with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to improve road 
connectivity at Ports across the country. The Committee however notes that the 
Ministry has not furnished any information regarding the inclusion of the requirement 
of linkage roads for upcoming ports, in the master plan for co mmunicating the same to 
NHAI. The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this 
regard. 
 
SAGARMALA 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Ministry has informed that under Sagarmala, State Maritime Boards are released 
grants for cr eation of capital expenditure. A sum of Rs. 211.00 crores in BE 2020 -21 for 
Sagarmala Projects/ Schemes which was allocated got reduced to Rs 96.69 crores at the RE 
2020-21 stage. This implies that State Maritime Boards have not been released their grants by 
the Ministry. The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for the same and 
measures taken to release the grants on time.       
  
 (Para 50) 
Reply of Ministry 

50 
  
6.1 An amount of Rs. 210 Cr. was allocated in BE 2020 -21 for Sagarmala Scheme which 
comprises of assistance to States for DDU -GKY-II Phase II projects, projects funded under 
Sagarmala Scheme, projects funded under Coastal Berthing Scheme and administrative 
expenditure of Sagarmala Cell. Funds under the head are sanctioned to State Maritim e 
Boards and Central Government Implementing Agencies. 
6.2 Out of the Rs. 210 Cr., around Rs. 90 Cr. was earmarked for the project of 
Development of National Maritime Heritage Complex. However, delay in finalization of 
structure due to Covid situation etc.  resulted in release of only Rs. 10 Cr. for the projects. 
Further, under many projects, in-principle approvals were conveyed to State Maritime Boards 
for assistance under Sagarmala Programme. Work order of some of the projects of Maritime 
Boards in which i n-principal approval was accorded, could not be awarded for want of 
various statutory clearances such as Environment Clearance, Mangrove Cutting clearance, 
etc.  and pandemic situation and in few cases, works could not be awarded even after 
multiple tendering. 
6.3 In many projects, funds could not be released to Implementing agencies due to non 
receipt of confirmation with regards to receipt of matching contribution from State 
Governments. 
6.4 However, it may be appreciated that expenditure was closely re -assessed at RE stage 
and savings at RE stage were surrendered well in time so that the funds could be utilized for 
needy quarters.  
6.5 It may appreciated that Ministry is releasing funds to the Implementing Agencies after 
following due procedure prescribed in GFR and as per guidelines of PFMS. Further, after due 
assessment and review of spending capacity of the Implementing agencies, an amount of Rs. 
96 Cr. was made available at Revised Estimate Stage under the head and almost 99% of the 
allocated funds were utilized. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
6.6 The Committee is dismayed to note that the Ministry could  release only Rs. 10 
crores out of the Rs. 90 crores earmarked for the project Development of National 
Maritime Heritage Complex due to delay in finalization of the complex structure, 
which, the Committee apprehends, may result in cost escalation and time overrun in the 

51 
  
project. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take 
corrective action to expedite execution of National Maritime Heritage Complex within 
the approved cost. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should 
implore upon the various State Maritime Boards to strive to make full utilization of the 
assistance being granted to them by the Ministry and  take steps to remove impediments 
like delays in tendering, and forest/ environment/ wildlife clearances, because in a 
resource-constrained country like ours, the Ministry should utilize the available scarce 
financial resources in most optimal manner. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee notes that out of 505 projects identified under the Sagarmala 
Programme, only  158 projects have been completed which account for only 31% of the 
Projects and 181 are under implementation. The Committee desires to know at what stage of 
implementation the rest of Projects identified are lying and by when they will be taken up for 
implementation. Even among the 181 Projects which are currently under implementation, no 
time-limit has been spelt out by Ministry for their completion. The Committee apprehends 
that the projects are moving at a snail’s pace due to lack of funds. The Committe e, is 
therefore, of the view that specific timeframe should be set for each and every identified 
project be closely and regularly monitored to achieve the desired goal. The funding pattern 
adopted in Sagarmala has also not been elaborated upon by the Minis try. A plan of action for 
implementing the remaining 166 projects may also be prepared and shared with the 
Committee by the Ministry.                       
(Para 52) 
Reply of Ministry 
7.1 There were 514 projects with estimated investment of Rs. 3.59 lakh c rore that have 
been identified under the Sagarmala Programme. Further, MoPSW has identified 294 projects 
worth Rs. 1,44,562 crores undertaken by Major Ports, MoPSW agencies, State Maritime 
Boards for inclusion in monitoring framework of Sagarmala Programme. These projects have 

52 
  
been made part of Sagarmala Programme after due approval of Hon’ble Minister of State 
(IC). 
7.2 Currently, there are 802 projects worth investment of Rs. 5.53 lakh crore for 
implementation under the Sagarmala Programme by 2035. Out of  which, 169 projects worth 
Rs. 87,905 crore have been completed and 236 projects worth Rs. 2.17 lakh Cr. are under 
implementation. Further, 397 projects worth Rs. 2.47 lakh Cr. are under various stages of 
development. Projects under development cover vario us project status such as: Pre -
feasibility/Survey/TEFR Preparation, DPR Preparation, Submit Proposal, Administrative 
Approvals/Clearances, Sanction of Project, Under Tendering and Award of Contract. 
7.3 Ministry, through Sagarmala Programme, is monitoring scope of development on all 
projects and plans possible handholding including financial assistance through grant in aid or 
equity investment by SDCL. 
7.4 As suggested by Committee, all under implementation projects will be monitored 
with specific timeline for their completion and action plan for under -development projects 
would be prepared. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
7.5 The Committee notes th at presently, 802 projects worth Rs. 5.53 lakh crores 
have been proposed for implementation under the Sagarmala Programme by 2035. The 
Committee observes that though the Ministry, in its reply, has submitted that all 
projects under implementation will be monitored for their completion, no specific  
timeframe has been provided fo r each project. The Committee, therefore, desires to be 
kept apprised of the timeframe set for execution for each project within the approved 
cost.  
7.6 The Sagarmala Programme being a flagship initiative of the Ministry, the prime 
objective of which is to  promote port-led direct and indirect development along India’s 
7500 km long coastline, leading to industrialization and job creation. The projects 
under the Sagarmala Programme need lakhs of crores of funding. Given the fact that 
the Covid -19 pandemic’s e conomic fallout has impacted India’s macroeconomic 

53 
  
landscape, the Committee desires to know whether the implementation of projects 
under Sagarmala are facing challenges in terms of mobilization of the investments in a 
timely manner and if so, the correctiv e measures taken to meet the requirement of 
funds for the projects under implementation.  
7.7 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may put a strong 
coordination mechanism in place at the State level to iron out any bottlenecks being 
faced in the  implementation of these projects and facilitate Sagarmala -related projects 
under the established principles of cooperative federalism. The Ministry should also 
formulate detailed plans to ensure that the amount of investments required for these 
projects are made available, so as to avoid delays on account of lack of funding support. 
 
SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Ministry should also introduce schemes/ programmes for training, research and 
development and introduction of modern technologies in the Ship building sector, where the 
country is lacking.                  
(Para 71) 
Reply of Ministry 
8.1 Schemes/ programmes for training: The technical collaborations/MoUs under the 
International Cooperation, such as India Russia IGA etc.,  is in progress, in order to introduce 
schemes/ programmes for training in polar ice region, for Indian seafarers. The cooperation in 
training areas are under discussion with Iran and UK. 
8.2 Schemes/ programmes for the Ship building sector: Technical coll aborations/MoUs 
under the International Cooperation, such as India Russia IGA  and Norway etc., are in 
progress. This will introduce the schemes/ programmes for training, research and 
development and introduction of modern technologies in the Ship building sector with Indian 
partners (Cochin Shipyards Ltd.) CSL, inter alia. 

54 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.3 The Committee appreciates the technical collaborations and MoUs signed under 
International Cooperation, such as India Russia Inter -Governmental Agreement. The 
Committee, however, feels that the Ministry must make concerted efforts to sign more 
such agreements and also effectively utilize local resources and expertise as well,  by 
introduction of schemes/ programmes for training, research and development and 
introduction of modern technologies in the Shipbuilding sector in order to further boost 
the growth of this sector in our country. 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHT SHIPS  
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee further recommends the Directorate General of Lighthouses and 
Lightships to adopt a technology of linking the lighthouses with radio signals of Ships and 
satellites for tracking, surveillance and sear ch and rescue to improve coastal security of the 
country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this direction. 
(Para 81) 
Reply of Ministry 
9.1 DGLL has established National Automatic Identification System Network in which 
87 Lighthouse seamlessly provide radio linkage to vessels equipped with AIS up to distance 
of minimum 25 NM or 46 Kms and maximum upto 100 Kms depending on weather condition 
along the coast (Including Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep). These lighthouses with 
AIS are connected to Monitoring facility at NDC (National Data Centre) Mumbai, MRCC 
Mumbai (DG Shipping), Indian Coast Guard at their Joint Ops Centres and Indian Navy at 
NC3I which is used for monitoring, tracking and in search & rescue operations. 
9.2 Regarding satellite AIS connectivity of lighthouses with vessels for SAR (Search & 
Rescue) operations, DGLL shall upgrade the system on availability of AIS with coastal as 
well as satellite connectivity. 
 

55 
  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.3 The Committee is happy to note that DGLL has established National Automatic 
Identification System Network in which 87 Lighthouses provide radio linkage to vessels 
equipped with AIS. The Committee recommends that DGLL may strive to install this 
technology at the remain ing and upcoming Lighthouses in the country in order to 
further boost the coastal security of the country and further to aid search and rescue 
operations in the regions nearby such lighthouses. 
 
INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee recommends the Ministry that in order to take IWT sector to higher 
levels there has to be necessary infrastructure to augment the IWT fleet. Large -scale private 
sector participation should be given a boost to c reate infrastructure and support the fleet 
operations to supplement the Government’s efforts. Further, to attract cargo, there has to be 
necessary infrastructure such as the fleet, fairway, terminals and navigational aids so that the 
IWT mode becomes more competitive along with operational river terminals or river Ports 
with provision to operate mechanized cargo.   
              (Para 95) 
Reply of Ministry 
10.1 Committee’s recommendations are noted for compliance. IWT is more economical, 
less pollutant and environment -friendly mode of transport in comparison to Rail and Road, 
but it is at nascent stage. Private sector participation may be attracted to this sector  by 
financial incentives for construction of inland vessels. Necessary infrastructure like fairway 
with navigational aids, terminals and vessels for IWT promotion have been provided on NW -
1 (Ganga -Bhagirathi-Hooghly river system), NW -2 (River Brahmaputra) and NW -3 (West 
Coast Canal in Kerala by the Government. Further, a World Bank assisted Jal Marg Vikas 
Project (JMVP) on NW-1 (at a revised cost of Rs. 4633.81 crore) is under implementation for 
large barge movement from Haldia to Varanasi which is schedule d to be completed by 
December, 2023. 

56 
  
10.2 At present, with 2% share in total transport scenario, IWT is economical for bulk 
cargo like coal, steel, food -grains, iron -ore, stone -chips, fertilizers etc. and wherever such 
cargo is available, certain percentag e of the same need allocation for movement by IWT 
mode. Such policy decisions with certain fiscal benefits to private operators may revive this 
mode of transport. 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
10.3 The Committee agrees with the observations of the Mi nistry regarding IWT 
being more economical, less polluting and environment -friendly mode of transport, as 
compared to other modes of transport and therefore, for overall development of IWT 
Sector in the country, it is necessary that Governments at the Cent ral and State levels 
simultaneously undertake development works. The Committee feels that IWT’s present 
share is 2% of total transport scenario , which  leaves a huge scope for promotion and 
growth of IWT as an alternate mode of transport in the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may develop a long -term vision to boost IWT 
in the country and come up with suitable policies and schemes to work towards this 
goal. The Committee also recommends that the connectivity of ports through IWT 
should be conceptualized by the concerned port and necessary investments made 
therein to exploit the full potential of IWT. 
 
INDIAN MARITIME UNIVERSITY  
Recommendation/Observation  
11. As per the reply furnished by the Ministry, a token amount of Rs 1.00 crore has been 
kept in the Budget Estimate for the year 2021 -22. A SFC proposal of IMU for the period 
from 2019-20 to 2023-24 was not supported by Mi nistry of Finance and NITI Aayog due to 
COVID-19 pandemic. The Ministry may again place this proposal before them at the R.E. 
stage.           
               (Para 101) 

57 
  
Reply of Ministry 
11.1 IMU has been asked to re -submit their SFC -II Proposal (complete in all respect) to 
the Ministry for placing the same before SFC Committee for consideration.  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
11.2 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the updated status regarding the 
SFC-II Proposal for the Indian Maritime University. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee recommends that training for marine cadets/ trainees which is an 
essential arm for the progress of the Shipping sector needs to be regularly conducted. The 
Committee also recommends that IMU should  design training policies/ programmes in 
consultation with the industry experts with a view to raise the competence level of cadets and 
to align them with present needs of the shipping industry with enhanced level of 
communication and critical thinking skills.    
            (Para 103) 
Reply of Ministry 
12.1 Noted for Compliance. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
12.2 The Committee desires to be apprised about the specific action taken by the 
Ministry with regard to designing of training policies/ programm es for marine cadets/ 
trainees in consultation with industry experts.  
 
MARITIME TRAINING  
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee observes that while the manpower strength at many Ports far exceeds 
their requirements, some Ports are facing acute shortage of manpower. The Ministry should 
take steps to re -deploy the excess manpower to the ports where there is acute shorta ge. The 

58 
  
Ministry should also take steps to reduce the excess manpower in the Ports by framing 
attractive voluntary retirement schemes. This measure will help in saving cost and the 
resultant savings can be used for other important activities of the Port.     
         (Para 110) 
Reply of Ministry 
13.1 Noted for compliance.  
Further Recommendation/Observation  
13.2 The Committee feels that the existence of shortage of manpower at some of the  
Ports, while more than required manpower at certain other Ports, is a matter of grave 
concern and this issue needs to be urgently addressed. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that keeping in view the dynamic changes in the port scenario and 
introduction of sophisticated port equipments, specific programmes may be designed 
for retraining and multi -skilling to facilitate redeployment of the surplus workforce , 
wherever it is needed. 
 
Mormugao Port Trust  
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee welcom es this move. On the issue related to 4 -lane connectivity, the 
Chairman informed that the issue of 4 -lane connectivity still persists and no progress has 
been made. On the environmental issues, he informed that the Local Pollution Control Board 
has now allowed full CTO to operate at both terminals of the port. The Committee was given 
to understand that an amount of Rs. 80 crore was spent on deepening the sea to bring ships 
close to the Port and the project has been completed. However, for want of CRZ cleara nce, it 
has not been made operational. The Committee urges the Ministry to urgently convene a 
meeting with the authorities of CRZ to sort out the issue and ensure that the money spent for 
this purpose does not go in drain. The Committee would expect the Mi nistry to submit a 
detailed note on the whole gamut of issues pertaining to Mormugao Port Trust.   
  
       (Para 122) 

59 
  
Reply of Ministry 
14.1 Port connectivity project: construction of four lane road from Varunapuri Junction to 
Sada Junction including fly over from gate no. 9(balance work) 
 The Tripartite MOU was signed between MPRCL -NHAI, MPT and Government of 
Goa for Operation, Construction and Management of Four -lane highway from 
Varunapuri Junction to Sada Junction and Flyover connecting Gate No. 9 on 2 nd Nov 
2014. 
As decided in the MOU, the break-up of contribution is as under:- 
NHAI Rs.156.00 cr 
MPT Rs.187.00 cr 
PWD, GoG Rs.203.00 cr 
Total Rs.546.00 cr 
 
 The executing agency for the work is PWD, Govt. of Goa. 
 
 The work awarded to M/s GAMMON for Rs 397.00 Crores on 20th August, 2015 
 
 The work was commenced by contractor on 14th October, 2015. 
 The scheduled date of completion was 13th October, 2018. 
 Physical work completed as on date: 79.00 %  
 The Technical Committee in a meeting on 29th June, 2018 , chaired by 
Chairman/MPT in the presence of the officials of MPT, PWD (GoG) and NHAI, 
agreed in principle for the following change of scope . 
A) Over Bridge at Gandhinagar  
B) Change in Traffic design concept at Ravindra Bhavan Junction 
C) Change in design criteria from Severe to Very Severe Condition      
D) Change of design for ROB-II                
 
 On the basis of the recommendations of the Technical Committee, PWD (GoG) 
placed the following proposal before NHAI on 21st Jan, 2019 for seeking approval of 
the Board. 

60 
  
1 Overbridge at Gandhinagar Rs. 6.10 cr. 
2 Change in traffic design concept at 
Ravindra Bhavan 
Rs.10.81 cr 
3 Change of design for ROB II Rs.56.92 cr 
4 Change in design criteria from 
severe to very severe  
Rs.21.99 cr 
 Total Rs.95.82 cr 
 
So far only three out of four Change Of Scope items i.e. at Sr no 1, 2 and 3 have been 
approved. 
 
Issues with NHAI: 
 
The approval for “Change in design criteria from severe to very severe“, at sr. no. 
4 in the above table is pending for a long time. The Technical Committee of NHAI 
has recommended to accept all items of change of scope. However, SPV of 
Mormugao Port Road Co Ltd is yet to accept this recommendation. 
 
14.2 Environmental Issues at MPT: 
 
Restoration of Consent to Operate coal/coke at Berth No. 6 & Berth No. 7 at 
Mormugao Port. 
 
The issue is regarding reduction of handling capacity of coal/coke at Berth No. 
6 operated by M/s. South West Port Limited (SWPL) and Berth No. 7 
operated by M/s. Adani Mormugao Port Terminal Pvt. Ltd. (AMPTPL) from 
its original capacity of 5.5MPTA & 5.2MP TA to 4.84MPTA with monthly 
capping.   
 
This matter was resolved with the intervention of Hon’ble Minister for Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways during the meeting held with the Chief Minister of 
Goa and other officials on 21.02.2020.   

61 
  
 
Thereafter, Goa State Po llution Control Board (GSPCB) by its order dated 
18.03.2020 has restored handling capacity of coal/coke at Berth No. 6 to 
5.5MPTA with monthly capping of 0.4MT during fair season and 0.55MT  
during monsoon period.  Also GSPCB vide its order dated 24.03.202 0 has 
restored handling capacity of coal/coke at Berth No. 7 to 5.2MTPA with a 
monthly capping of 0.4MT during fair season and 0.50MT  during monsoon 
period.   
 
With the restoration of handling capacity of coal/coke at Berth No. 6 & 7 to its 
original capacity, the issue in this regard may be treated as closed. 
 
 
14.3 Capital Dredging at Mormugao Port: 
 
Capital dredging of the Approach channel, Turning Circle, Berth Nos. 5, 6 & 7 
& approaches for cape size vessels at the Port of Mormugao -reg: Detailed 
Report. 
 
The Board of Trustees of Mormugao Port Trust had approved on 12.12.2014, 
the work of Deepening of Outer and Inner channel to ( -)19.8mts. and ( -)19.5 
mts. from the present ( -)14.1mts and ( -)14.4mts respectively to accommodate 
Cape size vessels.  
 
Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) (Infrastructure -2) meeting was held on 
21st to 22 nd December, 2015 and the proposal of “Deepening of Approach 
Channel for Cape Size Vessels at MPT” was cleared for grant of EC 
clearance. The official communication from MoEF&CC was  received on 9 th 
February, 2016.  
 
The above project was awarded to M/s. Dredging Corporation of India (DCI) 
on 31.12.2015 at their quoted amount of Rs.193.50 crores for a tender quantity 
of 15 Mm3 and with a completion period of 5½ months. The dredging work 

62 
  
commenced on 01.01.2016 and was continued till end of May 2016.  DCI 
could not complete the work within the stipulated time period. 
 
The dredgers were demobilized during fish breeding season commencing from 
1st June to 31 st July, 2016 as per MoEF stipulations. DCI thereafter 
recommenced the work in August, 2016.   
 
Based on the petition filed by Old Cross Canoe Association -Vasco on grant of 
EC without conducting Environmental Public Hearing, the National Green 
Tribunal (NGT) vide its order dated 02.09.2016 squashed  the project on the 
plea that EC was issued without conducting EPH. Accordingly, Port stopped 
the capital dredging w.e.f. 19.09.2016.  
 
At the time of stoppage, DCI could dredge only a quantity of 6.76 million m 3 
as against the tender quantity of 15 Mm 3. The Port paid bill amount totaling 
Rs.61.89 crores towards execution of the work done by DCI. 
 
As regards the expenditure incurred by Port for Capital Dredging, the same 
was recovered during the next 05 years due to savings on account of 
Maintenance Dredging.  From the below mentioned table, it can be seen t hat 
expenditure incurred for maintenance dredging prior to execution of capital 
dredging is Rs.137.66 cr.  However, post execution of capital dredging, the 
expenditure incurred for maintenance dredging was drastically reduced to the 
extent of Rs. 63.29 cr. for the next 05 years.  Therefore, there was a net saving 
of Rs.74.37 cr. on maintenance dredging and hence the expenditure on capital 
dredging amounting to Rs. 61.89 cr.  is thus recovered and there is no loss to 
the Port. The comparative table indicatin g maintenance cost for dredging 
before and after execution of capital dredging is shown below: 
 
Maintenance Dredging Expenditure 
Particulars Maintenance Dredging 
Expenditure in Rs. 
Total expenditure 
for 5 yrs in Rs. 
Difference amount 
in Rs. 
2011-12 2457,27,218.00  
 
 
13766,90,266.10 
7437,06,956.75 
2012-13 3174,75,861.00 
2013-14 2459,06,501.00 
2014-15 2792,27,588.00 
2015-16 2883,53,098.10 

63 
  
2016-17 1029,14,022.30  
 
6329,83,309.35 
2017-18 1453,62,987.61 
2018-19 1424,27,580.00 
2019-20 1262,65,923.44 
2020-21 1160,12,796.00 
 
Based on the directives of NGT, Mormugao Port had applied for fresh Terms 
of Reference (ToR) with MoEF&CC in Oct. 2016 and the EPH was conducted 
from 27 th April till 4 th May, 2017 along with other Port projects. The 
application was made to MoEF in the month of Feb. 2019 by uploading EIA 
studies, CRZ recommendations by State and other relevant documents.   
 
EAC meeting was held in the month of July 2019 and during the seco nd EAC 
held on 28.01.2020, EAC had favorably recommended for issue of EC. 
However the same is pending with MoEF&CC due to non -finalization of 
Coastal Zone Management Plan (CZMP) by the Goa State. The finalization of 
CZMP is mandatory as per the directives of NGT, New Delhi to MoEF&CC 
for granting Environmental & CRZ clearances for coastal projects.  
 
In this regard, it is stated that Goa State has not yet finalized CZMP in spite of 
repeated extension issued by NGT.  As per the latest directives issued by 
NGT, Goa State was directed to conduct fresh EPH within the stipulated time.   
 
Meanwhile, due to cancellation of iron ore mining leases in Goa by Supreme 
Court and subsequent reductions in cargo handling capacity of Mormugao 
Port Trust and its impact on revenue generation, it has been decided to keep on 
hold the implementation of capital dredging and the same was communicated 
to MoPSW vide letter dated 13.10.2020. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation  
14.4 The Committee desires to know the reason behind the delay in acceptance of 
NHAI Technical Committee’s recommendation to accept all items of change of scope, 
by the SPV of Mormugao Port Road Co. Ltd. The Committee recommends that the 

64 
  
Ministry may thrash out  the remaining long pending and unresolved  issues in the Port 
Connectivity Project at Mormugao Port Trust, in close coordination with the involved 
organizations so as to ensure that the construction of Four -lane highway from 
Varunapuri Junction to Sada Jun ction and Flyover, which was originally scheduled for 
completion by 13 th October, 2018, does not face any further delays.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry and Mormugao Port Trust may request the State 
Government of Goa to finalize the Coastal Zone Management Plan, so as to allow for 
capital dredging to be done when the requirement for the same is felt at the Mormugao 
Port. 
 
  

65 
  
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF 
THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
 
-NIL- 
**** 
  

66 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22) OF THE MINISTRY 
Realizing the fact that our ports and shipping sector is a key driver of trade for our 
country and that the Sagarmala Programme has been instituted to improve India’s 
maritime transport infrastructure and boost its export competitiveness and 
simultaneously appreciating the fiscal constraints f aced by the Government due to 
deceleration in economic growth in the wake of Covid -19 pandemic induced lockdowns, 
the Committee while making its recommendation in Para 5 of its 290 th Report had 
expected the Ministry to exercise more prudence in its budget formulation and move the 
Ministry of Finance for enhancement of funds at the R.E. 2021 -22 stage for maritime 
transport infrastructure and e -governance projects by drawing a roadmap with 
detailed explanation. Therefore, merely informing that the Committee’s  
recommendation has been “noted for necessary compliance” is not sufficient. The 
Committee feels that the notable reduction in allocation made at B.E. 2021 -22 stage, in 
comparison to that at the B.E. 2020 -21 stage, coupled with the drastic cut in the 
budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways at the R.E. 
2020-21 stage, must have had a significant adverse impact on the various schemes/plans 
made by the Ministry for the FY 2021 -22. The Committee would, therefore, like to 
know the al location made to the Ministry at the R.E. 2021 -22 stage. In case no 
significant budgetary enhancement has been made, the Committee may be apprised of 
the reasons, if any, given for the same by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee 

67 
  
would also like to know the steps taken by the Ministry to exercise due diligence in its 
budget formulation taking into account objectively its needs as well as its capabilities to 
utilize the budgeted funds.  
(Para 1.2) 
 
PORT CAPACITY  
The Committee while making its recommendati on in Para 17 of its 290 th Report had 
inter alia intended that the Ministry should pay more attention to improvement of port 
productivity and port operations through modernization of port infrastructure and 
adoption of sophisticated technology. Instead of dwelling upon the measures taken in 
this regard, the Ministry seems to have washed its hands off the matter by stating that 
Non-Major Ports are under the control of State Maritime Boards or State 
Governments. The Committee observes that India has not been able to reap the full 
potential of its port and shipping sector which is evident from the fact that the 
contribution of this sector to our GDP is just 1%. The Committee, therefore, desires to 
be apprised of the policy measures initiated to overcome structural and organizational 
impediments to increase port production and productivity. Considering the fact that the 
number of Minor Ports in the country is more than 200 and therefore, their role in the 
overall Shipping sector is indispensible, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping and Waterways should encourage the Major Ports across the country 
to lend technical assistance and expertise to the regional Minor Ports in order to help 
them expand at a faster pace.  
(Para 2.3) 
 

68 
  
 
The Committee notes with great concern that a lot of rai l and road port connectivity 
projects face huge delays in completion, thus causing significant adverse impact on the 
Average TRT. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
strongly pursue the matter with the concerned Ministries/Departm ents and hold 
regular meetings with them in this regard to ensure that these connectivity projects are 
completed within a reasonable timeframe. The Committee also desires to know whether 
Ministry of Railways, in coordination with Ministry of Ports, Shippin g and Waterways, 
has undertaken any PPP policy measures in Railway infrastructure in order to attract 
private sector participation in rail connectivity projects. 
(Para 3.3) 
DEVELOPMENT AND MODERNIZATION OF PORTS  
The Committee feels that having essential equipments available at the Major Ports, 
along with trained personnel to operate them, is a precursor to improve the overall 
efficacy of the service delivery at the respective Ports and effectively, the output of t he 
Shipping sector in our country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
the Ministry may take concrete action to ensure that essential equipments such as X -
Ray Container Scanners, are made available at all Major Ports without any further 
delay.  
(Para 4.4) 
 
 
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS  

69 
  
The Committee takes note of the various steps taken by the Ministry to work in close 
coordination with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to improve road 
connectivity at Ports across the country. The Committee h owever notes that the 
Ministry has not furnished any information regarding the inclusion of the requirement 
of linkage roads for upcoming ports, in the master plan for communicating the same to 
NHAI. The Committee desires to be apprised of the action taken  by the Ministry in this 
regard.  
(Para 5.4) 
 
SAGARMALA 
The Committee is dismayed to note that the Ministry could release only Rs. 10 crores 
out of the Rs. 90 crores earmarked for the project Development of National Maritime 
Heritage Complex due to delay in finalization of the complex structure, which, the 
Committee apprehends, may result in cost escalation and time overrun in the project. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take corrective action 
to expedite execution of National Maritime Heritage Complex within the approved cost. 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should implore upon the various 
State Maritime Boards to strive to make full utilization of the assistance being granted 
to them by the Ministry and tak e steps to remove impediments like delays in tendering, 
and forest/ environment/ wildlife clearances, because in a resource -constrained country 
like ours, the Ministry should utilize the available scarce financial resources in most 
optimal manner.  
(Para 6.6) 
 

70 
  
 
The Committee notes that presently, 802 projects worth Rs. 5.53 lakh crores have been 
proposed for implementation under the Sagarmala Programme by 2035. The 
Committee observes that though the Ministry, in its reply, has submitted that all 
projects un der implementation will be monitored for their completion, no specific 
timeframe has been provided for each project. The Committee, therefore, desires to be 
kept apprised of the timeframe set for execution for each project within the approved 
cost.  
(Para 7.5) 
The Sagarmala Programme being a flagship initiative of the Ministry, the prime 
objective of which is to promote port -led direct and indirect development along India’s 
7500 km long coastline, leading to industrialization and job creation. The projects 
under the Sagarmala Programme need lakhs of crores of funding. Given the fact that 
the Covid -19 pandemic’s economic fallout has impacted India’s macroeconomic 
landscape, the Committee desires to know whether the implementation of projects 
under Sagarmala are facing challenges in terms of mobilization of the investments in a 
timely manner and if so, the corrective measures taken to meet the requirement of 
funds for the projects under implementation.  
(Para 7.6) 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry may put a strong coordination 
mechanism in place at the State level to iron out any bottlenecks being faced in the 
implementation of these projects and facilitate Sagarmala -related projects under the 
established principles of cooperative federalism. The Ministry should also formulate 

71 
  
detailed plans to ensure that the amount of investments required for these projects are 
made available, so as to avoid delays on account of lack of funding support.  
(Para 7.7) 
 
SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY 
The Committee appreciates the technical collaborations and MoUs signed under 
International Cooperation, such as India Russia Inter -Governmental Agreement. The 
Committee, however, feels that the Ministry must make concerted efforts to s ign more 
such agreements and also effectively utilize local resources and expertise as well, by 
introduction of schemes/ programmes for training, research and development and 
introduction of modern technologies in the Shipbuilding sector in order to furthe r boost 
the growth of this sector in our country.  
(Para 8.3) 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF LIGHTHOUSES AND LIGHT SHIPS  
The Committee is happy to note that DGLL has established National Automatic Identification 
System Network in which 87 Lighthouses provide rad io linkage to vessels equipped with AIS. 
The Committee recommends that DGLL may strive to install this technology at the remaining 
and upcoming Lighthouses in the country in order to further boost the coastal security of the 
country and further to aid search and rescue operations in the regions nearby such lighthouses.  
(Para 9.3) 
 
INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  

72 
  
The Committee agrees with the observations of the Ministry regarding IWT being more 
economical, less polluting and environment -friendly mode of transport, as compared to 
other modes of transport and therefore, for overall development of IWT Sector in the 
country, it is necessary that Governments at the Central and State levels simultaneously 
undertake development works. The Committee feels that  IWT’s present share is 2% of 
total transport scenario, which leaves a huge scope for promotion and growth of IWT as 
an alternate mode of transport in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry may develop a long-term vision to boost IWT in the country and come 
up with suitable policies and schemes to work towards this goal. The Committee also 
recommends that the connectivity of ports through IWT should be conceptualized by 
the concerned port and necessary investments made therein t o exploit the full potential 
of IWT.  
(Para 10.3) 
 
INDIAN MARITIME UNIVERSITY  
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the updated status regarding the SFC -II 
Proposal for the Indian Maritime University.  
(Para 11.2) 
The Committee desires to be apprised about the specific action taken by the Ministry 
with regard to designing of training policies/ programmes for marine cadets/ trainees in 
consultation with industry experts.  
(Para 12.2) 
 
 

73 
  
MARITIME TRAINING  
The Committee feels that the existence of shortage of manpower at some of the Ports, 
while more than required manpower at certain other Ports, is a matter of grave concern 
and this issue needs to be urgently addressed. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that keeping  in view the dynamic changes in the port scenario and introduction of 
sophisticated port equipments, specific programmes may be designed for retraining and 
multi-skilling to facilitate redeployment of the surplus workforce, wherever it is needed.  
(Para 13.2) 
 
Mormugao Port Trust  
The Committee desires to know the reason behind the delay in acceptance of NHAI 
Technical Committee’s recommendation to accept all items of change of scope, by the 
SPV of Mormugao Port Road Co. Ltd. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may thrash out  the remaining long pending and unresolved issues in the Port 
Connectivity Project at Mormugao Port Trust, in close coordination with the involved 
organizations so as to ensure that the construction of Four -lane highway from 
Varunapuri Junction to Sada Jun ction and Flyover, which was originally scheduled for 
completion by 13 th October, 2018, does not face any further delays.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry and Mormugao Port Trust may request the State 
Government of Goa to finalize the Coastal Zon e Management Plan, so as to allow for 
capital dredging to be done when the requirement for the same is felt at the Mormugao 
Port.  
(Para 14.4) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3 :00 P.M. on Wednesday , the 8th December, 2021 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
7. Shri Prince Raj 
8. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
9. Shrimati Mala Roy 
10. Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Rajbahadur Singh  
12. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
13. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a very war m welcome to the Members of the  
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the   draft 
Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Ninetieth Report on the Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) of Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways. 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, consid ered the aforesaid draft Report  and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
74

 
4.  *   *   *   * 
5.   The meeting adjourned at 5:00 P.M. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i 
                                                           
i * Relates to other matters 
 
75

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
  

  
Annexure :- A 
(Para 12.1 of Chapter-II) 
  
Directorate General of Lighthouses and Lightship 
*** 
Proposed allocation for development of Lighthouses (BE- 2021-22)  
  
( Rs. In Lakh) 
Sl No Name of the Scheme Proposed 
BE 2021-22 
Status of project Time line 
1 2 3 4 5 
1 Establishment of new 
Lighthouse in A&N 
Islands at Hoiniph Rock 
Point in Katchal  Harbour 
50 Stage-II clearance for diversion 
of forest land is under process 
at MoEF & CC Chennai.  
The MOEF and CC New Delhi 
accorded approval for CRZ 
clearance, however the same 
has been kept in abeyance as 
per NGT guidelines due to non 
updation of Integrated Island 
Management Plan (IIMP) for 
Kachal Island (Nicobar) by UT 
of Andaman Nicobar Island. 
The Final IIMP is required to 
be finalized by the UT in order 
to clear CRZ by MOEF and CC 
New Delhi. The work is being 
rescheduled and erection work 
will be commenced subject to 
clearance of MOEF & CC New 
Delhi. 
  
.   
  
Target date of 
completion is March 
2022, subject to forest 
land diversion and 
CRZ Clearance 
2 Establishment of a new 45 
M 
high  Lighthouse  tower  at 
Maipura (Odisha Coast) 
100 The soil investigation has been 
carried out on the plot of land 
received from Forest 
department. As per the soil 
report, it is necessary to have 
pile foundation with heavy pile 
cap and also the land is required 
to be filled up to 2.5 mtrs. as 
the land is located in back water 
sub-merged area. Hence, as per 
discussion with IIT Madras, the 
cost of the tower is likely to be 
increased than the sanctioned 
amount. Alternatively, a light 
beacon is being planned to be 
installed on the top of Damara 
Port Building wh ere AIS base 
station is installed.   
  
  
Target date of 
completion is March 
2022 
  
76

  
3 Beautification of 
Lighthouses (Promotion of 
Tourism at Lighthouses) 
1000 In-house Projects: Work at 
Gopnath Veraval and Dwarka 
is in progress. Work at 
Mahabalipuram, Muttam and 
Kadlur Point are being taken 
up. 
  
In PPP: EoI for tourism in PPP 
mode at 65 Lighthouses has 
been received and evaluation 
work is in progress.  
  
Target date of 
completion works 
at  Gopnath Veraval 
and Dwarka is March 
2022. 
  
Work at 
Mahabalipuram, 
Muttam point and 
Kadlur Point, 
foundation laying in 
December 2021 and 
completion March 
2023. 
  
For 65  Lighthouses, 
Foundation laying 
December 2021, and 
completion by March 
2025. 
4 Establishment of a lighted 
beacon at Bhet Dwarka  
(Gujarat Coast) 
100 Land acquisition in progress. 
  
  
Target date of 
completion is March 
2022, subject to 
finalization of land 
acquisition by State 
Govt. 
5 Procurement of Wreck 
Marking Buoys 
10 The provision is kept for 
emergency requirement to meet 
the requirement of marking. 
  
  
Continuous Scheme.  
  
6 Improvement of local 
lights  
10 Under this provision, periodical 
maintenance of local lighthouse 
is being carried out to enhance 
safety of mariners  
  
Continuous scheme. 
7 Recapitalization of DGPS 
Phase -II 
1300 Due to insufficient tender 
received fresh e -tendering is in 
progress.   
  
  
Target date of 
completion is March 
2022.  
  
8 Miscellaneous works 530 Major and special repair works 
like construction of compound 
walls, roads / Pathways etc. are 
carried out under this scheme. 
The securing of lighthouse 
assets of the Directorate by 
construction of compound wall 
in the present day context has 
become important.  
  
.  
Continuous scheme 
9 Improvement of 
Lighthouses 
1000 Under this provision, 
Lighthouses are being upgraded 
/ improved by replacing the 
Continuous Scheme 
77

  
existing equipment and 
installing new equipment 
working on electricity, non -
conventional energy source like 
solar power. Improvement of 
Lighthouse structures is also 
being carried out by replacing 
lattice structures by 
masonry/RCC structures to act 
as prominent day marks.  
  
  
10 Establishment of   New 
Lighthouses at Dhanush 
Khodi 
100 Shell structure by using slip 
form completed and other 
structure in progress. 
  
  
Target date of 
completion is July 
2021 
11 Establishment of New 
Lighthouses at Chaumukh, 
Odisha 
100 Land acquisition in progress.    
  
  
Target date of 
completion is 
September 2022, 
subject to finalization 
of land acquisition by 
State Govt. 
12 Establishment of VTS at 
Port Blair 
1100 The sites for Radar installation 
has been finalized. 
 Soil investigation completed. 
MoU is required to be signed 
before e-tender. 
  
  
Target date of 
completion is Dec 
2023. 
13 Recapitalization of 
Remote Control and 
Automation System in 
Lighthouses under 
Jamnagar and 
Gandhidham Directorate. 
800 Work order has been issued. 
FAT completed. 
  
. 
Target date of 
completion is March 
2022 
14 Improvement of 
Lighthouses tower at 
Rutland Island  A&N 
50 SVNIT, Surat  has been 
approached for soil 
investigation and design of 
foundation. 
  
  
Target date of 
completion is March 
2022.  
  
15 Establishment of New LH 
at Kalvan Reef 
200 EOI is being issued for obtain 
the list of intended bidders. 
  
  
Target date of 
completion is March 
2022. 
  
16 Replacement of existing 
LH at Saiyad Rajpara 
50 SVNIT, Surat has been 
approached for design of 
foundation. 
  
  
Target date of 
completion is March 
2022. 
  
  Sub Total 6500     
17 Replacement of Assets: 500 The assets of the Directorate Continuous Scheme 
78

  
  like Lighthouse equipment have 
a prescribed span of life as per 
LH Accounting Rules and the 
Directorate contributes towards 
depreciation of each asset.   The 
expenditure towards 
replacement of these assets is 
met out of the depreciation fund 
of the Directorate. Replacement 
of old obsolete equipment, 
Racons buoys/moorings and 
support vehicles for the 
maintenance and management 
of Aids to Navigation are 
covered under this scheme of 
replacement of assets. During 
the proposed period , the 
replacement of obsolete 
equipment, buoys and Genset at 
Lighthouses have been 
proposed with modern state -of-
the-art LH equipment which 
consumes less energy and 
operate at higher efficiency. 
  
    Total: 7000     
  
  
 
 
  
79

  
Annexure:- B 
(Para 19.2 of Chapter-I) 
 
The List of 31 Port projects to be offered on PPP basis for asset monetization are given 
below. 
Initial List of 11 Projects for Asset Monetization: 
S. 
No. 
Port Name of Berth/Finalized Assets 
1 & 
2 
Paradip Port 
  
Deepening and optimization of Inner Harbour facilities including 
development Western Dock Captive berth (two no.) to handle capsize 
vessels 
  
3 Paradip Port Mechanisation  of  CQ1 & CQ2 Berth  
4 Mumbai 
Port 
Development of Marina (PPP) Capacity 300 yacht 
  
5 Mumbai 
Port 
Operation & Maintenance of Mumbai International Cruise Terminal (PPP) 
  
6 SMP, 
Kolkata 
Mechanisation of Berth no. 3 (PPP) 
  
7 SMP, 
Kolkata 
Conversion of 2 berths as Container Betty at Khidderpore Dock (PPP) 
8 MoPT, Goa Operation & Maintenance of proposed Mormugao Port International Cruise 
Terminal. On PPP mode 
9 Deendayal 
Port 
Oil Jetty No.9 
10 Deendayal 
Port 
Oil Betty No.10 
11 Deendayal 
Port 
Oil Jetty No.11 
 Projects to be offered on PPP mode in 2021-2024 (list of nine projects): 
Sl. No. Port Project Name 
1. JNPT Container Terminal at Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
2. JNPT Operationalization of coastal berth at Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
3. PPT Mechanisation of SQB berth- Paradip Port 
4. DPT Berth No.14: Mechanization of Fertilizer Berth at Deendayal Port 
5. VOCPT Berth No. 9 - at V.O. Chidambaranar Port 
6. VOCPT NCB-3 Berth at V.O. Chidambaranar Port 
7. VPT WQ-7 & 8 at Visakhapatnam Port  
8. VOCPT Berths 1, 2, 3 & 4 at V.O. Chidambaranar Port  
9. NMPT Berths 9, 10 & 11 at New Mangalore Port 
 11 Projects for Consideration to offer on PPP Mode in the Financial Year from 2021-22 
to 2024-25: 
80

  
Sl. No. Port Project Name 
1 JNPT Development of Additional Liquid Cargo Jetty at JNPT 
2 MoPT Redevelopment of Berth No. 9 and three nos. barge berth of PPP basis 
3 MoPT Operation and Maintenance of Berth Nos. 10 & 11 on PPP basis 
4 VPT Mechanization of EQ-6 berth 
5 VPT Mechanization of EQ-7 berth 
6 VPT Mechanization of WQ-6 berth 
7 SMP, 
KDS 
Mechanization of Berths 4 & 5 NSD on DBFOT basis 
8 SMP, 
KDS 
Strengthening and Mechanization of Berth 7, 8 NSD on DBFOT basis 
9 SMP, 
KDS 
Construction and Mechanization of Container berths at KDS Outer 
Terminal 
10 SMP, 
HDC 
Mechanization of Berth No. 10 
11 SMP, 
HDC 
Mechanization of Berth No. 5 
  
 
***** 
81