Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
211
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi, 
National Museum and other important 
issues pertaining to the Ministry of Culture

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

61
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT
Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi,
National Museum and other important
issues pertaining to the Ministry of Culture
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—12
5. O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ... 13—19
6. Annexure–I and II ............................................................................................................ 21—37
7. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 3 9—41
8. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 42—60

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred and Eelventh Report on “Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi,
National Museum and other important issues pertaining to the Ministry of Culture”.
2. The Committee in the first chapter of this Report has dealt with upkeep of various
important monuments in Delhi. Most of the issues raised here were under examination of the
Committee for a long time and recently the Committee heard the views of the Ministry of Tourism,
Ministry of Culture, Aga Khan Trust for Culture, Archaeological Survey of India and INTACH on
27
th January, 2014 on the subject. Similarly, the portion pertaining to the National Museum is also
based on the replies received from the Ministry of Culture on the 167 th and the 179 th Reports of
the Committee. Given the crucial importance of the subject, the Committee has made further
observations/recommendations in this Report for follow up action.
3. The Committee has also dealt with several outstanding issues on which recommendations
were given in various Reports earlier but, those have not been implemented fully. The Committee
understands that if implemented, it will go a long way in protecting the cultural heritage of the
country and the interface of culture with tourism will certainly be better.
4. The Committee is thankful to the Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Tourism for their
written and oral replies/submissions on different occasions. The Committee is also thankful to Aga
Khan Trust and INTACH for their participation in the meeting.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 18
th February, 2014.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 18, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Magha 29, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
A.D. – Anno Domini
A.S.I. – Archaeological Survey of India
C.A.A. – Civil Aviation Authority
D.D.A. – Delhi Development Authority
H.R.D. – Human Resource Development
INTACH – Indian National Trust For Art and Cultural Heritage
M.C.D. – Muncipal Corporation of Delhi
N.C.T. – National Capital Territory
N.D.M.C. – New Delhi Municipal Corporation
O.M. – Office Memorandum
UNESCO – United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
W.H.C. – World Heritage Centre
(iv)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
Conservation, Preservation and Protection of important Monuments in Delhi
Introduction
Cultural heritage of a nation, in fact, is the medium to understand the sublime facet of
history of a country and its people, which is manifested in myriad forms of creativity and
excellence. Therefore, the conservation, upkeep and maintenance of our historical monuments
assumes greater significance and hence a national concern. The Committee has been of the view
that highest peace time destruction of cultural assets has taken place in India during the British
colonial period, particularly, after the First War of Independence in 1857. Today, this era of rabid
consumerism and crass commercialization have posed serious threats to the existence of our
cultural heritage and resources. India is not an exception in this regard. It has been a common
perception that we in India know how to build great monuments but we are unable to protect and
preserve them. Our performance has been rather unimpressive in respect of their upkeep and
maintenance. Our monuments are symbols of our great and rich past. It appears that we no longer
take pride in our cultural heritage which is reflected in our unkempt cultural sites. Nothing is more
enduring in the perception of a visiting tourist than aesthetically maintained monuments and their
adjoining premises. There are myriads of tangible and intangible aspects having cascading effect for
our economy. Yet, our premium monuments and historical and cultural sites are facing serious
threats to their existence due to negligence.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture had always emphasised on many other problems apart from the protection, preservation,
upkeep and the facilities available to tourists at our major monuments. The Committee in its
meetings held from time to time had emphasised on these and other matters concerning our major
monuments and the cultural sites. The interface between the Ministry of Culture with the Ministry
of Tourism and other agencies has been important concern from the perspective of developing
tourism in the country. The major issues discussed before the Ministry of Culture and the
Committee’s recommendations thereon have been given in the succeeding paragraphs:–
Upkeep of Red Fort
3. The Committee’s concern about upkeep, maintenance, the renovation of our premier cultural
sites in Delhi is well known through its different reports. Recently, it had a meeting with the
officials of Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Tourism to take stock of the arrangements made
at these sites. The Red Fort was deliberately converted into military barracks leading to reckless
encroachment and defacement of its original beauty. Efforts have been made to restore it but, much
is still to be done on ground to revive the lost grandeur of this monument.
4. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made by the Ministry to get back
the original Mughal era charm of Red Fort. This can happen only when its surrounding is
also developed tastefully in a contemporaneous style of the Monument. It is a sad story that
nothing has been done to renovate this great monument and compensate for the loss and
deliberate destruction that took place during the colonial period by converting it into
military barracks. The Committee recommends that the Ministries of Culture and Tourism
should make a joint effort for this purpose. The Committee emphasises the need to

2
integrate the Red Fort to Shahjahanabad as the entire Mughal City, including Red Fort, has
been nominated as part of a World Heritage City of Delhi.
5. The Committee also took note of several important museums like Freedom Fighter’s
Museum, Indian War Memorial Museum and Red Fort Archaeological Museum housed inside
Red Fort which preserve many important historical antiquities. But, adequate steps have not
been taken to improve their visibility. The Committee also learnt that many posts are lying
vacant and many museum staff are working as casual labour in these museums almost for
two decades and have not been regularised despite their eligibility. The Committee
recommends that steps be taken to fill these vacancies in time and also to regularise the
eligible casual appointees to boost their morale so they would contribute best in their
service career.
Illumination of Qutub Minar
6. The Committee has also discussed the importance of adequate and appropriate lighting
facilities in and around our major monuments. It was of the view that not only poor lighting but
also over lighting spoils the beauty of a Monument. The example of Qutub Minar was cited in this
respect.
7. The Committee therefore emphasises the need for proper and adequate illumination
of the Qutub Minar to enhance its beauty as well as its visibility. The Committee found that
the flood light at night is too bright that it might harm the monument. The Committee
recommends to improve this at the earliest.
8. The Committee also feels that Qutub Minar, like any other monument, should not
be dealt with in isolation from its surroundings. This world famous Heritage Monument,
therefore, must be developed as an integrated site including historic Mehrauli Village and
Mehrauli Archaeological Park.
Upkeep of Humayun’s Tomb
9. One of the most impressive structures located in Delhi is the Humayun’s Tomb. This
brilliant architectural splendour of the Mughal period testifies the craftsmanship of the Mughal
architects, which was inspired by the Persian style of architecture. The tomb is surrounded by
beautiful lush green Mughal garden. The garden is divided into four parts by pathways. This is
typical of all Mughal gardens. The various water channels for the fountains make this tomb a true
architectural delight.
10. The Humayun’s Tomb was declared as a Centrally Protected Monument in the year 1913
and since then Archaeological Survey of India is continuously taking its conservation, chemical
cleaning and environmental development. In view of the importance of the monument, UNESCO
has included Humayun’s Tomb in the list of World Heritage Property in the year 1993. Despite this
the Committee found in one of its visit that the condition of Humayun’s tomb was in bad shape
and its upkeep etc. woefully inadequate. Water seeped through the roofs and blue Persian tiles were
covered in dirt and grim. The once – resplendent Mughal gardens were overrun with dense over
growth of wild grass and weeds. At many places new encroachments have come up. Aga Khan
Trust for Culture and Archaeological Survey of India were found doing renovation work there. Aga
Khan Trust had signed an agreement for restoration/conservation of Humayun’s Tomb. The
conservation work has been completed on 18
th September, 2013.
11. The Committee in the meeting held earlier and the one held on the 27 th January, 2014 took
stock of the renovations done by Aga Khan Trust for Culture and INTACH and found that the

3
restorations work being done by them praiseworthy. The cement deposits were removed as cement
was not used in historical monuments. Now the monument sports a renewed look. The basic
amenities including parking, toilet facilitates, safe drinking water, bilingual signages, etc have been
provided at the monument. In addition, cultural text in Braille has also been provided at Humayun’s
Tomb.
12. The Committee appreciates the work done by Aga Khan Trust and INTACH and
recommends that such good initiatives should continue in future for other monuments also.
Partnership with people and developing a larger synergy and coordination among several
stakeholders/agencies for protection and preservation of our iconic Monuments/ Heritage
Sites is the need of the hour. But, we also cannot lose sight of the majority of our
monuments that are lying unattended. Through our own resources as also having
partnership with international organizations such as UNESCO, and other bodies like Aga
Khan Foundation, resources may be generated for renovation, upkeep and beautification of
monuments. Since maintenance is a continuous affair, this can best be done through
increasing people’s participation. The Ministry of Culture should put in place a credible
system to encourage and motivate a large section of the local populace in the task of
upkeep and maintenance of historical and cultural monuments. Once the people treat these
monuments as their own assets and develop a sense of ownership, their maintenance
become assured.
Issues pertaining to Lal Mahal
13. The Committee also considered the problems regarding protection of Lal Mahal, situated in
Nizamuddin area of Delhi, one of the India’s oldest Islamic period monuments from demolition and
illegal encroachment. Lal Mahal or Kushak-i-Lal is said to have been built by Ghiyasuddin Balban
(AD 1266-1286) in AD 1255.The structure of Lal Mahal was constructed out of red sandstone over
a plinth comprising a central domed room with a verandah around having flat roof supported on
pillars and lintels.
14. The Ministry of Culture admitted that the monument is encroached upon and is under use
for residential purposes. The monument is privately owned. There have been several attempts in
the past to demolish the structure and to undertake fresh constructions on the site. There have
been several requests from the interested persons/agencies to declare the monument as protected
keeping in view its historical and architectural importance.
15. The Committee in its 150th Report on ‘the National Commission for Heritage Sites
Bill, 2009’ had made significant recommendation pertaining to Lal Mahal Palace’s upkeep and
protection . The said Report was presented to Parliament on the 23
rd November, 2009 and
forwarded to the Ministry of Culture for taking necessary action on it. While examining the subject,
the Committee had called for oral evidence of the MCD, Delhi Police and INTACH etc. The
Committee in the said Report had inter-alia recommended that–
“The Committee has seen for itself that the demolition of Lal Mahal in Delhi was mainly
due to lack of coordination, monitoring and regular interaction between the Union and
State Governments and its agencies like ASI, State Archaeology Boards, local bodies, police
and revenue authorities. Administrative mechanism required for ensuring protection of
heritage sites are not there at every levels. ASI is greatly handicapped on account of
manpower, resources and necessary legal powers, as a result of which, it is able to protect
only 3675 monuments. State Governments put together are taking care of only about 4000
heritage sites, while there are estimated about two lakhs unprotected heritage sites in the
country. There is a distinct lack of required effort at different levels in regard to
identification, notification and preservation/protection of our heritage.”

4
16. The Committee took up the matter seriously and requested the Ministry of Culture to
furnish their comments on the reported threat to Lal Mahal Palace.
17. The Ministry of Culture were further reminded on the issue vide OM dated the 25 th July
and 10 th October, 2013. After prolonged persuasion, the Ministry vide their O.M . dated
17th December, 2013 had informed this Committee that the Archaeological Survey of India’s
proposal to declare Lal Mahal as a National Monument has been approved by the Minister of
Culture in principle. Resultantly, a total area of 276 sq. meters of this important Monument will
be protected by the ASI. The ASI has taken necessary action to declare Lal Mahal as protected.
As soon as the land acquisition issue pertaining to the site of Lal Mahal is sorted out, the ASI
would bring out the protection notification under Section 4(i) of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958.
18. In the meeting held on 27
th January, 2014 the Committee also raised this issue with the ASI
and it was updated on the status that the encroachers are denying access to ASI even to
photograph the destroyed monument and in such circumstances it is difficult to start the work
relating to revival, renovation etc.
19. The Committee is glad to note that as a result of its prolonged persuasion, now the
Ministry has given in-principle approval to include Lal Mahal in the list of centrally
protected monuments under the ASI.
20. However, it appears to the Committee that in case of Lal Mahal, land grabbers and
various authorities were conniving with each other. They could successfully destroy the
precious monument and illegal constructions took place while Government authorities
remained silent spectators. Even now the ASI people are being denied entry into the
illegally encroached premise of Lal Mahal. The Committee recommends that since a
decision has been taken to protect this important monument no laxity should be shown to
the encroachers and they should be removed with the help of police force and suitably
renovated.
21. The Committee is of the view that even if some important monuments are privately
owned, it does not authorise the private owners to alter, deface or demolish the monuments.
Appropriate legal and institutional mechanism need to be put in place to make such private
persons accountable and face severe legal consequences for destroying such monuments/
ancient sites.
Issue of Training Tourist Guides
22. The Ministry of Culture clarified before the Committee that Tourist Guides are being trained
by the Ministry of Tourism.
23. The Committee observes that the Ministry of Culture has the domain knowledge
about the specifications of art and architectural traditions and innovativeness of each
monument/site. Therefore, they should impart the training to tourist Guides. The
Committee learnt that there is no system for on the spot booking of guides at our premier
cultural sites. As a result, tourists are left to be cheated by fake/ untrained guides. The
Committee also observes that just like counters to sale entry tickets to visit a monument,
a counter should also be there for guided tour/visit of the monument. Moreover, the
specialized Guides should be available with each monument/heritage sites.
The Issue of coordination between various Government agencies
24. In regard to the coordination between various Government agencies in Delhi the Ministry

5
of Culture informed the Committee that for protection and preservation of monuments, a meeting
of senior officers of the Central Government, Government of NCT of Delhi, DDA, NDMC, MCD,
etc. was convened by the Minister of Culture in which it was decided to constitute two Sub-
Committees i.e., one under the Secretary (Culture), Government of India and the other under the
Regional Director, ASI, Northern Region with representations from various agencies in Delhi for the
purpose of protection and preservation of monuments in Delhi and to have proper coordination for
development around the monuments.
25. The Committee observes that several agencies are involved in the process and they
meet on various fora; yet, communication gaps have been often noticed on important
matters. The Committee recommends that both the Culture and Tourism Ministry should
develop a closer synergy for preserving and promoting our heritage and culture. For
instance, the Ministry of Tourism is nodal in imparting training to the Tourist Guides
whereas the Culture Ministry has the domain knowledge of all monuments sites. As a
result, many touts are passing on half cooked information to innocent visitors at various
monuments and tourist destinations.
Identification, notification and preservation/protection of our heritage
26. The Central Government has brought out the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 to check construction activities around the
centrally protected monuments. The Act came into force from 30
th March, 2010. Despite this, the
Committee has noticed that several important monuments and sites having unique features are
languishing due to neglect and the Ministry of Culture does not have a list of these monuments/
sites. The Committee observed from the Lal Mahal case that when a monument is being
encroached and destroyed, all the authorities turn blind eye and allow that to happen. They do not
stop it for the reasons best known to them. ASI feels helpless in this as it does not have the
authority to use force etc. to stop and they don’t get the required co-operation from concerned
authorities. There is no authority to stop it with force either from the State Government or from
the Central Government. And when things come to notice and pressure is put it is argued that they
do not have access to encroached monument. This nexus and keeping eyes shut is a serious cause
for concern.
27. The Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that under the National Mission on
Monuments and Antiquities, the ASI is in the process of identification of heritage buildings all
across the country including Delhi. After a database on existence of heritage buildings/monuments/
ancient sites has been created efforts would be made to identify the potential ones for declaring
them as protected.
28. The Committee observes that our heritage sites are neglected and left unattended in
Delhi and so also at other places in the Country. The ASI is not in a position to render
appropriate care and protection to monuments. Numerous cases of encroachment and
unauthorised construction in and around these sites have been noticed. The Committee
strongly recommends that an Authority should be created under the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010. On receiving
a complaint from the public or any other private/ public organization the proposed authority
should be empowered to take strong action immediately. The Committee also recommends
that creation of database on existence of heritage buildings/monuments/ancient sites should
be completed in a time bound manner and progress in the matter should be informed to this
Committee at the earliest. Further, efforts should be made separately to identify the
potential ones for declaring them as protected. A comprehensive assessment of preservation
works should also be done.

6
29. The Committee also understands that creation of mechanisms under the provisions
of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remain (Amendment and Validation)
Act, 2010 has been very slow so far. The Committee earlier had asked the Ministry about
it but was not informed about the efforts made in this regard and the reasons for delay.
The Committee would again like to remind the Ministry about the para 42 of 192nd Report
and recommend to be proactive for putting the required mechanism in place at the earliest
in order to save our ancient sites/monuments and the Ministry may also apprise the
Committee about it through an explanatory note.
Framing of new Conservation Preservation Policy
30. The Committee further notes that the 90 years old John & Marshall guidelines for
preservation of monuments are still followed in India whereas new conservation and
preservation policy has not taken shape so far. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation that the Government must frame new updated conservation policy
incorporating latest technology and practices for monuments preservation across the
country, on priority.

7
7
CHAPTER-II
Issues pertaining to National Museum
31. The Committee had examined the functioning of the National Museum in detail and in its
167th Report had made several recommendations for bringing improvement therein. Subsequently, in
the 179 th Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry thereon further observations were made.
However, the Committee feels that still much has been left to be done. On the basis of the
reply received from the Ministry vide OM No. F 4-7 /2010 – M- I (vol.II), dated 21-12-2012
the Committee would like to make further observations on the followings:
(i) Closure of Galleries - The Committee appreciates the work completed by the
Ministry. It hopes that the renovation work of Manuscripts Gallery might have
been undertaken as the due dates of opening of CAA and Decorative Art
Gallery have since been completed.
(ii) Museums Reforms - The Committee notes and appreciates the Action Taken
Report on the 14 points/issues listed for Museum Reforms (Annexure -I). It
would be glad if the same pace of momentum for the reforms is continued in
future.
(iii) Extra space with the Museum - The Committee feels that extra space should
be made available with the Museum so that whenever renovation work of
galleries are undertaken display items could be relocated.
(iv) Maintenance of National Museum - The Committee further recommends that
thorough checks for leakages may be carried out regularly and in case of their
being noticed; they should be attended to promptly. Latest position may be
obtained from the Ministry regarding building maintenance, civil and electric
work.
(v) Museum Security - The Committee notes that despite the recommendations
made in 167
th and 179 th Reports no satisfactory reply has been received from
the Ministry of Culture. Nothing has been mentioned by the Ministry about the
upgradation of security gadgets of the Museum and the financial implications/
concurrences for such installations.
(vi) Display of Exhibits and its publicity - The Committee appreciates the display
percentage of the National Museum. It needs to be increased further in order
to bring it at par with other internationally acclaimed Museums. The
Committee feels that it could not be done without the resumption of Phase-III
work. The Committee is receiving some argument for a long time that the
Phase-III construction of National Museum would commence only after the
vacation of ASI premises.
(vii) Promotional measures to increase footfall - The Committee recommends that
apart from print-media, other publicity avenues like, FM radio, Notice-Board,
electronic media, etc., which are easily accessible to the common people may
also be explored. To encourage maximum foot fall of younger generation,

8
student concession tickets and summer-holiday rebates should also be
introduced.
(viii) Resumption of Art Acquisition Committee - The Committee recommends that
the Art Acquisition Committee should start functioning at the earliest and they
should also take note of the latest acquisitions. It does not know how long it
is going to take more for doing this.
(ix) Verification of collections - Almost a decade has passed since the last
verification was done. The Committee is aghast to note that it is yet not done.
The Ministry may impress upon the experts to hold verification urgently.
(x) Digitization - Out of the 2,06,000 collections only 150 artifacts could be
digitized which is a very small number. The Committee recommends that more
digitization should be done.
(xi) Organizational Structure of the Nastional Museum - Efforts made by the
Ministry has been noted by the Committee. The Ministry of Culture ought to
work out an amicable solution to improve the organisational structure while
retaining creative independence of institution.
(xii) Action on the Goswamy Committee Report - The Committee had earlier
recommended in the 167
th Report that the Ministry should comply with the
recommendations of the Goswami Committee Report. However a lot needs to be done
like setting up an “Advisory Boards or a Committee” with specialists from fields of
exhibition, gallery collections management, presentation etc. so that they can pool
their efforts and guide the curators and others. The Ministry informed that in
pursuant to this the Museum Advisory Board has met number of times; necessary
action has been taken to fill up the vacancies on contract basis till regular
appointments are made. Finalization of Recruitment Rules is also underway. The
Committee does not find the reply convincing and disapproves the ad-hoc
solutions found by the Ministry in giving contractual appointments. The
Committee may be apprised of the activities suggested by the Museum Advisory
Board for the National Museum and the action taken so far for effective
functioning of the National Museum. The work is pending since long time.
Museum Advisory Boards decisions on Gallery renovation and formation of
experts’ body should also be submitted to this Committee.

9
9
CHAPTER-III
Important Issues Extracted from Previous Reports of the Committee
32. The Committee had made several important recommendations in the bygone years on which
Action Taken Reports have also been received from the Ministry of Culture. However, nothing
much has happened as regards these issues even after repeated assertions by the Committee. The
Committee feels that relevance of such recommendations remain very high and if implemented in
true spirit, would certainly go a long way in protecting the cultural heritage of the Country.
Therefore, the Committee would like to flag these again in the succeeding paragraphs and would
also like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Government in respect of each of these
recommendations:
Provision of Adequate Funds
33. The Committee had repeatedly recommended for increasing the budgetary allocation for the
Ministry of Culture. Often an explanation was also given that since they failed to utilize the BE
allocations often reductions were made at RE stage by the Ministry of Finance.
34. Although the Ministry has been receiving increased budgetary allocation, still it is far
less than what actually was required. The Committee strongly feels that given the gigantic
dimension and importance of the task under taken by the Ministry, particularly the ASI,
the amount allocated is not adequate. Hence, the Committee has been recommending every
year for more allocation to the Ministry of Culture lest many of its important activities
would suffer. The Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission should not have “One-size fit
all” attitude for all the Ministries while making budgetary allocations. The Committee
recommends that the non-utilization of funds due to the hostile weather and season may
be considered as a special case and ensure that allocations of the Ministry of Culture are
not reduced at R.E. stage.
Regarding Proper Utilisation of Funds
35. The Committee would like to refer to para 22 of the 192nd Report and to point out
the under-utilization of funds observed under the heads- Archaeology, Archives and Archival
Libraries, museums, Public Libraries and International Cultural relations. The Committee
finds a dichotomy between the Ministry’s claim of spending more than 90% during the last
many years and reporting under utilization in the areas which constitute a large share in
the ministry’s allocation. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Culture will have to make more sincere efforts to maximize its expenditure, at least before
the review of the R.E. allocations begins. Under utilization/savings will certainly impinge
upon regular flow and increase of allocation to the Ministry.
Creation of a non-lapsable fund from out of collection on entry tickets
36. The Committee has been making a strong case for allocating the fund raised on the
entry tickets to ASI to be used for the conservation, protection, preservation, etc. of our
monuments. The Committee has strongly recommended to the Ministry of Finance to

10
appreciate the importance of our heritage and allow the amounts collected out of entry fee
at monuments to be kept/utilized by the ASI for its activities and it should be made a non-
lapsable fund. The matter be pursued at apex level and the response of Ministry of Finance
should be informed to the Committee. The recommendation made at para 37 of 192
nd Report
may be implemented in earnest spirit.
37. The Committee also notes that the ASI undertakes major activities only after
monsoon. Therefore, the allocations made for conservation preservation activities should be
non-lapsable. The Committee recommends that the fund allocated to A.S.I. need to be
permanently given a special status by the Ministry of Finance so as to make it non-lapsable.
Requirement of Trained Man-Power and Creation of a Culture Cadre
38. The Committee noted that Ministry of Culture has a largest number of institutions under its
purview. Whereas, dearth of trained man-power is largely felt in all the institutions and this factor
is also affecting their output. More over many of the important institutions under the Ministry are
still headless such as, the ASI, all the three National Akademis, the National Museum and the
National Library to name a few. An ad-hoc approach has been adopted by the Ministry to depute
an Officer on a temporary basis to officiate. The Committee in it 175
th Report had recommended
to fillup the large number of vacancies in various cadres of Museums and was surprised to get
the reply ( reference para 29 of 186
th Report )that a stop gap arrangement was made by merging
Museums with ASI Circles.
39. The Committee noted that large number of vacancies lying in various offices and institutions
under the Ministry of Culture is adversely affecting their performance. Adequate training has also
not been imparted to the people manning these crucial cultural organisations. As a result, state of
the art conservation and preservation technology is not being implemented in restoring and
up-keeping our monuments.
40. The Committee strongly recommends that timely steps should be taken to recruit
the staff as per requirement. It also observes that most major organisations like, ASI,
National Museum, National Library are headed by the people who have little experience and
knowledge about how to manage Arts and Culture. Many of them lack professionalism
required for the field. The Committee has over the years found that our premier cultural
institutions such as National Museum, Delhi, ASI, and Lalit Kala Academy are headed by
officers from the Ministry. It appears that a situation is allowed deliberately to be created
where an officer from the Ministry has to head it and again such a position is allowed to
be continued for a long time on one pretext or the other. While there might be genuine
reason sometimes to do so but, it sends a very wrong signal which vitiates everything in
the cultural field.
41. The Committee feels that a cultural cadre distinct from the regular administrative
cadre needs to be created to man the functioning of the Akademis, Museums and other
cultural institutions. This should consist of individuals who may be ‘generalists in the arts’.
Courses would have to be introduced for education them in the arts to make them
conversant with different forms of theatre, dance, music, poetry and literature, painting,
sculpture and architecture courses created under the Ministries of HRD and Culture to
produce right kind of persons to administer our cultural institutions in a better way. The
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should seriously consider the creation of
cultural cadre on the above lines. These organisations require specific domain knowledge
and therefore instead of a generalist a specialist should be appointed. The Committee in
this regards reminds the Ministry about the Para 37 of the 201st Report to create culture
cadre for filling up such posts.

11
Encroachments, unauthorized occupation and illegal construction in and around monuments/
heritage sites
42. The Committee noted that the encroachment in the premises of the protected monuments
and protected areas are rampant. The unauthorised construction are not removed as per the
provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 1958 (Amendment and
Validation) Act, 2010 and Rules framed thereunder. The Committee is astonished to see that 278
cases of encroachment have been noticed by the Ministry as on date across the country. The
Committee is sure that many cases must have gone unnoticed and unreported. Huge number of
monuments which are under encroachment and punitive measures are pending with regard to them.
The list is placed at ‘Annexure-II’ of the Report. It appears clearly from the annexed list that this
is happening as a result of a nexus between the encroachers and several authorities of Central and
State Governments and also the local authorities.
43. The Committee is surprised to note that a staggering number of 1593 demolition
notices/orders have been issued in this regard. The Committee in the para 41 of its 192nd
Report has pointed out about apathy of the civic authorities, local Police and other agencies
in the matter. ASI has no power to ensure compliance for such orders from them. Even
court orders were also ignored at times. The Committee is aware that encroachments,
unauthorized occupation and illegal construction near our monuments is a problem about
which we have not been able to do much so far. The Committee feels that possibility of a
nexus between the vested interests, private parties and civic and police authorities cannot
be ruled out in this context. Defacing of our national monuments is another serious
problem. Therefore, strong action should be taken against not only the encroachers/
offenders but also the agencies/officials of the concerned departments if these do not obey/
cooperate. The Committee may be informed about the efforts made and responses of the
concerned authorities in this regard.
Need for Increasing the Number of Monuments under the Protection of ASI
44. The Committee also feels that number of protected monuments under the ASI at
present is far too less and lakhs of our ancient monuments are languishing. As a result,
large numbers of them have either vanished or encroached or illegally occupied. The
Committee emphasizes the urgent need to bring most of them under protected category.
Therefore, as mentioned at para 29 of the 192
nd Report, the Committee again strongly
recommends that number of protected monuments should be increased on priority and in
a phased manner for which we should have a roadmap and realistic allocation of funds
required.
Co-ordination with States
45. Numerous monuments are scattered all over the country which require archaeological
protection. For that we will have to take State on board, who it appears are not able to pay
required attention to this aspect. The Committee is of the view that our National Policy
must provide adequate emphasis on this aspect to make conservation and protection as a
joint effort with adequate financial and other support for the culture as mentioned at para
30 of the 192
nd Report.
Preparation of dossiers sent to UNESCO with adequate care
46. The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that the dossiers sent to the
UNESCO for including our Heritage sites in the List of World Heritage Sites are generally

12
found not to be in order. As a result, these are sent back for corrections, etc. This has
happened several times in respect of our different sites. The Committee has taken up this
issue earlier also with the Ministry and had expressed its concern about this. It feels that
with the kind of vast technical and other expertise that we have in this regard, we are
unable to present our case properly to the UNESCO. It appears we do not do our homework
seriously and send dossiers to UNESCO casually. It is alleged that dossiers are deliberately
not processed properly for unknown reasons. It is a serious matter that our dossiers have
been returned several times. The Committee recommends that a “Dossiers Committee”
should be constituted comprising eminent persons from relevant areas as well as other
professionals for the purpose so that Nation does not have to hear again about our proposals
being returned. The Para 45 of the 192
nd Report may be referred to in this regard.
47. The Committee in this context would like to site the case of Majuli Island, Assam,
which was recommended by the Ministry for being adopted by UNESCO as a World Heritage
Site. But the said request was returned by the World Heritage Centre (WHC) in March 2012
as it was not complete and not according to the Guidelines framed by WHC.
48. The Committee also learnt that the Government of NCT of Delhi has submitted the
detailed dossier to nominate Delhi as a world Heritage City to the UNESCO. In view of this,
the Committee recommends that this may be pursued more seriously. A coordinated and
holistic approach is required to conserve the cultural heritage of this ancient city instead
of adopting an isolated monument by monument approach.
Requirement to strengthen all wings of ASI
49. The Committee emphasizes the urgent need for strengthening of all wings of
Archaeological Survey of India like Monument, Conservation, Exploration and Excavation,
Epigraphy, Chemistry, etc. due to increase in the quantum as well as nature of these works.
The Committee observes that the workload of Horticulture Wing has increased manifold
with the increase in number of gardens under maintenance from 100 to 500 with no
corresponding increase in the manpower. As a result, sites, monuments, etc. are not being
properly maintained and landscaped. Their upkeep is generally not upto the mark. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a commensurate increase in the
workforce engaged in all the Departments of ASI, particularly in Horticulture for
showcasing our heritage sites. The Committee also recommends that vacancies at all levels
should be filled up on priority and revival of posts whenever necessary also be expedited
with the Ministry of Finance. It is taking lot of time. The Committee desires the Ministry
to keep it informed about the recommendations of the Manpower Management and Planning
Consultants and status of its implementation. The Committee’s recommendation at Para 50
of 192
nd Report in this regard may also be referred to.

13
13
RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
CHAPTER–I
Conservation, Preservation and Protection of important Monuments in Delhi
Upkeep of Red Fort
The Committee recommends that efforts should be made by the Ministry to get back
the original Mughal era charm of Red Fort. This can happen only when its surrounding is
also developed tastefully in a contemporaneous style of the Monument. It is a sad story that
nothing has been done to renovate this great monument and compensate for the loss and
deliberate destruction that took place during the colonial period by converting it into
military barracks. The Committee recommends that the Ministries of Culture and Tourism
should make a joint effort for this purpose. The Committee emphasises the need to
integrate the Red Fort to Shahjahanabad as the entire Mughal City, including Red Fort, has
been nominated as part of a World Heritage City of Delhi. (Para 4)
The Committee also took note of several important museums like Freedom Fighter’s
Museum, Indian War Memorial Museum and Red Fort Archaeological Museum housed inside
Red Fort which preserve many important historical antiquities. But, adequate steps have not
been taken to improve their visibility. The Committee also learnt that many posts are lying
vacant and many museum staff are working as casual labour in these museums almost for
two decades and have not been regularised despite their eligibility. The Committee
recommends that steps be taken to fill these vacancies in time and also to regularise the
eligible casual appointees to boost their morale so they would contribute best in their
service career. (Para 5)
Illumination of Qutub Minar
The Committee therefore emphasises the need for proper and adequate illumination
of the Qutub Minar to enhance its beauty as well as its visibility. The Committee found that
the flood light at night is too bright that it might harm the monument. The Committee
recommends to improve this at the earliest. (Para 7)
The Committee also feels that Qutub Minar, like any other monument, should not
be dealt with in isolation from its surroundings. This world famous Heritage Monument,
therefore, must be developed as an integrated site including historic Mehrauli Village and
Mehrauli Archaeological Park. (Para 8)
Upkeep of Humayun’s Tomb
The Committee appreciates the work done by Aga Khan Trust and INTACH and
recommends that such good initiatives should continue in future for other monuments also.
Partnership with people and developing a larger synergy and coordination among several
stakeholders/agencies for protection and preservation of our iconic Monuments/ Heritage
Sites is the need of the hour. But, we also cannot lose sight of the majority of our
monuments that are lying unattended. Through our own resources as also having
partnership with international organizations such as UNESCO, and other bodies like Aga
Khan Foundation, resources may be generated for renovation, upkeep and beautification of

14
monuments. Since maintenance is a continuous affair, this can best be done through
increasing people’s participation. The Ministry of Culture should put in place a credible
system to encourage and motivate a large section of the local populace in the task of
upkeep and maintenance of historical and cultural monuments. Once the people treat these
monuments as their own assets and develop a sense of ownership, their maintenance
become assured. (Para 12)
Issues pertaining to Lal Mahal
The Committee is glad to note that as a result of its prolonged persuasion, now the
Ministry has given in-principle approval to include Lal Mahal in the list of centrally
protected monuments under the ASI. (Para 19)
However, it appears to the Committee that in case of Lal Mahal, land grabbers and
various authorities were conniving with each other. They could successfully destroy the
precious monument and illegal constructions took place while Government authorities
remained silent spectators. Even now, the ASI people are being denied entry into the
illegally encroached premises of Lal MahaI. The Committee recommends that since a
decision has been taken to protect this important monument, no laxity should be shown to
the encroachers and they should be removed with the help of police force and suitably
renovated. (Para 20)
The Committee is of the view that even if some important monuments are privately
owned, it does not authorise the private owners to alter, deface or demolish the monuments.
Appropriate legal and institutional mechanism need to be put in place to make such private
persons accountable and face severe legal consequences for destroying such monuments/
ancient sites. (Para 21)
Issue of Training Tourist Guides
The Committee observes that the Ministry of Culture has the domain knowledge
about the specifications of art and architectural traditions and innovativeness of each
monument/site. Therefore, they should impart the training to Tourist Guides. The
Committee learnt that there is no system for on the spot booking of guides at our premier
cultural sites. As a result, tourists are left to be cheated by fake/ untrained guides. The
Committee also observes that just like counters to sell entry tickets to visit a monument,
a counter should also be there for guided tour/visit of the monument. Moreover, the
specialized Guides should be available with each monument/heritage sites. (Para 23
The Issue of co-ordination between various Government agencies
The Committee observes that several agencies are involved in the process and they
meet on various fora; yet, communication gaps have been often noticed on important
matters. The Committee recommends that both the Culture and Tourism Ministry should
develop a closer synergy for preserving and promoting our heritage and culture. For
instance, the Ministry of Tourism is nodal in imparting training to the Tourist Guides
whereas the Culture Ministry has the domain knowledge of all monuments sites. As a
result, many touts are passing on half cooked information to innocent visitors at various
monuments and tourist destinations. (Para 25)
Identification, notification and preservation/protection of our heritage
The Committee observes that our heritage sites are neglected and left unattended in

15
Delhi and so also at other places in the Country. The ASI is not in a position to render
appropriate care and protection to monuments. Numerous cases of encroachment and
unauthorised construction in and around these sites have been noticed. The Committee
strongly recommends that an Authority should be created under the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010. On receiving
a complaint from the public or any other private/ public organization, the proposed authority
should be empowered to take strong action immediately. The Committee also recommends
that creation of database on existence of heritage buildings/monuments/ancient sites should
be completed in a time bound manner and progress in the matter should be informed to this
Committee at the earliest. Further, efforts should be made separately to identify the
potential ones for declaring them as protected. A comprehensive assessment of preservation
works should also be done. (Para 28)
The Committee also understands that creation of mechanisms under the provisions
of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remain (Amendment and Validation)
Act, 2010 has been very slow so far. The Committee earlier had asked the Ministry about
it but was not informed about the efforts made in this regard and the reasons for delay.
The Committee would again like to remind the Ministry about the para 42 of 192 nd Report
and recommend to be proactive for putting the required mechanism in place at the earliest
in order to save our ancient sites/monuments and the Ministry may also apprise the
Committee about it through an explanatory note. (Para 29)
Framing of new Conservation Preservation Policy
The Committee further notes that the 90 years old John & Marshall guidelines for
preservation of monuments are still followed in India whereas new conservation and
preservation policy has not taken shape so far. The Committee reiterates its
recommendation that the Government must frame new updated conservation policy
incorporating latest technology and practices for monuments preservation across the
country, on priority. (Para 30)
CHAPTER-II
Issues pertaining to National Museum
However, the Committee feels that still much has been left to be done. On the basis
of the reply received from the Ministry vide OM No. F 4-7 /2010 - M- I (voI.II), dated
21.12.2012 the Committee would like to make further observations on the following:
(i) Closure of Galleries - The Committee appreciates the work completed by the
Ministry. It hopes that the renovation work of Manuscripts Gallery might have
been undertaken as the due dates of opening of CAA and Decorative Art
Gallery have since been completed.
(ii) Museums Reforms - The Committee notes and appreciates the Action Taken
Report on the 14 points/issues listed for Museum Reforms (Annexure-I). It
would be glad if the same pace of momentum for the reforms is continued in
future.
(iii) Extra space with the Museum - The Committee feels that extra space should
be made available with the Museum so that whenever renovation work of
galleries are undertaken, display items could be relocated.

16
(iv) Maintenance of National Museum - The Committee further recommends that
thorough checks for leakages may be carried out regularly and in case of their
being noticed; they should be attended to promptly. Latest position may be
obtained from the Ministry regarding building maintenance, civil and electric
work.
(v) Museum Security - The Committee notes that despite the recommendations
made in 167
th and 179 th Reports, no satisfactory reply has been received from
the Ministry of Culture. Nothing has been mentioned by the Ministry about the
upgradation of security gadgets of the Museum and the financial implications/
concurrences for such installations.
(vi) Display of Exhibits and its publicity - The Committee appreciates the display
percentage of the National Museum. It needs to be increased further in order
to bring it at par with other internationally acclaimed Museums. The
Committee feels that it could not be done without the resumption of Phase-III
work. The Committee is receiving some argument for a long time that the
Phase-III construction of National Museum would commence only after the
vacation of ASI premises.
(vii) Promotional measures to increase footfall - The Committee recommends that
apart from print-media, other publicity avenues like, FM radio, Notice-Board,
electronic-media, etc., which are easily accessible to the common people may
also be explored. To encourage maximum foot fall of younger generation,
student concession tickets and summer-holiday rebates should also be
introduced.
(viii) Resumption of Art Acquisition Committee - The Committee recommends that
the Art Acquisition Committee should start functioning at the earliest and they
should also take note of the latest acquisitions. It does not know how long it
is going to take more for doing this.
(ix) Verification of collections - Almost a decade has passed since the last
verification was done. The Committee is aghast to note that it is yet not done.
The Ministry may impress upon the experts to hold verification urgently.
(x) Digitization - Out of the 2,06,000 collections only 150 artifacts could be
digitized which is a very small number. The Committee recommends that more
digitization should be done.
(xi) Organizational Structure of the National Museum - Efforts made by the
Ministry has been noted by the Committee. The Ministry of Culture ought to
work out an amicable solution to improve the organisational structure while
retaining creative independence of institution.
(xii) Action on the Goswamy Committee Report - The Committee does not find the
reply convincing and disapproves the ad-hoc solutions found by the Ministry in
giving contractual appointments. The Committee may be apprised of the
activities suggested by the Museum Advisory Board for the National Museum
and the action taken so far for effective functioning of the National Museum.
The work is pending since long time. Museum Advisory Boards decisions on
Gallery renovation and formation of experts’ body should also be submitted to
this Committee.
(Para 31)

17
Chapter-III
Important Issues Extracted from Previous Reports of the Committee
Provision of Adequate Funds
Although the Ministry has been receiving increased budgetary allocation, still it is far
less than what actually was required. The Committee strongly feels that given the gigantic
dimension and importance of the task under taken by the Ministry, particularly the ASI,
the amount allocated is not adequate. Hence, the Committee has been recommending every
year for more allocation to the Ministry of Culture lest many of its important activities
would suffer. The Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission should not have “One-size fit
all” attitude for all the Ministries while making budgetary allocations. The Committee
recommends that the non-utilization of funds due to the hostile weather and season may
be considered as a special case and ensure that allocations of the Ministry of Culture are
not reduced at R.E. stage. (Para 34)
Regarding Proper Utilisation of Funds
The Committee would like to refer to para 22 of the 192
nd Report and to point out
the under-utilization of funds observed under the heads- Archaeology, Archives and Archival
Libraries, museums, Public Libraries and International Cultural relations. The Committee
finds a dichotomy between the Ministry’s claim of spending more than 90% during the last
many years and reporting under utilization in the areas which constitute a large share in
the ministry’s allocation. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Culture will have to make more sincere efforts to maximize its expenditure, at least before
the review of the R.E. allocations begins. Under utilization/savings will certainly impinge
upon regular flow and increase of allocation to the Ministry. (Para 35)
Creation of a non-lapsable fund from out of collection on entry tickets
The Committee has been making a strong case for allocating the fund raised on the
entry tickets to ASI to be used for the conservation, protection, preservation, etc. of our
monuments. The Committee has strongly recommended to the Ministry of Finance to
appreciate the importance of our heritage and allow the amounts collected out of entry fee
at monuments to be kept/ utilized by the ASI for its activities and it should be made a non-
lapsable fund. The matter be pursued at apex level and the response of Ministry of Finance
should be informed to the Committee. The recommendation made at para 37 of 192
nd Report
may be implemented in earnest spirit. (Para 36)
The Committee also notes that the ASI undertakes major activities only after
monsoon. Therefore, the allocations made for conservation and preservation activities
should be non-lapsable. The Committee recommends that the fund allocated to A.S.I. need
to be permanently given a special status by the Ministry of Finance so as to make it non-
lapsable. (Para 37)
Requirement of Trained Man-Power and Creation of a Culture Cadre
The Committee strongly recommends that timely steps should be taken to recruit
the staff as per requirement. It also observes that most major organisations like ASI,
National Museum, National Library are headed by the people who have little experience and
knowledge about how to manage Arts and Culture. Many of them lack professionalism

18
required for the field. The Committee has over the years found that our premier cultural
institutions such as National Museum, Delhi, ASI, and Lalit Kala Academy are headed by
officers from the Ministry. It appears that a situation is allowed deliberately to be created
where an officer from the Ministry has to head it and again such a position is allowed to
be continued for a long time on one pretext or the other. While there might be genuine
reason sometimes to do so but, it sends a very wrong signal which vitiates everything in
the cultural field. (Para 40)
The Committee feels that a cultural cadre distinct from the regular administrative
cadre needs to be created to man the functioning of the Akademis, Museums and other
cultural institutions. This should consist of individuals who may be ‘generalists in the arts’.
Courses would have to be introduced for educating them in the arts to make them
conversant with different forms of theatre, dance, music, poetry and literature, painting,
sculpture and architecture courses created under the Ministries of HRD and Culture to
produce right kind of persons to administer our cultural institutions in a better way. The
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should seriously consider the creation of
cultural cadre on the above lines. These organisations require specific domain knowledge
and therefore instead of a generalist, a specialist should be appointed. The Committee, in
this regard, reminds the Ministry about Para 37 of the 201 st Report to create culture cadre
for filling up such posts. (Para 41)
Encroachments, unauthorized occupation and illegal construction in and around monuments/
heritage sites
The Committee is surprised to note that a staggering number of 1593 demolition
notices/ orders have been issued in this regard. The Committee in para 41 of its 192
nd
Report has pointed out about apathy of the civic authorities, local Police and other agencies
in the matter. ASI has no power to ensure compliance for such orders from them. Even
court orders were also ignored at times. The Committee is aware that encroachments,
unauthorized occupation and illegal construction near our monuments is a problem about
which we have not been able to do much so far. The Committee feels that possibility of a
nexus between the vested interests, private parties and civic and police authorities cannot
be ruled out in this context. Defacing of our national monuments is another serious
problem. Therefore, strong action should be taken against not only the encroachers/
offenders but also the agencies/officials of the concerned departments if these do not obey/
co-operate. The Committee may be informed about the efforts made and responses of the
concerned authorities in this regard. (Para 43)
Need for Increasing the Number of Monuments under the Protection of ASI
The Committee also feels that number of protected monuments under the ASI at
present is far too less and lakhs of our ancient monuments are languishing. As a result,
large numbers of them have either vanished or encroached or illegally occupied. The
Committee emphasizes the urgent need to bring most of them under protected category.
Therefore, as mentioned at para 29 of the 192
nd Report, the Committee again strongly
recommends that number of protected monuments should be increased on priority and in
a phased manner for which we should have a roadmap and realistic allocation of funds
required. (Para 44)
Co-ordination with States
Numerous monuments are scattered all over the country which require archaeological

19
protection. For that we will have to take State on board, who it appears are not able to pay
required attention to this aspect. The Committee is of the view that our National Policy
must provide adequate emphasis on this aspect to make conservation and protection as a
joint effort with adequate financial and other support for the culture as mentioned at para
30 of the 192
nd Report. (Para 45)
Preparation of dossiers sent to UNESCO with adequate care
The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that the dossiers sent to the
UNESCO for including our Heritage sites in the List of World Heritage Sites are generally
found not to be in order. As a result, these are sent back for corrections, etc. This has
happened several times in respect of our different sites. The Committee has taken up this
issue earlier also with the Ministry and had expressed its concern about this. It feels that
with the kind of vast technical and other expertise that we have in this regard, we are
unable to present our case properly to the UNESCO. It appears we do not do our homework
seriously and send dossiers to UNESCO casually. It is alleged that dossiers are deliberately
not processed properly for unknown reasons. It is a serious matter that our dossiers have
been returned several times. The Committee recommends that a “Dossiers Committee”
should be constituted comprising eminent persons from relevant areas as well as other
professionals for the purpose so that Nation does not have to hear again about our proposals
being returned. The para 45 of the 192
nd Report may be referred to in this regard.
(Para 46)
The Committee in this context would like to site the case of Majuli Island, Assam,
which was recommended by the Ministry for being adopted by UNESCO as a World Heritage
Site. But the said request was returned by the World Heritage Centre (WHC) in March 2012
as it was not complete and not according to the Guidelines framed by WHC. (Para 47)
The Committee also learnt that the Government of NCT of Delhi has submitted the
detailed dossier to nominate Delhi as a world Heritage City to the UNESCO. In view of this,
the Committee recommends that this may be pursued more seriously. A co-ordinated and
holistic approach is required to conserve the cultural heritage of this ancient city instead
of adopting an isolated monument by monument approach. (Para 48)
Requirement to strengthen all wings of ASI
The Committee emphasizes the urgent need for strengthening of all wings of
Archaeological Survey of India like Monument, Conservation, Exploration and Excavation,
Epigraphy, Chemistry, etc. due to increase in the quantum as well as nature of these works.
The Committee observes that the workload of Horticulture Wing has increased manifold
with the increase in number of gardens under maintenance from 100 to 500 with no
corresponding increase in the manpower. As a result, sites, monuments, etc. are not being
properly maintained and landscaped. Their upkeep is generally not upto the mark. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a commensurate increase in the
workforce engaged in all the Departments of ASI, particularly in Horticulture for
showcasing our heritage sites. The Committee also recommends that vacancies at all levels
should be filled up on priority and revival of posts whenever necessary also be expedited
with the Ministry of Finance. It is taking lot of time. The Committee desires the Ministry
to keep it informed about the recommendations of the Manpower Management and Planning
Consultants and status of its implementation. The Committee’s recommendation at Para 50
of 192
0d Report in this regard may also be referred to. (Para 49)

ANNEXURE

23
ANNEXURE -I
Vide para 31(ii) of the Report
Action Taken Report on 14 Issues Listed for Museum Reforms
(1) Collection and Stores Management
In this connection, in order to develop adequate storage facilities, space would be available,
after the Phase-III of the National Museum is constructed, which is expected to take-off in the
beginning of 2013, since it is expected that the ASI would vacate the space by end of 2012.
As regards the control of atmospheric heat, dust and humidity, a proposal for replacement
of AHU of central plant of Air Conditioning of the Phase I of the National Museum has been
received from the CPWD. The same has been processed in the file for approval.
(2) Proper/Scientific Display of Artefacts
Display in the Gallery of the National Museum has been done scientifically and the display
techniques are upgraded on professional lines whenever a Gallery is renovated. During the process,
modernisation of lighting is ensured. Periodically display materials are also circulated. For instance,
the lighting arrangements in the Decorative Art gallery and Wooden Carvings Gallery are modern
with LED lights. Similar lighting arrangements will be provided in the renovated gallery of Tanjore
paintings for which the study on the effect of new lighting is in progress.
(3) Information, Signages, Floor Plans and Visitor Facilities
In the Tanjore and Mysore School Gallery, attractive digital shows have been provided.
Brochure and Portfolio on Tanjore Paintings are being printed. Comfortable benches and resting
places at various places in the Museum and inside the Galleries have been provided. Pure drinking
water and toilet facilities have been provided to the visitors. Enthusiastic volunteers as Museum
assistants have been provided to guide visitors.
(4) Museum Shops and Souvenirs
The Souvenir Shop of National Museum is managed by a public sector undertaking under
the Ministry of Textiles “The Handicrafts and Handloom Exports Corporation of India Ltd”. The
PSU has been requested to take further necessary action to promote its products “as suggested by
the Department related Parliamentary Committee.
(5) Multi–Media, Audio Visual and Guide Facilities
The tender process has been finalized and work has been awarded for redesigning of
National Museum website. The redesigning is expected to be finalized and the new website will be
uploaded shortly.
As part of digitization of artifacts for virtual guide, Google Art Project has been
implemented and uploaded. The arrangement is as per MoU signed between National Museum and
M/s Google India for virtual move around the Museum Galleries. As part of the digitization process,

24
the re-designed website of the Museum is under finalization and which will be online with in a
fortnight’s time.
A tender for multimedia Audio visual guiding system for the visitors is almost final and has
been submitted to Ministry of Culture/IFD for financial concurrence.
The Tanjour Gallery which is being modernized has an LCD panel to display digitized the
artifacts/paintings of this gallery. When other galleries are renovated similar LCD panel would be
implemented.
(6) Attract Various Audience Segments, including Students/Children
Workshop on Arts and Crafts entitled ‘Know your Museum’ is being organised every year
during the Summer Holidays for the School Children. About 1000 children participated for this
programme during 2012.
As ‘Out-reach’ programmes for different segments, painting competition for school children
at Government Museum, Jhansi was organised. Also the National Museum set up the first Museum
Corner in a Government Sarvodaya Vidyalaya, New Delhi. The National Museum organised the
photographic exhibition on Ramayana Paintings at Government Museum, Jhansi.
The National Museum has also organised interactive programme for the School children in
the Museum and organised a workshop. Gifts were distributed to the children.
Free guided tours to the galleries, film shows in the auditorium and special educational tours
were arranged for school and college students· in the National Museum. Free bus facilities were
also provided to MCD/NDMC school students and to the disadvantaged groups settled at J.J.
Clusters.
Workshop and Cultural show entitled ‘Evolution of hope for special children’ was
conducted by National Museum Institute, and National Museum, New Delhi for the students of
Central Institute on Mental Retardation, Thiruvananthapuram on 4 and 5 August 2011.
(7) Image Buidling, Publicity and Cultural Events
The National Museum celebrates cultural world days viz. International Museum Daytou
18 May and advertisements are given in the leading Newspapers regarding special programmes-Gallery
talks, special film shows, etc. being organised on the day. Also International Women’s Day is organised
on 08 March every year and on this day, cultural activities specific to Women are organised. On these
occasions, attractive advertisements and informed articles are published in the media.
(8) Visiting and Travelling Exhibitions
The following exhibitions were mounted/organised:
● The Archaeological Survey of India has organized an exhibition entitled ‘Treasures of
Ancient China’ in the National Museum w.e.f. February 19 to March 20, 2011.The
National Museum had provided logistic support.
● An exhibition entitled ‘1100 – 1900: the 40 greatest masters of Indian Paintings’ sent
to Museum Rietberg, Zurich, Switzerland, inaugurated on April, 30, 2011 and was on
show till August 21, 2011. Thereafter, it had been shifted to Metropolitan Museum of
Art, New York, USA and was on show w.e.f. September 26, 2011 to January 8, 2012.
● An exhibition entitled ‘Paintings Past and Present’; w.e.f.  April 09-30, 2011,
inaugurated by Dr. Karan Singh.

25
● An exhibition entitled ‘Soul Survivors-Portraits of Tribals from the Apatani Tribe of
Arunachal Pradesh the Konyak tribe of Nagaland and nomads from South-West Tibet’,
w.e.f. May 4-31, 2011.
● An exhibition entitled ‘Croatian Monuments on ‘UNESCO List of World Heritage Sites
Inaugurated by the Hon’ble Minister of Culture on August 19, 2011 and was on show
till September 4, 2011.
● An exhibition entitled Anugunj, in collaboration with Indira Gandhi  Rashtria Manav
Sanagrahalaya w.e.f. September 15 to October 29, 2011
❖ In frequent intervals the National Museum, New Delhi announces its ‘Gallery of  the month’
as well as ‘Object of the Month’
(9) Expansion and Acquisition of Collections
Due to shortage of space acquisition of Collections in the National Museum has been
temporarily discontinued. The same will be resumed after the Phase-III of the National Museum
is constructed, which is expected to start in 2013, after vacation of space by ASI.
(10) Professional Development of Museum Personnel.
There is a continuous effort on professional development of Museum Professionals in their
respective fields. For instance, two curatorial officers of the National Museum was deputed for
Leadership Training Programme during January – May, 2012 at Delhi, London and Mumbai. In
addition, two deputy curators of the National Museum have been deputed for capacity building
training programmed at Victoria and Albert Museum, London in June-July, 2012. The process is a
continuous one.
(11) Implementation of Plan Schemes and special projects
At present plan schemes and special projects are implemented and efforts are taken to fully
utilize the funds. Wherever required works are assigned/outsourced to Museum professionals. For
instance Dr. Nasim Akhtar was invited to Decipher the Persian/Arabic inscriptions on the 80 objects
in the Decorate Arts Department and transcribing into English. Similarly Dr. Mathur, Former
Assistant Director of the National Museum has been assigned the work of editing for National
Museum website.
As part of private public partnership the Souvenir Shop of National Museum is managed by
a public sector undertaking under the Ministry of Textiles “The Handicrafts & Handloom Exports
Corporation of India Ltd”. The PSU has been requested to take further necessary action to promote
its products.
(12) Security: Modern Techniques
As part of upgradation of Security Gadgets process for purchase/replacement of outdated
security gadgets numbering about 154 fixed colour cameras and the requisite number of LCD’s
monitor and other related security gadgets, two x-ray baggage and 04 DFMD’s is under finalization.
As soon as the proposal is approved the security gadgets the National Museum will be upgraded.
(13) Conservation and Restoration
Conservation Laboratory of the National Museum is as old as National Museum and is
responsible for conservation/restoration/documentation and technical study of Art Objects housed in

26
the National Museum. Since its inception Laboratory is regularly upgraded to meet conservation
requirement of Art objects, for this purpose proper lighting arrangements being made and mini
exhaust fumes were installed for extracting fumes emitted by chemicals and solvents. Frequently
choking drainage system in laboratory· is replaced by new drainage line. Various equipments were
also procured which are to be utilized in conservation and analysis of art objects these includes
ultrasonic cleaner, UV Monitor and X-Ray Florescence etc. Since upgradation is continuous process
equipments and tools are being procured as per requirement of laboratory.
In house capacity for conservation/restoration of Art objects is regularly enhanced/up to
dated by imparting training to staff in training courses being conducted by the Laboratory and other
institutions. In three months training course on conservation of art objects which is being run by
laboratory since 1967 on different Museum objects, one or two staff members are regularly
included in training course so as to trained them in conservation of different objects.
In the past some staff members were trained at Rome Centre of ICCROM, Germany and
U.K. Since in this modern era the concept of Conservation Techniques are changing very fast
hence there is need to upgrade the knowledge in the field. This is being done by attending
workshop/seminars/conferences and interacting with fellow professionals in the field. However, for
advance training staff members may be deputed abroad to learn latest techniques in conservation
and on their return the techniques can be taught to fellow beings. As and when seminar/workshops
on conservation of art objects being held in India by ICCROM and ICOM and other foreign
institution it is always being participated by conservator of Laboratory to learn latest techniques in
Conservation.
Conservation Laboratory is regularly organizing three months training course on
conservation of Museum objects since 1967 on rotation basis which is being participated by staff
of smaller museum all over the country, thus the knowledge being acquired by the staff of
conservation laboratory is being dispensed among the staff of smaller museum throughout the
country. Laboratory also give the technical advice to smaller Museums for up keeping of their art
objects, it has carried conservation of art objects/paintings of different institution/organization such
as Rashtrapati Bhawan, Parliament House, Prime Minister Office, Poundichery Museum, Shri Chitta
Art Gallery (Trivendrum) etc.
The National Museum Laboratory houses the Secretariat Office of Indian Association for the
study of conservation of cultural property since 1966 it help in publishing of journal of IASC –
Conservation of Cultural Property. Staff of Laboratory is regularly publishing papers in this journal
of IASC. The journal is published every year on different topic on conservation.
Conservation Laboratory is regularly organizing workshops/seminars throughout the country
on care and preventive conservation of art objects. Laboratory have organized workshops in Leh
and North Eastern Region of the country to exchange the opinion amongst conservator and arose
the public awareness towards the need of conservation of cultural property. Through these seminar/
workshop stake holder are given practical trainings how to take care of art objects.
14) Interactions with Academics, Archaeologists and Artists
Mrs. Chhaya Bhattacharya-Haesner, Prof. Sadashiv V . Gorakshkar, Shri I.D. Mathur and
Dr. Daljeet have been engaged/associated for expert advice and allied technical advices on various issues
relating to the National Museum viz. Gallery renovations, publication of portfolio, digitisation, etc.
National Museum experts/Curators have been giving technical advice to different museums
in India with regard to setting up of Museums, other related issues. Also the Curators of National
Museum are giving academic lectures in the Museum as well as other academic instructions like
CCRT, NIFT, MAI, etc.

27
27
ANNEXURE -II
Vide para 42 of the Report
List of Centrally Protected Monuments under Encroachment
Sl. No. Name of Monument/Site Locality/District
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh (Hyderabad Circle)
1. 1. Golkonda Fort Hyderabad
2. Assam (Guwahati Circle)
2. 1. Sri Suryapahar Ruins Distt. Goalpara
3. 2. Rock-cut Caves Jogighopa, Distt. Bongaigaon,
4. 3. Cachari Ruins Khaspur, Distt. Cachar
5. 5. Kedar Temple, Hajo Kamrup
6. 6. Ganesh Temple, Hajo Kamrup
3. Bihar (Patna Circle)
7. 1. Sher Shah Tomb Sasaram
8. 2. Buddhist Stupa Kesaria, Distt. Champaran
9. 3. Hasan Shah Suri’ s Tomb Sasaram, Rohtas
10. 4. Ashokan Pillar and Excavated Remains Kolhua, Muzaffarpur
4. Chhattisgarh (Raipur Circle)
11. 1. Danteswari temple Dantewada  Distt.
12. 2. Chaiturgarh Fort Lepha, Distt.Korba
13. 3. Kotmi Fort Kotmi, Bilaspur
14. 4. Area around Sirpur Village and the mound Sirpur
15. 5. Temples (Ruined) Gatora, Bilaspur
16. 6. Malhar Fort Malhar, District Bilaspur
17. 7. Shiva Temple Belpan, District Bilaspur
5. Gujarat (Vadodara Circle)
18. 1. Malik Alam’ s Mosque Ahmedabad,
19. 2. Saiyed Usman Mosque Ahmedabad Usmanpura/Ahmedabad

28
12 3
20. 3. Small Stone Mosque, Ahmedabad Paldi/Ahmedabad
21. 4. Dariyakhan Tomb, Ahmedabad Back of Dudheshwar/Ahmedabad
22. 5. Achyut Bibi’ s Mosque, Ahmedabad Dudheshwar/Ahmedabad
23. 6. Khawaja Dana Saheb Dargah Surat
24. 7. Ancient Site Gohilwad Timbo Amreli Distt.
25. 8. Ruined Hindu temple and Jain Temples on the Pavagadh/Godhra-Panchmahal
top of Hill
26. 9. Nawab Sardar Khan Roza with its compound Jamalpur/Ahmedabad
Wall
27. 10.  Mir Abu Turab  Tomb, Ahmedabad Jamalpur/Ahmedabad
28. 11. Ram  Laxman Temple, Baradia Baradia/Distt. Jamnagar
29. 12. Shah Kupai Masjid, Ahmedabad Karian Khas Bazar/Ahmedabad
30. 13. Caves at Talaja and Jaina Temples Talaja, District Bhavnagar
6. Haryana (Chandigarh Circle)
31. 1. Ancient Site, Ther Mo und, Sirsa Sirsa
32. 2. Mosque of Sarai of Ali Vardi Khan Gurgaon
33. 3. Two Gateways of Mughal Sarai, Gharaunda Karnal
34. 4. Prithviraj Chauhan’s Fort Hansi,District Hissar
35. 5. Ancient Site, Rakhigarhi Hissar
36. 6. Buria Kal Nala Faridabad
37. 7. Raja Harsh Ka Tila Kurukshetra
38. 8. Kos Minar 22, Palwal Palwal
39. 9. Ancient Site, Khokrakot
40. 10. Ancient Site Theh Polar, District Kaithal
41. 11. Ancient Site Naurangabad, Bhiwani
42. 12. Kos Minar Sector 35, Faridabad
7. Himachal Pradesh (Shimla Circle)
43. 1. Gauri Shankar Temple Naggar, Tehsil-Kullu, District-
Kullu
44. 2. Nurpur Fort Nurpur
8. Jammu and Kashmir (Mini Circle Leh)
45. 1. Hemis Monastery Hemis, district Leh

29
12 3
46. 2. Phyang Monastery Phyang, district Leh
47. 3. Likir Monastery District Leh
48. 4. Lamayuru Monastery Lamayuru, district Leh
49. 5. Rock-cut sculpture of Maitreya Mulbeg, district Kargil
50. 6. Buddhist Monastery Alchi, Ladakh J&K State
51. 7. Shey Palace Shey, Ladakh
9. Karnataka (Dharwad Circle)
52. 1. Ali Shaheed Peer Mosque Bijapur (East)
53. 2. Allahpur Gate Bijapur (East)
54. 3. Ambar Khan Bijapur (East)
55. 4. Badi Kaman Bijapur (East)
56. 5. Bahumani Gate Bijapur (East)
57. 6. Bathulla Khan's Mosque Bijapur (East)
58. 7. Fort Wall (from Managoli gate to Bahumani Bijapur (East)
Gate)
59. 8. Golgumbaz and other structures within the Bijapur (East)
protected area
60. 9.  Haji Hassan Saheb's tomb Bijapur (East)
61. 10. Managoli Gate or Fateh Gate Bijapur (East)
62. 11. Moats of the Fort wall (from Bahumani gate Bijapur (East)
to Mangoli gate)
63. 12.  Mubarak Khan Mahal Bijapur (East)
64. 13. Mustafa Bad Gun Bijapur (East)
65. 14. Mustafa Khan Mosque Bijapur (East)
66. 15. Nagthan Gate Bijapur (East)
67. 16. Nov Gumbaz Bijapur (East)
68. 17. Padshapur Gate Bijapur (East)
69. 18. Water Pavilion to the North of Mubarak Bijapur (East)
Khan’s mosque
70. 19. Water tower No. 114 with inscriptions to the Bijapur (East)
south of Asar Mahal
71. 20. Water tower No. 115 to the south of Chinch Bijapur (East)
Didi Mosque

30
12 3
72. 21. Water tower No. 142 to the north west of Nav Bijapur (East)
Gumbaz and to the west of Kawas Khan's Mahal
73. 22. Water tower No. 147 to the south of Badi Bijapur (East)
Kaman
74. 23. Water Tower No. 286 to the North East Bijapur (East)
of Mecca Masjid
75. 24. Sanda Burz Bijapur (West)
76. 25. Shapur Gate Bijapur (West)
77. 26. Jorapur Gate Bijapur (West)
78. 27. Mecca Gate Bijapur (West)
79. 28. Gun Farangi Shahiburz Bijapur (West)
80. 29. Sarwad Mosque Bijapur (West)
81. 30. Landa Khasba Gun Bijapur (West)
82. 31. Small Pavilion in front of Asar Mahal Bijapur (West)
83. 32. Water Pavilion Bijapur (West)
84. 33. Arquilla Moat Bijapur (West)
85. 34. Chinch Didi Mosque Bijapur (West)
86. 35. Andu Masjid Bijapur (West)
87. 36. Ibrahim Old Jami Mosque Bijapur (West)
88. 37. Gummat Bavdi Bijapur (West)
89. 38. Sikandar Shah Tomb Bijapur (West)
90. 39. Yakub Dabuli Mahal (30) Bijapur (West)
91. 40. Ikhlaskhan Mosque Bijapur (West)
92. 41. Shah Nawazkhan’s Mosque/tomb Bijapur (West)
93. 42. Moti Darga (Mahal) Bijapur (West)
94. 43. Hyderkhan's tomb Bijapur (West)
95. 44. Nityanavarasa Mosque Bijapur (West)
96. 45. Tomb No. 47 Bijapur (West)
97. 46. Suneri Masjid Bijapur (West)
98. 47. Tomb No. 22 near Chand Bavadi Bijapur (West)
99. 48. Masjid Katijapur Bijapur (West)

31
12 3
100. 49. Aqueduct running from Bhat Bavadi South West Bijapur (West)
of Torvi village to Taj Bavadi
101. 50. Chand Bavadi Bijapur (West)
102. 51. Mulla Mosque Bijapur (West)
103. 52. Zanziri Mosque of Jahan Begaum's Mosque (20) Bijapur (West)
104. 53. Malik Sandal Mosque Bijapur (West)
105. 54. Fort Gulbarga
106. 55. Khan Jahan Barid tombs Bidar
107. 56. Bidar Fort (Inner and outer) Bidar
Bangalore Circle (Karnataka)
108. 57. 1. Gowrishwara Temple Chamanarajanagar, Yelandur
10. Kerala (Trissur Circle)
109. 1.St. Angelo Fort Kannur
110. 2. Fort Palakkad
111. 3. Bekal Fort Pallikkare, Pallikkare Panchayat,
Kasargod
11. Madhya Pradesh (Bhopal Circle)
112. 1. Gond Fort called Satkhanda and the tower Mandla, Distt. Mandla (Mandla)
on Rajghat called Shahburz and the Temples
therein
113. 2. Pre-Historic Rock Shelters at Bhimbetka Distt. Raisen
12. Maharashtra (Aurangabad Circle)
114. 1. Kotla of Twelve Imams Ahmednagar
115. 2. Mucca Masjid Ahmednagar
116. 3. Ancient site locally known as Ladmod Newasa, Ahmednagar
117. 4. Ancient Site at Paithan Paithan, Distt. Aurangabad
118. 5. Ellora Caves Ellora, Distt. Aurangabad
119. 6. Grishneshwar Temple Ellora, Distt. Aurangabad
120. 7. Devi Temple at Patna Patna Distt. Jalgaon
121. 8. Balapur Fort Balapur, Distt. Akola
122. 9. Anchaleshwar T emple Chandrapur
123. 10. Mahakali Temple Cha ndrapur

32
12 3
124. 11. T emple of Shiva on further side of the stream At-Parner, Distt.- Ahmednagar
at Parner
125. 12. Siddheshwar Mahadeo Temple At Kaigaontoka, Ahmednagar
126. 13. Ancient Site and remains at Tekwada Jalgaon
127. 14. Group of temple at Markandadeo Gadchiroli
128. 15. Trimbakeshwar Temple Nashik
129. 16. Mathichi Ghadi Nashik
130. 17. Siddeshwar Mahadev Temple, at Vaghli, Jalgaon
Dist-Jalgaon
131. 18. Caves and T emple at Harishchandragad Ahmednagar
Mumbai Circle (Maharashtra)
132. 19. 1. Sholapur Fort Distt. Sholapur
133. 20. 2. Ardhanari Nateshwar Temple Velapur, Distt. Sholapur
134. 21. 3. Raigad Fort Distt. Raigad
135. 22. 4. Kolaba Fort Alibag, Distt. Raigad
136. 23. 5. Mound locally known as Sonar Bhat Nalasopra (Gas), Distt. Thane
137. 24. 6. Group of monuments, Agarkot Distt. Raigad
138. 25. 7. Jageshwari Caves Distt. Mumbai Suburban
139. 26. 8. Ancient site at Brahampuri Distt. Kolhapur
140. 27. 9. Bhuleshwar Mahadev Temple Malsiras, Distt.Pune
141. 28. 10. Hirakot Old Fort Alibag Distt. Raigad
142. 29. 11. Bassein Fort Vasai, Distt. Thane
143. 30. 12. Portuguese Monastery over the cave and Distt. Mumbai, Suburban
Large Watch Tower on the Adjoining Hill,
Mandapeshwar
13. Delhi (Delhi Circle)
144. 1. Nili Masjid, Hauz Khas Hauz Khas
145. 2. Ancient Mosque, Palam Palam
146. 3. Qudasia Mosque, Qudasia Garden Qudasia Garden
147. 4. Sunehri Masjid near Red Fort, Delhi Fort Near Red Fort, Delhi Fort
148. 5. Purana Qila (Indraprastha), Two miles south (Indraprastha), Two miles
south
149. 6. Tughluqabad, Badarpur Zail Badarpur

33
12 3
150. 7. Begumpuri Masjid and Bijai Mandal Begumpur
151. 8. Sarai Shahji, Near Shivalik Malviya Nagar Malviya Nagar
152. 9. Rajpur (Mutiny Cemetery), Old Rajpur Old Rajpur Cantonment
Cantonment, North District
153. 10. D’Eremao Cemetery Kishangaj
154. 11. T omb of Razia Begum in Mohalla Bulbuli Kha na, Sahajahanabad
Sahajahanabad
155. 12. Bijay Mandal neighbouring domes, buildings and Begumpur
dalan in village Kalusarai to north of Begumpur
14. Odisha (Bhubaneshwar Circle)
156. 1. Barabati Fort Cuttack
157. 2. Khandagiri Hill Bhubaneswar
158. 3. Sisupalgarh Bhubaneswar
159. 4. Choudwar Fort Cuttack
15. Punjab (Chandigarh Circle)
160. 1. Bhatinida Fort Bhatinda
161. 2.  Mound known as Mud fort Abohar, Distt. Firozpur
162. 3. Summer Palace of Maharaja Ranjit Singh, Amritsar
Company Bagh
163. 4. Noor Mahal, Sarai Jalandhar
164. 5. Ancient Site, Naggar Jalandhar
16. Rajasthan (Jaipur Circle)
165. 1. Chittourgarh Fort Chittourgarh
166. 2. Ra nthombhor Fort Ranthombhor
167. 3. Kumbhalgarh Fort Rajsamand
168. 4. Shiv Temple at Charchoma Kota
169. 5. Saraj Sadulla, Bayana Bharatpur
170. 6. Lal Mahal Roopwas, Bharatpur
171. 7. Delhi Gate Ajmer
172. 8. Babars Garden Jhor, District Dholpur
173. 9. Sheargarh Fort Dholpur
174. 10. Ancient Mound Bhadrakali Hanumangarh

34
12 3
175. 11. Ancient Mound Badopal, Hanumangarh
176. 12. Temple containing Fresco Paintings Galtaji, Jaipur
177. 13. Ancient Site Lodruva Patan Jaisalmer
178. 14. Kalapahar Todaraisingh Dist. Tonk
179. 15. Ancient Mound Bharatpur
17. Tamil Nadu (Chennai Circle)
180. 1. Megalithic Site, Thirupporur Kanchipuram District
18. Tripura (Guwahati Circle)
181. 1. T emple of Chaturdasa Devata Udaipur, Distt. South Tripura
19. Uttar Pradesh (Agra Circle)
182. 1. Burhiya ka Tal Itimadpur, Agra
183. 2. Jama Masjid Itimadpur, Agra
184. 3. Jama Masjid Agra
185. 4. Excavated sites Kankali Tila, Mathura
186. 5. Kota Mound Mathura
187. 6. Gate way and Sarai, Ekdil Etawah
188. 7. Mosque and Sarai Khudagunj, Farrukhabad
189. 8. Mound known as old fort of Kannauj Kannauj
190. 9. Mound known as Lakha Mandap, Barnawa Baraut, Bagpat, Distt. Baghpat
191. 10. Kha nquah Fatehpur Sikri Agra
192. 11. Khatia Khana, Fatehpur Sikri Agra
193. 12. Fort wall near Lal Darwaza Fatehpur Sikri Agra
194. 13. Jagner Fort Agra
195. 14. Fortified Sarai with all its walls and gateways, Mathura
Kosi
196. 15. Khera ki Bandi, Old Cemetery Lodhipur, Saharanpur
Lucknow Circle (Uttar Pradesh)
197. 16. 1. Small high mound at Bara Allahabad
198. 17. 2. Ruined fort of Samudra-Gupta and Hansagupta Allahabad
at Jhunsi
199. 18. 3. Tomb of Solar Saifud-din Bahraich
200. 19. 4. Tomb of Rajab Salar Alias Hatila Salar Bahraich

35
12 3
201. 20. 5. Jama Masjid Banda
202. 21. 6. Monuments in memory of General White Banda
lock’s force
203. 22. 7.  Extensive brick strewn mound at Asothar Fatehpur
204. 23. 8.  Bagh Badshahi at Khajuha Fatehpur
205. 24. 9. Hathikhana mosque or Jaichnadi mosque at Fatehpur
Hathgaon
206. 25. 10. Circular mound, the site of a temple at Fatehpur
Khairai
207. 26. 11. Tikhariya extensive mound & a group of Fatehpur
Hindu sculptures
208. 27. 12. Kurari Four temple Fatehpur
209. 28. 13. Square sand stone pillar bearing an Fatehpur
inscription Mahipal Deva Samrat dated 974 in
the Municipal Garden attached to the town hall
210. 29.
14. Tomb of Bahu Begum Faizabad
211. 30. 15. Tomb of Shuja-ud-Daula (Gulab Bari) Faizabad
212. 31. 16. Tomb of Hazi Iqbal Faizabad
213. 32. 17. Tomb of Nawab Sadar Jahan at Pihani Hardoi
214. 33. 18. Memorial Tomb at Khasaura Hardoi
215. 34. 19. Gandwa, Brick mound locally called Hardoi
banker garh
216. 35. 20. Jain temple mounds at Sumerpur Hamirpur
217. 36. 21. Panch Mahal complex, Jhansi Fort Jhansi
218. 37. 22. Mound at Bithur Kanpur City
219. 38. 23. Memorial well Garden Kanpur City
220. 39. 24. Subedar Ka Talab Kanpur City
221 40. 25. Three images and a Gupta Pillar in the Kanpur Dehat
compound of a temple at Behta, Ghatampur
222. 41. 26. Bundela temple at Banpur Lalitpur
223. 42. 27. Jain temple at Banpur Lalitpur
224. 43. 28. Large temple in front of Panch Marhia Lalitpur
Madanpur
225. 44. 29. Jain temple and a Torana or gateway at Lalitpur
Siron Khurd

36
12 3
226. 45. 30. Cemetery Kaiser Pasand near Kaiser bagh Lucknow
Bus Stand
227. 46. 31. Kalan-ki-Lat at Amindabad Lucknow
228. 47. 32. British Cemetery at Chiria Jheel at Sapru Lucknow
Marg
229. 48. 33. Two Cemeteries at Lucknow - Faizabad Lucknow
Raod, miles 4.5
230. 49. 34. Tomb of janab-e-Aliya Lucknow
231. 50. 35. Bara Imambare (Asaf-ud-Daula's Imambara) Lucknow
232. 51. 36. Asafi Masjid Lucknow
233. 52. 37. Maqbara Shahnajaf or Tomb of Ghazi-ud-Din Lucknow
Haider
234. 53. 38. Rauza-e-Kazmain/Kazmain building Lucknow
235. 54. 39. Picture gallery Lucknow
236. 55. 40. Jama Masjid at Hussainabad Lucknow
237. 56. 41. Chhota Imambara/tomb of Mahammad Ali Lucknow
Shah
238. 57. 42. Tahsin Ali Masjid Lucknow
239. 58. 43. Amjad Ali Shah’s Mausoleum Lucknow
240. 59. 44. Sher Darawaza/Neil’s Gate Lucknow
241. 60. 45. Kaisarbagh Gate Lucknow
242. 61. 46. General Wali Kothi Lucknow
243. 62. 47. Karbala Talkatora Lucknow
244. 63. 48. Dargah Hazarat Abbas Lucknow
245. 64. 49. Dianut-Daula Karbala Lucknow
246. 65. 50. Malka Jahan Karbala Lucknow
247. 66. 51. Nasir-ud-din Haider's Karbala, Daliganj Lucknow
248. 67. 52. Nagram mound Lucknow
249. 68. 53. Paharnagar Tikuria mound Lucknow
250. 69. 54. Sikehawali Kothi Lucknow
251. 70. 55. Jama Masjid Mahoba
252. 71. 56. Lake of Kirat Sagar Mahoba
253. 72. 57. Lake of Madan Sagar Mahoba

37
12 3
254. 73. 58. Lake of Vijay Sagar Mahoba
255. 74. 59. A flat roofed temple at Urvara Mahoba
256. 75. 60. Large tank at Pathari Kadin Mahoba
257. 76. 61. Isauli Mosque Sultanpur
258. 77. 62. Large Dih called Majhangaon with brick Sultanpur
towers on four comers
259. 78. 63. Mound known at Kutti Satruhan Das Sravasti
260. 79. 64. Small round shaped mound, T andwa Sravasti
261. 80. 65. Tomb of Qurban Mohammed at Banger Mau Unnao
262. 81. 66. Old Nawabi Mosque Ambedkar Nagar
Patna Circle (Uttar Pradesh)
263. 82. 1. Stone Observatory, Man Mahal Varanasi, District- Varanasi
264. 83. 2. Dharahra Masjid Dharahra, District- Varanasi
265. 84. 3. Remains of fine massive brick fort Chandravati, District- Varanasi
266. 85. 4. A large mound of brick ruins Dhanapur, District- Chandauli
267. 86. 5. Tomb of Abhiman Mehnagar, District- Azamgarh
268. 87. 6. Atala Masjid Jaunpur
269. 88. 7. Jama Masjid Jaunpur
270. 89. 8. Lal Masjid (Lal Darwaza) Jaunpur
271. 90. 9. Ancient mound Fazil Nagar, Dist. Kushinagar.
272. 91. 10. Mound of brick ruins called Asmanpur Dih, Dist. Kushinagar
Chetiaon
273. 92. 11. Large flat topped mound of ruins called Chetiaon, Dist. Kushinagar
Dharmatiya
274. 93. 12. Ancient mound of ruins Kakandi-Nagar, Dist.- Deoria.
275. 94. 13. Dih or mound apparently the remains of Tarkulwa, District - Deoria
Buddhist stupa
276. 95. 14. High square shaped mound, Rudrapur Dist.- Deoria.
277. 96. 15. Extensive mound  Sohnag, Dist. - Deoria
20. West Bengal (Kolkata Circle)
278. 1. Clive House Dum Dum, District 24
Parganas

MINUTES

40

41
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 18 th February, 2014 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shri Satish Sharma
8. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
9. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Direrctor
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered
the following draft Reports:
(i) * * *
(ii) 211
th Report on the Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi, National Museum and other
important issues pertaining to the Ministry of Cultures;
(iii) * * *
(iv) * * *
3. The Committee adopted the said reports without any modifications after some discussion and
decided to present/lay the Reports to Parliament on 19
th February, 2014.
4. The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
41
*** Relates to other matters.

42
42
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 (with
evidence)
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence)
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)
LIST OF REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE

43
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 (with evidence)
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence)
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98)
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th January, 1996.

44
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 (with evidence)
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence)
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (1 Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

45
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption From Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.8.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001 (8 Reports)
2002 (7 Reports)

46
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 (with evidence)
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the
country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
2003 (12 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.

47
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 70
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004
2004 (4 Reports)
2004-05 (12 Reports)

48
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 (with evidence)
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
6.12.2004 (RS)
3.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.9.2005
22.2.2006
22.2.2006
22.2.2006
2005-06 (18 Report)

49
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage By Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

50
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India‘
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture.
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.5.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.4.2007
16.4.2007
2006-07 (13 Reports)

51
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006.
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006.
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
16.8.2007
16.8.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (19 Reports)

52
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133rd
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seven teenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

53
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (l0 Reports)

54
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty Ninth Report on Development
of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities
for the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.02.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 03.03.2010
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

55
1
158th
159th
160th
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty First Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament
01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

56
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House of
the Parliament 11.08.2011
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House
of the Parliament on
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
02.04.2012
07.052012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
27.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

57
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India”
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping 2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.052012
07.05.2012
21.052012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11. 2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

58
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One
HundredSeventy-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways-
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
27.02.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

59
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
204th
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 07.08.2013
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 07.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament 17.12.2013
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament 06.02.2014
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
13.01.2014
2013-14 (10 Reports)

60
1
205th
206th
207th
208th
209th
210th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Two Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Third Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninety Fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Fifth Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety First Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Eighth Report on Functioning
of Commission of Railways Safety
4
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
19.02.2014
3
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
18.02.2014
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.