 
DEPARTMENT -
ON TRANSPORT 
 
TWO HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the 
its Two Hundr 
Demands for Grants 
(Pr esented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT , TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2016/ Agrahayana  1938 (Saka) 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FIRST REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
its Two Hundr ed and Thirty Fourth Report on the 
Demands for Grants  (2016-17) of Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways 
 
esented to the Rajya Sabha on   15 th  December, 2016 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 15 th  December, 2016 
 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
(Saka)  
REPORT NO. 
24 1 
EPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Committee contained in 
Report on the  
Road Transport 
December, 2016  ) 
December, 2016  ) 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FIRST REPORT  
ON  
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in its Two Hundred and Thirty Fourth Report on the  
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on   15 th  December, 2016 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  15 th  December, 2016  ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2016/ Agrahayana,  1938 (Saka) 


 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS               (iii)-(iv) 
4. REPORT                                1-             
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS-AT A GLANCE   - 
 6. *MINUTES         - 
7. ANNEXURES        - 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended at printing stage. 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2016-2017) 
(Constituted on 1 st  September, 2016) 
 
1. Shri Mukul Roy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi  
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore  
6. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  
8. Kumari Selja  
9. Shri Rajeev Shukla  
 9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
 10. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi 
12. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
13. Shri Vinod Chavda 
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama  
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
17. Shri P. Kumar  
18. Shri Harish Chandra Meena  
19. Yogi Aditya Nath 
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala  
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey  
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan   
23. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy  
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
25. Shri Prathap Simha 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
28. Shri Rakesh Singh 
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal  
        
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary S tanding Committee 
on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been auth orized by the Committee to 
present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two H undred and Forty First Report on 
“Action Taken Replies by the Ministry of Road Trans port and Highways on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its Tw o Hundred and Thirty Fourth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Minis try of Road Transport and 
Highways ”. 
2.  The Two Hundred and Thirty Fourth Report  of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tour ism and Culture was presented 
on the 4
th  May, 2016 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained 
in its Two Hundred and Thirty Fourth Report was rec eived from the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways on 5th  August, 2016. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 9 th  
December, 2016.   
 
 
 MUKUL ROY 
NEW DELHI;                      Chairman,  
December, 9,  2016                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
18 Agrahayana, 1938                 Committee on  Transport, Tourism and  Culture, 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
 
ADB – Asian Development Bank  
AGs – Accountant Generals  
B.E. – Budget Estimates  
BKC – Bandra Kurla Complex  
BoT – Build-operate-Transfer  
BRO – Border Roads Organization  
CCA – Chief Controller of Accounts  
CCTV – Closed Circuit Television  
CRF – Central Road Fund  
DIMTS – Delhi Integrated Multi-Modal Transit Systems  
E&I – Electrical & Instrumentation  
EAP – Externally Aided Projects  
EC – European Commission  
EI – Economic Importance  
EPC – Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
EPFO-Employees Provident Fund Organisation 
FDR – Flood Damage Repairs  
GBS – Gross Budgetary Support  
GoTN – Government of Tamil Nadu  
GPS – Global Positioning System  
HAM – Hybrid Annuity Model  
HSD – High Speed Diesel  
IAHE – Indian Academy of Highways Engineering  
IEBR – Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources  
IIM – Indian Institute of Management  
IIT – Indian Institute of Technology  
ISC&EE – Inter-State Connectivity and Economic Importance  
InvITs – Infrastructure Investment Trusts  
IRC – Indian Road Congress  
IRQP – Improvement of Riding Quality  
IT – Information Technology  
JNPT – Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust  
LA – Land Acquisition  
LIC – Life Insurance Corporation  
LWE – Left Wing Extremism  
M&R – Maintenance & Repair  
MDRs – Major District Roads  
MoRTH – Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  
NER – North Eastern Region  
NH(O) – National Highways (Original)  
NHAI – National Highways Authority of India  
NHDP – National Highways Development Programme  
NHIDCL – National Highway and Infrastructure Develo pment Corporation Limited. 
NHs – National Highways  
O&M – Operation & Maintenance  
OMT – Operate Maintain Transfer  
OR – Ordinary Repairs  

(iii) 
PBFF – Permanent Bridges Fee Fund  
PGIMER – Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research  
PPP – Public-Private Partnership  
PR – Periodic Renewal  
PSP – Private Sector Participation  
PWD – Public Works Department  
R&D – Research and Development  
R.E. – Revised Estimates  
SARDP-NE – Special Accelerated Road Development Programme (North-East) 
SHDP – State Highways Development Programme 
SHs – State Highways  
SPV – Special Purpose Vehicle  
SR – Special Repair  
SRTU – State Road Transport Undertaking  
ToT – Toll Operate Transfer 
TPC-Total Project Cost  
TSP – Tribal Sub Plan UC – Utility Certificate 
UTs – Union Territories  
VGF – Viability Gap Funding  
WHO – World Health Organization  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Report  
Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken  by the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways on the observations/recommen dations as contained in its Two 
Hundred Thirty Fourth on Demands for Grants 2016-17  of the Road Transport and 
Highways which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 4 th   May, 2016. 
2. Action Taken Replies were received from the Mini stry in respect of all the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 
     
 
of the Government replies: 
      
 
been accepted by the Committee: 
   
 
still awaited. 
 
  
 
be furnished at the earliest. 
 
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Mi nistry. The recommendations of the 
 
Ministry and recommendations/Observations of the Co mmittee on each item of action taken 
has been given in the succeeding paragraphs:  
Annual Plan 2015-16  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  OF THE COMMITTEE 
5. The Committee finds the expenditure is 97% of th e total budget allocated at RE to the 
Ministry for the year 2015-16. The Committee feels that the expenditure percentage is good 
and it hopes that it will continue so, for next financial year i.e. 2016-17 also. 
(Recommendation at Para 7 of the 234 th  Report) 
Reply of the Government  
6. Noted for compliance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
7. The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Paragraph Nos.:7, 9, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 40, 41, 46, 48, 55, 59, 61, 63, 74, 76, 77, 86, 87,
          TOTAL:28
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
4.  On  scrutiny  of  the  Action  Taken  Replies,  the  Committee  has  made  observations  on  each
Committee contained in the Two Hundred Thirty Fourth Report, action taken thereon by the
 TOTAL:  13
88, 97, 107, 111, 115, 118, 120 and 122
Paragraph Nos.: 13, 14, 15, 28, 29, 71, 72, 90, 91, 92, 93, 95 and 100
observations  which  have  been  categorized  as  interim  replies  by  the  Committee  should
Paragraph Nos: 23, 24, 25, 44, 45, 50, 51, 52, 57, 66, 69, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 98 and 105
           TOTAL: 183.  The  Committee  desires  that  final  replies  in  respect  of  those  recommendations/
TOTAL: 3Paragraph Nos.: 36, 37 and 38

Achievement of Target  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  OF THE COMMITTEE 
8. The Committee notes Ministry’s claim of achievin g target completely without any 
shortage of funds. On the other hand, it has cited many factors which delayed the projects 
that are largely beyond its control viz. problem in land acquisition, shifting utilities, obtaining 
statutory clearance etc. Performance of contractors  is also poor and other major concern in 
some areas is law and order problem. The Committee suggests the Ministry should 
proactively work as coordinator/facilitator in all these respects. It should take up the matter 
with concerned agencies before hand to solve these problems. Although, the Ministry has set 
a high target of constructing 10,000 km road in the  year 2016-17, the Committee has 
apprehension how this mammoth task could be completed in the given situation. 
(Para 9 of  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. It is submitted that at the stage of preparation  of detailed project report(DPR) of the 
highway project, consultations with local people ar e done regarding land acquisition and 
proposed alignment of NH stretch. At the DPR stage only, the liaisoning is done with 
concerned departments of Central / State Government s for utility shifting/ 
Environment/Forest/Wildlife clearances is done. Fur ther, there is a State Level Coordination 
Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Chi ef Secretary of each State/UT for 
expeditious clearances/approvals.    
10. At Central level, a high level “Group of Infras tructure” has been constituted to sort 
out the inter-Ministerial issues, under the Chairma nship of  Hon’ble Minister of Road 
Transport and Highways with Hon’ble Ministers of Ra ilways, Civil Aviation, Minister of 
State (IC) of Environment, Forest and Climate Chang e, Principal Secretary to Prime 
Minister, Cabinet Secretary, Secretary(RT&H), Chair man (Railway Board), Secretary 
(Environment & Forests), Secretary(Shipping) and Se cretary (Civil Aviation) as its 
Members.   
11. NHAI has finalised Contractor/Concessionaire ra ting system alongwith key 
performance indicators; the allied IT system archit ecture and design is under preparation. 
The pilot phases of the system will be put for evaluation by 31.12.2016. 
12. Concerted efforts are being made to proactively  facilitate resolving the hindrances. 
Keeping in view the past achievements and consideri ng recent initiatives by the Ministry in 
last two years (like – exit policy, revival of lang uishing projects by one time fund infusion, 
promotion of Hybrid Annuity Model, amendments to MC A for BOT projects) and also 
looking at the quantum of the ongoing NH works, the  target of 10,000 km construction of 
road should  be achievable. All efforts shall be made to maximize the length of completion. 
13. Ministry has received enhanced funds during BE 2016-17 of Rs.55,000 crore. The 
actual requirement and additional fund requirement,  if any, shall be projected at the time of 
Revised Estimate proposal. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
14. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee hopes that the efforts made by 
the Ministry to resolve the hindrances in the way o f achieving target of road 
constructions may yield results. 
 
Road Development 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 

15. Development and maintenance of National Highway s by State PWDs, NHAI and 
BRO. The Committee observes that the Budgetary allo cation (proposed) for 2016-17 for 
Road Sector is Rs.43,807 crore and through Internal  Extra Budgetary support (Proposed) is 
Rs.59,279 crore. 
16. The Committee is not convinced with the IEBR pr ojection of Rs.59,279 crore. If it is 
compared with 2015-16, projection of IEBR at BE was  Rs.42,695 crore, but the actual IEBR 
upto December, 2015 i.e. in 3 quarters of financial  year, 2015-16 was only Rs.16,555 crore a 
deficit of Rs.26,140 crore, and even if it goes upt o Rs.20,000 crore, it comes to only 46.84% 
of total requirement. So, seeing the trend of previ ous financial year, to raise Rs.59,279 crore 
as IEBR during 2016-17 appears to be an uphill task for the Ministry. 
17. The Committee notes that the projections are no t supported by appropriate measures 
to raise the money internally or from the market. T he Committee expresses its dismay and 
recommends that the NHAI should be allowed to raise  tax-free bonds and capital gains relief 
bonds in order to achieve the huge IFBR of Rs.59,27 9/- crores during the financial year 
2016-17. 
(Para 13, 14and 15 of  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
18. As per Union Budget 2016-17, the following allo cation has been made for NHDP and 
projects with NHAI: - 
 (Rs. In Crore)  
Cess 12,153 
Toll Plough Back  7,500 
IEBR 59,279 
Total  78,932  
19. NHAI has projected its resource gap and to brid ge it, NHAI’s borrowing amounting 
to Rs. 59,279 crore has been estimated under the He ad IEBR in the Union Budget 2016-17. 
In the previous year 2015-16 NHAI has raised Rs. 23 ,281.71 crore against the Revised 
Estimates of IEBR of Rs. 28,000 crore, its comes to  83.14% of total requirement. The NHAI 
is engaged in talks with LIC/EPFO etc. to raise Rs.  50,000 crore and Rs. 5,000 crore through 
54EC Bonds. 
20. NHAI intend to raise funds amounting to Rs. 500 0 crore via 54 EC Capital Gain 
Exemption Bonds &Rs. 50,000 crore through taxable b onds and other instruments, if 
required. NHAI will prefer to raise funds from LIC and EPFO etc. In case tax free bonds is 
allowed by the Government to NHAI in 2016-17, the a mount to be raised from LIC / EPFO 
will reduce to that extent. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
21. The Committee is still not convinced with the reply  of the Ministry regarding 
funds generation for road projects.  Six months of current financial year i.e. 2016-17 
has lapsed and the Ministry is still engaged in tal ks with LIC/EPFO for issuing bonds 
etc.  The Committee further recommends to expedite the process of funds generation 
for road projects other-wise many of the projects t argeted during the current financial 
year will remain incomplete. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
22. The Committee observes that the expenditure on National Highways (original) works 
is very poor. At BE 2015-16 Rs.4207.56 crore was sa nctioned and at RE it was further 
increased to Rs. 5508.06 crore but upto 31st Decemb er 2015, only 60% of RE budge ti.e. 

Rs.3330.99 crore has been spent. Now for 2016-17, R s.15,500 crore has been sanctioned for 
NH(O) work. The Committee hopes that factors respon sible for short expenditure would be 
taken care of this year. The Committee recommends t hat the Ministry should plan well in 
advance to utilize the money. 
(Para 16 and 17 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
23. Noted for compliance.  Necessary action is bein g taken up to ensure that no fund is 
surrendered.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
24.  The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
25. The Committee observes that budget allocation u nder Special Accelerated Road 
Development Programme-North Eastern Areas (SARDP-NE ) for the year 2015-16 
wasRs.4,000 crore but only Rs.3094.99 crore was spe nt upto December 2015. Now, 
Rs.5,000crore has been allocated. The Committee is concerned that even after good 
allocation under this head, the money is not utiliz ed optimally and the work could not be 
completed on time due to one or other reasons. The Committee hopes that the Ministry 
would utilize full budget to complete the road projects in the current financial year. 
(Para 18 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
26. The allocation for SARDP-NE for 2015-16 was Rs. 4,000 crore.  Further, additional 
amount of Rs.900 crore was re-appropriated to this Head in March, 2016.  An expenditure of 
Rs.4855.32 was made out of total fund of Rs.4900 crore during the financial year 2015-16.  
27. Observations of the Committee is noted for comp liance and best efforts will be made 
to utilize the full allocation of Rs.5,000 crore un der SARDP-NE during the financial year 
2016-17.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
28. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
29. The Committee also observes that even under non -plan head-Maintenance of 
National Highways with State PWDs it was allocated Rs.2698.40 crore at RE but could 
spend only Rs.1340.22 crore. In view of poor mainte nance of Highways/ Roads, such a 
shortfall in expenditure is unacceptable for whatever reasons. 
30. The Committee is not pleased with this pattern of expenditure. It is not encouraging 
and recommends that Ministry should give due care in proper planning and its execution. 
(Para 19 and 20 of ibid ) 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
31. Upto March, 2016, an expenditure of Rs.2354.98 crore was booked under the Head 
Maintenance and Repairs of National Highways.  Paym ent under sub-heads Ordinary 
Repairs (OR), Flood Damage Repairs(Continue) [FDR(C)] and Flood Damage Repairs(New) 
[FDR(N)] are made to State Governments on reimbursement basis.   

32. Claims from State Governments are received thro ugh AGs Offices upto June-July of 
the next financial year.  So, as per practice, thes e bills are adjusted upto June-July and final 
expenditure under the head will be higher than it i s shown as on March, 2016. Therefore, 
although works are executed on ground booking of ex penditure under reimbursement 
process takes time; hence, status of utilization of  funds at any point of time during the 
financial year may not enable correct appreciation of actual physical completion/progress of 
maintenance works such as OR and FDR. 
33. However, observations of the Committee are note d for needful compliance.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
34.  The Committee notes the reply. 
Budget For (2016-17) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
35. The Committee finds the information provided by  the Ministry regarding budgetary 
provision for upcoming projects is very encouraging . The Committee observes that the 
Ministry is already facing lots of problems pertain ing to acquisition of land, other statutory 
clearance and earlier awarded unfinished road proje cts whether it was based on PPP model 
on BOT (Toll) mode. 
36. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld attract some more private 
companies/corporate houses to invest in this field with good returns. The Committee also 
thinks that the completion of delayed projects will  give NHAI strength in the financial 
market which will help it in generating fund for further projects. 
37. The Committee further recommends that the Minis try should give priority to finish 
the delayed projects so that it could get returns at the earliest. 
(Para 23, 24 and 25of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
38. NHAI has acquired 9285 HA of land in year 2015- 16 as compared to 6733 HA in the 
year 2014-15 and 8465 HA in year 2013-14. The land acquisition figures for the previous 09 
financial years are as follows: 
Financial Year  2006 -
07  
 2007 -  2008 -  2009 -  2010 -  2011 -  2012 -  2013 -  2014 -  2015-16 
Possession 
(in Ha.) 
    5513   3684 3120  6244  8533  9801  6762  8465  6733  9285 
39. The LA issues vary from project to project and also from district to district within the 
same project. The general issues are mainly delay i n award of compensation and delayed 
disbursement of compensation by CALA and delayed ha nding over possession of land by 
CALA. The issues are being monitored by NHAI and ta ken-up with the concerned State 
Govt. on a regular basis. Also, meetings have been held at the highest levels between the 
State Govt., NHAI and the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to resolve such issues. 
40. In order to get the delayed projects completed early, all possible efforts at all levels 
are being made, including continuous and follow up meetings with the top Management of 
the Concessionaire/Contractors, whenever the delay is occurred due to their failure.  All 
possible assistance and logistic support for obtain ing permissions/approvals/ funds is 
extended by NHAI to concessionaires/ contractors.  Wherever issues pertaining to State 
Government/other Agencies are found to be affecting  the progress of the work, the same is 
taken up at appropriate levels for expeditious disposal.  

41. The Ministry acknowledges the concerns of the C ommittee regarding completion of 
delayed projects. 
42. The Policy initiatives taken to revive the lang uishing projects and facilitate their 
completion are:-  
• Loan secured to the extent of termination payment. 
• Securitization of toll income (30% of TPC). 
• Infrastructure debt fund – Long term financing at low interest rates 
• Re-schedulement of premium – Bank Rate+2%.  Facility availed for 15 projects. 
• 100% exit after 2 years of completion in projects awarded before 2009. 
• Fund infusion by NHAI in stalled projects where the physical progress is 50% 
and the concessionaire is facing shortage of funds. 
• NHAI liberally permitting refinance with elongation of repayment period.  RBI 
has also issued circular for providing long term debt finance matching the 
concession period without classifying the exposure as restructured. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
43.  The Committee notes the reply and finds that the M inistry is taking various 
initiatives to solve the problems of languishing pr ojects. The Committee is worried 
about those projects where substantial money has be en invested but the projects are 
not yet ready.  The Committee further recommends th at the Ministry should treat the 
completion of delayed projects on priority basis. 
Maintenance Of National Highways 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
44. The Committee finds that the allocation for mai ntenance of national highway under 
non-plan head is another cause of concern. An amoun t of Rs.2701.47 crore was allocated in 
B.E. 2015-16 which was slightly reduced to 2698.47 crore at R.E. stage. Now,Rs.2853.57 
crore has been allocated for the next fiscal. The C ommittee is not convinced with the 
explanation of the Ministry regarding maintenances of National Highways. Regular 
maintenance of roads increases its longevity and sa ves money. The Committee notes that 
allocation for maintenance of National Highways is very poor. This Committee has time and 
again pointed out that the National Highways constr ucted with tax payers money should not 
be wasted away by not maintaining it properly. The condition of the roads are very bad, new 
roads develops potholes and get eroded within a few months though its life should have been 
five to six years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate funds be allocated for 
maintenance of NHs and there should be strict monit oring by officials to ensure timely and 
quality maintenance. 
45. The Committee recommends that Ministry should p rovide top most priority and 
attention to maintenance and repair of the roads re gularly as bad roads not only cause 
inconvenience to users but also accidents, all of w hich have serious implementation for our 
economy. 
(Para 28 and 29 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 

46. The Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of NH stretche s are carried out for the stretches 
not covered under any programme or completed stretc hes where there are no liabilities of 
contractors to maintain such stretches.  
47. In addition to this, the NH stretches which are  developed on EPC mode (Engineering, 
Procurement, Construction), the contractor is respo nsible for remedying of the defects and 
concurrent maintenance of project highway during th e four years defect liability period after 
completion of the work.  
48. For the NH stretches developed on BOT mode, the  Concessionaire is responsible for 
the maintenance of the project highway during the c oncession period. For golden 
quadrilateral stretches which are being widened fro m 4 to 6 lane, the maintenance 
responsibility is with the Concessionaire. 
49. For some of the developed NH stretches through public funding, maintenance 
contracts have been taken up for a definite time pe riod (4 to 9 years) on Operate, 
Maintenance and Transfer (OMT) basis. The maintenan ce of the project highway under 
OMT contracts is the responsibility of the Concessionaire. 
50. It is pertinent to mention here that the funds allocation under maintenance head 
during 2016-17 is Rs.2,853.57 crore against the pro jected requirement of Rs.7,070 crore. 
Usually the annual allocation of non-plan funds for  M&R of NHs is about 40% of estimated 
requirements of funds.  This leads to the compulsio n of thin spreading of available resources 
for the NH stretches in need of M&R.  This is one o f the main reason for inability to take up 
timely maintenance interventions.  The issue is bei ng taken up every year with Ministry of 
Finance.  The concerns of the Committee is noted.  All efforts shall be made to ensure better 
upkeep of NH infrastructure.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
51. The Committee is not convinced with the reply of th e Ministry.  From the reply, 
it is clear that the fund allocation is not suffici ent for the maintenance and repair of 
NHs.  It can be further inferred from the reply tha t the responsibility of maintenance 
and repair lies with concessionaire, where the stre tches were developed on BOT mode, 
it is similar in the case of NHs developed on EPC m ode then where the question arises 
of fund for the maintenance of these roads.  The re ply is not clear about the length of 
road which is to be maintained by NHAI solely. The Committee further recommends 
that there should be strict monitoring mechanism in  the NHAI to ensure that the 
concessionaire, are adhered to the agreements to ex ecuting the road repair works in 
their respective stretches of national Highways. 
52. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the re quired fund would be 
generated to complete the targeted projects. 
Budget For NHAI 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
53. The Committee feels in view of the position exp lained above, the target for 
completion of 10,000 km of NHs during 2016-17 is qu ite a high jump in comparison to 
previous years and therefore, the total gross budge tary allocation for highways may not be 
adequate during 2016-17. 
54. The Committee finds projection of target by the  Ministry as highly ambitious because 
it may also go for entrustment of additional 20,000  km. of NHs to NHAI so that it could 
effectively raise and utilize its budgeted IEBR of Rs.59,279 crore. 

55. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld work hard to raise the money 
from the market and suggests that instead of making  huge target it should go for smaller 
target, otherwise big target without fund arrangeme nt will be proved like castles in the air. 
The Committee wishes that efforts of the Ministry w ill be materialized by issuing a tax free 
bonds and with disciplined planning and execution. 
(Para 36, 37 and 38 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
56. Requirement of additional fund for National Hig hways will be reviewed at RE stage 
keeping in view the expenditure made as on 30/09/20 16 and the issue shall be appropriately 
taken up with Ministry of Finance for providing additional fund, if required.  
57. NHAI will make all effort to raise money from t he market to meet the targets.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
58. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the re quired fund would be 
generated to complete the targeted projects. 
Budget For National Highways (O) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
59. The Committee observes that the allocation for 2016-17 for NH(O)-development of 
non-NHDP NHs primarily through State PWDs is Rs.15, 504 crore which is around three 
times more than the budget of Rs.5512.06 crore at R E 2015-16 under the same head. At the 
same time the Committee is constrained to note that the allocation for Special Programme for 
development of Roads in Left Wing Extremist (LWE) a ffected areas has been decreased by 
Rs.300 crore. 
60. The Committee is of the opinion that LWE affect ed areas are sensitive and need due 
care and attention. There should be some extra effo rt to link such areas with main cities and 
towns. The Committee recommends that the Ministry s hould take the projects in LWE areas 
on priority and should put more funds at RE stage. 
(Para 40 and 41of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
61. Out of about 5,453 km of roads (1,177 km of NHs  and 4,276 km of State Roads) in 
Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas works on 5 ,359 km length have been awarded 
upto 31/05/2016.  Further, till May, 2016, development in 4,052 km length was completed. 
62. The provision of fund under NH(O) and for Speci al Programme for development of 
roads in LWE affected areas for 2016-17 have been e armarked based on estimated fund 
requirements.  
63. However, as directed by the Committee the statu s of projects and fund requirement 
shall be reviewed and proposal for additional fund requirements, if needed, shall be 
forwarded to Ministry of Finance at appropriate stage.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
64.  The Committee is happy to note that 4,052 Km lengt h of road has been 
completed till May, 2016.   
Delayed Road Projects 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 

65. The Committee observes that in the annexure I, there are 199 ongoing road projects 
in various stages. These projects have been awarded  since 2005. The Committee observes 
that the situation in Assam is the worst. There are  around 17 road projects which were 
awarded in 2005-06 and they are yet to be completed . These projects have been funded by 
NHAI under NHDP- Ph-II and the project cost is Rs.4 200 crores (approx.). Other badly 
affected States are Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Ta mil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh, where 
various road projects are going on for more than 5 years but are yet to be completed. The 
Committee expresses concern on the status of road p rojects languishing for the last 5 to 
10years, involving a huge sum on these projects. 
66. The Committee recommends that NHAI particularly  must make all out efforts to 
complete these delayed projects. 
(Para 44 and 45 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
67. Initiatives taken by NHAI/Government to complet e delayed projects are as under: 
i. Change of Mode : 
• Committee headed by Secretary, Ministry of Road Tra nsport and Highways 
(MoRTH) empowered to decide about the change of mode. 
• Adoption of new Hybrid Annuity Mode. 
ii. The power of MoRTH for appraisal and approval raise d from Rs.500 crore to 
Rs.1000 crore. 
iii. Environment and Forest Clearance –  
• Delegation of powers to Regional Offices by Ministr y of Environment and 
Forest.  
• Cutting of trees permitted after FC Stage-I.   
• EC not required for length of 100 km. Even beyond 1 00 Km, EC is not required 
if widening is restricted to 40m and realignment to 60m. 
iv. ROBs: The procedure for GAD approved by Railways for ROBs  has been simplified 
and made online.  Maintenance charges which were ha mpering the progress of many 
projects, stand waived by railways.  Standard design put on website. 
v. Financial initiatives  
• Loan secured to the extent of termination payment. 
• Securitization of toll income (30% of TPC). 
• Infrastructure debt fund – Long term financing at low interest rates 
• Reschedulement of premium – Bank Rate+2%.  Facility availed for 15 projects. 
• 100% exit after 2 years of completion in projects awarded before 2009. 
• Fund infusion by NHAI in stalled projects where the physical progress is 50% 
and the concessionaire is facing shortage of funds. 

• NHAI liberally permitting refinance with elongation of repayment period.  RBI 
has also issued circular for providing long term debt finance matching the 
concession period without classifying the exposure as restructured. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
68.  The Committee notes the reply. Reply is very encou raging and the Committee 
hopes that the steps taken by the Ministry will bring the desired results. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
69. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministr y has awarded 61 road projects in 
various States during the year 2015. The Committee hopes that these projects would be 
completed within stipulated time without any hindrance. 
(Para 46 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
70. Noted for compliance.  All efforts will be made  to complete the projects within 
stipulated time .  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
71.  The Committee notes the reply. 
Delays In Project Implementation  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
72. The Committee has observed that generally cost and time overruns occur due to delay 
in land acquisition (LA), obtaining regulatory clea rances, uncertainty in legal regime, etc. 
The Committee recommends that no project should be approved or awarded without the 
requisite land acquisition and other necessary clea rances. The Committee further 
recommends that errant contractors may be checked t hrough some penalty measures. The 
Committee is of the view that a delayed project not  only enhances cost escalation but at the 
same time, it also delays revenue generation which is the pinching part of the system of NH 
development. The Ministry therefore, should find ou t a solution sitting with RBI for 
providing further loan in this regard. 
(Para 48of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
73. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and NHA I have now decided that no 
project would be appraised/awarded unless 80% of la nd is available with the Authority with 
requisite forest clearance. Similarly, possession w as linked to 3 D notification but now 
possession means deposit of compensation and possession thereafter. 
Recent Financial initiatives  
• Loan secured to the extent of termination payment. 
• Securitization of toll income (30% of TPC). 
• Infrastructure debt fund – Long term financing at low interest rates 
• Reschedulement of premium – Bank Rate+2%.  Facility availed for 15 projects. 
• 100% exit after 2 years of completion in projects awarded before 2009. 
• Fund infusion by NHAI in stalled projects where the physical progress is 50% 
and the concessionaire is facing shortage of funds. 

• NHAI liberally permitting refinance with elongation of repayment period.  RBI 
has also issued circular for providing long term debt finance matching the 
concession period without classifying the exposure as restructured. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
74. The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee also appreciates the initiatives 
taken by the Ministry and hopes that these steps wo uld help in completing the delayed 
projects. However, the Ministry is silent over pena lty measures to be imposed upon 
errant contractors. 
Projects Linked To Port Connectivity 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
75. The Committee feels that port-connectivity is o ne of the most important factors for 
augmenting trade and commerce in any country. Port plays a vital role in transporting goods 
from one place to another. 
76. The Committee is concerned about Chennai Port t o Maduravoyal on NH-4 project 
involving Rs.1,345 crores. The project is in jeopardy due to the court litigation. 
77. The Committee hopes that the litigation may be sorted out soon so that the ongoing 
project should be completed. The Committee recommen ds that NHAI make all out efforts to 
complete the road. Toll notification pending with T amil Nadu Govt. regarding Chennai- 
Ennore Port be expedited beforehand. 
(Para 50, 51 and 52of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
78. The Project from Chennai Port to Maduravoyal is  held up due to litigation by Tamil 
Nadu Government in form of SLP before Hon’ble Supre me court against the order of 
Hon’ble high court Chennai, vide which GoTN was dir ected to allow the execution of the 
project. Hon'ble High Court gave decision in NHAI f avour on 20.2.2014. Matter is now in 
Hon'ble Supreme Court since 04 March 2014. The work  is suspended on order of state 
government on 29.03.2012 at physical progress of 14 .8% but concessionaire did not resume 
the work even on the available fronts and even afte r judgment of Hon’ble High court. 
However, the work contract has since been terminate d by the concessionaire on 18.01.2016 
and also by NHAI on 08.04.2016under clause 37.1.2 o f CA. Thus the project can be 
completed only after providing the encumbrance free  land by State government to 
NHAI/MoRTH alongwith necessary permission/cooperation.  
79. Regarding Chennai-Ennore port, it is stated tha t out of total 29.138 km length, the 
work is completed in 27.933 km length by  port connectivity SVP (NHAI 41%, Chennai Port 
40.69%,Ennore Port 9.90% and GoTN 8.73%) with an in vestment of about Rs 560crore. 
Balance length could not be completed due to non-av ailability of encumbrance free land by 
the Government of Tamil Nadu (GoTN) at NTO Kuppam& Fishing stalls located near Gate 
No. 1 of Chennai Port. The capital investment can b e recovered by tolling on the state road 
on line with NH fee rule as per MOU between parties . However publication of fee 
notification for tolling is pending with GoTN since  28.04.2015 since project is substantially 
completed. A number of reminders have been issued a nd the matter has been taken up with 
State Government of Tamil Nadu. However, the same remains unresolved. 
80. The Ministry has also requested State Governmen t recently for expediting the needful 
action and facilitate resolving the issue. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 

81.  The Committee observes that from the reply of the Ministry, it seems that the 
Government of Tamil Nadu is least interested in com pleting the Chennai-Ennore 
project because the State Government of Tamil Nadu has failed to give encumbrance 
free land for the project. The Committee recommends  that the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways and NHAI pursue the matter m ore vigorously with the 
Government of Tamil Nadu to get the land to complete the project. 
Average Contribution of NH During 2015-16  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
82. The Committee finds the average contribution en couraging and hope that the same or 
even better average will be maintained in the year 2016-17 to achieve the target set up by the 
Ministry itself. 
(Para 55 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
83. Projects in about 10,098 km length of roads wer e awarded during 2015-16.  A target 
for award of 25,000 km length of roads have been set during 2016-17. 
84. Construction of 6,061 km length of roads was co mpleted during 2015-16. The target 
for construction of roads for 2016-17 is about 10,000 km.  
85. Considering recent initiatives by Ministry in l ast two years (like – exit policy, revival 
of languishing projects by one time fund infusion, promotion of Hybrid Annuity Model, 
amendments to MCA for BOT projects) and also lookin g at the quantum of the ongoing NH 
works, it is considered that  the target would be a chievable. All efforts shall be made to 
maximize the length of award and completion of projects. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
86.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the t arget set by the Ministry 
itself could be achieved.  
Infusion of Additional Funds to Languishing Projects 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
87. The Committee feels it is a commendable step an d recommends that NHAI should 
quickly identify the projects which are completed m ore than 50% and where there is a need 
of infusion of additional funds may be given on loa n basis to complete languishing projects. 
At the same time, the Govt. should ensure that conc essionaire has followed all the necessary 
condition of the agreement and not siphoned off the public money. 
(Para 57 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
88. With pro-active initiatives it has been possibl e to reduce the total number of 
languishing projects to 17.   
89. Fund infusion request is being processed in all  deserving cases as and when required. 
All efforts are being made to ensure that there is correct utilization of public money.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
90. The Committee notes the reply and desires that the languishing projects report 
may be furnished for information of the Committee a long with time frame when these 
projects would be physically completed. 
Public Transport System 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
91. The Committee observes that the Ministry has in itiated/implemented IT related 
features in the transport system of 17 States and s ome more projects are on the cards. The 
Committee recommends that remaining States may also  be covered under the new schemes 
and all the modern technology should be used in the  transport system. The Committee 
further  recommends that transport system operating  in the remote areas and on long stretch 
should be well-equipped to thwart any kind of misad venture by anti social elements to 
drivers/passengers. The Secretary submitted to the Committee that the Ministry is planning 
to introduce GPS locator in the bus and in every pu blic transport a panic button and a CCTV 
Camera are to be installed but the Ministry is yet to decide about the modalities on who will 
respond the panic button. The Committee recommends that these features should be installed 
in public transport system on priority basis since it is not only for women safety but for all 
the passengers travelling in public transport. 
(Para 59 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
  
92. The direction of the Committee has been noted f or compliance.  It is submitted that 
Ministry has released funds to 19 SRTCs under 17 St ates to implement IT related features 
such as GPS, PIS, ITMS, ETMs etc. in the transport system.  
93. With the objective of providing safe and secure  public road transport to people of the 
country, and particularly women and girl child, Min istry of Road Transport & Highways is 
in the process of making GPS/CCTV/Alert button mand atory in public road transport 
vehicles. In this regard, a draft notification has been prepared and uploaded on Ministry’s 
website. After receipt of the comments from stakeho lders, the final notification will be 
issued.  Thereafter, all new vehicles will come wit h these devices i.e factory fitted.  As per 
this notification, all transport vehicles with  sea ting capacity of 23 passengers and above 
should be equipped with vehicle Location Tracking device, CCTV based surveillance system 
and emergency button whereas the transport vehicle with seating capacity of less than 23 
passengers be equipped with Vehicle Location Tracking device and emergency button. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
94.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes for instal lation of various security 
measures (IT based) in the public transport vehicles at the earliest. 
Development Of Bus Terminals And Multi Modal Transit Terminal on BOT Basis 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
95. The Committee has noted the information provide d by the Ministry regarding 
development of bus terminals and multimodal transpo rt terminal on BOT basis on fund 
sharing basis. The Ministry would bear 75% of expen diture and the concerned State will 
have to part with 25%. The Committee feels that it will help the State in building transport 
infrastructure and will also improve transit facili ties to passengers. It recommends that this 
scheme be implemented on priority. 
(Para 61 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
96. The direction of the Committee has been noted f or compliance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 

97.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry will accord priority in developing bus 
terminals and multi modal transport terminal in tho se places where the number of 
inter-state vehicles are very large. 
Work Towards Safety Of Women On Public Transport System 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
98. The Committee observes that the safety for wome n in public transport is of utmost 
importance and it also thinks that not only women b ut the Ministry should think over safety 
for all. The Committee is unable to understand why the Ministry is taking too much time in 
implementing the security measures in public transp ort, especially in a city like Delhi, where 
people even travel at odd hours and it is not safe for women to commute in odd hours. The 
Committee notes that the promises made by the Govt. on the security of the women in public 
transport system remains as a promise though many y ears have passed without any concrete 
and fruitful measures. The Committee recommends tha t the Govt. should come out with 
comprehensive policy on women safety and implement it effectively. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take measures i mmediately to ensure safety and 
security of women passengers in public transport system. 
(Para 63 of  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
99. MORTH strongly feels that public road transport  is most vulnerable to anti social 
activities especially for girl child and women.  Th erefore, installation of GPS/CCTV/Alert 
button will definitely help girl child and women when they are in distress. In this connection, 
this Ministry has issued a draft notification for m aking the installation of GPS/CCTV/Alert 
button mandatory in public road transport vehicles.    After receipt of the comments from 
stakeholders, the final notification will be issued .  Thereafter, all new vehicle will come with 
these devices i.e. factory fitted. 
100. Besides two proposals of Transport Department,  Govt. of NCT of Delhi has been 
recommended by Empowered committee of WCD under 'Ni rbhaya Fund' for installation of 
CCTV and GPS devices in the buses (DTC + Cluster) c osting Rs. 140.00 cr. The another 
proposal is about installation of CCTVs in modern s tainless steel bus queue shelters located 
at strategic locations costing Rs. 1.87 cr. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
101.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the s ecurity equipments would be 
installed soon in public transport system in Delhi because Delhi has witnessed one of 
the most heinous crimes towards a woman in the recent past. 
Amendment in Motor Vehicle Act 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
102. The Committee is happy to note that the Minist ry is working on “The Road Transport 
and Safety Bill, 2015”. From the name itself it see ms it would also contain safety measures 
in transport field. The Committee agrees with the M inistry that revenue collection and its 
distribution is a delicate issue, but it thinks tha t it can be sorted out with meaningful 
dialogues between States and the Centre. The Commit tee recommends that Ministry may 
remind those States which have not furnished their comments to send the required 
amendments. The Committee recommends that on non-co ntroversial issues likes safety; 
increase in the penalty for unauthorized driving, m inor driving, increase in the penalty for 
various kinds of traffic violations etc., the Govt.  should legislate the law. The controversial 

issues can be dealt with separately. The Committee hopes that the Motor Vehicles 
Amendment Bill will become a reality soon. 
(Para 66 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
103. The Road Transport and Safety Bill, 2015 is st ill in consultation stage. On the advice 
of PMO, the latest version of the Road Transport an d Safety Bill, 2015 was sent to all the 
States/UTs for seeking their comments/views.  About  twenty six State Governments/UTs 
have so far furnished their comments till date. Rem inders to States/UTs from where 
comments/suggestions have not been received were sent.   
104. In March 2016, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has constituted a Group of 
Ministers (GoM) under the chairmanship of Shri Yoon us Khan, Hon’ble Minister for PWD 
and Transport, Govt. of Rajasthan to deliberate on the issues facing the transport sector in the 
country. The GoM is mandated to examine the best practices in the road transport sector with 
a view to improve safety and mobility and to sugges t actionable measures for 
implementation. The Road Transport and Safety Bill was discussed in its first meeting of 
GoM held on 29.04.2016 in detail. As Transport is a State subject and there is need for wider 
consultation with the States before the draft of the Bill can be finalized for introduction in the 
Parliament. The GoM is of the view that keeping the  need for urgent changes in the Motor 
Vehicles Act and the Central Motor Vehicles rules t o address safety and efficiency issues in 
the transport sector, pending the finalization of t he RTS Bill, necessary amendments may be 
carried out the present Act and Rules. 
105. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism 
and Culture on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways has also recommended that on non-controver sial issues like safety, increase in the 
penalty for unauthorized driving, minor driving, in crease in the penalty for various kinds of 
traffic violations etc., the Govt should legislate the law.  The controversial issued can be 
dealt with separately.  
106. Accordingly, it has been decided by the compet ent authority that the 
recommendations of the Group of Ministers (GoM) may  be considered keeping in view the 
urgent matters relating to Road Safety and other pressing issues and necessary amendment in 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 may be made through Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill keeping 
the Road Transport and Safety Bill pending.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
107. The Committee notes the reply and to state that the  Motor Vehicles 
(Amendment) Bill, 2016 has already been referred to  the Committee to consider and 
report thereon.  The Committee will soon deliberate  upon various amendments 
suggested by the Ministry and will try to give mean ingful recommendations on the 
subject. 
Planning For State Highway Development Project 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
108. The Committee observes that the picture of Sta te Highways projected by the Ministry 
is not very encouraging. The Committee feels that S tate Highways are bridge between 
National Highways and people. Development of any St ate depends on good roads. The 
Ministry can also provide its expertise in road dev elopment and planning. The Committee 
recommends that NHAI and State Govt. should work in  co-ordination while planning for 
highways as it forms the life of the core network. The Committee agrees with the Ministry’s 

approach that priority may be given for development  of core network. The Committee feels 
that there is a requirement of National Mission for  development of State roads. The funding 
to the State Govt. by the Central Govt. may be link ed to the maintenance and construction of 
good State Roads. The Committee recommends that the  Central Govt. should take initiative 
to create a data bank of State roads and District t o enable the planning and execution of 
projects. 
(Para 69 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
109. The Ministry is primarily responsible to devel opment and maintenance of National 
Highways (NHs).  The State Governments concerned ar e responsible for the development 
and maintenance of State Roads.  
110. However, the Ministry provides funds to the St ates for development of State roads 
also under Central Road Fund (CRF) Scheme as per th e provisions of the CRF Act, 2000. 
 Besides, development of State Roads are also taken  up under the Economic Importance and 
Inter-State Connectivity (EI & ISC) Schemes as per the CRF Act, 2000.  
111. In due recognition of the need to encourage St ates to develop state roads in a planned 
manner, it has been stipulated in the CRF (State Roads) Rules, 2014 that: - 
(a)  the priority is given to take up projects from  the Core Network only and within the 
Core Network, priority shall be assigned in the following order- 
(i)  the potential roads which are considered as im portant from the perspective of 
declaration as new national highways; 
(ii)  the State Highways; 
(iii)  the Major District Roads; and 
(iv)  the other District Roads. 
112. Further, there are enabling provisions in the CRF (State Roads) Rules, 2014 including 
funding arrangements for ensuring adequate quality control, monitoring of works by State 
Quality Monitors and also monitoring and quality control by Central Government.  
113. There has been persistent demands from State G overnments and Peoples’ 
Representatives for declaration of more and more St ate Roads as new NHs.  In view of the 
above the NH network length has been enhanced from 91,287 km as on 31/03/2014 to about 
1,03,519 km at present.  Further, about 42,745 km l ength of State Roads have been approved 
In-Principle for declaration as new NHs subject to outcome of their DPRs.  Development of 
such roads shall improve the overall Socio-economic development of the country.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
114.  The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry h as upgraded the status of 
state highways as National Highways and further ste ps have been taken to declare 
more stretch as N.H. depending upon their DPRs.  Th e Committee recommends that 
mere declaration of state highways as national high ways won't serve the purpose but at 
the same time these length should be upgraded and m aintained properly for smooth 
running of traffic.  
Urban Linkages to National Expressways Network 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
115. The Committee observes that urban linkages is an essential part of road network, 
without which the purpose of highways will be defea ted. The Committee agrees with the 

Ministry envisaging the need of integrated scheme i n co-ordination with Ministries of Urban 
Development, Road Transport and Highways and State Govt. for urban linkages. 
116. But the Committee in view of past experience i n this sector would caution the 
Ministry while exploring the chance of developing urban linkages on PPP mode as this mode 
has not been quite a success. The Committee expects  the Ministry to come up with concrete 
solution to meet the existing challenges without any financial problem. 
(Para 71 and 72of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
117. The Government had approved Phase-VII of Natio nal Highway Development Project 
(NHDP) in November, 2007 which envisages constructi on of stand alone Ring Roads, 
bypasses, flyovers, elevated roads, tunnels, grade separators, Road Over Bridges, 
underpasses, service roads, etc., for removing iden tified traffic bottlenecks on the existing 
National Highways (NHs) at a total estimated cost o f Rs. 16,680 crore. Under this 
programme, the State Governments are required to pr ovide requisite assistance such as 
sharing of expenditure / effort towards pre-constru ction activities (Land Acquisition and 
shifting of utilities) including Resettlement and R ehabilitation (R&R) and signing of State 
Support Agreement. 
118. At present, project in about 22 km length has been completed and works in about 98 
km is in progress.  
119. There has been very limited progress under NHD P-VII primarily on account of 
inadequate response from State Governments. 
120. The Ministry is considering to explore taking up of decongestion measures for some 
major city roads.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
121.  The Committee is not happy with the reply of the M inistry.  The Committee 
recommends that decongestion plan with the road lin kages are very essential for 
smooth flow of traffic.  The Ministry may take up t he issue with the State Governments 
to work in this direction.  Schemes are there to re move the bottlenecks but the work is 
not going on and the Ministry has cited the reason as inadequate response from the 
State Governments.  The Committee recommends that v arious teams should be formed 
to look into the matter at specific places and purs ue the matter with the State 
Governments for their co-operation.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
122. The Committee notes the initiative taken by th e Ministry to identify the total network 
of State Highways. The Committee feels that saving of ecosystem is very important for all of 
us and is happy that the Ministry has started think ing in this direction. The committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take initiative s to plant more trees alongside the roads. 
Ministry should also put it as a clause in the agre ement to be made with the developers while 
awarding a project to plant trees alongside the roads they construct. 
(Para 74of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
123. Ministry promulgated Green Highways (Plantatio n, Transplantation, Beautification 
and Maintenance) Policy-2015.  The policy envisions  "development of eco friendly National 
Highways (NHs) with participation of the Community,  Farmers, NGOs, Private Sector, 
Institutions, Government Agencies and the Forest De partment for economic growth and 
development in a sustainable manner."  

124. For the quick roll out of the Green Highways P rogram, a specialised team of experts, 
professional of plantations and forestry sector is being created.  In this regards it has been 
decided NHAI would create a separate entity and pro vide all necessary facilities, financial 
support and delegation of powers to the new entity under NHAI for implementation of 
nationwide highways plantations.  
125. Until the formation of new entity it has been decided that National Green Highways 
Mission (NGHM) (currently a specialised team of 4 p ersons) under NHAI will handle all 
matters related to Green Highways Projects. The key  roles identified for NGHM are as 
under:- 
• Develop guidelines for plantation, transplantation,  beautification, landscaping and 
maintenance activities. 
• Develop operational models for effective execution of Green Highways Projects. 
• Empanelment/Registration of plantation agencies/NGO s/ Cooperatives/CBOs etc for 
undertaking plantation and maintenance activities. 
• Award of Green Highways Projects (Plantations, Transplantations, Landscaping etc) 
• Assessment of yearly budget requirement for Green Highways Project. 
• Finalise annual targets for green corridor development along NHs. 
126. With respect to roles identified for NGHM foll owing actions have been taken till 
date:- 
126.1 Vision Document & Guidelines for implementation of Green Highways Policy -
 
2015  
These documents will act as a reference guide for plantation agencies and NHAI/NGHM 
officials in planning, implementation and monitorin g of green highways projects. 
Comprehensive Strategy, Mission and Action Plan for  next ten years have been 
developed. Similarly Green Corridor Development Met hodology, Empanelment/ 
Registration procedure for implementing agencies, W ork Award Process, Monitoring & 
Payment procedure of Plantation Projects and Planta tion Species Matrix for selection of 
trees/shrubs species for plantation have been detailed out in Guidelines.  
126.2 Empanelment of Plantation Agencies  
Total 42 agencies have sent their applications for empanelment and out of which 22 
agencies have been empanelled by NGHM. The other 20  agencies have been informed 
to submit relevant documents which are missing from  their applications. The 
empanelment process will remain open till 31st Marc h, 2017, it is expected to empanel 
1000 plantations agencies by the financial year end.  
126.3     Award of Green Highways Projects  
NGHM has awarded Green Highways Projects for 1,590 km stretch along 20 NHs 
covering 10 States. For these projects, it is expec ted to invest Rs. 300 crore in next five 
years in plantations and maintenance. Total 19 agen cies (Govt, Private, NGOs, Start-
ups) have been provided work to ensure timely execution of plantations works.  
126.4 Innovative Initiatives  
126.4.1Adopt a Green Highway Program  

NGHM is exploring options for enhancing people's pa rticipation in greening initiative. 
Customized approaches for Voluntary organizations/i nstitutions willing to adopt/fund 
roadside plantations along NHs have been developed.  Power Finance Corporation 
Limited, New Delhi has already committed to adopt 90 km stretch of NH 7 in the Nagpur 
region with an investment of Rs 15 crore. NGHM also  exploring possibility of 
convergence with CSR program of other PSUs and priv ate corporations such as Coal 
India Limited and Indian Oil  
126.4.2 Transplantation Workshop  
NGHM in joint collaboration with TERI organized a w orkshop on the topic 
"Transplantations along NH's as a measure for carbo n sequestration" on 27th April at 
India Habitat Centre, New Delhi. International expe rt agencies, researchers and 
professionals working in transplantations sector sh ared their views during the day long 
workshop. The recommendations received during the w orkshop will be used for 
developing best management practices for transplant ations. A knowledge report in this 
regards is already prepared and launched during the event held on 1st July.  
126.5 Green Highways Projects Launching  
An event was organised on 1st July at India Interna tional Centre, New Delhi,  in the 
presence of Hon’ble Minister, RT&H to officially aw ard Green Highways Projects for 
this rainy season. Publications related to Green Hi ghways Mission such Vision 
Document, Guidelines, Adopt a Green Highways Progra m, Kisan Harit Rajmarg Yojna 
(Pilot Scheme) were launched.  MoUs were also signe d with Haryana Forest Department 
and AP Urban Greening & Development Corporation Ltd.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
127.  The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee appr eciates the efforts taken by 
the Ministry in the direction of Green Highways Pro jects.  The Committee hopes that 
the blue print drawn for plantation and beautificat ion of highways will come into 
reality. 
Strategies for Implementation of State Roads through Private Sector Financing 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
128. The Committee feels that implementation of Sta te Roads through private Sector 
financing is a right step in positive direction. It  will attract developers since 40% fund of 
total project cost is to be contributed by the cent ral as well as by State Govt. Implementation 
of projects would enable the States to grow and prosper. 
129. The Committee is of the view that the latest t echnology in this sector is with the 
Ministry and it can guide and help developers throu gh NHAI to carry out the projects. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should play active role in helping States at every 
stage of the project. 
(Para 76 and 77 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
130. Central Government through Ministry of Finance  is already having scheme of 
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) of Public Private Partn ership (PPP) projects for State Roads. 
 Under the scheme, any State Road Project taken up on PPP is eligible for VGF grant of up 
to 20% from Ministry of Finance.  The balance grant  up to 20% may be borne by the 
concerned State Government.  

131. The State Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Ra jasthan have done a number of 
projects under this scheme.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
132. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
133. The Committee notes the information submitted by the Ministry regarding the budget 
allocation given for State Roads. Various States gi ve proposal to the Ministry for State road 
funds and Ministry allocate after examining the pro posal. The Committee finds that in the 
year 2015-16, Rs.2809.80 crore has been allocated f or State roads and the Ministry has 
allocated Rs.1772.74 crore to the States upto February, 2016. The Ministry has cited reasons, 
that it has received less number of proposals and s econdly the utilization certificate has not 
been submitted by some of the States to get the funds further. 
134. The Committee finds it strange that why State Govts. are so casual in submitting 
proposals and giving utilization certificates. 
135. For the year 2016-17, under this head Ministry  has received Rs.10,833 crore for the 
purpose. The Committee finds it difficult that how the Ministry would allocate such a large 
amount, when it has exhausted only 1772.74 crore in previous financial year. The Committee 
recommends that Ministry should actively interact w ith the various States and take other 
necessary steps, so that the States give their prop osals and Utilization Certificates in time so 
that allocated fund can be utilized fully and the c ondition of  roads can be improved in 
various parts of the country. 
(Para 78, 79 and 80 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
136. It is submitted that during 2015-16, an amount  of Rs2,369.47 crore was released 
under CRF to state Governments. 
137. Under the Central Road Fund (State Roads) Rule s, 2014, there is provision for 
releasing one third of the annual accrual/allocatio n to the state at the start of financial year 
for works under CRF scheme and this one third amoun t is maintained as reserve while 
releasing funds against Utilisation Certificates (U Cs) to States. Still, there remains some 
delay by some States in timely submission the UCs to the Ministry and the release of funds is 
delayed in such cases. Ministry has taken up the matter with all State Governments to submit 
the UCs in time so that funds are utilised and works are completed without delays. 
138. The Ministry shall review the status of submis sion of UCs and progress of projects 
periodically with State Governments and shall make all efforts to ensure utilization of entire 
outlay earmarked during Financial Year 2016-17.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
139. The Committee notes the reply and further recommend s that the Ministry may 
make all out efforts to get the proposals and utili ty certificates from the States on time 
and ensure that amount sanctioned in the current fi nancial year i.e. 2016-17 is fully 
utilized.  
Roads in Delhi 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
140. The Committee observes that for the year 2015- 16, Delhi was allocated Rs.25 crore 
under State road fund but due to non-receipt of pro posals from Delhi Government, the fund 

was not allocated. The Committee is of the view tha t many roads in Delhi are in bad shape 
and there is immediate need of repair/maintenance o f such roads. It is strange that proposals 
from Delhi Government were not submitted. The Commi ttee would like to know the reasons 
for this. 
141. The Committee recommends the Ministry to take up the Committee’s concern to the 
State Government of Delhi and make all efforts of i mproving roads in Delhi and make it a 
better place to live in. 
(Para 81 and 82of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
142.  This Ministry is primarily responsible for th e development and maintenance of 
National Highway (NHs) network in the country. Pres ently, 82 km length of NHs is in NCT 
of Delhi. All the stretches of NHs passing through NCT of Delhi are maintained in traffic 
worthy condition within the available budgetary resources. 
143. As far as development of roads under Central R oad Fund (CRF) is concerned, this 
Ministry releases the fund to state based on the su bmission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) 
and advance (one third of accrual for the current f inancial year) as per the CRF rules. Total 
accrual upto 2015-16 is Rs. 674.99 crore and out of which Rs. 570.91 crore has been released 
by end of financial year 2015-16 based on the UCs received from NCT of Delhi. 
144. The Committee’s concerns have been taken up wi th State Government of Delhi.  In 
order to enable further release, State Government o f Delhi needs to furnish utilization 
certificates (UCs).  Further, proposals under CRF m ay be considered for sanction in the 
Ministry only upon receipt of same from the State G overnment. Accordingly, State Govt of 
Delhi has been requested to submit UCs for release of fund and proposals for consideration 
under CRF scheme.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
145. The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee furth er recommends that the 
Ministry may keep on reminding the Government of De lhi to submit UCs for further 
release of fund and also send further proposals for consideration under CRF scheme.  
INTER-STATE CONNECTIVITY 
 
State Road Network – Review Of Progress And Constraints  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
146. The Committee wanted to know the status of pro jects of Inter-State Connectivity and 
Economic Importance but the Ministry has only infor med about the length and costs of the 
projects. The Committee wants to know the places an d time-period when these projects are 
going to be completed. The Committee observes that under rule provision, if the fund is 
lacking then it has to be arranged by the executing  agency. The Committee wants to know 
the number of such projects which have been completed so far within stipulated time. 
(Para 86 of the 234 
th  Report) 
Reply of the Government  
147. As per the Central Road Fund (State Roads) Rul es, 2014, the payments for works on 
state roads under EI & ISC schemes are being releas ed by Ministry under Direct Payment 
Procedure (DPP) directly to the contractors. This h as enabled to maintain the cash flow of 
the contractors and progress of many held up projects have been expedited.  
148. The Annual allocation of funds under EI &ISC s chemes was about Rs.294 Crore 
during 2015-16. Till 2015-16, the Annual level of a llocation under the scheme was about Rs 
250 to 300 crore. 

149. However, on account of enhancement of the cess  from Rs.2 to Rs.6 per litre of petrol 
and high speed diesel oil, the allocation has been enhanced to Rs.1,233 crore at BE 2016-17. 
Therefore, generally the fund availability scenario has improved significantly now. 
150. Further, as per the CRF(State Roads) Rules, 20 14, the project under the schemes are 
now fully funded by the Central Government contrary  to earlier policy of 50-50 sharing of 
funds between the Central and States for projects under EI scheme. 
151. It is submitted that out of 219 completed proj ects under EI&ISC scheme, 130 number 
of projects have been completed in time.  
 
152. The list of 47 number of ongoing projects unde r EI&ISC scheme with their revised 
completion time is placed at Annexure-I.  
Details regarding number of completed works under E conomic Importance and Inter-
State 
Connectivity (EI & ISC) Scheme 
Sl. No. Name of State/UT Number of Completed works Number of works which have 
been completed within stipulated 
time 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 1 1 0 0 
2. Assam 6 6 0 0 
3. Bihar 1 1 0 0 
4. Goa 0 1 0 1 
5. Gujarat 24 23 24 23 
6. Haryana 5 7 4 7 
7. Himachal Pradesh 0 4 0 0 
8. Karnataka 2 3 0 1 
9. Kerala 0 4 0 4 
10. Madhya Pradesh 4 12 0 0 
11. Maharashtra 3 9 0 0 
12. Manipur 0 2 0 0 
13. Mizoram 0 2 0 2 
14. Nagaland 2 1 0 0 
15. Odisha 10 7 8 7 
16. Punjab 0 6 0 6 
17. Rajasthan 4 28 0 5 
18. Sikkim 4 7 4 7 
19. Tamil Nadu 4 10 3 9 
20. Tripura 4 0 4 0 
21. Uttar Pradesh 0 8 0 8 
22. West Bengal  0 2 0 2 
23. Puduchhery 0 1 0 1 
 Total 74 145 47 83 
Total (EI&ISC) 219 130 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 

153.  The Committee notes the reply and happy that 219 p rojects under this scheme 
have been completed out of which 130 have been comp leted on time. The Ministry has 
done a commendable job. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
154. The Committee observes that annual budget for 2015-16 was Rs.293 crore which was 
increased to Rs.354.35 crore, but the expenditure u pto February, 2016 is onlyRs.189.25 
crore. 
155. The Committee is constrained to note that even  after increased allocation at Restage 
it could only spend Rs.189.25 crore, then how the M inistry is going to spend Rs.1233 crore 
allocated for 2016-17. The Committee recommends tha t the Ministry should take up the 
matter on priority basis with various States/UTs to  implement the road project of economic 
importance. 
(Para 87and 88 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
156. It is submitted that expenditure under Economi c Importance and Inter-State 
Connectivity (EI&ISC) during 2015-16 was Rs.267.08 crore. The bank of sanction (BOS) as 
on 01.04.2016 for state road works under EI&ISC sch eme is Rs 2,416.36 crore and Ministry 
has already approved In Principle works under EI&IS C scheme amounting to Rs.1434.21 
crore which would enhance the BOS to Rs. 3850.57 crore. 
157. As per the Central Road Fund (State Roads) Rul es, 2017, release of fund were made 
to State Governments for works under ISC scheme(fully funded by Central Government) and 
EI works [which was 50% funded by Central Govt befo re CRF Rules(State Roads), 2014] 
 against Utilisation Certificates and many projects  were held up due to fund scarcity 
(particularly for EI works which were 50% financed from Central Government). 
158. As per the Central Road Fund (State Roads) Rul es, 2014, the payments for works on 
state roads under EI & ISC schemes are being releas ed by Ministry under Direct Payment 
Procedure (DPP) directly to the contractors. This h as enabled to maintain the cash flow of 
the contractors and progress of many held up projec ts have been expedited. All efforts shall 
be made to spend the outlay earmarked for projects under the scheme for 2016-17.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
159.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that remai ning incomplete projects 
and EI & ISC projects will be completed during the current financial year i.e.  2016-17 
Repair & Maintenance  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE 
160. The Committee has the opinion that the mainten ance and repair of the road is as 
important as construction of the road. If, the poth oles and broken roads are not repaired on 
time, it causes more harms to remaining road. The C ommittee thinks that damage to road are 
due to overuse, use of low-grade material and poor quality construction, vagaries of nature 
etc. 
161. The Committee recommends that damaged road be repaired on time to avoid cost 
overrun and inconvenience to the public and also ro ad accidents, fuel wastage and wear and 
tear to vehicles/tyres. 
162. The Committee finds its strange that there are  large no. of roads which require 
maintenance but the allocated fund has not been utilized to repair such roads. 

163. The Committee doesn’t find unutilized money as  saving because, work is there but it 
has not been done. 
164. Maintenance being a non-plan activity there is  also a tendency by the Government to 
apply adhoc cuts in the face of resource constraints. 
(Para 90, 91, 92, 93 and 95 of ibid ) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
165. The Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of NH stretch es are carried out for the stretches 
not covered under any programme or completed stretc hes where there are no liabilities of 
contractors to maintain such stretches.  
166. In addition to this, the NH stretches which ar e developed on EPC mode (Engineering, 
Procurement, Construction), the contractor is respo nsible for remedying of the defects and 
concurrent maintenance of project highway during th e four years defect liability period after 
completion of the work.  
167. For the NH stretches developed on BOT mode, th e Concessionaire is responsible for 
the maintenance of the project highway during the c oncession period. For golden 
quadrilateral stretches which are being widened fro m 4 to 6 lane, the maintenance 
responsibility is with the Concessionaire. 
168. For some of the developed NH stretches through  public funding, maintenance 
contracts have been taken up for a definite time pe riod (4 to 9 years) on Operate, 
Maintenance and Transfer (OMT) basis. The maintenan ce of the project highway under 
OMT contracts is the responsibility of the Concessionaire. 
169. It is pertinent to mention here that the funds  allocation under maintenance head 
during 2016-17 is Rs.2,853.57 crore against the pro jected requirement of Rs.7,070 crore. 
Usually the annual allocation of non-plan funds for  M&R of NHs is about 40% of estimated 
requirements of funds.  This leads to the compulsio n of thin spreading of available resources 
for the NH stretches in need of M&R. This is one of  the main reason for inability to take up 
timely maintenance interventions.  The issue is bei ng taken up every year with Ministry of 
Finance. The concerns of the Committee is noted.  A ll efforts shall be made to ensure better 
upkeep of NH infrastructure.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
170. The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry.  It has 
described all types of modalities and rules pertain ing to maintenance of repair of NHs, 
but the reply is still missing.  The Committee seek s reply on maintenance of NHs which 
are in bad shape and the reasons for non-utilization of funds meant for maintenance. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
171. The Committee feels that maintenance of Nation al Highways is an important work 
which the Ministry has to provide due priority. The  Committee notes that the budget 
allocated by the Ministry for maintenance and repai r is not sufficient and there is a need 
offend to be used for repair of highways. Ministry has submitted that maintenance being a 
non-plan activity there is a cut due to resource crunch. The Ministry has also suggested some 
measures to generate money for the purpose. Out of these, one suggestion which appeals to 
the Committee is to take up short term maintenance works on already developed stretches 
through private sector on operate-maintain-transfer  (OMT) basis. The Committee feels that 
maintenance through private parties would be a better choice as the maintenance work would 
be completed in lesser time. 

(Para 97of ibid ) 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
172. The Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of NH stretch es are carried out for the stretches 
not covered under any programme or completed stretc hes where there are no liabilities of 
contractors to maintain such stretches.  
173. In addition to this, the NH stretches which ar e developed on EPC mode (Engineering, 
Procurement, Construction), the contractor is respo nsible for remedying of the defects and 
concurrent maintenance of project highway during th e four years defect liability period after 
completion of the work.  
174. For the NH stretches developed on BOT mode, th e Concessionaire is responsible for 
the maintenance of the project highway during the c oncession period. For golden 
quadrilateral stretches which are being widened fro m 4 to 6 lane, the maintenance 
responsibility is with the Concessionaire. 
175. For some of the developed NH stretches through  public funding, maintenance 
contracts have been taken up for a definite time pe riod (4 to 9 years) on Operate, 
Maintenance and Transfer (OMT) basis. The maintenan ce of the project highway under 
OMT contracts is the responsibility of the Concessionaire. 
176. It is pertinent to mention here that the funds  allocation under maintenance head 
during 2016-17 is Rs.2,853.57 crore against the pro jected requirement of Rs.7,070 crore. 
Usually the annual allocation of non-plan funds for  M&R of NHs is about 40% of estimated 
requirements of funds.  This leads to the compulsio n of thin spreading of available resources 
for the NH stretches in need of M&R.  This is one o f the main reason for inability to take up 
timely maintenance interventions.  The issue is bei ng taken up every year with Ministry of 
Finance.  The concerns of the Committee is noted.  All efforts shall be made to ensure better 
upkeep of NH infrastructure.  
177. As already mentioned above whereas long term m aintenance liability is vested with 
concessionaire of BOT projects, under EPC Projects,  the contractor is responsible for 
concurrent maintenance liability & Defects liabilit y period of 4 years after completion of 
construction. As majority of the Projects on NHs ar e now to be implemented under these 
modes of delivery, therefore there are no requireme nts of immediate maintenance liability 
for completed stretches. 
178. For developed NH stretches through public fund ing, the Ministry has taken up 
maintenance contracts for a definite time period (4  to 9 years) on Operate, Maintenance and 
Transfer (OMT) basis. The maintenance of the projec t highway under OMT contracts is the 
responsibility of the Concessionaire. Till date, Na tional Highways Authority of India 
(NHAI) has awarded maintenance works on OMT basis for a  NH length of about 3000 km.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
179.  The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
180. The Committee recommends that the maintenance work should be given top priority 
and the fund required for maintenance of NHs be enhanced. The Ministry should take up this 
matter with Ministry of Finance for their support. It can be done also by diverting funds if 
possible, from those heads where savings are expected. The Committee finds no reasons why 

only 40% of the requirement for maintenance of road s is allocated by the Ministry of 
Finance. The Committee recommends that the requirem ent of funds for maintenance of 
National Highways must be allocated to the maximum possible extent by the Ministry of 
Finance. 
(Para 98 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
181. The funds allocated for Maintenance & Repair ( M&R) of NHs during 2016-17 is Rs. 
2,853.57 crore against the estimated requirement of  about Rs.7,070 crore. The Annual Non-
Plan Outlay for M&R of NHs is about 40% of the esti mated requirements. The Ministry has 
been consistently following up with M/o Finance to enhance the outlay. The matter shall be 
taken up again with M/o Finance for enhancement of outlay under RE 2016-17. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
182.  The Committee notes the reply. The Committee furth er recommends that the 
work of repair and maintenance should not suffer du e to shortage of funds and the 
Ministry is requested to take up the issue of fund shortage with the Ministry of Finance 
or arrange the fund from other Heads for the purpos e.  The Committee feels that 
maintenance work should not be compromised at any cost. 
Treatment of Accident Victims  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
183. The Committee feels that accidents on NH is ve ry frequent and it has been seen that 
road accident victims are left to die due to lack of medical facilities during golden hours. The 
Committee recommends that trauma centres be opened at the NH stretch after a gap of 40-50 
km. and patrolling van and ambulance may be deploye d in sufficient number to provide 
medical facilities to accident victims immediately.  The Committee learnt that uninsured 
victim of hit and run cases, do not get required tr eatment. In view of increase ins uch 
accidents, something has to be done to ensure that such victims get at least basic treatments 
during golden hours to save their lives. They shoul d not be denied treatment by any hospital, 
nursing homes, etc, who should have surely to be co mpensated afterwards. Govt. and 
insurance companies and other can be roped in to do something in this regard. 
(Para 100 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
184. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been  implementing a scheme 
‘establishment of an integrated network of Trauma C entres’ along the Golden Quadrilateral, 
North-South and East-West Corridors of the National  Highways by upgrading the trauma 
care facilities in 140 identified State Government hospitals during 11th Five Year Plan. The 
Scheme covers entire Golden Quadrilateral, North-South and East-West corridors. 
185. The Network has been so designed that no traum a victim has to be transported for 
more than 50 kilometer.  It will bring down the mor bidity and mortality on the road by 
observing the golden hour concept. The project comp rises of well equipped life support 
Ambulances at every 50 Kilometer of the completed stretches of the National Highways with 
well-equipped & staffed trauma centre at every 100- 200 Kilometer of the National 
Highways.  
186. During 12th Five year plan, Ministry of Health  and Family Welfare has to establish 
85 Trauma centres (5- Level-I, 25 Level-II, and 55 Level-III) in Government Hospitals on 
National Highways, at the total cost of 534.64 crore. They have also proposed to complete 27 

Trauma Care which was sanctioned during 11th Five Y ear Plan with the estimated cost of 
Rs.  306.81 crore. 
187. As regards ambulance under National Highways A ccidents Relief Service Scheme 
(NHARSS) the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways have supplied 134 Advanced Life 
Support Ambulances (ALSA) to the identified Trauma Care Centre being set up by M/o 
Health & Family Welfare during 2010 to 2013.  
188. Ministry of Road Transport & Highways is imple menting the scheme namely 
“Cashless Treatment” on pilot basis on following stretches:- 
i. Gurgaon - Jaipur stretch of National Highway (NH) N o.8. (Implemented by ICICI 
Lombard General Insurance Company) (Being implemented since July 2013)  
ii. Vadodara – Mumbai stretch of NH No. 8 (Implemented by IFFCO Tokio General 
Insurance Company Limited.) (Implemented during September 2014 to 31.03.2016) 
iii. Ranchi – Rargaon – Mahulia stretch of NH No. 33. (I mplemented by ICICI Lombard 
General Insurance Company) (Implemented during September 2014 to 09.03.2016) 
189. The project envisages transport of accident vi ctims from the accident scene to 
hospital and, where required, from one hospital to another for treatment at a public or private 
hospital for the first 48 hours or Rs. 30,000/-, wh ichever is earlier so that lives of accident 
victims by providing prompt and appropriate medical  care during 'Golden Hour" may be 
saved.  
190. The pilot project will provide guidance in wor king out a proper pan-India scheme. 
Based on the findings of the pilot project, the sch eme for cashless treatment to road accident 
victims would be finalized for country-wide roll ou t. The experience and data gathered 
during the pilot project will provide:  
• Likely average cost of treatment for (A) simple injuries (B) serious injuries.   
• Modalities of treatment and of meeting expenses if the accident victim is not fit for 
discharge after 48 hours. 
• Size of the fund required to be established by MoRT&H 
191. In case of Gurgaon-Jaipur stretch, on an avera ge an ALS ambulance takes 8 minutes 
to reach the road accident victims and 18 to 19 min utes are required to drop the victims to 
the nearest empanelled hospital. BLS ambulance take s 3 minutes to reach the victims and 13 
minutes are required to drop the accident victims t o the nearest hospital.  Till February 2016, 
9869 accidents were attended which includes 12,738 accident victims. The average 
expenditure on one road accident victims is around Rs. 13,500/-.  
192. In case of Ranchi-Mahulia Stretch of NH-33, it  was informed that average time taken 
by a patient to reach the hospital is still 43 minu tes because of inequitable distribution of 
hospitals.  Till February 2016, 784 accidents were attended which includes 1283 accident 
victims. The average expenditure on one road accident victims is around Rs. 11,500/-.  
193. In case of Vadodara – Mumbai stretch of NH No.  8, on an average an ambulance 
takes 7-8 minutes to reach to the road accident vic tims and 15 minutes are required to drop 
the patient to the nearest hospital. Till March 201 6, 1554 accidents were attended. The 
average expenditure on one road accident victims is around Rs. 10,000/-. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 

194 . The Committee is not satisfied with the steps tak en by the Ministry towards 
welfare measures available for accident victims in various stretches of National 
Highways and it further recommends that some more m easures may be taken to 
upgrade the maintenance work. 
Training And Research 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
195. The Committee observes that training is a very  important aspect of an agency 
working in road construction sector and a well trai ned agency can perform its duties more 
efficiently compared to untrained one. The Committe e finds that the Ministry has vision to 
improve the technology, but it has not been implemented so far aggressively. The Committee 
finds that budget allocation for this purpose has h ardly been spent in the last financial year. 
For the current financial year, it has got Rs.100 c rores. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should give priority to road research and the fund may be utilized for the purpose. 
(Para 105 of  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
196. As per sub-rule (b) & (c) / Rule-7 (13) and su b-rule 3/Rule-9 of Central Road Fund 
(State Roads) Rules, 2014, the funds @ 2 % (1% shar e of Executing Agencies (i.e. State 
/UTs)and 1 % share for Central Government) shall be utilised for meeting the cost of Quality 
Assurance System, Training, Research and development for works under CRF Scheme.  
197. Executing agencies are to utilise the funds as  per CRF (State Roads) Rules, 2014 for 
Quality Assurance System, Training, Research and De velopment for works under CRF 
Scheme and Indian Academy of Highway Engineers (IAH E) is utilising the funds for 
training the highway engineers from Central and Sta tes/UTs Governments with entire 
funding including to and fro journey fares. IAHE ha s conducted 10 training programmes 
during 2015-16 in which 118 number of participants participated, out of Rs.3.50 crore 
allocated to IAHE for this purpose during 2015-16.   Apart from this, IAHE imparted 
trainings to about 1,452 nos.of participants during 2015-16. 
198. As intimated in Reply to Question No. 10 of th e 220 th  Report of the Committee, there 
are 4 nos. of Ongoing R&D schemes pertaining to the  Ministry. Further, the Ministry has 
tentatively identified about 41 nos. of R&D schemes  for 2016-17. The Ministry plans to take 
up more and more R&D schemes keeping in mind the en hanced budgetary outlay now 
available for these schemes considering the amended  provision of the CRF(State Roads) 
Rules, 2014as mentioned in sub-para (1) above. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
199.  The Committee notes the reply and suggests that tr aining programme for 
various categories of engineers and other participa nts may be organised on regular 
intervals and the Committee further recommends that  new technology in the training 
programmes may also be incorporated.  
 
 
 
Central Road Fund 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
200. The Committee notes that the fund allocated fo r 2015-16 under  CRF was Rs.33,014 
crores and the expenditure upto February 2016 was R s.27, 066 crores. The committee finds 

that the expenditure has been upto the mark, but gr ants to State and UT for development of 
roads is not very encouraging. Fund for development  of roads in LWE areas is also less 
compared to its allocation. The Committee recommend s that the Ministry should allocate 
more funds under these two heads so that the project could be completed. 
(Para 107 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
201. (1) Central road cess Fund (CRF):- The NH share of cess under CRF for the 
Ministry till 2015-16 BE were earmarked for NHDP. T he Ministry was allocated additional 
outlay under GBS for funding for other major scheme s such as National Highways(Original) 
[NH(O)], Special Programme for Development of Roads  in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) 
affected areas including Tribal Sub-plan (TSP), Cou nterpart funding for Externally Aided 
Projects, etc. 
202. However, with effect from, RE 2015-16, the fun ding under all these schemes have, 
since, been subsumed under NH share of the cess including NHDP. 
203. As regard, the allocation/release of funds to States/expenditures incurred for 
development of State Roads under CRF and Economic I mportance and Inter State 
Connectivity (EI&ISC) schemes of the Ministry during 2015-16, the details are as follows:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
204. The efforts shall be made to expedite progress  of works and ensure that the funds 
earmarked during 2016-17 for these schemes are fully utilized/spent. 
205. (2) Special Programme for development of Roads in LWE affected areas: -Outlay 
provided under BE 2016-17 of Rs. 700 crore is based on estimated fund requirement.  
206. As already mentioned in reply to observation o f the Committee vide Para 40 and 41 
of the 234 
th  Report, 4,052 km road length has been completed as  on 31.05.2016 out of the 
total  awarded length of 5,359 km. However, fund re quirement shall be duly amended at RE 
stage and additional fund, if required, shall be sought accordingly under RE 2016-17. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
207.  The Committee notes the reply. 
Bridge Fee Fund  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
208. The Committee observes that CRF and Bridge Fee  Fund get handsome collection and 
the collected sum goes back to NHAI and State PWDs.  The Committee also notes that total 
plan budget of Rs.55,000 crore during 2016-17, is t o be funded through CRF and permanent 
Bridge Fees Fund. The Committee would like to say t hat since 90% of budget of Ministry of 
Scheme  BE  
(2015-16)  
RE  
(2015-16) 
 
Release/Expenditure 
upto 31/3/16  
CRF for State Roads 2,910.00  2,910.00  2,398.10 
Economic  Importance / Inter-state 
connectivity  
294.00 
 354.35  267.08 

Road Transport & Highways is funded by road users. It should be utilized properly for 
interest of public at large in a efficient manner. 
(Para 111of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
209. All efforts shall be made to ensure that the e ntire allocation earmarked to the 
Ministry, including the CRF and Toll Remittances/Bridge Fee Funds, are effectively utilized. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
210.  The Committee notes the reply. 
Development Of National Highways In The North-Eastern Region  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE  
211. The Committee observes that North Eastern Regi on is a hilly terrain and to develop 
road infrastructure is a tedious job. The Committee finds that work under special Accelerated 
Road Development Programme is North Eastern Region (SARDP-NE) is going on for last 
several years. The Committee understand the problem  being faced by the agencies in 
constructing and maintaining the road in North East  area. The Ministry has got Rs.5,000 
crore for the financial year 2016-17 for the road p rojects in NER. The Committee 
recommends that Ministry should extend all types of  help to State PWDs in carrying out the 
work. 
(Para 115of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
212. The pace of construction is slow due to variou s reasons, which are as below:- 
i. Delay in Land Acquisition 
ii. Delay in Forest Clearance 
iii. Extended monsoon period in NER 
iv. Slow/poor mobilization by some of  the Contractors 
v. Non availability of quarries for materials. 
vi. Departmental construction by BRO 
213. In order to expedite road construction , Minis try of Road Transport & Highways has 
set up a company under Company Act named as “Nation al Highways and Infrastructure 
Development Corporation limited” (NHIDCL)   on 18th  July 2014 for construction/up 
gradation/widening of National Highways in the regi ons that share international boundaries 
with neighboring countries.  
214. In order to avoid cost and time overrun, Minis try has adopted Engineering 
Procurement, and Construction (EPC) mode for award of new works so that works can be 
completed within stipulated time and cost. Further,  review meetings and monitoring of 
projects are being done at highest level in the Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
215.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the M inistry will make some 
more efforts to complete the projects undertaken by them in the North-Eastern states. 
Amenities 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 

216. The Committee recommends that in future when t he Ministry plan Highways at the 
time of acquiring land itself, they should take car e of the facilities such as drinking  water, 
medical facilities, restaurant, toilets etc. 
(Para 118 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
217. National Highways Authority of India(NHAI) has  entrusted the task for development 
of Way Side Amenities (WSAs) along National Highway s(NHs) to Indian Highways 
Management Company Limited (IHMCL). IHMCL was incor porated under the Companies 
Act, 1956 to carryout Electronic Tolling and other allied works by NHAI jointly with its 
Concessionaires and Financial Institutions.  
218. Project Management Consultant (PMC) has been a ppointed for development of 
wayside amenities (WSAs)and PMC has visited 106 sit es of WSAs out of total 167 sites 
identified for setting up Way Side Amenities. The l and is available for 78 nos. of sites and 
the process for acquiring land at remaining sites i n going on.  The feasibility reports for 39 
sites have been prepared. 12 number of sites are developed and ready to be leased for WSAs. 
  
219. The wayside amenities would include facilities  such as: 
• Parking for cars, buses & trucks separately,  
• Restaurant/food court, low cost dhaba,  
• Telephone booth/ATM,  
• Fuel station & Minor repair shop,  
• Rest rooms for short-stay,  
• Clean Toilets,  
• Landscaping,  
• Kiosk for sale of miscellaneous sundry items 
• Space for spreading Government welfare programme.  
220. The facilities for truckers & other road users  are proposed to be segregated. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
221.  The Committee is happy to note the proposed steps to be taken by the Ministry 
regarding way side amenities to passengers. The Com mittee further recommends that 
the facilities for truckers and other road users ma y be segregated.  It would be a 
welcome step towards giving facilities to riders who travel with families. 
 
 
Road Connectivity to Minor Ports 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
222. The Committee feels that the connectivity to m inor ports is of utmost importance 
since the minor ports are now growing faster and lo ad and unload substantial volume of 
cargo/containers. The Ministry has chalked out the plan to develop 2 lane roads in  nearby 
areas of 50 minor ports. The Committee would like t o know the progress of the projects 
taken up by the Ministry through State PWDs. 
(Para 120 of ibid ) 

Reply of the Government  
223. This Ministry is primarily responsible for dev elopment and maintenance of National 
Highways across the country.  Hence, there is no se parate proposal in the Ministry for 
connectivity to minor ports through State PWDs.  Ho wever, the Ministry is considering to 
take up a new scheme which inter-alia envisages to provide connectivity in a length of about 
1,000 kms to minor ports handling Export-Import car go.  However, the scheme is yet to be 
launched formally.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
224. The Committee notes the reply. 
Special Package for development of Road Connectivity to Airports 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATION   OF THE COMMITTEE 
225. The Committee observes that the Ministry has c halked out the development of road 
connectivity to 24 airports in the country for arou nd 15 km area around each airport at an 
estimated cost of Rs.5 crore per kilometre. The Com mittee would like to know the progress 
made in the project how much fund so far allocated for this scheme, which airport has been 
linked with good roads, and by when all the propose d 24 airports will be linked with good 
roads. 
(Para 122 of ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
 
226. Various new schemes were proposed to be taken up during the twelfth Five Year Plan 
(2012-17). These included proposal for taking up Sp ecial package for development of road 
connectivity for 24 Airports involving 360 km for total GBS requirement of Rs. 1,800 crore. 
227. However, in the absence of additional budgetar y supports, the same could not be 
taken up so far. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
228.  The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
 
 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS-AT A GLANCE  
 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 7) 
Achievement of Target  
 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee hopes that the efforts made by 
the Ministry to resolve the hindrances in the way o f achieving target of road 
constructions may yield results. 
(Para 14) 
Road Development  
 The Committee is still not convinced with the reply  of the Ministry regarding 
funds generation for road projects.  Six months of current financial year i.e. 2016-17 
has lapsed and the Ministry is still engaged in tal ks with LIC/EPFO for issuing bonds 
etc.  The Committee further recommends to expedite the process of funds generation 
for road projects other-wise many of the projects t argeted during the current financial 
year will remain incomplete. 
(Para 21) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 24) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 28) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 34) 
Budget for (2016-17)  
 The Committee notes the reply and finds that the M inistry is taking various 
initiatives to solve the problems of languishing pr ojects. The Committee is worried 
about those projects where substantial money has be en invested but the projects are 
not yet ready.  The Committee further recommends th at the Ministry should treat the 
completion of delayed projects on priority basis. 
(Para 43) 
Maintenance of National Highways  
 The Committee is not convinced with the reply of th e Ministry.  From the reply, 
it is clear that the fund allocation is not suffici ent for the maintenance and repair of 
NHs.  It can be further inferred from the reply tha t the responsibility of maintenance 
and repair lies with concessionaire, where the stre tches were developed on BOT mode, 
it is similar in the case of NHs developed on EPC m ode then where the question arises 
of fund for the maintenance of these roads.  The re ply is not clear about the length of 
road which is to be maintained by NHAI solely. The Committee further recommends 
that there should be strict monitoring mechanism in  the NHAI to ensure that the 
concessionaire, are adhered to the agreements to ex ecuting the road repair works in 
their respective stretches of national Highways. 
(Para 51) 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the re quired fund would be 
generated to complete the targeted projects. 
(Para 52) 

Budget for NHAI  
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the re quired fund would be 
generated to complete the targeted projects. 
(Para 58) 
Budget for National Highways (O)  
The Committee is happy to note that 4,052 Km length  of road has been 
completed till May, 2016.   
(Para 64) 
Delayed Road Projects  
 The Committee notes the reply. Reply is very encou raging and the Committee 
hopes that the steps taken by the Ministry will bring the desired results. 
(Para 68) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 71) 
Delays in Project Implementation  
 The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee also appreciates the initiatives 
taken by the Ministry and hopes that these steps wo uld help in completing the delayed 
projects. However, the Ministry is silent over pena lty measures to be imposed upon 
errant contractors. 
(Para 74) 
Projects linked to Port Connectivity  
 The Committee observes that from the reply of the Ministry, it seems that the 
Government of Tamil Nadu is least interested in com pleting the Chennai-Ennore 
project because the State Government of Tamil Nadu has failed to give encumbrance 
free land for the project. The Committee recommends  that the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways and NHAI pursue the matter m ore vigorously with the 
Government of Tamil Nadu to get the land to complete the project. 
(Para 81) 
Average Contribution of NH During 2015-16  
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the t arget set by the Ministry 
itself could be achieved.  
(Para 86) 
Infusion of Additional Funds to Languishing Projects  
 The Committee notes the reply and desires that the languishing projects report 
may be furnished for information of the Committee a long with time frame when these 
projects would be physically completed. 
(Para 90) 
Public Transport System  
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes for instal lation of various security 
measures (IT based) in the public transport vehicles at the earliest. 
(Para 94) 
Development of Bus Terminals and Multi Modal Transit Terminal on BOT Basis  

The Committee hopes that the Ministry will accord p riority in developing bus 
terminals and multi modal transport terminal in tho se places where the number of 
inter-state vehicles are very large. 
(Para 97) 
Work Towards Safety of Women on Public Transport System  
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the s ecurity equipments would be 
installed soon in public transport system in Delhi because Delhi has witnessed one of 
the most heinous crimes towards a woman in the recent past. 
(Para 101) 
Amendment in Motor Vehicle Act  
 The Committee notes the reply and to state that the  Motor Vehicles 
(Amendment) Bill, 2016 has already been referred to  the Committee to consider and 
report thereon.  The Committee will soon deliberate  upon various amendments 
suggested by the Ministry and will try to give mean ingful recommendations on the 
subject. 
(Para 107) 
Planning for State Highway Development Project  
 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry h as upgraded the status of 
state highways as National Highways and further ste ps have been taken to declare 
more stretch as N.H. depending upon their DPRs.  Th e Committee recommends that 
mere declaration of state highways as national high ways won't serve the purpose but at 
the same time these length should be upgraded and m aintained properly for smooth 
running of traffic.  
(Para 114) 
Urban Linkages to National Expressways Network  
 The Committee is not happy with the reply of the M inistry.  The Committee 
recommends that decongestion plan with the road lin kages are very essential for 
smooth flow of traffic.  The Ministry may take up t he issue with the State Governments 
to work in this direction.  Schemes are there to re move the bottlenecks but the work is 
not going on and the Ministry has cited the reason as inadequate response from the 
State Governments.  The Committee recommends that v arious teams should be formed 
to look into the matter at specific places and purs ue the matter with the State 
Governments for their co-operation.  
(Para 121) 
 The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee appr eciates the efforts taken by 
the Ministry in the direction of Green Highways Pro jects.  The Committee hopes that 
the blue print drawn for plantation and beautificat ion of highways will come into 
reality. 
(Para 127) 
Strategies for Implementation of State Roads through Private Sector Financing  
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 132) 
 The Committee notes the reply and further recommend s that the Ministry may 
make all out efforts to get the proposals and utili ty certificates from the States on time 

and ensure that amount sanctioned in the current fi nancial year i.e. 2016-17 is fully 
utilized.  
(Para 139) 
Roads in Delhi  
 The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee furth er recommends that the 
Ministry may keep on reminding the Government of De lhi to submit UCs for further 
release of fund and also send further proposals for consideration under CRF scheme. 
(Para 145) 
INTER-STATE CONNECTIVITY  
State Road Network – Review of Progress And Constraints  
 The Committee notes the reply and happy that 219 p rojects under this scheme 
have been completed out of which 130 have been comp leted on time. The Ministry has 
done a commendable job. 
(Para 153) 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that remai ning incomplete projects 
and EI & ISC projects will be completed during the current financial year i.e.  2016-17. 
(Para 159) 
Repair & Maintenance  
 The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Ministry.  It has 
described all types of modalities and rules pertain ing to maintenance of repair of NHs, 
but the reply is still missing.  The Committee seek s reply on maintenance of NHs which 
are in bad shape and the reasons for non-utilization of funds meant for maintenance. 
(Para 170) 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 179) 
 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee furth er recommends that the 
work of repair and maintenance should not suffer du e to shortage of funds and the 
Ministry is requested to take up the issue of fund shortage with the Ministry of Finance 
or arrange the fund from other Heads for the purpos e.  The Committee feels that 
maintenance work should not be compromised at any cost. 
(Para 182) 
Treatment of Accident Victims  
 The Committee is not satisfied with the steps take n by the Ministry towards 
welfare measures available for accident victims in various stretches of National 
Highways and it further recommends that some more m easures may be taken to 
upgrade the maintenance work. 
(Para 194) 
 
Training and Research 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and suggests that tr aining programme for 
various categories of engineers and other participa nts may be organised on regular 
intervals and the Committee further recommends that  new technology in the training 
programmes may also be incorporated.  
(Para 199) 
Central Road Fund  

 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 207) 
Bridge Fee Fund  
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 210) 
Development of National Highways in the North-Eastern Region  
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the M inistry will make some 
more efforts to complete the projects undertaken by them in the North-Eastern states. 
(Para 215) 
Amenities  
 The Committee is happy to note the proposed steps to be taken by the Ministry 
regarding way side amenities to passengers. The Com mittee further recommends that 
the facilities for truckers and other road users ma y be segregated.  It would be a 
welcome step towards giving facilities to riders who travel with families. 
(Para 221) 
Road Connectivity to Minor Ports  
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 224) 
Special Package for development of Road Connectivity to Airports  
 The Committee notes the reply. 
(Para 228) 
 
 
 
  

 
ANNEXURE-I 
Details of Ongoing Works Sanctioned under Economic Importance and  
Inter-State Connectivity ( EI & ISC) Scheme  
Sl. 
No.  
State  Name of the Sche  
-me 
Length 
 (km) 
 
Sanctio  
n-ed  
Cost  
(Rs in  
crore|)  
Date  
of  
Sanction  
 
Date of 
 Award  
 
Scheduled  
 date of  
completion  
 as per  
Contract  
Agreement 
 
 
 Revised  
 target  
date of 
 
 completion 
 
          
  1 Andhra 
 Pradesh 
Widening and 
Strengthening  
of Kadiri- 
Hindupur (old  
Rajampet –  
Kadiri –  
Thumkur road) 
 
from km.28/0  
to km.42/400 in  
Anantapur  
district in  
Andhra  
Pradesh. 
ISC  14.4 20.2  12.11.2015  11.05.2017  11.05.2017 
  2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arunachal  
 Pradesh 
 
 
 
C/o Road from  
Gothung  
Pagma Senmak 
 
Lagam under  
Dirang  
Division in  
West Kameng  
Dist.(12.20 km) 
EI  12.20 20.46 25 -11-2011  05 -12-2011  31-03-2014  31-03-2018 
  3 
Improvement 
of Ego-Daring- 
Daring-Zirdo 
 (L= 13.00 km) 
EI  13.00 10.00 15 -04-2015  - - 31-03- 2018 
  4 
Improvement  
of Yingkiong- 
Gette-Pugging  
road under  
Economic  
Importance in 
 the state of  
EI  20.65 28.27 14 -06-2016  - - 31-03- 2019 

Arunachal  
Pradesh. 
  5 
C/o Road from 
 Mite Village to 
 Upper  
Subansiri  
District to  
Gogamukh in  
Assam via  
Kote, Yetor,  
Hanker, Niji,  
Sarijo, Old  
Maga, Kicho,  
Dingram and 
 Dollungmukh 
 (L=70 lm) Ph- 
I: 0 to 19.00  
km. 
ISC  19.00 24.36 09 -12-2011  30 -08-2012  30-11-2015  31-03-2018 
6 
Shergaon- 
Doimara-Foot  
Hills  
(Kamengbari)- 
Missamari- 
Thelamara on 
 NH-52 (Sh:- 
Shergaon- 
Doimara=72.00 
 km) Ph:- I = 0  
to 28 km 
ISC  28.00 14.85 19 -10-2007  2010  31-03-2017  31-03-2018 
7 
C/o Road from 
 Boasimla in  
Arunachal  
Pradesh to  
Ananda Tea  
Estate  
(Pathalipam) in 
  Assam via  
Dollungmukh  
Circle  
(L=100.00 km), 
 Ph-I: 0 to 
 25.00 km. 
ISC  25.00 22.55 09 -12-2010  12 -10-2015  31-12-2017  31-03-2018 
8 C/o Road from 
 Yachuli of  ISC  20.00 23.39 23 -10-2008  26 -12-2014  31-03-2017  31-03-2018 

Lower  
Subansiri  
Diastrict of AP 
 to  
Gerugamukh of 
 Assam via  
Mai, Leg, Pei, 
 Pochu & Dado 
 village, phase- 
I:0 to 20.00  
km under  
centrally  
sponsored  
scheme of Inter 
 state  
connectivity in 
 AP 
9 
C/o Road from 
 C.O. Hq.  
Balemu to  
Bhairakund  
(L= 3.12 km) 
ISC  3.12 7.45 25 -09-2014  23 -12-2015  31-03-2017  31-12-2017 
10  
Assam 
Upgradation &  
strengthening  
of road from  
16th km of  
Golaghat- 
Merapani road  
(SH-34) to  
Sarupatahr  
Town via  
jamuguri &  
Borapathar 
ISC  27.71 19.42 12.02.15  11.08.15  12.04.17 12.04.17  
11  
Widening &  
Strengthening 
 of Dibong  
Ghat  
Chapakhowa 
Tezu road 
ISC  27.5 41.04 22.01.15  29.08.15  28.08.17 28.08.17  
12  Himachal  
 Pradesh 
Improvement  
& Up-gradation 
 of Hoshiarpur  
(Bankhandi)   
Punjab Border 
ISC  15.3 17.47 04.03.2014  16.10.2014  30.10.2016  30.10.2016 

 to Una  
(Jhalera) road 
 km. 0/0 to  
15/300. MDR- 
40. 
13  
Improvement  
& Up-gradation 
 of Nurpur – 
Sanjha Nallah 
 Lahru Tunu  
Hatti road upto  
Punjab Border  
from km 0/0 to 
 40/810 on SH- 
28 
ISC  40.81 37.43 31.03.2015  17.12.2015  08.08.2017  08.08.2017 
14  
Improvement  
and  
upgradation of 
 Bathri Sundla  
Langera J&K  
boundary/HP  
border road km 
 80/0 to 93/400 
 to double lane 
 standard in  
District  
Chamba. 
ISC  13.4 25.38 23.11.2015 27.06.2016  27.06.2018 27.06.2018 
15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jharkhand 
Widening from  
5.5m to 7.0m & 
 Strengthening  
of Chhattarpur  
to Taridih Road 
 (length- 10.80  
km) for the  
year 2014-15 
ISC 
 10.8 24.23 31.03.2015 28.10.2015  12.02.2018 12.02.2018 
16  
Widening from 
 5.5m to 7.0m  
&  
Strengthening  
of Taridih  
Road to umaria 
 Road (length-  
12.875 km) for 
 the year 2014- 
ISC 
 12.875 20.85 28.05.2015 28.10.2015  12.08.2017 12.08.2017 

15 
17  
Karnataka 
Construction of 
 Bridge across  
River  
Tungabhadra  
near Haravi  
village in  
Hadagali  
Taluk, Bellary  
Dist. 
ISC   20.46 24.01.11  30.05.11 
29.05.14.EOT 
31.03.17 
18  
Improvement  
to road from  
Gulbarga to  
Maharastra  
border via  
Chowdapur- 
Gangapur- 
Afzalpur  
(Selected  
reaches) 
ISC  46.23 76.37 18.02.13.  28.10.2014  27.04.2016 31.03.17 
19  Maharashtra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maharasht 
Improvement 
 to Saundane  
Kalwan  
Borgaon  
Surgana  
Umbarthan  
Bardipada to 
 State Border 
 km 69/00 to 
 136/00 in  
SH22 Taluka  
Surgana Distt. 
 Nashik 
ISC  67  78.65 24.06.2014 20.04.2015  19.04.2017 19.04.2017 
20  
Construction of 
 4-lane flyover 
 on NH-6  
integared with  
ROBs and river 
 bridge  
including  
approach  
ramps, service  
roads,  
footpaths over  
EI  6.94 649.5 23.12.2015 11.01.2016  10.07.2018 10.07.2018 

RCC utility  
ducts from  
Pardi Octroi  
Naka to Itwari 
 (Ch. 544.715  
to 548.015 &  
Inne Ring Road 
 from  
Manewada to  
Kalmna  
(Km28.810 to  
Km23.048) and  
from Rani  
Prajapati  
square to  
Vaishnodevi  
Square(Km0.02  
to Km0.546)  
including  
RUIBs on LC 
 No. 71 & 72  
and Inner ring 
 roasd junction  
to APMC  
anamsarket  
Gate in  
Nagpur,  
Maharashtra on  
EPC mode und 
21  
Manipur 
Construction of 
 road from NH- 
2 (Mao in  
Manipur) to 
 Kedima  
(Nagaland  
Border) under  
ISC in the State 
 of Manipur 
ISC 
 11.6 24.17 21.10.2014 18.03.2015  01.04.2017 01.04.2017 
22  
Construction of 
 road from  
Karong NH-39( 
 in Manipur) to  
Kedima  
(Nagaland  
ISC  38.9 37.29 23.03.2015 08.09.2015  27.09.2017 27.09.2017 

Border) under  
ISC in the State 
 of Manipur 
23  
Meghalaya 
Reconstruction  
of major bridge  
across river  
Myntang along 
 with its  
approached on 
 Sahsniang-  
Kurileya Road  
in the State of  
Meghalaya 
ISC  0 4.29 06.08.2004 27.07.2005  31.03.2014 Dec-16 
24  
Rehabilitation  
of Pasyih- 
Garampani 
 Road  
(Improvement  
of Riding  
Quality) 
ISC  20  20.65 13.10.2011 15.06.2012  31.12.2013 Oct-16 
25  
Nagaland  
Construction of  
road from Tizit  
to Nokzang via 
 Yanpan,  
Sukho and  
Yaukun 
ISC  32.6 3478.69 25.11.10  21.07.11 21.07.14  Mar, 18 
26  
Construction of  
road from  
razhaphe to  
Dhansiri via  
Kiyeto &  
Industrial  
Growth centre 
 Ganeshnagar 
ISC  21  3500 22.02.12  17.11.12 17.11.16  Jun, 17 
27  
Improvement 
 of road from  
Aghunato to  
Asuto via  
Satami 
EI  16  1084.28 24.03.06  06.04.06 06.04.09  Mar, 17 
28  
Improvement  
of Defence  
road Jn. To  
Tokiye Town  
EI  8 906.1 24.03.06  06.04.06 06.04.09  Mar, 17 

to Sheipu via  
Tokhini road 
29  
Improvement  
of road from  
NEC Jn. Near  
Pondogong  
Kongtsunyu- 
Saqtiqa)13- 
33.6 km)(ph-1) 
EI  25  2932.07 17.11.06  21.12.06 21.12.09  Nov, 17 
30  
Odisha 
Improvement 
 to  Vizag- 
Jeypore road  
from  
173/00Km to 
 198/00Km in  
EPC Mode 
ISC  25  55.01  25.06.2015  24.12.2016 24.12.2016 
31  
Widening &  
Strengthening 
of Chipat Jn.to 
 Baripada – 
Baghara  
road(ODR) 
 from  14/0 to 
 39/000Km 
ISC  25  52.43 30.03.2015 18.01.2016  17.01.2018 17.01.2018 
32  
Rajasthan  
Four Laning of 
 Kuchaman  
Didwana  
Ladun Road  
SH-7D road 
 km 110/0  
(Rehman Gate) 
 to 115/550  
(Hospital  
Chorahan) 
EI  5.55 14.75 09.03.2015 18.07.2015  18.07.2016 30.11.16 
33  
Widening to 2- 
Lane &  
Strenthening of 
 Ajmer  
Badhighati- 
Jayal- Ganeri  
Road SH-60 
 road from km  
164/0  
(Kayamkhani  
EI  3.40 4.78 09.03.2016 24.06.2015  24.01.2016 30.08.16 

Hostel) to 164 
 /900  
(Bhagatsingh  
Circle) & km  
167/0  to  
169/500 
34  
Construction of 
 High level  
Thapara Bridge 
 on Chordi  
Choraya-Kuba- 
Anandpuri road 
 in KM 22 of  
Banswara  
District on EPC 
 Mode 
ISC   37.86 24.07.2015 08.06.2016  07.06.2018 07.06.2018 
35  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Sikkim 
Construction of 
 Gurassey road 
 from Bio- 
Diversity park 
 (Temi) 
EI  7.00 2,021.84  E&I- SK- 26-Mar-08  Dec,12 Dec,17 
36  
Construction of 
 road from  
Radong (NH 
 31 A ) to  
Kimchithang  
via Chuba km 
 1st to 15 th 
EI  15.00 1,403.77 SK -E&I - 21-Apr-08  20-Apr-14 March, 2017 
37  
Upgradation  
widening,  
drainage,  
carpeting and  
P/W on Chuba  
Parbing road  
km 1st to 11th. 
EI  11.00 926.90 SK E&I 30-Dec-10  30-Dec-13 March, 2018 
38  
Construction of 
 3road from  
Salangdang to 
 Lohdhama  
including 5  
nos. of bridges. 
ISC 
 4.50 1647.00 ISC-SK- 5-Sep-09 4-Oct-12 April, 2019 
39  Upgradation, 
 Widening and  ISC  26.26 3118.51 ISC-SK- 24-Jul-12 23-Jul- 15 December, 

Improvement 
 of Budang-  
Chumboong-  
Chakhung-  
Soreng road in 
 West Sikkim 
40  
Upgradation  
and Carpeting  
of Namchi 
 Sikip wok road 
 in South  
Sikkim. 
ISC  23.00 2472.43 ISC-SK- 7-Aug-13  6-Aug-16 December, 
41  
Tamil  
Nadu 
Improvements  
work from km  
0/0-71/552 on  
SH -179 on  
kanyakumari  
 
ISC 
 71.55 6829.73 27.07.15  24.02.2016  23.02.2017  23.02.2017 
42  
Improvements  
to Paraseri –  
Monday  
market-  
Pudukadai road 
 in km 0/0-15/8 
 &km 17/2 –  
25/7 (SH-91)- 
ISC  24.30 2261.24 24.07.15  04.03.2016  03.01.2017  03.01.2017 
43  
Telangana  
Improvements 
 by Widening 
 and  
Strengthening 
 of Boath- 
Kinwat road  
from Km 0/0 to 
 16/0 in  
Adilabad  
District. 
ISC  16  36.46 28.05.2015 03.12.2015  02.06.2017  02.06.2017 
44  
Construction of 
 Flyover at  
Hanumanpet  
Cross roads,  
Peddavoora – 
Miryalaguda in 
 Km.43/0-4 and 
EI  Bridge Central 30.07.2009 01.03.2012  28.02.2014 31.10.17 

 Narketpalli – 
Addnaki road 
 from km.61/2- 
4 in  
Miryalguda  
Town 
45  
Uttar  
Pradesh 
Construction of  
bridge on  
Yamuna River  
on Lakhnauti-  
karnal marg in 
 District  
Shaharanpur 
ISC  0 29.29 10.02.2010 Oct-10 Oct-12  31.03.17 
46  
Widening &  
strengthening  
of Hargaon-  
Daeli-  
Piparjhala road 
 in District  
Sitapur/  
Lakhimpur 
 Kheri 
ISC  17.7 31.04 22.03.2012 Apr-13 Dec-16 Dec- 16 
47  West  
Bengal  
Strengthening  
and IRQ from 
 Murarai (15  
km) to Rajgram 
 (31 km) of  
SH-7 in  
Birbhum (in  
Principle  
Sanction) 
ISC 
 16  56.51 31.07.2015 10.02.2016  24.02.2018  24.02.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

THE   234 th   REPORT OF   THE   DEPARTMENT - RELATED 
  PARLAIMENTARY   STANDING   COMMITTEE   ON   TRANS PORT, 
  TOURISM   AND   CULTURE   ON   “DEMANDS   FOR   G RANTS (2016-17)   OF 
  MINISTRY   OF   ROAD   TRANSPORT   &   HIGHWAYS”  
Status   of   recommendation / observations   accepted   by   the   Government  
Para  
No of 234 
Report 
Brief issue and status of recommendation  Accepted or 
not  
7 The expenditure percentage is good Accepted. 
9 The Ministry should proactively work as coordinat or/facilitator Accepted 
13, 14 & 15 Projection of IEBR Accepted  
16 & 17 Performance of NHAI Accepted 
18 Non- utilization of funds under SARDP(NE) Accept ed 
19 & 20 Less expenditure under M&R Accepted 
23, 24 & 25 Completion of delayed project by NHAI Accepted. 
28 & 29 Allocation for maintenance of NHs is very poor Acce pted. 
36, 37 & 38 Budget for NHAI Accepted 
40 & 41 Special Programme for Development of Roads in the L eft Wing 
Extremism (LWE) Affected Areas on priority basis 
Accepted  
44 & 45 Delayed road projects – NHAI Accepted. 
46 Timely completion of projects Accepted. 
48 Delays in project implementation Accepted 
50, 51 & 52 Projects linked to port connectivity Accepted. 
55 Average contribution of NH during 2015-16 Accept ed. 
57 Infusion of additional funds to languishing proj ects Accepted 
59 Modern technology should be used in the transpor t system Accepted  
61 Development of Bus Terminals And Multi Modal Transit Terminal 
on BOT Basis 
Accepted. 
63 work towards safety of women on public transport  system Accepted. 
66 Amendment in motor vehicle act Accepted 
69 Proper planning for state highway development pr oject Accepted. 
71 & 72 Urban linkages to national expressways network Acce pted. 
74 Plantation  of trees alongside the roads Accepte d 
76 & 77 strategies for implementation of state roads through private 
sector financing 
Accepted  
78, 79 & 80 Utilization of funds under CRF Accepted. 
81& 82 Non utilization of  CRF fund by State Govt. Delhi A ccepted. 
86 Number of projects completed under EI&ISC Scheme  Accepted 
87 & 88 Proper implementation of road project under EI Acce pted. 
90, 91, 92, 
93 & 95 
Poor maintenance of roads Accepted. 
97 Development of NH stretches through public fundi ng Accepted 
98 Enhancement of funds under  M&R Accepted  
100  Treatment of accident victims Accepted. 
105  Priority to road research and maximum utilization of funds Accepted. 
107  Fund allocation under CRF & LWE  Accepted 
111  Proper utilization of funds under CRF & PBFF Accept ed. 
115  Development of NHs in the NE Region Accepted. 

118  Wayside amenities Accepted 
120  Road connectivity to minor ports Accepted  
122  Special package for development of road connectivity to Airports Accepted. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 