file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                                                       
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (LAKHIPUR-BHANGA
STRETCH OF THE BARAK RIVER) BILL, 2007.
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4.3.2008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4.3.2008)
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 MARCH, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (LAKHIPUR-BHANGA
STRETCH OF THE BARAK RIVER) BILL, 2007.
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON      4.3.2008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON    4.3.2008)

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
MARCH, 2008/ PHALGUNA,1929 (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
PAGES
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                      (i)        
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                (ii)
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                1 -
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE        
5.             ANNEXURE                                                                                             
6.         MINUTES                                                                                                                            
.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury             - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.   Shri Naresh Gujral
4.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5.
      Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9.      Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.  Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.  Shri Joachim Baxla
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Smt. Priya Dutt
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri P. Karunakaran
21.  *Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
22.  Dr. P.P. Koya
23.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Hemlal Murmu
27.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28.  Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh
30.  Shri Suraj Singh

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
31.  Shri Prahlad Joshi
32.  **Shri Rakesh Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
  
* Expired on 13.11.2007
** Nominated on 1.12.2007.                                                  (i)
 
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised  by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and
 Thirtieth  Report of the Committee on the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River) Bill,
 2007*.
2.         In pursuance of rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble
 Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 29 th August, 2007 and pending
 therein, to the Committee on 28 th September, 2007 for examination and report within three months.  On the request
 being made by the Chairman of the Committee, the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted extension of time upto
 the first day of the last week of the Budget Session (first part) of Rajya Sabha for presentation of the report of the
 Committee on the aforesaid Bill.
3.          The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Department of Shipping and the Chairman, IWAI and other
 senior officers at its meeting held on the 23
rd October, 2007 on the provisions of the Bill.  
4.         The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Shipping,
 Chairman, IWAI for the assistance and inputs provided during deliberations on the provisions of the Bill for finalizing
 the Committee Report.
5.        The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same on the 31st  January, 2008.
                                                                                                                                  
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                               SITARAM YECHURY
January 31, 2008                                                                              Chairman
                        Magha 11, 1929 (Saka)                                Department-related Parliamentary Standing
        Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
_____________________________________________________
*   Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 29.8.2007.
**   Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.44503, dated 1.10.2007.
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)
REPORT

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
 
            The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga  stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007 was introduced in the Lok
 Sabha on 29th August, 2007. On 28 th  September, 2007, the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the
 Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha referred the Bill to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Transport, Tourism & Culture for examination and Report.  Under the mandate, the Committee has examined the Bill
 and finalised the Report.  The Bill seeks to provide for the declaration of the Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of the Barak river
 in the State of Assam to be a national waterway and also to provide for the regulation and development of the said
 stretch of the river for purposes of shipping and navigation on the said waterway and for matters connected therewith or
 incidental thereto. (Annexure-I)
2.       In the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the Government has enumerated the objects to be achieved by
 this legislation.
2.1       The Department of Shipping informed that in the absence of a suitable organization and paucity of resources with
 the State Governments, development of Inland Water Transport (IWT) has not made much headway. Certain advantages
 in this mode of transport are its low cost of transport, energy efficiency, generation of employment among weaker
 sections of the society and eco-friendly nature. Various committees set up by the Government for the purpose of looking
 into this matter recommended that the Central Government should declare certain waterways as National Waterways
 and assume responsibility for their development. The Central Government has accordingly constituted the Inland
 Waterways Authority of India under the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 for the regulation and
 development of inland waterways for the purposes of shipping and navigation. The Allahabad-Haldia  stretch of the
 Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River, the Sadiya-Dhubri stretch of the Brahmaputra  river and the Kollam-Kottappuram
 stretch of the West Coast Canal along with Champakkara  and Udyogamandal  canals have already been declared as
 National Waterways. Consequently, the Inland Waterways Authority of India has taken up the development,
 maintenance and management of these waterways.  The infrastructure facilities on the existing three National
 Waterways are being created by it. It is aimed to make these three National Waterways fully functional by 2007-08.
2.2       The Department of Shipping proposes to declare the Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of the Barak River as a National
 Waterway. Infrastructural facilities currently available on this waterway are not adequate for safe, convenient and
 sustained shipping and navigation by large mechanized crafts. Therefore, the waterway is required to be developed by
 providing adequate infrastructure for safe, convenient and sustained shipping operations. The regulation and
 development of the proposed National Waterway under the control of the Union Government for the purposes of
 shipping and navigation is in the public interest and declaration to that effect has also been made in this Bill.
 
3.          The Department of Shipping further informed that Inland Water Transport is an economic, fuel efficient,
 environment friendly and employment oriented mode of transport. The role of the Union Government is to regulate
 shipping and navigation on Inland Waterways declared by Parliament by Law to be national waterways. The
 responsibility and executive authority for development and maintenance of all waterways other than those declared as
 National Waterways rests with the State Governments.
3.1       The Committee has been informed by the Department of Shipping that in view of the negligible share of inland
 water transport which is less than 1%, it has become inevitable to give impetus to this mode of transport in the overall
 interest of the country.  For this purpose, it is considered necessary to include more inland waterways in the list of
 national waterways.   It is now proposed to declare Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch (121km) of Barak River as national
 waterway.  The entire waterway is falling in the States of Assam.  Further, the Infrastructure currently available on this
 waterway is not adequate for safe, convenient and sustained shipping and navigation by large mechanized crafts. 
 Therefore, the waterway is required to be developed by providing adequate infrastructure for safe, convenient and
 sustained shipping operations.   It has been visualized that substantial quantum of inland water transport traffic to the
 tune of  9.96 lakh tonns is likely to be carried on the proposed national waterway after its full development in a span of
 3 years.  This traffic is expected to be handled at 4 terminals namely Lakhipur, Silchar, Badarpur and Bhanga.  The
 identified cargo are bamboo and bamboo products, cement, coal, edible oils, provisions and household items, fertilizers,
 iron & steel, paper and paper products, pulses, rice, stone boulder and chips, sugar, tea and coffee, wheat timber, wood
 etc.  The proposed dimension of the waterway is:-
 
                              Bed width         -           40 m

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
                              Depth               -           1.6.m              
                              Side slope        -           1:5
 
3.2.      The Department of Shipping further submitted that upon development of the first phase, improvement in depth
 upto 2 m would be considered during Phase-II at a later stage along with improved maintenance of waterways in
 Bangladesh.  The development of the river along with provision of infrastructure facilities for purpose of shipping and
 navigation and to handle the proposed traffic includes development of the waterway for navigation, channel marking,
 construction of terminals, transit sheds, installation of handling equipment, etc.   It was estimated that the expenditure
 with respect to the said development will be of the order of Rs.91.50 crore (Rs.54 crore for fairway development +
 Rs.34.50 crore for terminals + Rs.1.50 crore for setting up of office + Rs.1.50 crore for navigational Aids).  The
 expected period of implementation of the project is 3 years.  Besides, annual maintenance cost of Rs.6.26 crore was also
 estimated by the Consultant for operation of the waterway and terminals.  The waterway will facilitate movement of 350
 tonnes vessel (45 m X 9 m X 1.2 m) in this river.  It will provide an alternative mode of transportation for movement of
 commodities between ports of Haldia/Kolkata through Indo-Bangladesh Protocol route for Transit and Trade and
 various hinterland cities namely Lakhipur, Silchar, Panchgram, Badarpur and Bhanga.  It will also provide inter-country
 movement of goods between these hinterland cities and that of Bangladesh .  It will also facilitate decongestion of roads
 & fuel savings, provide better environment corridor, ensure better port-hinterland connectivity and generate
 employment among weaker sections of the society and increase tourism activities in the region. 
4.         The Committee in its sitting held on the 23
rd October, 2007, heard the views of the Secretary, Department of
 Shipping and the Chairman, IWAI and other senior officers on the provisions of the Bill. 
5.         On a question about declaration of inland waterway on Lakhipur-Bhanga  Stretch of Barak River, the Secretary,
 Department of Shipping deposed before the Committee that the sixth waterway, which are now proposing, is for the
 Barak Basin river in Assam. Legislation is necessary to declare this as a national waterway, and this can only be done by
 an Act of Parliament.  Assam, distinctly divided into two basins: one is the valley of Brahmaputra and the other is that
 of Barak.  The Barak River, therefore, constitutes a very significant river basin of Assam which can be navigable up to
 121 to 160 kms.  Of course, we are excluding that portion of the Barak River which is in the hills because navigation is
 not so easy there.    But for about 121 kms., upto Bhanga, or a little more up to Karimganj  and Lafassil , it could be
 developed as a national waterway for easy and smooth navigation and shipping.  We have limited it to Bhanga because
 Bhanga is within the Indian territory.  Karimganj and Laffasil would be on the fluid boundary of Bangladesh  and India,
 and the Ministry of External Affairs felt that since there were disputes, it would not be correct to take up and declare this
 stretch on the fluid boundary as a national waterway.  This may be contentious.   The Secretary also submitted that they
 have consulted the State Government and the Chief Secretary of Assam had given the consent for the waterway.
           
6.         The Committee inquired about the details of security arrangement in Sunder Bans/Protocol routes in West-
Bengal.  The Department of Shipping informed the Committee that under the Trade Agreement entered into between the
 Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh and the Government of the Republic of India and the Protocol
 signed by both the countries on IWT Trade & Transit, IWAI is the nodal agency in issuing necessary permission for
 inland barges of Bangladesh and India for their movement across the country and undertaking loading/unloading
 operation at designated Ports of Call.  Checking of authorized/illegal transportation of men and materials (cargo) falls
 under the purview of Customs Department (for material) and Immigration Department (for men) and IWAI do not play
 any role in the same.  The above two authorities, at their respective check points, check and verify, if, the cargo carried
 by them and the men present on board the ship are as per the declared manifesto (certified by BIWTA, the nodal agency
 on Trade & Transit Protocol on behalf of Bangladesh Govt).  At all other points the Border Security Force keeps vigil
 on illegal immigrants/illegal movement of goods.  No security personnel is provided on Bangladeshi vessels by
 BSF/State Government/IWAI.  The crew of Bangladeshi vessels has to report to Customs and Immigration Department
 at their respective check points at the border for their verification and necessary entry.  Similarly, for outgoing vessels,
 the above details are again cross checked by Immigration/Customs Department.  The Government of West Bengal or
 Assam has never raised any issue regarding security problem due to plying of Bangladeshi vessels in
 Sunderbans/Protocol route.  Bangladeshi vessels never demanded from IWAI, security arrangement in their vessels nor
 have the State Government of West Bengal/Assam ever requested that security arrangement in  Bangladeshi  vessels be
 provided.  However, communications to the Government of West Bengal and Ministry of Home Affairs have been

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
 issued for comments in this regard.
 
7.         The Committee pointed out that there is no updated Financial Memorandum appended with the Bill showing
 details of expenditure plan and the cost projections.  The cost components of the project have been worked out date back
 to year 2002.  The Committee wanted to know the reasons for the same.  The Secretary, Department of Shipping
 informed the Committee that actually legislation that is pending before the Parliament and is to declare it as national
 waterway.  Then immediately, each component of the project cost would be examined and estimated afresh and a
 detailed estimate would be prepared.  Based on the individual components of the project estimate would be prepared and
 the money provided as we go ahead with it.  With regard to the resources, we do not anticipate any dearth.   Once the
 proposed national waterway No.6 is declared as such by an Act of Parliament then the Budget provision will take place. 
 At that point of time when we had made the original estimate we thought that it would be Rs.46 crore.  Rs.46 crore if it
 is properly indexed then we will arrive at a particular figure.  But after the Parliament declares this as a National
 waterway, we will go into each component of the project for a detailed estimate over the time period of implementation
 necessary budgetary provision will be made.   The Committee was not satisfied with the reply and the Ministry was
 asked to prepare a revised financial memorandum and submit it to the Committee.   Later on, the Department vide
 their
 OM dated 7th December, 2007 furnished a revised Financial Memorandum to the Committee. 
 
8.         As regards, the trend of cargo movement on the national waterways, the Secretary, Department of Shipping
 informed the Committee that in 2003-04 we had 32 million tonne transportation in Indian water transport.  In 2006-07,
 last year, we have achieved 55.8 million tones.  The pace of progress is not very impressive but nevertheless the people
 are more conscious of using inland water transport increasingly.  There is gravitation towards greater use of inland water
 transport.  The Secretary further submitted that the trend of cargo movement on NW-1 and NW-2 since their declaration
 shows that despite lack of adequate infrastructural facilities, appreciable amount of cargo is still being transported on
 these waterways which are likely to increase substantially in the coming years for the overall benefit of national
 economy.  The cargo movement on NW-1 & 2 since 1986 to 2006 is given as under:-
                                                            
(In lakh tonnes)
Year NW-1 NW-2
1986-87 2.35 ……..
1987-88 1.99 ……..
1988-89 2.17 0.56
1989-90 3.54 0.39
1990-91 3.25 0.38
1991-92 2.57 0.14
1992-93 2.61 0.28
 1993-94 1.93 0.32
 1994-95 6.22 0.13
 1995-96 5.11 0.36
 1996-97 5.20 0.37
 1997-98 9.98 0.17
 1998-99 8.41 0.19
 1999-2000 7.14 0.22
 2000-2001 3.35 0.50
 2001-2002 4.11 0.41
 2002-2003 6.32 0.98
 2003-2004 7.86 7.96
 2004-2005 9.87 8.19
 2005-2006 10.01 8.04
 2006-2007 13.17 10.86
 
9.         The Committee then enquired about the plan for increase of cargo movement on the national waterways.  The
 Department of Shipping informed the Committee that to increase the cargo movement on the three national waterways,
 IWAI has prepared on Action Plan for making the three national waterways fully functional at an estimated cost of

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
 Rs.751 crore subject to availability of funds.  Under the Action Plan, specific projects have been identified for
 development of fairway, navigational aids, terminals, acquisition of cargo vessels under joint venture projects etc.  Most
 of the projects of this Plan have already been sanctioned by the competent authority and are under implementation.   The
 field Directors of IWAI had been directed to assess realistic cargo projections based on specific O-D pairs expected to
 move on three national waterways and accordingly the following cargo projection (in million tonne (MnT) and billion
 tonne Km (btkm)) on the three national waterways upto 2024-25 has been estimated, provided the infrastructure as per
 Action Plan for making the three national waterways functional is put is position:-
 
5 yearly
 periods
 starting from
        NW-1        
In             in
MnT     btkm
       NW-2
In             in
MnT    
 btkm       
      NW-3
In             in
MnT     
 tkm       
       Total
In             in
MnT    
 btkm       
2011-12 4.18       2.00 1.61       1.21 5.09       0.40 10.88     3.63
2016-17 7.26       3.40 2.40        2.37 5.61       0.44 15.27     6.21
2021-22 14.50     6.69 4.43        4.73 6.50       0.51 25.43    11.93
2024-25 18.20     8.69 5.65        4.87 7.17       0.56 31.02    14.12
 
10.       The Committee wanted to know the reasons for the dropped centrally sponsored scheme for development of IWT
 Sector.  The Department of Shipping informed the Committee that  for good economic development of any country the
 transport infrastructure is an extremely important factor.  Primarily there are three modes of transportation for bulk
 goods namely Rail, Road and Inland Water Transport (IWT).  However, while the rail and road modes developed
 significantly in the country, the IWT mode remained totally neglected due to which this mode lost its significance in the
 overall transport mix.  The development of inland waterways started with the formation of Inland Waterways Authority
 of India (IWAI) in October 1986.  However, as per constitutional provisions, only those waterways which are declared
 as National Waterways by Acts of Parliament can be developed by the Central Govt/IWAI.  The other waterways
 remain under the purview of the respective State Government.
 11.       So far, three waterways namely the Ganga from Haldia to Allahabad (1620km), the Brahmaputra from Dhubri to
 Sadiya (891 km) and the West Coast Canal from Kottapuram  to Kollam  along with Udyogmandal  and Champakara
 canals (205 km) have been declared as National Waterways and are being developed by IWAI for shipping and
 navigation by providing/maintaining basic IWT infrastructure i.e. fairway, navigational aids and terminals.  Three more
 waterways namely the Kakinada-Puducherry canals along with Godavari and Krishna rivers (1095 km), East Coast
 Canal along with Brahmani river and Mahanadi delta (623 km) and Barak river (121 km) are under active consideration
 of the Govt for declaration as new National Waterways.
 
12.       For overall development of IWT sector it is necessary that not only the National Waterways but the other
 waterways (many of which are the feeder waterways to these National Waterways) should also be developed by
 providing IWT infrastructure.  Then only the total potential of IWT sector
 in the country can be exploited.  The importance of development of this mode
assumes greater significance considering that the IWT mode is a cost effective, environment friendly and fuel efficient
 mode of transport, especially for bulk cargo, over dimensional cargo and hazardous cargo, if adequate infrastructure is
 developed and maintained on all potential waterways.
 
13.       Most of the State Governments, however, suffer from financial constraints due to which development of IWT
 mode does not become a priority activity for them.  It is because of this factor that a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS)
 which existed till March 2002 under which 50% financial assistance had been provided by the Central Government to
 respective States as a loan on reimbursement basis.  However, due to the above nature of
 the financial assistance this scheme was not very popular among the States and therefore, the funding pattern of CSS for
 IWT sector was modified in 2002 (guidelines of revised CSS issued in Nov. 2002) and 100% grant for North Eastern
 States and 90% grant for other States of the country was made available for taking up projects for IWT development by
 the States under CSS for IWT sector.
 14.       This change in funding pattern encouraged several States for taking up different projects for development of
 IWT mode and during the 10th Plan period alone, 35 projects of 15 States costing Rs.107 crore were sanctioned by the

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
 DoS and central share of Rs.53 crore was also released to these States during the years 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and
 2006-07.(Annexure-II)
 
15.       However, Planning Commission during February, 2007, took a decision to discontinue this scheme.  For North
 Eastern sector, however, it was stated in Planning Commission’s letter no N-11016/5(1)/2006-PC dated 09.02.07 that
 the Central Sponsored Scheme for IWT development is converted into Central Sector Scheme. Due to the above
 decision of Planning Commission, the projects which were under implementation by different States got adversely
 affected and presently no new project is being considered by IWAI/DoS for sanction.  For North Eastern sector also the
 Central Sector Scheme is to be now implemented by DoS, projects will be technically evaluated by the IWAI and State
 governments will be the executing agencies. Guidelines for taking up these projects are being prepared by the DoS.
 
16.       Therefore, considering that the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for IWT development is very important for overall
 development of IWT sector in the country, IWAI has requested the DoS that the scheme may be revived for whole
 country as existed up to 31.03.07.  The Hon’ble Minister of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways has also requested
 the Dy. Chairman, Planning Commission as well as Hon’ble Prime Minister for continuation of this scheme vide letters
 dated 21.03.07 and 11.10.2007 respectively.
 17.      The Committee has consistently expressed its concern over the slow pace of development of Inland Water
 Transport sector in the country. The Committee once again notes that Inland Water Transport is one of the oldest, fuel
 efficient, cost-effective and environment friendly mode of transport but unfortunately the potential of the sector Inland
 Water Transport remains largely unexplored due to the indifferent attitude of the Central and State Governments. The
 Committee observes that although the Department of Shipping is committed to increase the share of Inland Water
 Transport in the country’s total EXIM trade, still the waterways are not being utilized to their potential and remain
 largely neglected and underdeveloped for want of required infrastructure namely fairways, terminals and navigable aids,
 as a result, it has not reached at a threshold level to become commercially viable. The Committee is of the view that
 with adequate investments, policy framework and focused approach, the Inland Water Transport in the country can be
 developed into a viable mode complementary to the rail and road modes. The Committee is of the opinion that as the
 Government really intends to develop the Inland Water Transport sector with fast pace to its full potential in the country
 it should sincerely endeavor to provide institutional framework and minimize the procedural bottlenecks besides
 providing adequate investments both from public and private partnership primarily public investment in Inland Water
 Transport and to develop it to a level where private sector feels confident to invest in this sector particularly in
 ownership and operation of cargo and passenger vessels to Inland Water Transport mode. The Committee, therefore,
 recommends the Government to provide institutional framework and basic infrastructural facility for accelerated
 development of Inland Water Transport sector in the country so as to increase the capacity of Inland Water Transport
 agencies, commercialization of Inland Water Transport industries, increased cost recovery through user charges and
 creation of a vibrant Inland Water Transport sector in the country.
 
18.       The Committee notes with concern that Research & Development Studies facilities especially in design of
 vessels and night navigation facilities and identification of economically viable routes for development of Inland Water
 Transport sector has not been given due consideration.  The Committee had already taken up the matter in its 121
st  &
 122nd Reports dealing with the National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra  Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia Stretch of
 East Coast Canal, Charbatia-Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006 and the National
 Waterway (Kakinada-Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly  Tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry  Stretch of
 River Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada  Stretch of River Krishna) Bill, 2006 The Committee again reiterates its
 view that Research & Development activities is the backbone for success of any sector and recommends the
 Government to strengthen the Research & Development facilities for the desired development of Inland Water
 Transport Sector in the country  by providing specific budgetary allocations.
 
19.       The Committee notes that the proposed NW-6 can offer alternative mode of transport vis-à-vis rail and road
 modes.  The Committee also notes that the proposed NW will also boost the rural economy and provide IWT
 connectivity for movement of commodities between the Port of Haldia/Kolkata through Indo-Bangladesh protocol route
 for transit and trade and various hinterland and Bangladesh besides decongestion of roads and fuel saving, provide port-

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
hinterland connectivity, better environment corridor and generate employment among weaker sections and increase
 tourism activities in the region.  The Committee recommends that the existing Protocol routes connecting NW-1 &
 NW-6  and NW-2 & NW-6 may be taken up with the Bangladesh on an expeditious way to convert these waterways 
 into international waterways for effective transportation of inter-country movement of goods between hinterland cities
 and Bangladesh.   But in the process the security concern should not be compromised in any way. 
 
20.       The Committee observes that since waterways do not provide door-to-door service independently, it is expedient
 that the waterways are connected with rail or road modes for total transport linkages to the user.  The Committee,
 therefore, recommends the Government to improve the total modal mix of transport in the country and prepare the road
 map for integrated transport policy to include IWT, Costal Shipping, Civil Aviation, Road Transport and Highways and
 Railways. 
 
21.       The Committee notes with dismay about the inadequate repair facility being available on the national
 waterways.   The Committee feels that IWT vessels once start plying in large number on these waterways would require
 repair facilities on these waterways.  The Committee recommends the Department to prepare an action plan for meeting
 the growing demands of repair and service facilities of IWT vessels on all the national waterways.
 
22.       The Committee notes with anguish that no security personnel is being provided in Suderbans/Protocol routes in
 West Bengal by B.S.F./State Govt./IWAI.   The Committee is of the opinion that security is a prime concern and looked
 into seriously by making commensurate security arrangement    in Suderbans/Protocol routes.  The Committee
 recommends the Department of Shipping to take up the matter of beefing-up of security arrangement in the
 Suderbans/Protocol routes with the Union Home Ministry so that inadequacy of police deployment could be addressed
 in a big way.
 
23.       The Committee is constrained to note that there is no updated Financial Memorandum appended with the Bill and
 cost projections have been worked out based on the year 2002.  The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the
 Government that after declaration of NW-6 by the Parliament, the budgetary provision takes place.   The Committee is
 of the view that comprehensive planning and knowing the financial implication is a must for the Government to provide
 allocation for development of this waterway.  The Committee therefore, strongly recommends the Department of
 Shipping to append the updated Financial Memorandum based upon the individual project component of NW-6 with the
 Bill. 
 
24.       The Committee is constrained to note that cargo transportation by Inland Water Transport mode has not shown
 significant improvement on these National Waterways.  The Committee also expresses its displeasure over the fact that
 no comparative cost-output evaluation for transportation of cargo through this alternate mode of transport has been
 carried out by the Department.  The Committee is of the view that such evaluation would further establish the support of
 Inland Water Transport over other mode of transports.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that a detailed study
 should be carried out by the Department in this regard and Department of Shipping should fix some realistic physical
 target for cargo transportation year-wise for entire 11
th Plan.
 
25.       The Committee notes with dismay about the discontinuance of the centrally sponsored scheme for IWT
 development in the country by the Planning Commission.  The Committee is of the view that the decision of the
 Planning Commission to convert the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for IWT development into central sector
 scheme will adversely affect the pace of development of Inland Water Transport in the country.  The Committee
 recommends the Department of Shipping to impress upon the Planning Commission for the revival of the central
 sponsored scheme for overall development of the IWT Sector.
 
26.       Subject to the recommendations in the foregoing paragraphs the Committee adopts clauses 2, 3 and the schedule
 without suggesting any amendments therein.
 
27.       In clause 1(1) for the figure “2007”, the figure “2008” be substituted, consequently the figure “2007” appears in
 the short title of the Bill may also be substituted with “2008”.

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
 
28.       In the enacting formula the words ‘Fifty-eighth’ be substituted by ‘Fifty-ninth’.
 
29.       The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed in its present form with formal amendments. However, the
 Committee hopes that while implementing the provisions of the Bill, the recommendations made by the Committee in
 the foregoing paragraphs will be given due weight-age so that the purpose of declaration of the proposed National
 Waterway should not be defeated. The Committee also recommends that whenever necessary due consultations and
 concurrence of the State Government of Assam be also taken in preparing developmental plans and on other related
 issues for the proposed National Waterway.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS/ -- AT A GLANCE
 
 
            The Committee has consistently expressed its concern over the slow pace of development of Inland Water
 Transport sector in the country. The Committee once again notes that Inland Water Transport is one of the
 oldest, fuel efficient, cost-effective and environment friendly mode of transport but unfortunately the potential of
 the sector Inland Water Transport remains largely unexplored due to the indifferent attitude of the Central and
 State Governments. The Committee observes that although the Department of Shipping is committed to increase
 the share of Inland Water Transport in the country’s total EXIM trade, still the waterways are not being utilized
 to their potential and remain largely neglected and underdeveloped for want of required infrastructure namely
 fairways, terminals and navigable aids, as a result, it has not reached at a threshold level to become commercially
 viable. The Committee is of the view that with adequate investments, policy framework and focused approach,
 the Inland Water Transport in the country can be developed into a viable mode complementary to the rail and
 road modes. The Committee is of the opinion that as the Government really intends to develop the Inland Water
 Transport sector with fast pace to its full potential in the country it should sincerely endeavor to provide
 institutional framework and minimize the procedural bottlenecks besides providing adequate investments both
 from public and private partnership primarily public investment in Inland Water Transport and to develop it to
 a level where private sector feels confident to invest in this sector particularly in ownership and operation of
 cargo and passenger vessels to Inland Water Transport mode. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
 Government to provide institutional framework and basic infrastructural facility for accelerated development of
 Inland Water Transport sector in the country so as to increase the capacity of Inland Water Transport agencies,
 commercialization of Inland Water Transport industries, increased cost recovery through user charges and
 creation of a vibrant Inland Water Transport sector in the country.
 (Para 17)
            The Committee notes with concern that Research & Development Studies facilities especially in design of
 vessels and night navigation facilities and identification of economically viable routes for development of Inland
 Water Transport sector has not been given due consideration.  The Committee had already taken up the matter
 in its 121
st  & 122nd Reports dealing with the National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-
Charbatia Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers)
 Bill, 2006 and the National Waterway (Kakinada-Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly  Tank,
 Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of River Krishna)
 Bill, 2006 The Committee again reiterates its view that Research & Development activities is the backbone for
 success of any sector and recommends the Government to strengthen the Research & Development facilities for
 the desired development of Inland Water Transport Sector in the country  by providing specific budgetary
 allocations.
(Para 18)
            The Committee notes that the proposed NW-6 can offer alternative mode of transport vis-à-vis rail and
 road modes.  The Committee also notes that the proposed NW will also boost the rural economy and provide
 IWT connectivity for movement of commodities between the Port of Haldia/Kolkata  through Indo-Bangladesh
 protocol route for transit and trade and various hinterland and Bangladesh besides decongestion of roads and

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
 fuel saving, provide port-hinterland connectivity, better environment corridor and generate employment among
 weaker sections and increase tourism activities in the region.  The Committee recommends that the existing
 Protocol routes connecting NW-1 & NW-6  and NW-2 & NW-6 may be taken up with the Bangladesh on an
 expeditious way to convert these waterways  into international waterways for effective transportation of inter-
country movement of goods between hinterland cities and Bangladesh.   But in the process the security concern
 should not be compromised in any way. 
(Para 19)
            The Committee observes that since waterways do not provide door-to-door service independently, it is
 expedient that the waterways are connected with rail or road modes for total transport linkages to the user.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to improve the total modal mix of transport in the country
 and prepare the road map for integrated transport policy to include IWT, Costal Shipping, Civil Aviation, Road
 Transport and Highways and Railways. 
(Para 20)
            The Committee notes with dismay about the inadequate repair facility being available on the national
 waterways.   The Committee feels that IWT vessels once start plying in large number on these waterways would
 require repair facilities on these waterways.  The Committee recommends the Department to prepare an action
 plan for meeting the growing demands of repair and service facilities of IWT vessels on all the national
 waterways.
(Para 21)
            The Committee notes with anguish that no security personnel is being provided in Suderbans /Protocol
 routes in West Bengal by B.S.F./State Govt./IWAI.   The Committee is of the opinion that security is a prime
 concern and looked into seriously by making commensurate security arrangement   in Suderbans/Protocol
 routes.  The Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to take up the matter of beefing-up of security
 arrangement in the Suderbans/Protocol routes with the Union Home Ministry so that inadequacy of police
 deployment could be addressed in a big way.
(Para 22)
            The Committee is constrained to note that there is no updated Financial Memorandum appended with the
 Bill and cost projections have been worked out based on the year 2002.  The Committee is not satisfied with the
 reply of the Government that after declaration of NW-6 by the Parliament, the budgetary provision takes place. 
 The Committee is of the view that comprehensive planning and knowing the financial implication is a must for
 the Government to provide allocation for development of this waterway.  The Committee therefore, strongly
 recommends the Department of Shipping to append the updated Financial Memorandum based upon the
 individual project component of NW-6 with the Bill. 
(Para 23)
            The Committee is constrained to note that cargo transportation by Inland Water Transport mode has not
 shown significant improvement on these National Waterways.  The Committee also expresses its displeasure over
 the fact that no comparative cost-output evaluation for transportation of cargo through this alternate mode of
 transport has been carried out by the Department.  The Committee is of the view that such evaluation would
 further establish the support of Inland Water Transport over other mode of transports.  Therefore, the
 Committee recommends that a detailed study should be carried out by the Department in this regard and
 Department of Shipping should fix some realistic physical target for cargo transportation year-wise for entire
 11
th Plan.
(Para 24)
            The Committee notes with dismay about the discontinuance of the centrally sponsored scheme for IWT
 development in the country by the Planning Commission.  The Committee is of the view that the decision of the
 Planning Commission to convert the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for IWT development into central
 sector scheme will adversely affect the pace of development of Inland Water Transport in the country.  The
 Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to impress upon the Planning Commission for the revival of
 the central sponsored scheme for overall development of the IWT Sector.
(Para 25)
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
            Subject to the recommendations in the foregoing paragraphs the Committee adopts clauses 2, 3 and the
 schedule without suggesting any amendments therein.
(Para 26)
            In clause 1(1) for the figure “2007”, the figure “2008” be substituted, consequently the figure “2007”
 appears in the short title of the Bill may also be substituted with “2008”.
(Para 27)
            In the enacting formula the words ‘Fifty-eighth’ be substituted by ‘Fifty-ninth’.
(Para 28)
            The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed in its present form with formal amendments.
 However, the Committee hopes that while implementing the provisions of the Bill, the recommendations made by
 the Committee in the foregoing paragraphs will be given due weight-age so that the purpose of declaration of the
 proposed National Waterway should not be defeated. The Committee also recommends that whenever necessary
 due consultations and concurrence of the State Government of Assam be also taken in preparing developmental
 plans and on other related issues for the proposed National Waterway.
(Para 29)
 
*****
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE
 
 
            IV
 FOURTH MEETING

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 23 rd October 2007 in Committee Room 'A',  Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
4. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
5. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
6. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
8. Shri Joachim Baxla
9. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
11. Shri P. Karunakaran
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
15. Shri Prahlad Joshi
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
 DEPARTMENT):
 
Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Shrimati Veena Kothavale, Assistant Legislative Counsel
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING:
 
Shri A.K. Mohapatra, Secretary
Shri Rajeev Gupta, Joint Secretary (S&IWT)
            Shri Rajneesh Kumar, Director (IWT)
            Shri S.B. Mathur, Chairman, IWAI
            Shri Susheel Kumar, Vice-Chairman, IWAI
            Shri R.P. Khare, Director
            Shri S.S. Pandian, Chief Engineer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE
 DEPARTMENT):
 
Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
Dr. G.N. Raju, Additional Legislative Counsel
Shri K. Biswal, Deputy Legislative Counsel
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION:
 
Shri Ashok Chawla, Secretary
Shri K.N. Shrivastava, Joint Secretary
Shri Sandeep Prakash, Director
Dr. K. Ramalingam, Chairman, Airport Authority of India
Shri S.C. Chhatwal, Member (Finance), Airport Authority of India
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman briefed the Members about the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga  stretch of the
 Barak River) Bill, 2007 and the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Bill, 2007 which have been referred
 to the Committee for examination and report.  Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department
 of Shipping on the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga  stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007 followed by a power
 point presentation on the subject by the Vice-Chairman, Inland Water Authority of India (IWAI).   The Secretary replied
 to various queries raised by the Members during the meeting.    To several other queries raised by the Members, the
 Ministry representatives were requested to give written replies within a week. The Chairman of the Committee also
 informed the Secretary, Department of Shipping that the Department has not furnished the comments on the Memoranda
 received from various individuals/stakeholders on the Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007 forwarded to the
 Department and directed to furnish the same immediately. The representatives of the Department of Shipping then
 withdrew.
3.         *                      *                                  *
4.         *                      *                                  *.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.45 p.m. to meet again on the 2
nd November, 2007.
 
          * Relates to other matters
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 31 st January 2008 in Room No.  '139', First Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
 
6. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
7. Shri Joachim Baxla
8. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
9. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
10. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
11. Dr. P.P. Koya
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Akshy Pratap Singh

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/130threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:30:17]
15. Shri Dushyant Singh
16. Shri Rakesh Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION:
 
Shri Ashok Chawla, Secretary
Shri K. Gohain, Director-General, Civil Aviation
Shri J.K. Dutta, Commissioner of Security
Shri D.S. Chauhan, Additional Commissioner of Security
Shri K.N. Srivastava, Joint Secretary
Ms. Anna Roy, Director
 
 
            REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF 
INDIA:
 
            Dr. K. Ramalingam, Chairman
            Shri P. Seth, Member (O)
            Shri S.C. Chhatwal, Member (Finance)
            Shri M.C. Kishore, Company Secretary
 
            REPRESENTATIVES OF THE 
DELHI INTERNATIONAL AIRRPORT         PVT. LIMITED (DIAL) :
 
            Shri K. Narayan Rao, Director
            Shri Pradeep Panicker, Associate Vice-President
           
2.         At first, the Committee considered the draft Report on the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga  stretch of the
 Barak river) Bill, 2007. After some discussion the Committee adopted the Report with minor modifications. The
 Committee also authorized the Chairman to decide a date and nominate the Members for presentation of the said report
 to the Parliament during the ensuing Budget session.
 
3.         *                      *                      *.
4.         *                      *                      *.
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.30 p.m. to meet again on the 7
th February, 2008.
 
          * Relates to other matters
 