 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                159 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE  
 
  
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST 
REPORT ON CLOSURE OF BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD 
AIRPORTS; 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY FIRST REPORT ON 
MODERNISATION OF AIRPORTS; AND ONE HUNDRED AND 
FORTY SECOND REPORT ON FUNCTIONING OF PRIVATE 
AIRPORTS 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 6 TH  MAY, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 6 TH  MAY, 2010) 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MAY, 2010/VAISAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
                                                E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
  
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
ON CLOSURE OF BANGALORE AND HYDERABAD AIRPORTS; 
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY FIRST REPORT ON MODERNISATION 
OF AIRPORTS; AND ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY SECOND REPORT 
ON FUNCTIONING OF PRIVATE AIRPORTS  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 6 TH  MAY, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 6 TH  MAY, 2010)  
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI  
                                       MAY, 2010/VAISAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
   
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 1-25 
4. O BSERVATIONS /C ONCLUSIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS ----  AT A GLANCE 
............................................ 
26-28 
5. A NNEXURE ...................................................................................................................... 29-32 
6. M INUTES ........................................................................................................................ 33-37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury   ----- Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 
@5. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7. Shri Thomas Sangma 
 8. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma 
 *9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10. Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA 
 11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13. Shri V.Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 15. Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 16. Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 22. Shri S.D. Shariq 
 23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25. Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28. Shri K. Sugumar 
 29. Shri Kabir Suman 
 30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 

  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
@Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9th April, 2010 and re-nominated on 29th April, 2010. 
* Nominated on 12th September, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION  
  I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism 
and Culture, having been authorized by the Committe e to present on its behalf, do hereby present this 
One Hundred and Fifty Ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Thirty First report 
on Closure of Bangalore & Hyderabad Airports; One H undred and Forty First Report on 
Modernization of Airports and One Hundred and Forty  Second Report on Functioning of Private 
Airports.  
2.   The One Hundred Thirty First, One Hundred Fort y First and One Hundred Forty Second 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Sta nding Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture were presented to the Parliament on the 5th  March, 20th August and 23rd October, 2008 
respectively. 
3.   The Action Taken Replies on the recommendation s of the Committee contained in its One 
Hundred and Thirty First, One Hundred Forty First a nd One Hundred Forty Second Reports were 
received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 28th October, 2008, 2nd June  and 1st October, 
2009 respectively.  
4. The Committee in its meeting held on the 9th Feb ruary, 2010 decided that in order to have a more 
comprehensive and focused view on the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry on these 
three reports, one Action Taken Report be prepared as many of the recommendations were inter-
related and pertained to the problems that needed c ommon solution. This 159th report may thus be 
treated for a comprehensive Action Taken Report by the Government on this important issue. 
5.   The Committee considered and adopted the Repor t at its meeting held on the 5th May, 2010. 
 
 
  SITARAM  YECHURY 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
5 May , 2010 Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
15  Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka)   Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
REPORT  
  The Report of the Committee deals with the Action  Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its 13 1st Report on the Closure of Bangalore and 
Hyderabad Airports and matters related thereto, 141 st Report on the Modernization of Airports and 
142nd Report on the Functioning of Private Airports  and the related issues on the 5th March, 20th 
August and 23rd October, 2008 respectively. 
2.   On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the C ommittee has made observations on each item of 
Action-taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry o f Civil Aviation. The recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the One Hundred and Thirty F irst, One Hundred and Forty First and One 
Hundred and Forty Second Report, action-taken there on by the Ministry and 
recommendations/observations of the Committee on ea ch item of action taken has been given in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
CLOSURE  OF  BANGALORE  AND  HYDERABAD  AIRPORTS  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
3.  The Committee notes that the estimates and proj ections were made on the basis of the 1999 and 
2000 Statistics when the civil aviation sector was growing at 6% per annum but today it is growing at 
20% per annum. Actually, it was an underestimate of  gigantic proportions. If, the present trend 
continues in a couple of years even the present new  airports will not be able to handle the rush of 
passengers and the Government will have to look for other options. This is clear from the fact that th e 
private Greenfield airport at Bangalore is designed  to handle passenger traffic of 9 million per year.  
As noted above in 2007 itself this figure stood at 9.9million. As far as Hyderabad is concerned, the 
initial projected capacity is 7 million. In 2007 it self passenger traffic was 6.8 million. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the present airports shou ld be used, given the saturation of passenger 
traffic, in such a way that the private player is m aking a reasonable profit while the Government 
discharges its responsibilities of maintaining public goods and upholding public interest. 
       (Para 15) 
       (131st Report) 
4.   The Committee unanimously feels and recommends  that the existing airports at Bangalore and 
Hyderabad should not be closed for commercial operations to make the way for the commissioning of 
the private Greenfield airports. The Committee also  feels that this is the first time in the country t hat 
the Government owned airports built on the tax payers’ money are being closed for the commissioning 
of the private Greenfield airports where profit ear ning is the main motto rather than the service to t he 
passengers. This is contrary to the Government’s po licy particularly in a situation where both the 
airports are required in view of the changing scena rio in passenger traffic. This is in complete 
contravention of the ‘level playing field’ concept.  The Committee fails to understand the logic or 
rationale behind such drastic step of the Governmen t. The Committee is of the opinion that the 
Government’s reluctance to accept this Committee’s earlier unanimous recommendations presented to 
the Parliament on this subject without giving any r easons negates the very purpose of the 
Parliamentary Committee system. The Government still has the time to re-negotiate the issue with the 
concessionaire and can modify or scrap the clause which facilitates the closure of the existing airports. 
The possible revenue implications of such a re-nego tiation must not inhibit the Government from 

proceeding on such a course in national interest. S ince the aviation sector is growing in a big way, 
having two airports in a particular city will be a commercially viable option for the operators. 
       (Para 16) 
       (131st Report) 
5.   After considering all the facts placed before the Committee and keeping in view the traffic 
growth in recent years which is even more than thre e times as compared to the year when the 
projections were made and agreements were signed, t he Committee strongly recommends 
unanimously and unequivocally to the Government of India that the existing Hyderabad and 
Bangalore Airports should not be closed for commercial operation.  
(Para 17) 
(131st Report) 
Reply of the Government  
6.   Yes Sir. Government agrees with the Committee Note as above. Traffic forecast for Bangalore 
and Hyderabad airports are enclosed at Annexure I  and Annexure II  respectively. Air traffic at 
Bangalore Airport is forecasted to grow @ 30.0% dur ing the XI Five Year Plan Period and 20.8% 
during XII Five Year Plan Period. Similarly Air Tra ffic at Hyderabad airport is forecasted to grow @ 
28.1 % during the XI Five Year Plan Period and 23.7% during the XII Five Year Plan Period. 
7.  Under the Concession Agreement signed between G overnment of India and M/s HIAL/BIAL, 
closure of the existing airport is one of the oblig ations of GOI and in case the same is not fulfilled , it 
would imply that Government of India is in default of it obligations. However, General aviation 
services (other than those relating to commercial a ircrafts, charter flights, aircrafts hired or opera ted 
under commercial arrangements) are continued to be provided at the existing airports. However, in 
respect of Bangalore Airport, two rounds of discussions between Government of India, Government of 
Karnataka and Bangalore International Airport Limit ed have been taken place and issues including 
capacity of the new airports is being further exami ned. Bangalore International Airport Limited had 
earlier refused the proposal of Government of India to allow A TR operations from HAL airport. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
8.   The Committee has learnt that the newly opened  Bengaluru and Hyderabad Greenfield airports 
are reported to have faced decline in short-haul pa ssenger traffic due to the fact that the passengers  
have to travel a long distance to reach the airport s. The short-haul passengers are opting for other 
modes of transport like train and road journey. The  Committee, therefore, would like to draw the 
attention of the Government to the recommendation c ontained in its 131st Report wherein the 
Committee inter-alia  has recommended that the old airports at Bengaluru  and Hyderabad airports 
should be made operational. The Action Taken Report from the Government, however, is awaited. 
9.  Meanwhile, the Committee came to know that the Ministry of Civil Aviation asked the BIAL to 
make arrangements to increase its capacity in the next eighth months as the construction of the second 
terminal would take three years. It would, therefor e be a better option to augment the capacity by 
restarting the functioning of existing HAL airport.  In order to ensure that the wide winged aircraft b e 
accommodated properly at the Greenfield airports, the Government can take a policy decision to allow 
the small aircraft and ATRs to operate from the exi sting airports. The Committee, therefore, once 
again’ calls upon the Ministry of civil Aviation to  take necessary steps to ensure that the existing 
airports at Hyderabad and Bengaluru are kept functional. 

(Paras 61 and 62) 
(141st Report) 
Reply of Government  
10.   To improve the connectivity to the new airpor t at Shamshabad, the Government of Andhra 
Pradesh have got constructed National Highway No.7 (11km, 4-lane) by National Highway Authority 
of India (NHAI), elevated express highway from Aram garh Junction to Raithi Bowli Junction has 
been widened in 6-lane and DBM layer for entire str etch of road is completed, 21 km length of Inner 
Ring Road from UPPAL Junction to Aramgarh Junction has been widened. Government of Andhra 
Pradesh has also proposed setting up of a Hi-speed Express Rail Link from Begumpet airport to the 
new international airport. Besides, to improve the connectivity to the new airport at Devanahalli near  
Banglore, the following short and long term measure s have also been undertaken by Government of 
Karnataka. Short terms measures include construction of underpasses, widening with 8 lanes road, 40 
volvo VAJRA Airconditioned buses and 116 Non-AC Suv arna Karnataka low floor buses from all 
major work centers in Banglore city, and Road impro vement plan around BIAL has been taken up in 
12 packages. Long terms measures are development of  High Speed Rail Link from City Center to 
reach the new International Airport, Rail Corridor for Bus Rapid Transit System in the proposed 
Airport Expressway and connectivity from the southe rn part of BMR and especially integrated 
townships through Satellite Ring Roads (STTRR) and Interior Ring roads (IRR). 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
11.   Government of India have entered into a Conce ssion Agreement (CA) with M/s Bangalore 
International Airport Limited (BIAL) for construction and development of new international airport at 
Devanahalli near Banglore. Under the CA the Governm ent of India have agreed to close commercial 
operations at the existing airport once the new air port becomes operaional based on recommendation 
of the Task Force on Infrastructure. This decision was taken with a view to ensure financial viability  
of the new airport. Government of India is obliged to adhere to the contractual terms of CA. The 
existing HASL airport at Banglore would continue to remain operational for general aviation, defence 
purposes, national emergencies etc. The Committee n otes that the Government of India appears to be 
unconcerned about the obligation of BIAL to constru ct and provide an airport as per the concession 
agreement. Even the area and capacity were not veri fied before permitting to open new and closing 
HAL Airport. This appears to be an irregularity committed by Government of India in this matter. 
(Para 19.6) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
12.   The integrated terminal constructed is of app ropriate size to handle the maximum peak-hour-
demand of both the domestic and international fligh ts as on date, and BIAL is committed to monitor 
the capacity versus demand based on the traffic for ecasts periodically, and take steps to expand the 
terminal and ,hence enhance the capacity, as outlined in the Concession Agreement to BIAL. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
13.   The Committee notes that hundreds of crores o f rupees were spent for developing infrastructure 
at the old airports at Bengaluru and Hyderabad but it is lying unutilized due to the closure of airpor ts 
for commercial purposes. Another interesting thing brought to the notice of the Committee is that the 
old airports, the HAL Airport and Begumpet airport, are being used for operation of VIP flights, Non-

schedule Flights, General Aviation, Helicopter-Taxi s, etc. During the deliberations of the Committee 
the Airports Authority of India reported that there is absolutely no problem in opening up two airports 
simultaneously in a city. The Committee therefore, recommends that the old airports of Hyderabad 
and Bengaluru may be used exclusively for short hau l flights which are operating from the nearby 
airports. 
(Para 24) 
(142nd Report) 
14.  The Committee is of the opinion that the HAL A irport is most convenient for common public 
due to it being situated closer to the City Centre,  easy accessibility and availability of multi-mode 
transport options like Bus, Auto, Taxis, even 2-whe eler, etc. HAL Airport, therefore, would be more 
convenient and economical for public compared to, B IAL due to absence of UDF and less 
transportation cost due to multiple modes and short er distance. Less time in coming and going from 
the airport is also important aspect in this regard. 
15.  The Committee further recommends that the old airports may be made operational for short-haul 
passengers. Moreover, this is the practice being fo llowed in many of the major cities in the world 
wherein more than one airport exists. There is no r eason or justification for keeping the hundreds of 
crores of worth infrastructure at the old airports idle just to be used for VIP and other flights. 
(Paras 26 and 27) 
(142nd Report) 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
16.   The Committee notes that commercial civil avi ation activities are continuing in the Bengaluru 
HAL Airport with the consent of the management of B IAL and Government of India, whereas the 
Concession Agreement and the notification issued by  the Government of India clearly prohibits any 
commercial aviation activity. This shows that if the Government wants, they can operationalise the old 
airports notwithstanding the Concession Agreement. The Committee is of the considered view that 
HAL Airport at Bengaluru and Begumpet Airport at Hyderabad may be made operational for domestic 
civil aviation. 
(Para 31.5.3) 
(142nd Report) 
17.   The Committee has learnt that Don Mueang Inte rnational Airport (Old Bangkok Airport) was 
closed completely on opening of new Suvarnabhumi Ai rport on 28.09.06, which was 40 kms. away 
from the city. However, mainly due to demands of lo w cost carriers and the higher costs at the new 
Airport, old airport was reopened on 24.03.2007, without restrictions on distance or aircraft capacity.  
(Para 31.8.1) 
(142nd Report) 
18.   Another example brought to the notice of the Committee was Dallas Love Field Airport (USA) 
that was closed after new DFW International Airport  become operational. There was no Concession 
Agreement between the Operator and the Regulator or  the Federal Government. However, Southwest 
Airlines was permitted to operhte from the old Airp ort even after opening of DFW International 
Airport, as it was not a signatory to this Agreement. 
(Para 31.8.2) 
(142nd Report) 

19.   The Committee takes note of these examples of  more than one airport co-existing in the cities to 
cater to the needs of various types of passenger re quirements. The Committee feels that the same can 
be applied in case of Bengaluru and Hyderabad Airpo rts also and the old airports in these cities may 
be made functional.. 
20.   The Committee notes most of the reasons advan ced for the opening of the HAL Airport at 
Bengaluru are applicable to the Begumpet airport in Hyderabad also. 
(Paras 31.8.3 and 31.10.3) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
21.   Operation of two airports in close proximity has not been found feasible because of following 
reasons: 
/circle6 Concession Agreement:  The Concession Agreement clearly mandates that the old airports 
of Bangalore and Hyderabad will close for commercia l operations once the new airports 
start operations. As such, the Government are contr actually obliged to ensure that 
commercial operations do not take place from subject old airports. 
/circle6 Hub operations and transfers:  From passenger convenience point of view, it will be 
highly inconvenient for a passenger to land at old airports and travel to new airports to take 
connecting domestic or international flight. 
/circle6 Technical:  Simultaneous operations of two parallel runways gu ided by separate ATC staff 
is not advisable since it may lead to confusion and  will pose flight safety issues. The 
Operating airlines also will find the duplications of paraphernalia, especially the Ground 
Handling arrangements uneconomical. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
22.   The Committee also notes that the closure of HAL airport led to loss of jobs due to reduction of  
flights and due to closure of airlines operators. Thousands of direct and indirect workers also lost their 
jobs, this also includes trolley retrievers, small time vendors, taxi drivers, auto drivers, loaders e tc. 
Despite the assurances given by the BIAL and HIAL m anagements, they have not been 
accommodated in the new airports. The Committee, th erefore, recommends that all those people who 
are directly or indirectly affected due to closure of the HAL Airport and Begumpet Airport may be 
given preference and suitably accommodated at the new Green Field Airports.  
(Para 25) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
23. No employee of AAI has been retrenched/lost his /her job due to closure of HAL Airport at 
Bangalore and Begumpet Airport at Hyderabad. As reg ards giving preference for jobs is concerned, 
this issue needs to be taken up with respective Airport Operators at Shamshabad and Bangalore. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
24.   The Committee reiterates that employees’ issue be t aken up with the Airport Operators 
and their response be conveyed to it.  

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
25.   The Committee notes that the closure of HAL A irport was not mentioned in the tender for 
Bengaluru Greenfield Airport. Naturally, all the pa rties who participated in the tender process would 
have made their offers on this basis only. Making an offer of Closure of HAL Airport, after the Notice 
Inviting Tender (NIT), appears to be a clear violation of the due process. 
(Para 31.3.3) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
26.   In terms of he Memorandum of Understanding da ted 3rd May 1999 between AAI and Karnataka 
State Industrial Investment Development Corporation  (KSIIDC) a Steering Committee was 
constituted to oversee the bidding process for the selection of private sector partner for Bangalore 
International Airport Project. The bidding process has followed in three stages as expression of 
Interest (RFQ), submission of Concept Master Plan c alled airport development plan and Request for 
Proposal (RFP). Advertisements soliciting Expression of Interest from interested parties were released 
in national and International newspapers in June 19 99. These were evaluated on the basis of financial 
and experience criteria and qualifying parties were  short listed and taken to the next stage of biddin g 
process. Project Information Memorandum (PIM) conta ining the project background, broad technical 
specifications and traffic assessment was issued to  the short listed parties in September 1999. In the  
pre-RFP meeting, all the qualified bidders expressed serious concern and apprehension on keeping the 
HAL airport open for commercial operations after th e new airport becomes operational. The bidders 
insisted on clarity and reconfirmation regarding this before proceeding with the next phase of bidding. 
The steering Committee considered the matter and un animously decided to recommend to 
Government of India for consideration and approval of complete closure of civilian commercial 
operations from the existing HAL airport after comm encement of the operations by new airport at 
Devanahalli. Ministry of Civil Aviation communicate d that the status of international airport granted 
to the existing airport at Bangalore would be trans ferred/granted to the new airport to be developed 
with private sector participation at Bangalore on i ts commissioning in case it enjoys all the necessar y 
infrastructure facilities required for an international airport and the existing airport at Bangalore would 
be then closed for civilian operations. Based on th is an addendum to the Project Information 
Memorandum was issued to all the bidders notifying the closure of the existing airport at Bangalore 
for civilian operations after the new airport at Devanahalli becomes operational. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
27.   As regards the restriction on having another airport within 150 kms of existing airport, granting 
permission to start a new Greenfield airport within that radium  prima facie  seems to be in violation of 
the Government policy on airport infrastructure. 
28.   The pronounced policy also states that if an airport was allowed within an aerial distance of 150 
kms of an existing airport, a passenger sharing for mula has to be evolved. In the present case, the 
Government not only allowed the new airports to com e up within a distance of 150 kms but also 
closed down the existing profit-making airports, not to speak of passenger sharing formula. 
29.   The Committee notes some merit in these argum ents made by the representatives of AAEU. It 
also feels that the closure of old airports at Beng aluru and Hyderabad appears to have been done in 
haste. It is no doubt deprives the AAI a good amoun t of revenue that it needs to cross-subsidize 
airports in remote areas. 

(Paras 31.3.4, 31.3.5 and 31.3.6) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
30.   No violation of 150 km condition committed si nce in the RFP document for new Greenfield 
airport at Shamshabad, it was mentioned that Begumpet airport shall be closed for commercial traffic, 
which meant that the traffic shall stand transferred to the new RGI Airport, Shamshabad. The decision 
regarding closure of Begumpet airport and HAL airpo rt had been unanimously taken by the 
Government of India before the signing of the concession Agreement. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
31.  The Committee notes that the Government has ta ken shelter of Section 5A of Aircraft Act 1934 
to close down HAL airport. However, Section 5A talk s of closing of any airport when there is danger 
to the aircraft/country. The above reason is totall y irrelevant for the instant case. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Government should re visit various provision of the Concession 
Agreement to ensure that all the illegalities, etc.  are removed from it that are creating all kind of 
misgivings in the people’s mind. 
(Para 31.5.4) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
32.   Section 5A of the Aircraft Act, 1934 lists al l the conditions in which the Director General of 
Civil Aviation (DGCA) can issue Orders. The Order p assed for closure of HAL airport is consonance 
and perfectly within the power of DGCA. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
33.   The Committee notes that the NOC for setting up of Bengaluru Greenfield Airport by Ministry 
of Defence made it amply clear that the operations at HAL Airport Bengaluru will continue even after 
the BIAL becomes functional and the choice of airpo rt to be utilized should be left to the 
operators/commuters/general public. Same is true ab out the license issued to BIAL by the Director-
General, Civil Aviation. In terms of Notification d ated the 16th May, 2008, the HAL Airport stands 
closed for commercial operations. However, it is still being used for chartered flights, air taxi services 
and VIP flights. The Committee fails to understand that in such a situation, how the losses being 
incurred by the HAL Airport would be compensated as  desired by the Ministry of Defence while 
issuing NOC for the new airport at Bengaluru. 
(Para 31.6.3) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
34.  The conditions imposed in 2004 and in 2008 hav e to be perceived and considered within their 
own times. The relevancy of a condition imposed in the year 2004 may not necessarily continue to be 
the same in 2008. The condition in the NOC given by  the Ministry of Defence for Devanahalli 
Greenfield Airport under letter No. 3(48)/02/D (Air -II) was dated 3.3.2004. The Concession 
Agreement was signed on 5th July, 04 which is after  the NOC was granted. Further, it is submitted 
that the Ministry of Defence has deleted the condit ion that the operations of HAL airport will 
continue. 

FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
35.   The Committee is not convinced with the replies of the Government on the closure of the 
old airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad. The Committee feels that the replies submitted by the 
Government are incomplete and the Government is tak ing shelter behind Concession 
Agreements signed with the developers of the new Gr eenfield airports for closing the old 
airports. The Committee is of the opinion that by c losing these airports, Government has 
indirectly promoted the business interest of the pr ivate airport operators. The Committee feels 
that the Government has opened a Pandora’s Box and all the concessionaires in future will insist 
on closing the Government owned old airports to thwart competition to them. The Committee is 
of the opinion that the Government still has ample time to revisit the issue and make use of the 
closed old airports which were built by tax payers’  money. The Committee considers the 
reluctance shown by the Government in this issue ve ry unfortunate. The Committee considers 
the argument of the Government that operation of tw o airports in the same city will jeopardize 
the safety of the aircrafts and create difficulties  for ATC operations, fallacious and erroneous, 
mainly because the old airports are still handling VIP flights, charter flights and helicopter. 
Strangely, these operations are hampering neither t he safety of the aircrafts nor the operations 
of the ATC. The Committee, therefore, once again re commends that the Government instead of 
providing such unconvincing excuses should operatio nalise the old airports at Bangalore and 
Hyderabad without any delay.  
USER  DEVELOPMENT  FEE  (UDF) . 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
36.   The Committee notes that the Airports Authori ty of India while taking up the major expansion 
projects at Ahmadabad and Trivandrum had envisaged levy of User Development Fee of Rs.300 per 
passenger as prescribed Initial Rate of Return (IRR ) was not being achieved. However, the proposal 
was turned down by the Government. The Committee ob serves that the Government which turned 
down the proposal of Airports Authority of India is  happily agreeing to the demands of the private 
operators. The Committee is of the view that the le vy of any User Development Fee will give a 
negative signal to the upward growth and overall growth pattern of the aviation sector. 
(Para 20) 
(131st Report) 
Reply of the Government  
37. Initially, the major expansion projects at Triv andrum was not viable. In order to make the project  
viable, the levy of user development fee of Rs. 300  per passengers was proposed. However, the 
proposal for levy of User Development Fee (UDF) was  not permitted by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
38.   The Committee learnt that it was discouraging  for the short-haul passengers to take air travel 
after the new airports. A higher User Development F ee (UDF) was being charged by the new airport 
developers from the passengers. The user developmen t fee added with high taxi/bus fares due to long 
distances, compel the passengers to use other means  of transport such as road and trains for the short  
distance destinations. This has, in fact rendered the air travel from these airports added with high A TF 
prices, just prohibitive. 

(Para 17) 
(142nd Report) 
39.   The Committee notes that the Task force on Fi nancing Plan for airports (July 2006) had 
recommended that the users should not be burdened w ith ADFIUDF for financing at the airport 
projects. This is particularly important in the con text of the policy objective to make civil aviation  a 
mass, rather than an elitist model of travel and to  make air travel more affordable. After taking into  
account various aspects and the above recommendation of the Task Force, the committee feels that the 
imposition of UDF on passengers is a retrograde ste p contravening the Task Force recommendations 
and recommends that the UDF imposed on passengers m ay be withdrawn immediately and no more 
UDF may be imposed on passengers in any of the airports. 
(Para 18) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
40.   The nominal UDF has been authorized by the Mi nistry to bridge the gap between the revenues 
and operating expenses after scrutiny and is inevit able for any Greenfield airport in the formative 
years. UDF is required for the maintenance and deve lopment of infrastructure at airports. UDF is 
gradually phased out as the airport revenue streams  mature. Fuel surcharge as of now forms the 
biggest part of air ticket. While the ATF prices have come down by more than 50%. Airlines have not 
reduced the fuel surcharge. This makes the air tick et unattractive for passengers rather than the smal l 
amount of UDF. 
41.   The time taken to reach new Hyderabad airport  has come down since the inauguration of airport 
with the improvement in connectivity and now stands  less than 1 hr from most parts of the city. The 
‘Aero Express’ introduced by Hyderabad International Airport Ltd (HIAL) offers subsidized fares for 
commuting between city airport and vice-versa. Besi des passengers, visitors and employees have a 
number of cost-effective transportation options arranged by HIAL. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
42.  The Committee notes that the airlines and pass engers are the main sources of revenues for 
airport developers at Bangalore, Hyderabad, Mumbai and Delhi and with rising fares and cost cutting 
across the sector, developers are pruning infrastructure plan and opting for ways to cut cost and install 
low priced facilities. The Committee, therefore, re commends that the developers in these airports 
should be restrained from charging user development  fee and the government should not agree to it. 
The airport operators may be directed to implement the modernization plan as per the agreements 
within the scheduled time limit instead of concentr ating on revenue earning from commercial 
activities. 
(Para 58) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
43.   The modernization of IGI Airport has been pla nned in accordance to the agreement (OMDA) 
and is implemented as per the Master Plan and Major  Development Plan submitted to MoCA & AAI. 
None of the facilities being developed at IGI Airpo rts are low priced facilities in terms of quality a nd 
cost. All the facilities are benchmarked against th e leading airports around the world. Phase-I of the  
modernization will be completed by 2010. For DIAL, the UDF being proposed for funding the gap in 

project means of finance which is a result of revis ed structure of commercial property development 
and also to reduce the burden on airlines through tariff recovery. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
44.   The Committee feels that the UDF levied by private airport operators on the travelling 
public is really uncalled for. The Committee feels that the Government should have advised the 
private airport operators to venture into the capit al market to raise the required funds rather 
than imposing the UDF on the public. At a time when  air fare is already soaring, common 
passengers should not be burdened with UDF. The Com mittee notes that Airports Authority of 
India was not allowed to charge UDF on same criteri a by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The 
Committee feels that permitting the private operato rs to charge UDF is an example of double 
standard adopted by the Government discriminating a gainst its own PSU and favouring the 
private airports. The Committee may be provided wit h the information on the share of 
Government in UDF collected so far from these airports.  
REVENUES  OF  AIRPORTS  AUTHORITY  OF  INDIA  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
45.   The Committee observes the double standard of  the Government in dealing with the Airports 
Authority of India vis-a-vis  private operators in the development of airports i n the country. The 
Committee is not against private companies making p rofit at the same time the profit making Public 
Sector Undertakings should not be handed over to th e private players. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Govemment should not hand over the profit earning airports to the private sector. 
The Committee feels that AAI should also be given a dequate opportunities and encouragement in 
modernizing and developing of airports in the country. Airports Authority of India should be given all 
the financial and operating freedom enjoyed by a pr ivate joint venture company for competing with 
the private players. 
(Para 23) 
(131st Report) 
Reply given by AAI  
46.   The AAI is undertaking the upgradation and de velopment of 35 non-metro airports. 
Additionally 13 more airports are also being developed by AAI, besides modernization of Kolkata and 
Chennai airports. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
47.   The Airports Authority of India that has been  continuously earning profit every year and has 
proven ability of setting up, maintaining and moder nizing airports in India and also abroad. Even the 
private Cochin International Airport had been devel oped by it. The Committee is, therefore, against 
the handing-over of the profit making airports to t he private sector in the name of modernization and 
reconstruction, specially when the Airports Authority of India possesses the proven capability for thi s 
task. 
48.   The Committee also learnt that the Government  was planning to hand over 15 more profit 
making airports to private parties in the name of constructing green field airports. 
49.   The Committee notes that the greenfield airpo rts that are proposed to be handed over to private 
parties are largely being financed by Airports Auth ority of India, concerned State Governments and 

also by Indian Financial Institutions. The Committe e wonders, if the private players can manage the 
necessary resources within India, why can’t the Air ports Authority of India be allowed to pursue the 
same business strategy. In 2006, when the Delhi and  Mumbai Airports were being allowed to be 
modernized/expanded through PPP mode, the Airports Authority of India had submitted a plan with 
lesser time frame for the modernization of these ai rports. However, these were turned down for 
unknown reasons. The Committee feels that had the G overnment agreed to this proposal of the 
Airports Authority of India, the Mumbai and Delhi A irports would have been completed by this time. 
The Committee does not agree to the Government’s lo gic that the modernization of airports can be 
done only through privatization. It is a wrong and misplaced assumption. Airports, assuming 
important role in our economy as they are, the Comm ittee feels, must be under strong public 
regulation, if not under direct public control to e nsure that unfair monopolistic practices do not 
become rampant. Internationally, most successful examples of airport management are known to have 
retained over all public control even while outsourcing some particular activities to private people. For 
example, many airports have successfully brought in  private parties to invest in cargo handling 
facilities, parking bays, servicing and overhauling  facilities, maintaining terminals and so on. 
However, in India we are handing over the entire ai rport to the private parties which are in total 
negation to the best practices available in the world. 
(Paras 57, 58 and 59) 
(141st Report) 
Reply of Government  
50.   The Government decided to restructure and mod ernize airports through the Joint Venture 
Companies (JVC) route with an objective to set up a irports of international standards and to utilize 
private funds and efficiencies for this purpose. It  is submitted that the modernization of Delhi and 
Mumbai airports is estimated to cost an amount of a pprox Rs. 20000 crores. The resource position of 
AAI does not enable investment of this order. Furth er, the internal resources available with the AAI 
are required not only for the development/construction of Greenfield airports but also development of 
operational airports of AAI and also for modernization of the ATC control system. 
It is also submitted that:--- 
(i) The decision to restructure Delhi and Mumbai ro ute was taken after widespread 
consultation and examination of various proposals including that of AAI. 
(ii) The aforesaid airports have been leased out to  the JVCs in terms of Section 12A of the 
Airports Authority of India Act, 1994. As such, the  action has been taken as contemplated 
and provided for by the Parliament by way of the aforesaid Act. 
(iii) AAI has a 26% equity stake in JVCs. Besides, AAI also receives a revenue share of 45.99% 
in case of IGI airport, Delhi and 38.99% in case of CSI airport, Mumbai from the JVCs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
51.   The committee notes that the equity contribut ion of the consortium of private companies in 
BIAL is only Rs. 240/- crores. The rest of the fina ncing has come from state support, AAI, 
Government of Karnataka and by way of debt from financial institutions. The land was also given on a 
concessional rate. The same is the case with HIAL a lso. The equity contribution of the private 
companies is around Rs. 330/- crores. The rest of t he finance has come from Government agencies 
and by way of debt from financial institutions. The  Committee notes that with the kind of resources 

and expertise that the Airports Authority of India has, these airports could have been easily developed 
and operated by the Airports Authority of India itself. 
(Para 31.10.4) 
(142nd Report) 
52.   The Committee is, therefore, of the view that  being leading airport infrastructure provider, the  
Airports Authority of India which has got the resou rces and expertise should have a better say in the 
modernization of airports in the country. The Commi ttee recommends that any future Greenfield 
airports or Brownfield airports project must be don e under the management of Airports Authority of 
India. JVCs can be formulated but the Airports Authority of India must have a majority holding in the 
company and management control must rest with it. 
(Para 31.10.5) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
53.   Approval for the Greenfield airport projects at Devanahalli and at Shamshabad were accorded 
by the Government of India, based on the proposal m ade by Governments of Andhra Pradesh and 
Karnataka. Both the State Governments want to creat e world class airports of International standard 
with world class management could be established in their respective states. 
54.  Government of India will consider the recommen dations of Parliamentary Standing Committee 
while formulating Policy for the development of future Greenfield and Brownfield airports. . 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
55.   Besides, the Airports Authority of India, adv ertently or inadvertently, appears to not being given 
its due. Even though, ATC operations of all the air ports are still with them, the closure of HAL and 
Begumpet airports and placing Airports Authority of  India virtually at the mercy of the management 
of private airports, speaks a lot about it. The man ner in which the Concession Agreement and OMDA 
were signed has also invited wide criticism and these are alleged to have violated the existing policies, 
guidelines, norms, rules, etc. The Committee feels that there appears to be some truth in the 
apprehensions that are being raised against the Gov ernment in the entire exercise of privatizing the 
airports, developing the Greenfield airports and th e related matters. The Committee expects that the 
Government of the day to provide convincing explanation to all the points, raised in this report to clear 
the apprehensions that are being flown thick and wi de. It is for the Government to clarify the entire 
matter. 
(Para 64) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
56.   Government of India accorded approval for the  Greenfield airport projects at Devanahalli and at 
Shamshabad, based on proposal made by Governments o f Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, for the 
creation of world class Airports with the expertise  of the private players. The world class Greenfield  
airports at Devanahalli and Shamshabad have since b een commissioned. The Government would be 
getting 4% Concession Fee in accordance with the Concession Agreements entered by Government of 
India with BIAL and GHIAL. Further, Airports Author ity of India would be getting dividend for the 

investment made in these Greenfield airports. The l and and assets of the closed HAL and Begumpet 
Airports with Airports Authority of India would be put for alternative use. 
57.   The OMDA pertains to Delhi and Mumbai airport s. The interests of AAI have been taken care 
in OMDA which amongst other things envisage provision for revenue sharing. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
58.   The Committee finds that the replies of the Government are not convincing and feels that 
it is an attempt to mislead the Committee and natio n on privatization of airports and 
marginalizing the Airports Authority of India. The Committee is also apprehensive that the 
Government is planning to privatize majority of the  operations of the Airports Authority of 
India. The Committee still feels that the Airports Authority of India is not getting the due which 
it deserves from the Government. The Committee desires to know the policy of the Government 
in setting up of Greenfield and Brownfield airports  and the role of AAI in these new airports. 
The Committee also desires to have the detail of ch arges the private airport operators are 
paying to AAI for the services rendered to them.  
EMPLOYEES  OF  THE  AIRPORTS  AUTHORITY  OF  INDIA  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
59.  The Committee recommends that the grievances o f the employees of the both the airports should 
be well addressed by the Government. The employees should not be put into any hardship due to the 
wrong decision of the Government. The Committee fee ls that the Tripartite Committee should meet 
regularly to remove any uneasiness and settle issues agitating the employees of the Airports Authority 
of India on various issues. 
(Para 27) 
(131st Report) 
Reply of the Government  
60.   To sort out employee related issues at Delhi and Mumbai airports, Joint Working Cell during 
Operation Support Period has been set up consisting  of two representatives each of AAI and JVC of 
both airports in June 2006. Meetings of the cell ar e being held at regular intervals and problems 
related to employees are being discussed. 
61.   The meetings of the Tripartite Committee with  the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
Airports Authority of India and AAI Employees Joint  Forum are being held at regular intervals and 
various issues as stipulated in terms of reference of the Committee have been deliberated. The last 
meeting was held on 7.4.2008. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
62.   The private operators should recognize variou s staff welfare committees of Airports Authority 
of India and others working at these airports. Ther e should be regular consultative and coordination 
meeting of all the stakeholders at the new airports so as to resolve the different issues/grievances. 
(Para 16) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  

63.   The Coordination Committee meeting of all sta keholders is being conducted on regular basis. 
An airport coordination committee has been formed s oon after commissioning the airport. The 
committee meets on the third Thursday of every month. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
64.   The Government should take adequate and essen tial steps to equip the airports which are 30 to 
40 minutes flying time from the major airports to m eet any exigencies. The Committee is of the view 
that this problem can be solved if the Government expedites development/modernization of non-metro 
airports. 
(Para 42) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
65.   AAI has undertaken development and modernizat ion of 35 non-metro airports by providing 
world class infrastructure facilities at these airp orts. The 35 non-metro airports identified are 
Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Guwahati, Jaipur, Udaipur, Tri vandrum, Lucknow, Goa, Madurai, Mangalore, 
Agatti, Aurangabad, Khajuraho, Rajkot, Vadodara, Bh opal, Indore, Nagpur, Trichy, Vizag, 
Bhubaneswar, Coimbatore, Patna, Port Blair, Varanas i, Agartala, Dehradun, Imphal, Ranchi, Raipur, 
Agra, Chandigarh, Dimapur, Jammu and Pune. 
66.   The development works for the Terminal Buildi ngs and Airside have already begun at most of 
the airports. The works at Aurangabad, Arrival Bloc k of Amritsar Terminal, Nagpur, Trichy, 
Dehradun, Jaipur, Udaipur and Visakhapatnam airports have already been completed and work at rest 
of the airports is expected to be completed by the year 2010. AAI will make all efforts to complete 
these projects in stipulated time-frame. 
67.   In addition, AAI has also undertaken developm ent of 13 other non-metro airports. These 
airports are Akola, Belgaum, Calicut, Cooch Behar, Dibrugarh (Mohanbari), Gondia, Hubli, Kollu 
(Bhuntar), Mysore, Rajamundry, Surat, Srinagar and Vijayawada. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
68.   The Committee recommends that the women emplo yees should not be relocated to other cities. 
They may be given employment with the same or bette r terms and conditions by MIAL as they were 
enjoying with AAI. AAI may introduce a V.R.S. which is acceptable to the employees. 
(Para 47) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
69.   The provisions of the OMDA sufficiently addre ss the concerns of the employees of AAI posted 
at CSIA, Mumbai, as per the OMDA, the General Emplo yees of AAI are continue to be stationed at 
CSIA during the operation support period, which end ed on May 2, 2009. Before that date, MIAL was 
required to offer employment to a minimum of 60% of  the General Employees, on terms that are not 
less favourable than their employment terms with the AAI. Therefore, AAI employees have the option 
to join the services of MIAL or continue their empl oyment with AAI. Therefore, not only are the jobs 
of AAI staff secure, even their emoluments upon joi ning MIAL cannot be inferior to their present 
emoluments. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  

70.   The Committee notes with concern that some of  the provisions of OMDA appears to violate 
Clause 12 and 18 of the Airports Authority of India  Act 1994. The Clause 18 provides that the 
employees posted at the subject airport would conti nue to enjoy the same terms and conditions of 
employment while Clause 12 covers all the services of operations as well as non operations. The 
Committee understands that the plea of the employee s working at these two airports is that they 
should be allowed to continue their employment at t he same station of posting as per the contract of 
service issued on the date of appointment by AAI wi thout altering any service conditions by the 
Principal Employer. The provisions framed in the sa id AAI Act do not provide any option to transfer 
the employees from one employer to another as such the OMDA executed is not binding upon the 
employees. 
(Para 49) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
71.   As per OMDA under Clause 6.1.1. AAI is requir ed to provide operation support for a period of 
three years. As per Clause 6.1.4, the JVC is requir ed to make offers to a minimum of 60% of the 
General Employees. However, General Employees have the option to accept or decline the offers 
within one month. As per Clause 6.1.7, at the end o f operation support period the General Employees 
opting to continue employment with AAI or those not  receiving offers from JVC shall continue their 
employment with AAI and redeployed at establishment s other than the airport. Therefore, it may be 
seen that the employees have the option to choose t o join JVC on better terms and conditions or 
remain with AAI. 
72.   Section 18 of the AAI Act, 1994 does not have  any application in the present situation. The said 
section prescribes provisions in respect of officer s and other employees of the International Airports  
Authority and the National Airports Authority. The background for this provision is that the AAI Act, 
1994 was enacted to provide for the constitution of  the AAI and for the transfer and vesting of the 
undertakings of the International Airports Authorit y of India and the National Airports Authority to 
and in the AAI. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
73.   The Committee is of view that no arbitrary ag reement namely OMDA/Concession Agreement 
can supersede the provisions of the Parliament Act.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Governments to review all the provisions incorporat ed in the OMDA and make suitable provisions to 
accommodate all these employees of Airports Authority of India at their respective places of work, as 
has been done in Delhi Vidyut Board wherein the employees of the organization have been retained in 
BSES, Delhi on the same terms of employment enjoyed by them prior to privatization. 
(Para 50) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
74.   The Operation Management and Development Agre ement (OMDA) between Airports Authority 
of India (AAI) and MIAL includes provisions regardi ng offer of employment by MIAL to General 
Employees of AAI. MIAL has made offers to General E mployees of AAI in accordance with the 
provisions of the OMDA. The terms offered by MIAL to such employees were better than the terms of 
their employment with AAI. The financial terms offe red over and above the terms of employment 

with AAI, includes joining bonuses, special increme nts (including in the case of non-executive 
employees increments following wage settlement with  union) and taking over of subsidized loans. 
Employees absorbed by MIAL are around 7.17% of tota l General Employees available for absorption 
(i.e. total employees handed over to MIAL, less ret ired/expired etc.). This excludes employees who 
have joined voluntarily outside the absorption proc ess. Given the lack of response from AAI General 
Employees, MIAL has now made complete alternate arrangements including own staffing. 
75.   Besides this, AAI has introduced Voluntary Re tirement Scheme for these employees and has 
also redeployed the retiring employees after obtain ing three choices. Further, the operation support 
period has already expired on 2.5.2009. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
76.   The Committee recommends that MIAL should giv e preference to the casual labourers working 
in the Airport for future employment. In one form o r the other, they should be accommodated by 
MIAL. 
(Para 51) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
77.   The recommendations of the Comments are noted  and MIAL shall try to give preference in 
employment to existing talent pool at Airport subject to its requirements. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
78.   The Committee recommends that a coordination mechanism may be evolved for regular 
interaction among various stakeholders of Chattrapati Shivaji International Airport with representation 
from agencies such as MIAL, Airports Authority of India, Employees Unions of Airports Authority of 
India, various airlines etc. This mechanism will ir on out differences among the stakeholders of the 
Airport and will enable smooth functioning of the airport. 
(Para 62) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
79.   Various Committees already exist to oversee t he coordination of the smooth working of the CSI 
Airport at Mumbai, like the OMDA Implementation Ove rsight Committee, the Joint Working Cell 
during operation support period of OMDA between AAI  and MIAL, the Airport Operations 
Committee, which comprises all the stakeholders of the CSI Airport. 
FURTHER   RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
80.   The Committee notes that a substantial number of em ployees of AAI have not opted for 
absorption with DIAL and MIAL developing Delhi and Mumbai airports respectively. 
Employees absorbed by MIAL are around 7.17% of tota l General Employees available for 
absorption ( i.e.  total employees handed over to MIAL, less retired/ expired etc.). It seems the 
package offered was not attractive enough to leave AAI. The reply also does not present a clear 
picture about the employees of AAI - how many retired, retained and opted for private airports. 
It seems Ministry of Civil Aviation is not concerne d with the problems of the employees of AAI. 
The employees are still representing their grievanc es to various agencies for acceptable 

redressal. The Committee recommends that efforts sh ould be made to settle the grievances of 
AAI in a time bound manner. The Committee  also hopes that the Government will give due 
importance to Airports Authority of India Act rather than OMDA or concessionaire agreements 
signed with the private operators while dealing wit h issues related to employees in future. The 
Committee desires to have the latest information on  the status of employees of AAI in the Delhi 
International Airport Limited and Mumbai International Airport Limited.  
81.  Moreover, the Committee is afraid that the Airports  Authority of India will be burdened 
with the surplus employees at Delhi and Mumbai due to non-absorption by the private airport 
operators, which will make a dent on the already depleted resources of the Airports Authority of 
India. The Committee recommends that the Government  should intervene in the matter to 
ensure that the employees and Airports Authority of  India do not suffer due to privatization of 
airports at Mumbai and Delhi.  
CITY  SIDE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  AIRPORTS 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
82.   The Committee on Infrastructure headed by the  Prime Minister at its 12th meeting on the 8th 
June, 2006 decided that for 35 non-metro airports, the Airports Authority of India will undertake the 
airport side development, including terminal buildi ng, while the city side development will be 
undertaken through private public partnership. However, the Committee has been given to understand 
that the Inter Ministerial Group headed by Secretar y, Civil Aviation has decided on 6 May, 2008, to 
deviate from the decision taken by the Committee on  Infrastructure headed by the Prime Minister. 
Now the IMG has suggested that the commercial opera tions in the terminal building will be done 
through PPP. The IMG decided that the scope of work  of the project would include commercial 
operation and maintenance of Terminal Building, development and operation of Cargo and real estate 
development on the land identified for the purpose.  Maintenance of the Terminal Building would 
include maintenance of the building, equipment and utilities. On the basis of this decision, the 
Planning Commission has prepared a Model Concession Agreement for PPP for 30 years for terminal 
buildings. 
83.   The Committee feels that this is a deviation from the decision of the Committee on 
Infrastructure and fails to understand how the IMG headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, can go against or deviate from the decisi ons/directions of the COI headed by the Prime 
Minister himself. The Committee, therefore, expects PMO to issue a clarification in this regard, if th e 
IMG had its approval for deviating from the CoI and  if not, it must intervene in this matter to ensure  
that the commercial operation of terminal buildings was done by the Airports Authority of India itself. 
84.   Commercial operation of terminal buildings is  a profit making activity which would have 
generate revenue for the Airports Authority of India to spend on developing airside operations. 
85.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the  airport side development including the 
commercial use of terminal building should be entrusted to the Airport Authority of India. The AAI is 
also of the view that there will be conflict of int erests, if private parties and AAI were involved in to 
this simultaneously.  
86.   The Committee notes the statement made by the  representatives of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation that a decision on handing over the terminal buildings in non-metro airports to private parties 
had not been finalized so far. The Committee, there fore, recommends that in view of economy of 

scale, operational convenience and as also in natio nal and public interest, the views of the AAI be 
seriously considered before taking any decision in this regard. 
(Paras 53-56 and 64) 
(141st Report) 
Reply of Government  
87.   In pursuance to decision taken in 14th Meetin g of Committee on Infrastructure an Inter 
Ministerial Group under the Chairmanship of Secreta ry (Civil Aviation) was constituted to formulate 
proposals for operations and maintenance of the newly created terminals, for setting up subsidiaries of 
AAI in select non-metro airports and to finalize th e draft Model Concession Agreement for city side 
development of select non-metro airports through PP P. The IMG had several meetings to decide the 
structure of the PPP project for city side developm ent. However, the deliberations of the IMG could 
not be concluded. Keeping in view the need to final ize the issue at the earliest, the Government have 
decided that the scope of the city side development  projects will comprise of the commercial 
development of property on city side, car park and cargo operations only. AAI have been advised to 
take necessary action accordingly. 
FURTHER   RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
88.   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and f eels that the Ministry has not given 
full information regarding the airport side develop ment. When the AAI is able to take the 
airport side development including the terminal bui lding, why a PPP mode has been approved. 
This will make the way for AAI to go sick in due co urse. Further, it will put burden on 
exchequer of Government. The Committee recommends t hat only AAI should be entrusted to 
develop the airport side development on the 35 non- metro airports. The Committee may be 
apprised of the final decisions taken by the IMG on  the structure of PPP project for city side 
development and details of ongoing airport developm ent projects taken by Airports Authority 
of India.  
CONGESTION  AT  DELHI  AND  MUMBAI  AIRPORTS 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
89.   Aircraft have to hover around due to congesti ons at the airports; passengers have to face lot of  
inconveniences due to traffic jam at the airports, lack of basic amenities for the passengers at the 
terminals; number of accidents reported due to cong estion at the runways etc. are some of the 
problems which came to the notice of the Committee as regards the Mumbai and Delhi airports. The 
Committee observes that the lack of vision and proper planning are the main causes of these problems. 
The Committee feels that the lack of coordination b etween the governmental agencies and the private 
developers is also largely responsible for aggravat ing the problems at both the airports. The 
Committee hopes that the lessons learnt from the ex periences of Mumbai and Delhi airports in these 
regards, would be helpful in ensuring that in future such problems do not recur elsewhere. 
(Para 65) 
(141st Report) 
Reply of Government  
90.  The following actions have been taken to decon gest Delhi airspace and airport: 

(i) The third runway 29/11 has been commissioned on  25th September, 2008. 
(ii) Independent parallel operations are being carr ied out on the two runways 29/11 and 28/10. 
Runway 29/11 is issued for all arriving aircraft an d Runway 28 is used for all departing 
aircraft. 
(iii) PBN Based Standard Instrument Departure (SIDs ) and Standard Terminal Arrival Routs 
(STAR) have been implemented on 28th August, 2008 to streamline the air traffic and thus 
reducing RIT congestion and delays. 
  Due to above measures, the problem of congestion has been more or less eased. Action is also in 
hand to improve the position at Mumbai. 
FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
91.   The Committee notes the reply and feels that the congestion problem at Delhi airport is yet to be 
solved. Aircraft have still to hover around for mor e than 30 minutes before landing, resulting in 
wastage of precious fuel, inconvenience to passenge rs apart. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry should take the help of experts and improve their system. 
MODERNIZATION  OF  CHENNAI  AND  KOLKATA  AIRPORTS  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
92.   The Committee recommends that final sanction for the modernisation of Chennai, Kolkota and 
the Non-metro airports should be given without any delay. 
(Para 71) 
(141st Report) 
Reply of Government  
93.  The Government have approved the modernization  plans of Chennai and Kolkata airport at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 1808 crores and Rs. 1942.57 c rores, respectively. The work has awarded and 
commenced in October, 2008. As regards city side de velopment at 24 Non Metro Airports, out of 35 
Non-Metro Airports selected for development through  PPP route, the scope of the city side 
development has been redefined and would now comprise of commercial Development of property on 
city side, Car Park and Cargo operations. 
FURTHER   RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
94.   The Committee desires that the ongoing develo pment works of both Chennai and Kolkata 
airports may be expedited in time.  
FACILITIES  AT  PRIVATE  AIRPORTS  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
95.  The Committee found the plan and design of the  Greenfield airports to be of the international 
standard with certain useful facilities for the comfort and convenience of the passengers, for example, 
adequate and efficient check-in counters, self chec k-in machines and quick immigration clearance, 
large number of shops, eateries, etc. However, the Committee also came across certain areas that 
needed immediate attention. For example, the Commit tee found that the passengers at the Greenfield 
airports have to pay exorbitant prices for food ite ms. The eateries are charging much more than the 

MRP, which is against the Supreme Court order. Ther e is no separate canteen for the employees and 
the staff working at the airports. The drivers and others who are waiting outside the airports have no  
affordable canteen facility and basic amenities lik e toilets and bathrooms. The Committee 
recommends that the Government should ensure that t he Greenfield Airports at Bengaluru and 
Hyderabad provide basic facilities to the drivers a nd passengers and stop the eateries from charging 
exorbitant prices. Private airlines have to cough u p hefty amounts for parking bays and aerobridges, 
security charges, lounge rentals, telephone rentals and other facilities at the new airports. 
(Para 13) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
96.   Several cost effective food and beverage opti ons are available at various levels of airport to 
passengers, visitors, drivers, staff and other users of airport. Airport operators have informed that there 
is no charge over and above MRP for any food item a nywhere at the airports. Sufficient number of 
toilets and bathrooms are provided for use of all u sers of airports. Private airlines are paying the same 
rate for various common use facilities what they we re paying at the old airports. The rates of food 
items available in the Passenger Terminal are reaso nable taking into account the quality, availability  
of items catering to different tastes, both Indian and continental. Strict monitoring and care is taken to 
see that, the food is hygienically served in keeping with the international standards. 
97.   There are two canteens at the Bengaluru Inter national Airport, one located in the Administration 
Block, serving breakfast, lunch, evening snacks and  dinner and it is open to all the employees of all 
the departments, airlines, etc. and one in a tempor ary structure near the airside. In addition, there is 
another canteen located in the Cargo Terminal, where similar arrangement is available. For the benefit 
of the taxi drivers, and any other low-paid employe es, there is an outlet in the car parking lot servi ng 
breakfast and snack items apart from coffee and tea  at very low cost. Bengaluru International Airport 
Ltd. (BIAL) is also building facilities in the park ing lot itself for waiting drivers. There are fully  
functional staff canteens at RGIA, Hyderabad at bot h passenger and cargo terminals. Sufficient 
number of toilets and bathrooms are provided for us e of all users of airport. Separate canteen and 
dormitory facilities are being added at the Passenger Transportation Centre north of the main car park  
which caters to the needs of the drivers and other users of the airport. 
98.   Private airlines are paying the same rate for  various common use facilities what they were 
paying at old airports. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
99.  The parking charges for vehicles are also quit e heavy at the new airports. At Bengaluru, it is 
Rs.40/- per hour and Rs.20/-per additional hours. T he Committee is surprised to know that at 
Hyderabad airport, a vehicle while entering the air port for dropping or picking up a passenger has to 
pay Rs.35/- per trip. The Committee notes that spac e earmarked for passenger seating areas was 
inadequate and numbers of seats are also not adequa te, causing inconvenience to the passengers 
during peak times. This is so because much of the a irport space has been let out for commercial use 
and given to shopping outlets and F&B outlets. Ther e is conspicuous absence of lounges at these 
airports. There is a need for creation of additiona l reserved lounge for VIPs and Passengers. To help 
and guide the passengers, there should be round-the -clock help service at these airports. There were 
inadequate facilities provided for free drinking wa ter at these airports. More drinking water fountain s 

should be installed. The emergency medical facilities for treatment of the passengers in case of sudden 
illness should be in place in all the new airports as has been done at the new Hyderabad airport. 
(Para 14) 
(l42 nd  Report) 
Reply of the Government  
100.   The entry charge of Rs. 35/- which was intro duced at Rajiv Gandhi International Airport, 
Hyderabad, as a short term measure to instill traff ic discipline, has been withdrawn effective 1 st  
November, 08 after the opening of dedicated VIP car park. Premium parking now is being provided at 
economy car park rates. Sufficient number of seating is available for passengers during peak times and 
no passenger has reported lack of seating space at new RGI airport. The airport has maximum number 
of lounges ---- 12, including those dedicated for V VIPs, VIPs and reserved ---- compared to any 
airport in India. Round-the-clock airport helpdesk is available at both departure and arrival areas. Free 
drinking water fountains are available for passenge rs at various places in departure and arrival halls . 
For rest and recreation ‘Slumber Room’ facilities are provided. The 17-bed emergency and health care 
facility provided at RGIA Airport, Hyderabad has be en well received. The parking charges at 
Bengaluru Airport for vehicles are indeed less than  those obtaining at other airports in India managed  
by AAI. They are also equal or lower than previousl y charged at Hyderabad airport. BIAL has 
augmented the number of passenger seats in the Dome stic and International Departures. As on date, a 
sufficient number of seats are available. It may be  submitted that all the three airlines, Kingfisher 
Airlines, Indian and Jet Airways, did not have thei r own lounge ready at airport opening. As a result,  
this space and facility allocated to the airlines w as not available, some 300 seats. Addition seats ar e 
arranged throughout the Terminal building as the demand requires. 
101.   A well appointed Reserved Lounge has been op ened at Bengaluru Airport with facilities 
for VIPs to relax while waiting for the departure a nnouncements of their flights. The lounge has 
comfortable seating, F&B facilities, a choice of Ka nnada and English newspapers and magazines, 
television, shower facilities, FIDs. This is addition to the VIP Terminal adjacent to the main passenger 
Terminal. The reserve Lounge also houses an office for the State Protocol Department. There is 
competent Terminal Management Team and Guest Relati ons Unit to facilitate and held round-the 
clock to all passengers including VIPs at Bengaluru  Airport. The inner curb barrier is manned 24 
hours a day to ensure that VIP vehicles are given a  quick and hassle-free entry into the VIP lane. 
There are number of drinking water dispensers at the passengers Terminal at Bengaluru. 
102. Bengaluru Airport has a comprehensive tie-up w ith Columbia Asia Hospital. A doctor and nurse 
are available in the medical room in the Terminal B uilding round the clock and a full fledged 
ambulance is on stand-by at all times. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
103.   The Committee recommends that the flight del ay or cancellation must be reported to 
passengers well in time to avoid hardships to the p assengers. The baggage handling process should be 
strengthened so as to reduce the baggage delivery t ime and hardship to the passengers. Apron driving 
discipline should be maintained to avoid any accide nt on apron and staff should be given proper 
training for the driving skills and behaviors. There should be integration of air and ground surveillance 
information along with flight related data to enhan ce air travel safety and efficient air traffic 
management. 

(Para 15) 
(142 nd  Report) 
Reply of the Government  
104.   There are numerous flight information displa y systems available at the airports for 
dissemination of up-to-date flight information. It may be submitted that the baggage handling system 
is at par with the best in the world and the Service Level Agreement with the ground handler is strictly 
enforced in airports. Airside/Apron driving trainin g is given to all airside drivers and strict action  is 
taken against anyone found breaking the law. 
105.   The Airport Operations Control Centre integr ates all communication with ATC and 
ground agencies seamlessly through latest equipment . It monitors the activities of entire airport 
through strategically located CCTVs 
FURTHER   RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
106.   The Committee desires that the Government should im press upon the private 
airport operators to offer their services at an affordable price to the travelling public.  
FUNCTIONING  OF  MUMBAI  AIRPORT  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
107.   There has been delay in execution of moderni zation of Mumbai airport by JVC causing 
concerns in implementing process and procedures as promised for the terminal building. The work for 
development of infrastructure of terminal building and approach fly-over and facilities provided for 
departure gate security after immigration should be stream-lined and made time-bound.  
(Para 39.1) 
(142 
nd  Report) 
108.   The Committee notes that one of the basic pu rposes of handing over the modernization 
task of Mumbai and Delhi airports to the Joint Vent ure Company was to complete it within the given 
time limit. However, the Committee feels that JVC h as not been able to meet the time frame as 
mentioned in the agreement to complete various modernization projects (mandatory projects) and such 
projects are running behind schedule. The Committee recommends the Government to institutionalize 
the monitoring mechanism to avoid delays and cost o ver runs in the execution of the projects at 
Mumbai and Delhi airports. 
(Para 57) 
(142 nd  Report) 
Reply of the Government  
109.   There is no delay in implementation of proje ct. All mandatory projects have been 
completed as per schedule, which has been duly verified by Independent Engineer (IE) report has been 
submitted to this Ministry and Airports Authority of India (AAI). 
110.   Modernization plan for IGI Airport Delhi and  CSI Airport Mumbai is progressing 
satisfactorily; there is a monitoring Mechanism thr ough Independent Engineer reporting to the 
Government of India and through OIOC meeting. 

FURTHER  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
111.   The Committee notes the reply of the Government and  still feels that real picture as 
reported by the media and from the experience of th e Members of the Committee are totally 
different from the one portrayed by the Government.  The development of infrastructure of 
terminal building and approach flyover facilities a t Mumbai airport, etc., are not satisfactory. 
The Committee notes that everyday there is some rep ort of difficulties being faced by the 
passengers at Mumbai and Delhi airports. The Commit tee therefore further recommends that 
the Monitoring Mechanism may be further strengthene d to ensure that the modernization 
process takes place as scheduled. The Committee may be supplied with reports submitted by the 
independent engineers and minutes of the OIOC meetings of the last one year.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
112.   The proposed new ground handling policy effe ctive 1 st  January, 2009 will have a negative 
impact on airline industry and will render several thousand employees jobless. The airlines that are 
presently performing self handling may be permitted  to continue to do the same for providing best 
costumer services. 
113.   The international passenger transport facili ties to domestic flights are inadequate. The 
international passenger transportation needs immedi ate attention and the facilities should be 
augmented. 
(Para 39.2 and 39.3) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
114. Inter terminal transportation facility has bee n immensely improved by inducting sufficient 
number of new and improved buses. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
115.   Mumbai International Airport Ltd. is chargin g electricity charges as per the rates 
applicable to the commercial activities claiming th at M.E.R.C has categorized airports as a business 
and commercial activity resulting in huge losses to the airlines operators. The operators had submitted 
that it is service industry rather than a commercia l activity and accordingly, they may be charged 
electricity charges applicable only to the industrial units. 
(Para 39.5) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
116.   MIAL has to charge electricity rates under c ategory, which is finalized by the regulatory 
authority/utility provider. MIAL has already contes ted creation of new category resulting in tariff 
shock and matter is sub-judice and relief by courts shall be passed on to the consumers at Airport. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  

117.   The lounge space offered by the airport oper ator to the airlines is being provided at a very 
steep commercial rate, whereas the lounge facilitie s provided to passenger is not a commercial 
activity. 
(Para 39.6) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
118.   The lounge space rates are not high looking into the requirements of passengers travelling 
in business and first class who pay high airfares and expect matching services. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
119. The airlines do not have a choice of selecting  their service providers but are forced to go to th e 
one proposed by the airport operator. 
(Para 39.7) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
120.  In this regard, it is submitted that the serv ice providers have to be regulated at Airports to 
provide high class uniform service and it is essential also to avoid duplication of service providers. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
121.   The Common User Terminal Equipment (CUTE) fa cility charges should be rationalized 
and domestic airlines should not be forced to accep t CUTE as the situation does not actually warrant 
it. 
(Para 39.8) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
122.   The Common User Terminal Equipment (CUTE) fa cility is a worldwide used technology 
and is meant for efficient use of counters and for flexibility in handling of passengers. There is no 
reason that CUTE should not be adopted for domestic terminals. There is no such differentiation as far 
as CUTE technology is concerned anywhere in the wor ld based on type (domestic/international) of 
passengers. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
123.  Screening of registered baggage is perceived to be a serious cause of concern, once in-line 
screening comes into place. It is understood that t he airport operator has outsourced the security 
screening to an outside agency, which is a serious concern to all the airlines. 
(Para 39.9, ibid ) 
(l42nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
124.   In line baggage screening is through MIAL st aff and is as per guidelines of BCAS. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  

125.   The airport operator is in the process charg ing parking fee from staff for their vehicles and 
that would be equal to the outside public. 
(Para 39.10) 
(l42nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
126.  There are special subsidized rates for parking of vehicles for staff. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
127.   During the meeting, the Commissioner of Poli ce, Mumbai, pointed out that the shelter 
provided for Mumbai police outside the terminals ha d been removed as a result police personnel on 
duty faced problem. He requested for giving adequat e space at suitable place. The Committee also 
desires that a dedicated police post should be stat ioned at the airport and the members of the police 
department assigned to the MIAL airport as their no rmal patrol area for effective security. The 
Government should ensure that the private operator of MIAL should provide adequate land at suitable 
locations outside the Airport for construction of Police Post. 
(Para 52) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
128.   There is a provision of police station at bo th the Airports at Santacruz and Sahar. 
Improvements in facilities have been carried out based on needs from time to time. 
FURTHER   RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
129.   The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feels that the Government should 
have some mechanism to check the deficiency in available facilities so that the passenger services 
are not compromised by the private operator while c oncentrating on revenue streams to 
augment their profits.  
DEALING  WITH  PASSENGERS 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
130.  Some instances of impolite behavior with the passengers at the airports was brought to the 
notice of the Committee. This type of behavior does  not go well with the tourists and creates an 
unpleasant atmosphere. The Committee desires that o fficials deputed at the airport, should strictly be  
asked to be courteous and polite with the passengers particularly, the tourist from other countries. The 
officials deputed at the airport and dealing with t he passengers/tourists should be more careful, polite, 
helpful and tourist friendly. 
(Para 61) 
(142nd Report) 
Reply of the Government  
131.   Lot of emphasis is being put on grooming of airport staff with regard to dealing with 
passengers. All employees who come in direct contac t with the passengers have been put through 
behavioral and functional training programs, conducted by specialized agency. DIAL has also sent one 
batch of its Customer Service Executives to Kuala L umpur International Airport for training. Further 

airport operators have taken initiative to provide such kind of behavioral training to other agencies like 
Delhi Police, CISF, Immigration staff etc through specialized agency. 
FURTHER   RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
132.   The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feels that imparting behavioral training to 
personnel involved in airports should be a continuous process so that the passengers entering 
the airport have a pleasant experience during their short stay there. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS –– AT A GLANCE  
CLOSURE  OF  BANGALORE  AND  HYDERABAD  AIRPORTS 
  The Committee reiterates that employees’ issue be  taken up with the Airport Operators 
and their response be conveyed to it. (Para 24)  
  The Committee is not convinced with the replies o f the Government on the closure of the 
old airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad. The Committee feels that the replies submitted by the 
Government are incomplete and the Government is tak ing shelter behind Concession 
Agreements signed with the developers of the new Gr eenfield airports for closing the old 
airports. The Committee is of the opinion that by c losing these airports, Government has 
indirectly promoted the business interest of the pr ivate airport operators. The Committee feels 
that the Government has opened a Pandora’s Box and all the concessionaires in future will insist 
on closing the Government owned old airports to thwart competition to them. The Committee is 
of the opinion that the Government still has ample time to revisit the issue and make use of the 
closed old airports which were built by tax payers’  money. The Committee considers the 
reluctance shown by the Government in this issue ve ry unfortunate. The Committee considers 
the argument of the Government that operation of tw o airports in the same city will jeopardize 
the safety of the aircrafts and create difficulties  for ATC operations, fallacious and erroneous, 
mainly because the old airports are still handling VIP flights, charter flights and helicopter. 
Strangely, these operations are hampering neither t he safety of the aircrafts nor the operations 
of the ATC. The Committee, therefore, once again re commends that the Government instead of 
providing such unconvincing excuses should operatio nalise the old airport~ at Bangalore and 
Hyderabad without any delay. (Para 35)  
USER  DEVELOPMENT  FEE  (UDF) 
  The Committee feels that the UDF levied by privat e airport operators on the travelling 
public is really uncalled for. The Committee feels that the Government should have advised the 
private airport operators to venture into the capit al market to raise the required funds rather 
than imposing the UDF on the public. At a time when  air fare is already soaring, common 
passengers should not be burdened with UDF. The Com mittee notes that Airports Authority of 
India was not allowed to charge UDF on same criteri a by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The 
Committee feels that permitting the private operato rs to charge UDF is an example of double 
standard adopted by the Government discriminating a gainst its own PSU and favouring the 
private airports. The Committee may be provided wit h the information on the share of 
Government in UDF collected so far from these airports. 
(Para 44)  
REVENUES  OF  AIRPORTS  AUTHORITY  OF  INDIA 
  The Committee finds that the replies of the Gover nment are not convincing and feels that 
it is an attempt to mislead the Committee and natio n on privatization of airports and 
marginalizing the Airports Authority of India. The Committee is also apprehensive that the 
Government is planning to privatize majority of the  operations of the Airports Authority of 
India. The Committee still feels that the Airports Authority of India is not getting the due which 
it deserves from the Government. The Committee desires to know the policy of the Government 
in setting up of Greenfield and Brownfield airports  and the role of AAI in these new airports. 

The Committee also desires to have the detail of ch arges the private airport operators are 
paying to AAI for the services rendered to them.    
EMPLOYEES  OF  THE  AIRPORTS  AUTHORITY  OF  INDIA 
  The Committee notes that a substantial number of employees of AAI have not opted for 
absorption with DIAL and MIAL developing Delhi and Mumbai airports respectively. 
Employees absorbed by MIAL are around 7.17% of tota l General Employees available for 
absorption (i.e. total employees handed over to MIA L, less retired/expired etc.). It seems the 
package offered was not attractive enough to leave AAI. The reply also does not present a clear 
picture about the employees of AAI - how many retired, retained and opted for private airports. 
It seems Ministry of Civil Aviation is not concerne d with the problems of the employees of AAI. 
The employees are still representing their grievanc es to various agencies for acceptable 
redressal. The Committee recommends that efforts sh ould be made to settle the grievances of 
AAI in a time bound manner. The Committee also hope s that the Government will give due 
importance to Airports Authority of India Act rather than OMDA or concessionaire agreements 
signed with the private operators while dealing wit h issues related to employees in future. The 
Committee desires to have the latest information on  the status of employees of AAI in the Delhi 
International Airport Limited and Mumbai International Airport Limited. (Para 80)  
  Moreover, the Committee is afraid that the Airpor ts Authority of India will be burdened 
with the surplus employees at Delhi and Mumbai due to non-absorption by the private airport 
operators, which will make a dent on the already depleted resources of the Airports Authority of 
India. The Committee recommends that the Government  should intervene in the matter to 
ensure that the employees and Airports Authority of  India do not suffer due to privatization of 
airports at Mumbai and Delhi.   
 
CITY  SIDE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  AIRPORTS 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and  feels that the Ministry has not given 
full information regarding the airport side develop ment. When the AAI is able to take the 
airport side development including the terminal bui lding, why a PPP mode has been approved. 
This will make the way for AAI to go sick in due co urse. Further, it will put burden on 
exchequer of Government. The Committee recommends t hat only AAI should be entrusted to 
develop the airport side development on the 35 non- metro airports. The Committee may be 
apprised of the final decisions taken by the IMG on  the structure of PPP project for city side 
development and details of ongoing airport developm ent projects taken by Airports Authority 
of India. (Para 88)  
CONGESTION  AT  DELHI  AND  MUMBAI  AIRPORTS 
  The Committee notes the reply and feels that the congestion problem at Delhi airport is yet 
to be solved. Aircraft have still to hover around f or more than 30 minutes before landing, 
resulting in wastage of precious fuel, inconvenienc e to passengers apart. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take  the help of experts and improve their 
system. 
(Para 91)  
MODERNIZATION  OF  CHENNAI  AND  KOLKATA  AIRPORTS 

  The Committee desires that the ongoing developmen t works of both Chennai and Kolkata 
airports may be expedited in time.  (Para 94)  
FACILITIES AT PRIVATE AIRPORTS 
  The Committee desires that the Government should impress upon the private airport 
operators to offer their services at an affordable price to the travelling public. (Para 106)  
FUNCTIONING  OF  MUMBAI  AIRPORT 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Government a nd still feels that real picture as 
reported by the media and from the experience of th e Members of the Committee are totally 
different from the one portrayed by the government.  The development of infrastructure of 
terminal building and approach flyover facilities a t Mumbai airport, etc., are not satisfactory. 
The Committee notes that everyday there is some rep ort of difficulties being faced by the 
passengers at Mumbai and Delhi airports. The Commit tee therefore further recommends that 
the Monitoring Mechanism may be further strengthene d to ensure that the modernization 
process takes place as scheduled. The Committee may be supplied with reports submitted by the 
independent engineers and minutes of the OIOC meetings of the last one year. (Para 111)  
  The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feel s that the Government should have 
some mechanism to check the deficiency in available  facilities so that the passenger services are 
not compromised by the private operator while conce ntrating on revenue streams to augment 
their profits.    (Para 129)  
 
DEALING  WITH  PASSENGERS 
  The Committee notes the reply. The Committee feel s that imparting behavioral training to 
personnel involved in airports should be a continuo us process so that the passengers entering 
the airport have a pleasant experience during their short stay there. (Para 132)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-I 
TRAFFIC  FORECAST 
BANGALORE  AIRPORT  
Aircraft Movements (In '000) Passengers (In Lacs) C argo (In '000 MTs) 
Year International Domestic Total International Dom estic Total International Domestic Total 
2006-07  10.52 83.88 94.40 12.61 68.64 81.25 97.70 63.17 160.87 
(Base Year) 
(Growth Rate) 20.0% 25.0% 24.5% 30.0% 30.0% 30.0% 2 0.0% 15.0% 18.1% 
2007-08 12.62 104.85 117.47 16.39 89.23 105.63 117. 24 72.65 189.89 
2008-09 15.15 131.06 146.21 21.31 116.00 137.31 140 .69 83.54 224.23 
2009-10 18.18 163.83 182.01 27.70 150.80 178.51 168 .83 96.07 264.90 
2010-11 21.81 204.79 226.60 36.02 196.04 232.06 202 .59 110.48 313.08 
2011-12 26.18 255.98 282.16 46.82 254.86 301.68 243 .11 127.06 370.17 
(Growth Rate) 15.0% 20.0% 19.6% 25.0% 20.0% 20.8% 1 5.0% 12.0% 14.0% 
2012-13 30.10 307.18 337.28 58.53 305.83 364.35 279 .58 142.30 421.88 
2013-14 34.62 368.61 403.23 73.16 366.99 440.15 321 .51 159.38 480.89 
2014-15 39.81 442.34 482.15 91.45 440.39 531.84 369 .74 178.51 548.24 
2015-16 45.78 530.80 576.59 114.31 528.47 642.78 42 5.20 199.93 625.13 
2016-17               52.65               636.96                 689.62            142.88              634.16              777.05             488.98             223.92           712.90 

          
 
 
ANNEXURE-II  
TRAFFIC  FORECAST 
HYDERABAD  AIRPORT  
         
Aircraft Movements (In '000) Passengers (In Lacs) C argo (In '000 MTs) 
Year International Domestic Total International Dom estic Total International Domestic Total 
2006-07  9.79 58.39 68.18 12.14 45.36 57.50 21.72 2 2.93 44.65 
(Base Year) 
(Growth Rate) 12.0% 25.0% 23.4% 20.0% 30.0% 28.1% 2 0.0% 12.0% 16.2% 
2007-08 10.96 72.99 83.95 14.57 58.97 73.54 26.06 2 5.68 51.75 
2008-09 12.28 91.23 103.51 17.48 76.66 94.14 31.28 28.76 60.04 
2009-10 13.75 114.04 127.80 20.98 99.66 120.63 37.5 3 32.21 69.75 
2010-11 15.40 142.55 157.96 25.17 129.55 154.73 45. 04 36.08 81.12 
2011-12 17.25 178.19 195.45 30.21 168.42 198.63 54. 05 40.41 94.46 
(Growth Rate) 10.0% 20.0% 19.2% 15.0% 25.0% 23.7% 1 5.0% 10.0% 13.0% 
2012-13 18.98 213.83 232.81 34.74 210.52 245.26 62. 15 44.45 106.60 
2013-14 20.88 256.60 277.47 39.95 263.15 303.10 71. 48 48.90 120.37 

2014-15 22.96 307.92 330.88 45.94 328.94 374.89 82. 20 53.79 135.98 
2015-16 25.26 369.50 394.76 52.83 411.18 464.01 94. 53 59.17 153.69 
2016-17               27.79               443.40               471.19               60.76              513.97               574.73             108.71             65.08              173.79 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
VIII 
EIGHTH  MEETING  
  The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Tuesday the 9th February, 2010 in Committee Ro om A, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury     ------    Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 5.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
 6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7. Shri Thomas Sangma 
  LOK  SABHA 
 8. Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 9. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 10. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 11. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 12. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 13. Shri S.D. Shariq 
 14. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 15. Shri K. Sugumar 
 16. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 17. Shri Kabir Suman 
 18. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
2.  * * * 
3.  * * * 
4.  * * * 
5.  * * * 
6.  The Committee then took up the issue of prepara tion of Action Taken Report on the replies 
received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the  131st Report on ‘the Closure of Bangalore and 
Hyderabad Airports and matters related thereto’, pr esented on 5th March, 2008; 141st Report on ‘the 

Modernization of Airports’, presented on 20th August, 2008; and 142nd Report on ‘the Functioning of 
Private Airports and the related issues’, presented  on 23rd October, 2008. The Committee noted that 
all the three Reports were related to the Airports and many of the recommendations were inter-related 
and pertained to the problem that needed common solution. The Committee, therefore, decided that in 
order to have more focused view on the subject, only one Action Taken Report could be prepared. 
7.  * * * 
8.  * * * 
9.  * * * 
10.  * * * 
11.  * * * 
12.  * * * 
13.  * * * 
14.  * * * 
15.  The meeting adjourned at 5.20 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
***Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XIII 
THIRTEENTH  MEETING  
  The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Wednesday the 5th May, 2010 in Room No.63, Fir st Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury     ----    Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 3. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 4. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 5. Shri Thomas Sangma 
 6. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7. Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 8. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 9. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 10.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 11. Shri K. Sugumar 
 12. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s of the Committee. Thereafter, the 
Committee considered the Draft Report on the “Actio n Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in its 131 
st  Report on the Closure of Bangalore and 
Hyderabad Airports and matters related thereto; 141 st  Report on the Modernization of Airports; and 
142 nd  Report on the Functioning of Private Airports and the related issues”. After some discussion, the 
Committee adopted the report with minor modificatio n/changes. The Committee also decided to 
present/lay the report on 6 th  May, 2010 to the Parliament. The Committee authori zed the Chairman 
and Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz to present the report in the Rajya Sabha and S/Shri Shatrughan Sinha and 
Rajaram Pal to lay the report in the Lok Sabha. 
3.  The meeting adjourned at 3:30 
P.M. 
 