 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
304
_ 
THREE HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Ninety Third Report on the subject ‘Status of Aviation 
Connectivity in the country’ 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FOURTH REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Ninety Third Report on the subject ‘Status of Aviation 
Connectivity in the country’ 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
  

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-vi 
 4. REPORT                                1-58 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   59-62 
6.         
    7.  
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
MINUTES 63-64
ANNEXURES 65-73

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Ninety 
Third Report on the subject ‘Status of Aviation Connectivity in the country’. 
2. The Two Hundred and Ninety Third Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  23rd July, 2021 
to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Ninety Third Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
3rd January, 2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  31st 
January, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
January 31, 2022                                                     Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AAICLAS Airports Authority of India Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company 
Limited 
ACI Aero Club of India 
ADS-B Automatic Dependent Surveillance - Broadcast 
AERA Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India  
AIC Aeronautical Information Circular 
AME Aircraft Maintenance Engineer 
AMO Approved Maintenance Organisation 
ANS Airport Navigation Services  
APSU Airport Security Unit  
ASA Air Services Agreement 
ASG Aviation Security Group  
ASR Airport Surveillance Radar 
ATC Air Traffic Control 
ATF Aviation Turbine Fuel 
ATM Air Traffic Management 
ATS Air Traffic Services  
AVSEC Aviation Security 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BIAL Bengaluru International Airport Limited 
BVLOS Beyond Visual Line Of Sight 
C-ATFM Central Air Traffic Flow Management  
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CAP Corrective Action Plan 
CAPEX Capital Expenditure 
CAR Civil Aviation Requirements 
CAT Category or Clear Air Turbulence 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs  
CBNAAT Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test 
CCPD Chief Commissioner of Persons with Disability 
CDO Continuous Descent Operation 
CDR Conditional Routes  
CE Civil Enclave 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force  
CNS Communications, Navigation and Surveillance Systems 
CORSIA Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CPL Commercial Pilot License 
DAN Drone Acknowledgement Number 
DFT Directorate of Flying Training  
DG Director General 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 

iv 
 
DME Distance Measuring Equipment  
DoNER Development of North-Eastern Region  
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DSP Digital Sky Platform 
DVOR Doppler Very High Frequency Omni-range Radar  
DYCE Digi Yatra Central Ecosystem 
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
EDI Electronic Data Interchange 
EMD Earnest Money Deposit 
ETD Explosive Trace Detector 
FC Flight Crew 
FIDS Flight Information Display System 
FIU Flight Inspection Unit 
FTO Flying Training Organization 
FUA Flexible Use of Airspace  
FY Financial Year 
GFA Greenfield Airport 
GIFT Gujarat International Finance Tec-City 
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HMCA Honourable Minister of Civil Aviation 
IAF Indian Air Force 
IATA International Air Transport Association 
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 
ICEGATE Indian Customs Electronic Gateway 
ICES Indian Customs EDI System  
ICG Indian Coast Guard 
ICMS Integrated Cargo Management System  
IFSC Indian Financial System Code 
IGIA Indira Gandhi International Airport 
IGRUA Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
ILS Instrument Landing System 
IMD India Meteorological Department 
JV Joint Venture 
JVC Joint Venture Company 
KUSHAL Krishi Udan for Sustainable Holistic Agri-Logistics 
LPCO Licenses, Permits, Certificates and Other authorizations  
MAFI Modernization of Military Airfields  
MAT Minimum Alternate Tax  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MIS Management Information System 
MMT Million Metric Tons 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation  
MoD Ministry of Defence 
MoF Ministry of Finance 

v 
 
MoPNG Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
MoT Ministry of Tourism 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MRO Maintenance Repair and Overhaul  
MSSR Mono-pulse Secondary Surveillance Radar 
NAL National Aerospace Laboratories  
NAM National Agriculture Market  
NCAP National Civil Aviation Policy 
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trust Company Limited 
NDB Non-Directional Beacon 
NER North-Eastern Region 
NG New Generation 
NSCBIA Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport 
NSOP Non-Scheduled Operator Permit 
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OLODE Online On-Demand Examination 
PAPI Precision Approach Path Indicator 
PBN Performance Based Navigation  
PGA Participating Government Agency 
PLI Production Linked Incentive  
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PSF Passenger Service Fee 
QR Quick Response 
R&D Research and Development 
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RGNAU Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University  
RNFC Route Navigation Facility Charges  
RNP Required Navigation Performance 
RoFR Right of First Refusal  
RPTO Remote Pilot Training Organisation  
RPwD Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
RT-PCR Reverse Transcription–Polymerase Chain Reaction 
SAF Sustainable Aviation Fuels 
SAO Selected Airline Operator 
SARPs Standards and Recommended Practices 
SLA Service Level Agreement  
SMS Safety Management System  
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
TNLC Terminal Navigational Landing Charges 
UAS Unmanned Aircraft System  
UDAN Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UDF User Development Fee 
UIN Unique Identification Number  
UP Uttar Pradesh 
USAP-CMA Universal Security Audit Programme-Continuous Monitoring Approach 

vi 
 
UT Union Territory 
UTM Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management  
VAT Value Added Tax 
VC Verifiable Credential 
VTOL Vertical Take-Off and Landing  
WA Water Aerodrome 
WP Writ Petition  
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT  
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred Ninety 
Third Report on the subject ‘Status of Aviation Connectivity in the country' which was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 23rd July, 2021.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 3 rd January, 2022 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:-  
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  7.5, 7.6, 7.7, 8.1, 9.7, 12.6, 16.5, 16.7, 17.7, 23.2, 25.2, 25.3, 25.4, 
38.2, 42.2, 47.3 and 50.1  
Total: 17 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 8, 10.1, 10.2, 12.7, 12.8, 12.9, 12.10, 14.4, 15.2, 18.3, 19.3, 20.2, 
20.3, 20.4, 24.2, 26.1 , 28.2, 29.4, 30.2, 32, 34.2, 35. 3, 36.2, 37.2, 43.2, 44.2, 45.7, 
46.2 and 49.1 
Total: 29 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 7.8, 9.6, 9.8, 11.2, 13.3, 16.6, 16.8, 17.6, 21.2, 22.2 , 27.2, 31.2, 
31.4, 33.2, 39.2, 40.2, 41.2 and 48.1  
Total: 18 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil  
Total: Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
Airport Infrastructure  
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee notes that the aviation industry in India has witnessed tremendous 
amount of growth over the last decade as is eviden t from the fact that India’s domestic 
passenger throughput has reached around 137 million in FY 2019 -20 from 61 million in FY 
2013-14 and international passenger traffic has reached 67 million in FY 2019 -20 from 47 
million in FY 2013 -14. Prior to the outbr eak of COVID -19 pandemic, the Indian civil 
aviation sector was growing at a CAGR of 14% and was among the fastest growing civil 
aviation sector in the world. Despite India being the world’s fastest growing aviation market, 
its airports are grappling with s erious capacity constraints because such a pace of growth 
has resulted in a strain on the aviation infrastructure, resulting in traffic congestions and 
delays at majority of the airports. If a high growth in civil aviation sector is to be sustained, 
it is imperative to augment and modernize India’s aviation infrastructure. The Committee 
notes with satisfaction that the AAI and private airport operators have envisaged a 
modernization and development plan with an estimated cost of ₹89,000 crore by 2024. The 
Committee urges the Ministry to make privacy a focus of the regulatory framework for the 
Ecosystem of Drones. 
(Para 7.5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation has notified liberalized Drone Rules 2021 on 25 August 
2021. The Rules are based on  trust, self -certification and non -intrusive monitoring. The 
essential features include: 
a) Every drone, except for those meant for research, development and testing 
purposes, is required to be registered and should have a Unique Identification Number 
(UIN). 
b) An airspace map of the country segregating the entire airspace into red, yellow 
and green zones is available on the digital sky platform. Operation of drones in red and 
yellow zones is subject to the approval of Central Government and Airports Au thority 
of India (AAI) respectively. No approval is required for operation of drones in green 
zones. 
c) The State Government, the Union Territory Administration and Law 
enforcement agencies have been empowered under the Rules to declare a temporary red 
zone for a specified period. 

3 
 
d) Drones are required to have the necessary type certification issued by 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). No type certification is however 
required in case of nano drones (up to 250 gram all -up weight) and model drones made 
for research and recreation purpose. 
e) The owner and operators of drones are required to furnish the necessary 
personal details including their Indian passport number etc. for issuance of any 
registration or licence. 
f) Rule 17 of the Drone Rules, 2021, lays down the provision of transfer of drone 
to another person by way of sale, lease, gift or any other mode, after providing requisite 
details of the transferor, transferee and unique identification number of the drone on the 
digital sky platform along with the applicable fees. 
g) Drone operations that violate the provisions of the Drone Rules, 2021 are 
punishable under Rule 49 of the Drone Rules, 2021 as well as provisions of any other 
law, for the time being in force. 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and 
futuristic Master Plan for implementation of projects to provide world class airport 
infrastructure, by bringing in cutting edge technology and the global best practices o f the 
aviation industry, so as to encourage growth in passenger and cargo traffic and catapult 
India into the league of top aviation markets within a period of 5 years. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to address not only the existing capacity constra ints in various 
airports, but also address infrastructural requirements in the context of growth scenario 
forecast for the coming years. It should be strictly ensured that the development/ upgradation 
of airport projects are completed as per the prescribed timelines. 
(Para 7.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 All Airports are being comprehensively planned and developed considering long term 
forecast.  Accordingly, land is earmarked / additional land is requested from State 
Government based on long -term futuristic development of single runway or parallel runway 
configurations and the type of aircraft expected to operate in future considering the potential 
of traffic it will be handling.  Due to the dynamic nature of development, the Master Plans are 
reviewed regularly based on the revised growth forecast. The expansion of development of 
infrastructure facilities at the airports is a continuous process and is undertaken on the 
operational requirements for safety of aircraft operation and demand from airlines, dependi ng 
upon availability of land and viability, as well as other facilities with reference to intended 
aircraft operations. To create additional capacity, work is in progress at Goa, Port Blair, 
Agartala, Guwahati, Chennai, Lucknow, Dehradun, Leh, Trichy, Pune , Patna, Darbhanga 
(CE), Kolhapur, Bareilly (CE), Jabalpur, Surat, Adampur (CE), Kanpur (CE), Bhubaneshwar, 
Vijayawada etc.  Work is in planning stage at Jaipur, Srinagar, Agra, Indore, Ahmedabad, 

4 
 
Bihta (CE), Bhubaneshwar, Varanasi etc. AAI is not just building new Greenfield airports but 
is also upgrading its airside infrastructure with works like runway extension, strengthening 
and resurfacing of runways, construction of parallel taxiways, rapid exit taxiways, ATC 
Tower cum Technical block, setting up adequate ground installations like Instrument Landing 
System (ILS), DVOR, ASR/MSSR etc.418 additional parking bays are planned at various 
airports in next five years for night parking of new aircrafts being purchased by airline 
operators.  The list of additio nal parking bays (proposed / under construction) is enclosed as 
Annexure A. Route optimization, CDO (Continuous Descent Operation), Upper Airspace 
harmonization, ATM Automation, Flexible Use of Airspace, R&D, Telecommunication 
Infrastructure upgradation, A utomation system backup, Remote Tower and alternate towers, 
Procurement of aircraft for FIU, Replacement of CNS facilities, etc. are other initiates which 
are taken up at airports for making these upto date. 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee als o urges the Ministry to ensure that adequate parking space and 
slots are available at the airports. The Committee notes that potential growth in the 
passenger and cargo traffic would require enormous investments in terms of construction of 
new airports and  expansion and modernization of existing airports. Given the risks, lenders 
are cautious about issuing long -term debt to airport operators. The Committee, therefore, 
would like the Ministry to formulate necessary policies, schemes and guidelines, to attrac t 
much needed investment for airport projects so that the way for raising resources towards 
funding the development, modernization and upgradation plans of airports could be paved 
and multiple funding option including external commercial borrowing, capital  markets long-
term borrowing etc. could be explored. 
(Para 7.7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 All Airports are being comprehensively planned and developed considering 30 years 
forecast. Accordingly, land is earmarked/ additional land is requested from State 
Governments based on long-term futuristic development of single runway or parallel runway 
configurations and the type of aircraft expected to operate in future considering the potential 
of traffic it will be handling. Due to the dynamic nature of development , the Master Plans are 
reviewed regularly based on the revised growth forecast. Based on the futuristic traffic 
projections adequate Aircraft parking bays and slots are created and planned at the airports, 
such that it would be able to meet all the future traffic demand. Around Rs.90,000 crores of 
investments are expected to be pumped into Civil Aviation Sector. To meet the demand, AAI 
has embarked upon a capital expenditure (CAPEX) plan of Rs. 25000 crores in next five 
years for development / modernization / up gradation of airport infrastructure projects of AAI 
airports in the country. 418 additional parking bays are planned at various AAI airports in 
next five years for night parking of new aircraft being purchased by airline operators. The 
remaining approximately Rs. 65,000 is being spent by the private sector. Big ticket projects 
like expansion of existing Delhi, Hyderabad and Bangaluru airports are being executed by 
private airport operators. Further, mega Greenfield airports such as Navi Mumbai, Mopa, 
Jewar, Dholera, Rajkot etc. are also under implementation. 

5 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee has been given to understand that large numbers of institutional 
clearances are required for airport projects, which lead to delays and cost escalation.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should set up a single-window clearance 
mechanism to facilitate institutional clearances for airport projects and ensure timely 
completion of such projects. 
(Para 8.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 For an y airport to be developed, activities relating to Air Traffic Services (ATS), 
security, customs and immigration are reserved for Central Government agencies. Provision 
of these services are governed by the policy to be laid down by the Central Government f rom 
time to time. These activities include Defence clearance, Air Traffic Services (ATS) 
Functions by AAI, issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) from time to time, 
Customs clearance from the Department of Revenue for provision of Custom services,  MHA 
Clearance for Immigration in case of an international airport, BCAS Clearance for security 
and IMD clearances for Airport Meteorological Services. MoCA has been signing MoUs 
with all the airport operators given under lease to private parties where the re is a provision to 
provide single window clearance for necessary clearances. Further, under the Greenfield 
Airports Policy of MoCA, clearances for new airport projects are granted by MoCA as a 
single window. Therefore, single-window clearance mechanism for airport projects is already 
in place. 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to closely and meticulously, monitor the 
implementation and impact of the UDAN Scheme and formulate plans and guidelines to 
ensure that the benefits of the Scheme actually reach the passengers, as per the spirit of the 
Scheme. 
(Para 9.7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. Noted. There is a well -structured monitoring system. A number of Committees have 
been set up at appropriate level to oversee the implementation and monitoring of the Scheme. 
Further, Ministry of Civil Aviation has been reviewing the Scheme in consultation with the 
stakeholders and appropriate course corrections are being taken. Robust institutional 
mechanism has been incorporated in the Scheme. A Steering Committee at the level of 
Secretary, Civil Aviation has been constituted for effective monitoring and c ourse correction. 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) has been designated as Implementing Agency. The 

6 
 
Implementing Agency has awarded 948 valid routes across the country. Out of these 948 
awarded routes, 403 routes have been operationalized involving 65 airp orts including 8 
heliports and 2 water aerodromes. 1,55,776 UDAN flights have taken off and 80.12 Lakh 
passengers till 14.11.2021 have flown under UDAN. Thus, the Scheme is successful in 
meeting its purpose.   
 
Air Cargo  
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee notes that besides geographical location, India’s cargo industry has 
the advantage of a growing economy along with a population of 1.3 billion plus India’s 
impressive growth in international and domestic trade in the last decade. However, despit e 
tremendous potential, India’s total annual freight volumes stood at 3.33 MMT in fiscal 2019 -
20 and has not reached close to any one of the top three world -class airports, viz., Hong 
Kong, Memphis and Shanghai. The Committee is constrained to note that th e total air cargo 
throughput handled by all Indian airports put together is less than that handled by individual 
airports like Hong Kong, Memphis and Shanghai. It is, therefore, evidently clear that despite 
having all the ingredients to be one of the world’s air cargo hubs, India has not fully realized 
its potential in terms of air cargo. The Committee is of the view that inadequate 
infrastructure is a major bottleneck in developing the country’s air cargo sector. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take effective steps to address the 
crippling infrastructure constraints by way of establishing dedicated cargo airports in the 
country and developing new airports with a focus on making them cargo hubs so that the 
Ministry’s ambitious cargo throughput target of 10 MMT by 2027 could be realized. 
(Para 12.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The observations of Hon’ble Committee have been noted. In this regard, the following 
submissions are relevant: 
● Traffic restrictions in the Indian major cities  for movement of heavy vehicles to/fro 
Air Cargo Terminals also play a vital role in deciding the dwell time of import and 
export cargo processed through Air Cargo Terminals. 
● In Indian Customs scenario, majority of the consignments for import and export ar e 
subjected to Customs examination/inspection, whereas in the foreign Airports under 
reference, very few consignments are subjected for examination/inspection. 
● So far as the setting up of dedicated cargo airports is concerned, it may be noted that 
this option would be feasible if there is critical minimum level of cargo is available 
for air transportation. Presently, establishment of dedicated cargo airports in India is 
not feasible on account of following: 
⮚ Current tonnage handling capacity in India is alre ady around double the cargo 
presently handled at various terminals in India. 

7 
 
⮚ Bulk of air cargo handled in India as Belly cargo in passenger aircrafts 
whereas in other countries most of the cargo is transported in dedicated 
freighter aircraft. 
⮚ India has too few dedicated freighter aircraft as compared to other countries. 
⮚ There is less trans -shipment cargo handled in India as compared to other 
countries. 
● Hong Kong, Memphis and Shanghai model are different from India’s model as they 
are primarily Trans-shipment based Air Cargo Terminals.   
 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) prices and aviation taxes 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee takes serious note of the high ATF prices prevailing in the country 
which is further aggravated by high taxes such as customs  duty, excise duty, sale/State tax, 
Value Added Tax (VAT) levied thereon. The Committee has been given to understand that the 
cost of ATF nearly forms 40% of the total operating cost of airlines and impacts the financial 
viability of their operations and h urts their competitiveness because Indian carriers are 
unable to compete against their global counterparts on account of the exorbitantly higher 
prices of ATF. The Committee is constrained to note that ATF prices in the country are 
distorted because it is subjected to multiple taxes by different Government entities. The 
airline industry is capital -intensive and works on very thin profit margins. This is why most 
Indian carriers are reeling under losses despite tremendous growth in air traffic. Therefore, 
relief on ATF is crucial for the viability of airline industry and would be a major incentive for 
airlines to augment their operations. 
(Para 16.5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. The observations of the Hon’ble Committee are absolutely valid. It is, however, 
submitted that the taxation issues come within the purview of Ministry of Finance (MoF). 
Ministry of Civil Aviation has on its part requested MoF, on multiple occasions to bring ATF 
under the ambit of GST. Most recently, vide Hon’ble Minister of Civil Aviatio n’s (HMCA) 
D.O. letter dated 12/10/2021, also our request has been reiterated to MoF. Meanwhile, we are 
also advocating with MoF and State Governments to reduce Central Excise Duty and VAT 
respectively which will provide much needed relief for the sector. 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee is of the opinion that ATF is a small component of overall petroleum 
products and hence, deserves to be treated separately. The Committee notes that despite ATF 
being an input fuel (similar to coal and gas), the  issue of inclusion of ATF under GST has 
been a long standing issue and requires final resolution by the GST Council. 
(Para 16.7) 

8 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The observation of the Committee has been noted. The matter pertains to GST 
Council. Ministry of Civ il Aviation has on multiple occasions requested Ministry of Finance 
to bring ATF under the ambit of GST. Most recently, vide Hon’ble Minister of Civil 
Aviation’s (HMCA) D.O. letter dated 12/10/2021, MoF has been requested to bring ATF 
under the ambit of GST. 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO)  
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee could understand that whenever any airline enters into an agreement 
with the airline manufacturers for procurement of new aeroplanes, the manufacturing 
company insists upon the purchasing company to enter into a contract for maintenance of the 
aircraft also in their country, even though that facility may be available in the country of the 
purchasing company. The Committee is of the considered view that this contract cla use 
hampers the growth of local MRO industry in our country. The Committee, therefore, desires 
that in order to give much desired fillip to the local MRO industry, the Ministry should devise 
a suitable MRO policy which will help the growth of local MRO ind ustry, whereby, 
employment opportunities can be created for the local youth. 
(Para 17.7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. Revised guidelines dated 1 September, 2021 have been issued for rationalization of 
the charges leviable on Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Service Providers for ease 
of doing business and to provide further incentives to the sector, with the following key 
features: 
i. Concession fee, in any manifestation including royalty, shall not be leviable in new 
contracts and from the respective date of renewal of existing contracts. 
ii. Selection of agency and procedures for allotment of land/ space under rationalized land/ 
space rental for new MRO contracts and renewal of existing MRO contracts, shall be 
through call of open tender by AAI (e-tendering) 
iii. The bidders to quote the lease fee, which shall be the bid parameter. The agency quoting 
the highest lease fee shall be the selected bidder for that specific land parcel. 
iv. The renewal of the existing land leases/ space license of MRO service providers/ AMOs  
shall be on the basis of bidding wherein Right of First Refusal (RoFR) shall be given to 
the existing lessee/ licensee to match the first rank bid in terms of the selection criteria 
provided their bid is within 15% of the most competitive bid received. 

9 
 
v. For the purpose of ensuring serious and apposite level of participation in the Tender, an 
appropriate amount of EMD, shall be kept. 
vi. The quoted/ accepted lease fee shall be escalated @15% after every 3rd year. 
vii. For the existing MRO organisations that have outs tanding dues or are under litigation 
and are seeking renewal of their existing contracts or participation for the new contracts, 
their candidature for bidding shall only be considered after the settlement of dispute and 
clearance of outstanding dues by way  of settlement/ negotiation in a time -bound manner 
through a Committee constituted by AAI.   
viii. The maximum period of contract for allotment of land/ space under these provisions 
shall be 30 years for new or old renewal is from the date of handing over of sit e or date 
of renewal respectively. 
ix. However, in case if the MRO agency commits default or ceases to perform the MROs 
activities at allotted land/ space, the lease shall be terminated without payment of any 
compensation by AAI. 
x. As of now, MRO activities shal l be promoted from the following airports: Bhopal, 
Chandigarh, Chennai, Hyderabad (Begumpet), Juhu, Kolkata, Delhi and Tirupati. 
9.2. Other airports with available land/ space resources, with potential to attract MRO 
service providers/ AMOs for establishing their facilities, shall be identified and notified by 
AAI from time to time. 
 
Need for greater co-ordination among various stakeholders 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee recognizes the need for the airlines to work closely with the  State 
Tourism Departments and other stakeholders to ensure that sufficient passengers are 
available in all the sectors wherein the air carriers are operating. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure greater co -ordination among the various  
stakeholders in this regard. 
(Para 23.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Ministry regularly interacts with the stakeholders including MoT, tour operators from 
time to time with an aim to improve air connectivity and passenger load.  
 
 

10 
 
Necessary Navigation Aids at all Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
11.  The Committee is dismayed to note that regular delay in flight operations and 
cancellation of flights occurs at various airports, due to non -availability of CAT -II or CAT -
III facility. The Committee fails t o understand the reasons behind non -installation of CAT II/ 
CAT facilities in such airports, in the present age of technology. The Committee takes serious 
note of the inconvenience and delays faced by the flyers and international & domestic 
tourists, due t o such deficiencies at the airports. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should ensure that the up gradation of air navigation infrastructure in the country is 
kept in line with international standards. 
(Para 25.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Noted. Necessary Radio Navigational aids (Viz. ILS, DVOR/DME, NDB) have been 
provided/being provided at -operational airports (including remote areas) depending on the 
operational requirements. AAI has also taken steps to upgrade ILS from CAT -I to CAT-II/III 
(B) to sustain flight operations to the suitably equipped aircrafts and trained aircrews at major 
airports which are affected by low visibility for prolonged period due to fog etc. so that 
minimum inconvenience is caused to travelling public. So far CAT -II/III(B) ILS has been 
made operational at Delhi (IGIA 03 Runways), Bengaluru (BIAL 02 Runways), Kolkata  - 
Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport  (NSCBIA 01 Runway), Jaipur, Amritsar 
and Lucknow Airports. CAT -II ILS has been made operational at Kolkata  (NSCBIA 01 
Runway). It is to note that enhancement of navigational aids in the airports necessitates 
further land requirement which is to be made available to the Airport Operators by the State 
Governments free of cost and free from encumbrances and is a challenge to the up gradation 
of navigational aids in the airports. 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee hopes that Modernization of Military Airfields (MAFI) project which 
is a turnkey project, would enhance the operational capability, by facilitating air operations 
of civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather conditions, while enhancing 
aerospace safety. The Committee observes that MAFI project of the Indian Air Force should 
decide and cull out those activities which are primarily navigational equipment including 
approach landing systems, PAPI runway lights, threshold ligh ts, instruments and equipment 
etc., where AAI/ATS have a unique advantage, since they have been handling these systems 
across the country, for over seven decades. Domestic civil aviation safety is the primary 
responsibility of the Ministry of Civil Aviatio n, DGCA and AAI. The utilization of these 
navigational aids/approach landing systems/equipment etc., which have been installed across 
the country, is primarily done by the AAI, which has domain knowledge. They are also 
familiar with the quality procurement  processes, maintenance and operational requirements 
of these instruments which they have been using for Civil operations for over fifty years. The 
Committee recommends that a High Level Committee may be created with the Indian Air 

11 
 
Force to cull out those activities related to navigation and landing facilities which are, 
primarily, in the domain knowledge, with the AAI for Civil operations. The Committee 
recommends that apart from this, the development of the rest of the infrastructure planned 
under the MAF I scheme may continue as envisaged, for a greater synergy between civil 
aviation requirements and operational requirements of Indian Air Force. 
(Para 25.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Recommendation noted for compliance and subsequent action will be taken i n 
consultation with Ministry of Defence (MoD). The recommendations have been also sent to 
MoD for their information and taking necessary action in this regard. This issues has also 
been discussed in the recent meeting of Hon’ble Minister of Civil Aviation with Hon’ble 
Minister of Defence was held on 29.10.2021 for development of CAT -II/III ILS at Srinagar 
Airport by under MAFI scheme and MoD is taking up the work in 2022. 
Recommendation/Observation  
13.  The Committee emphasizes the imminent need to employ modern technologically 
advanced navigation aids and facilities at all airports in the country. The Ministry should 
urgently chalk out an Action Plan to operate CAT -II/III(B) ILS in all airports, in a fixed time 
bound period. 
(Para 25.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Noted. As per ICAO guidelines, conventional Radio Navigational aids (NDB and 
DVOR/DME) will be progressively decommissioned and replaced with GNSS [Global 
Navigation Satellite System] based Performance Based Navigation [PBN] routes and 
approaches. Accordingly, PBN based RNP [Required Navigation Performance] approach 
procedures are being provided where ever possible to meet the navigational requirement at 
airports including remote areas to the suitably equipped aircrafts and trained aircrews. 
Satellite Based Augmentation system for Navigation is also being deployed. Other advance 
systems such as satellite based and Ground Based ADS -B (Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance - Broadcast (ADS-B) technology for surveillance of air traffic in Oceanic and 
terrestrial air space have been provided. Central Air Traffic Flow Management [C -ATFM] 
has been made operational to address the balancing of capacity against the demand to achieve 
optimum utilization of the major resources viz., airport, airspace and aircra ft at every Indian 
airport where there is a capacity constraint. Cat -II/III ILS system are systematically being 
provided at airports which are affected by low visibility for prolonged period due to fog etc. 
 
 
 

12 
 
Exorbitant air fares 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee desires that the Ministry should consider fixing an upper limit for 
every sector, especially in the economy class of air fares. The Committee also notes that even 
after reduction of the ATF prices over a period of time, the airlines ha ve not passed on the 
benefit of reduction in ATF prices to the consumers. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should take effective steps to ensure that the airlines pass on the benefit to the 
travelers by reducing the air fares and inform the Commi ttee about the specific steps taken in 
this regard and the outcome thereof. 
(Para 38.2)  
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 It is submitted that, MoCA has issued Order 02/2020  (amended from time to time) on 
minimum and maximum economy fares that an airline can charge. MoCA has classified all 
the sectors on the basis of approximate duration of flights. The guideline on airfare are issued 
to ensure that airline do not charge excessive airfare from the passengers. The said order has 
been amended by the ministry fro m time to time in revised airfare and all airlines are in 
compliance to the said order. It is further submitted that, before COVID outbreak, airfare 
were not regulated by the Government. Air Transport undertakings engaged on scheduled air 
services were req uired to establish tariff having regard to all relevant factors, including cost 
of operation. Characteristics of services, reasonable profit and the generally prevailing tariff 
airline were free to charge reasonable airfare a per their operation viabilitie s subject to 
compliance of rule 135 of the aircraft Rules, 1937. The prices were fixed by airlines keeping 
in mind the market demand seasonality and other market forces. Airline ticket prices were 
determined by demand and supply theory and were governed by  the philosophy of 
competition laws. 
 
Challenges being faced by AAI 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee desires that the Ministry should carefully examine the above 
mentioned challenges faced by AAI. AAI, being a very vital organization in the ci vil aviation 
sector, should be provided all support and avenues to function effectively as per its mandate. 
Therefore, the Committee emphasizes the urgent need for removal of bottlenecks which exist 
in the functioning of AAI. 
(Para 42.2) 
 
 

13 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Noted. Airports Authority of India regularly liaising with concern State Governments 
to resolve the land issue for development of infrastructure at the respective airports. Besides 
for better management and in public interest, AAI has already le ased out 8 brownfield 
airports to Private Concessionaires. AAI has also identified 13 airports further for leasing out 
under PPP under Asset Monetisation pipeline. The proceeds for leasing of these airports 
through payment of upfront fees by the concession aires to AAI will facilitate AAI to tackle 
the financial crisis and the demand of expansion/upgradation/modernization of the airports 
and to concentrate on the development of airports of Tier-2 and tier-3 cities of the country. 
 
WINGS 2017 “Sab Uden, Sab Juden” 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that 
this will encourage collaboration among the various stakeholders of the civil aviation sector 
and that the aviation industry will reap the benefits of this initiative in the future. 
(Para 47.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Noted. MoCA would continue strive to engage with various stakeholders including 
State/UTs Governments through WINGS to promote aviation industry. 
 
Drone Directorate 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee feels that the setting up of Drone Directorate is a step forward in 
strengthening the Drone ecosystem of India, by way of addressing the delays in rolling out 
permission, managing Drone Training Schools and fast tr acking Drone certifications. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take requisite steps for the proper 
functioning of the Drone Directorate. 
(Para 50.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Drone Directorate in DGCA has been set up on to regulate the drone operations in the 
country. The Directorate is headed by Deputy DG, DGCA and consists of 13 officials 
including 2 Directors. 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Airport Infrastructure  
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee has been given to understand that there is a need to look at the entire 
structure of airports and the way the airport concessions are given. At present, the rights to 
operate airports are given to individuals or entities who bid the highest with the Airports 
Authority of India. When those services are given to the highest bidder, the highest bidder 
charges the highest amount of money from the airlines, which has little or no bearing on the 
actual cost of the service. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
look into these issues and take urgent steps to ensure that such anomalies and structural 
problems are rectified in the interest of the aviation sector. 
(Para 8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (AERA),an autonomous tariff 
regulator formed under an Act of the Parliament, determines the aeronautical tariffs of major 
airport in accordance to AERA Act and AERA Guidelines issued  from time to time. The 
tariffs are not determined to recover the investments made but to maintain and operate the 
airport along with a reasonable return on investment. Therefore, a fair and transparent 
mechanism is in place to determine tariffs at major a irports. As such, the tariffs are not 
decided by the airport operator but by AERA. 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme  
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee takes note of the fact that out of the 778 routes awarded under RCS, 
only 315 have been operationalized so far. The Committee desires that the Ministry should 
examine the reasons for non -commencement of routes that have already been awarded u nder 
the UDAN Scheme; identify the bottlenecks in this regard; and chalk out strategic steps to 
address the issues involved.  
(Para 10.1) 
 
 

15 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 So far, 403 RCS routes have been commenced under UDAN. There has been some 
delay in operat ionalizing some routes/discontinuation of the routes, for reasons which 
include:-  
i) Non -readiness of civil airports/heliports, which may be related to availability of land, 
creation of regional infrastructure, obtaining license from the Regulator etc.  
ii) Un-sustainability of the operation on the awarded routes.  
iii) Non-readiness of Selected Airlines Operators (SAOs)  
v) Adverse impact of COVID-19 pandemic 
2.2 Efforts are continuing to expedite the operationalization of awarded routes. Regular 
review & monitoring meeting also held with States, Airline Operators etc. for effective 
implementation.  
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee notes that there are a number of non -operational airstrips/airports 
owned by AAI and State Governments. Since provision of airport infrastructure is Capital 
intensive, the Ministry should focus on optimally utilizing existing airport infrastructure and 
operationalizing unused airstrips and dormant airports for promoting regional/remote area 
air connectivity under RCS. The Committee is of the view that operationalizing these inactive 
AAI and State Government airstrips will not only release significant untapped infrastructure 
capacity in the aviation industry, but also contribute to reducing the airport charge airline 
cost structure. 
(Para 10.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 RCS-UDAN is market driven scheme. Interested airlines depending upon their 
assessment of demand on a particular route submit proposal at the time of bidding under 
UDAN. There is a tentative list of underserved/unserved airports in the Scheme document to 
facilitate the prospective bidders under the UDAN. Besides, the tentative list of 
underserved/unserved airports, prospective bidders based on their due diligence of demand 
formulate routes other than the underseved/unserved airports mentioned in the Scheme 
document and submit its proposal at the time of bidding.  
3.2 In India there are more than 450 airports/ airstrips whose ownership varies from State 
Government, Ministry of Defence (IAF/Army/Navy/ICG), Central paramilitary forces, 
Private, Central Public se ctor undertakings, Joint venture companies, Airports Authority of 
India (AAI) etc. Many of these airstrips do not have enough land or infrastructure required 
for obtaining license for commercial operations. Maintenance and development of the 
airstrip/ airport lie with the individual owners.  

16 
 
3.3 Under the Scheme, 65 unserved/underserved airports including 8 heliports and 2 
water aerodromes have been operationalized so far giving the thrust to the economic 
development of that local region. 
 
Air Cargo  
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee is aware that the air cargo industry is hamstrung by paper -driven 
legacy systems and procedures. Since automation is critical for air freight to maintain its 
competitiveness, the Committee recommends that the Ministry , in tandem with the 
stakeholders, should take effective measures to automate information systems as well as 
streamline or simplify redundant processes and regulations for faster, transparent and 
seamless movement of air cargo. 
(Para 12.7)  
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Following steps have been taken towards development of information systems and 
streamlining of process:  
● Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs (CBIC) has taken an initiative since April 
2019 for paperless processing (e -Sanchit) for electroni c transmission of Licenses, 
Permits, Certificates and Other authorisations (LPCOs) issued by Participating 
Government Agencies has been made mandatory for exports. The PGAs upload the 
LPCOs on e-sanchit and communicate the same to the beneficiary exporter who refers the 
same in the Customs clearance document. This initiative is with the objective of reducing 
physical interface between Customs/regulatory agencies and the trade and to increase the 
speed of clearance in exports.  
● Information Technology infrastructure at airports is adequately equipped and regularly 
updated to handle the growing digital traffic for processing and clearance of cargo and 
ensure smooth functioning of Indian Customs EDI System (ICES) and Indian Customs 
Electronic Gateway (ICEGATE). 
● Presently, Customs EDI System (ICES) and Indian Customs Electronic Gateway 
(ICEGATE) is integrated with the Participating Government Agencies (PGAs) and 
stakeholders under the single window system which is updated at regular intervals. 
● CBIC has been continuously engaged in upgradation of the system and now to roll out 2.0 
version with augmented facilities. 
● At most JV airports apart from AAICLAS, cargo operations are substantially paperless. 
Most of the JVs management is highly advance through the use  of e-Freight, Digital flow 
of cargo information by Web based Air Cargo, Digital Corridor, Cargo mobile application 
for real-time tracking of cargo and, Digital messaging with regulatory, airlines and other 
stakeholders. 

17 
 
● AAICLAS has established Integrated Cargo Management System (ICMS) which 
integrates all cargo partners for paperless transactions at Major Airports. 
● E-Delivery Order and E -Gate Pass introduced at airports in July 2020 for electronic 
submission of documents. 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee has been given to understand that due to the Open Sky Policy for 
cargo in India, foreign carriers carry 90 to 95 percent of the total international cargo to and 
from India, while Indian air cargo operators face all sorts of barriers when they go into other 
countries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that for providing a level playing field for 
Indian air cargo operators, the Ministry should make appropriate changes in the Open Sky 
Policy for cargo. The Committee also recommends that Ministry/ DGCA should take note of 
Indian cargo operators facing discriminatory and restrictive practices or regulatory 
impediments in operating international cargo flights in any of the foreign countries and take 
urgent steps to address/resolve them. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action 
taken and the outcome achieved in this regard. 
(Para 12.8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation has reviewed the Open Sky Policy for Foreign Cargo 
carriers as promulgated vide AIC/1992 dated 11.05.1 992 and appropriate changes have been 
made with a view to ensure fair and equal opportunity in the air cargo capacity offered by 
Indian registered airlines and airlines registered elsewhere. The revised open sky policy has 
been promulgated vide AIC 41/2020  dated 31 -12-2020. Under the revised policy, the 
operations of foreign ad hoc and pure non -scheduled freighter charter service flights have 
been restricted to 6 airports, namely Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Hyderabad, and 
Mumbai, and Operations of Scheduled cargo operation by foreign carriers is permitted as per 
the provisions of the Bilateral Air Services Agreement (ASA) with the respective country.  
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee is aware that in September, 2020, the Ministry of Civil  Aviation 
restricted non-scheduled freighter flights by international carriers to six Indian airports, viz., 
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad, with the objective of providing 
a level playing field for Indian air cargo operators. The  Committee desires to know, as to 
what extent this action has been able to ensure equal opportunities for Indian carriers. 
(Para 12.9) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 To protect the interest of the exporters/importers the following has been ensured: 
a) Indian carriers are allowed to operate non -scheduled and scheduled international all 
cargo services from any airport in India with customs facility. There has thus been no 

18 
 
change in the operations of Indian carriers. Further, Indian carriers are being a ctively 
encouraged to increase all cargo freighter operations from non-metro cities. 
b) Cargo carried in the belly of passenger aircraft operated by both Indian and foreign 
carriers continues without any change. 
c) Bulk of the cargo carried on all -cargo freighter aircraft from India is being transported 
through scheduled services. Scheduled all-cargo services offered by the foreign carriers as 
per the provisions of the Bilateral Air Services Agreement with the respective country, 
continue largely unaffected. 
6.2 The restrictions were necessitated by the COVID -19 pandemic which has had a 
devastating impact on the aviation industry. The pandemic has resulted in international 
passenger traffic dropping by 85% between 2019 -20 and 2020 -21. However, during the 
same period, the international cargo traffic dropped only 25% highlighting the resilience of 
the air cargo sector. As a result, 
(a) At a time when several airlines were entering insolvency worldwide, the Indian carriers 
had the opportunity to turn to cargo operations for staying afloat. 
(b) The number of all- cargo freighter aircraft with Indian carriers had increased from 7 in 
2018 to 28 in 2021. Indian carriers had also modified 150 passenger aircraft to carry on -
seat cargo. 
(c) Between May 2019 and May 2021 , freighter movements by Indian carriers as a 
percentage of total international freighter movements to/from India increased from 2% to 
19%. 
(d) Revenue from international cargo operations for Indian carriers increased from Rs. 
1498.07 crore in 2019-20 to Rs. 2301.06 crore in 2020-21. 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take timely action to address the 
issues of congestion at the entry of terminal, inadequate screening, inadequate storage space, 
lack of temperature facility etc. at the cargo terminals. The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry should take steps to ensure that attractive and uniform transit handling costs and 
procedures are implemented across all airports in the country. 
(Para 12.10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 While the challenges like bunching of flights in morning and evening, bunching of 
export cargo beyond 1500 hrs at Air Cargo Terminals by stakeholders, traffic restrictions in 
major cities for 24x7 movement of loaded/empty Trucks are exist ing in India, AAICLAS & 
other Air Cargo Terminal operators have been continuously engaged in smoothening 24x7 
processes at major cities. 

19 
 
● AAICLAS on its part positioned adequate new & Dual view X -ray machines as per 
BCAS mandates at all its Terminals. 
● Further procurement of X-Ray machines, Explosive Trace Detector (ETD) are also in 
hand with airport operators for the replacement of old machines and for new facilities 
being created. 
● Major Airport operators has established number of  Cold Chambers ranging  different 
temperatures to store perishable cargo, pharmaceuticals, vegetables, fruits, vaccines, food 
items, frozen food etc in its International Air Cargo warehouses. Few Domestic Air Cargo 
Terminals having Cold Chambers to handle Agri products. 
● Continuous efforts are put in for augmentation of facilities by AAICLAS and JV 
airports. 
 
Seaplanes 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. There is immense potential for seaplanes operations in the country. However, such 
potential has not yet been exploited fully. The sea plane services will revolutionize the 
nation’s regional connectivity. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to 
encourage seaplane operations. The Committee recommends that the Government should put 
in place, requisite policies and inf rastructure to enable seaplane operations in India. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the necessary amenities matching up 
to international standards for seaplane operations, such as terminal buildings, facilitation 
counters, check -in counters, modern ticketing methods, food counters, motels, shopping 
facilities etc. are provided, for the smooth operation of seaplanes. The Committee also 
underlines the urgent need to formulate a ‘Seaplane Policy’. 
(Para 14.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation has introduced seaplane operations from water aerodromes 
under UDAN. AAI awarded seaplane routes connecting 12 Water Aerodromes, covering 5 
states and 01 UT Lakshadweep viz.  
(i) Sardar Sarovar Dam (Statue of Unity) 
(ii) Sabarmati Riverfront 
(iii) Shatrunjay Dam  
(iv) Swaraj Dweep (Havelock Island)  
(v) Shaheed Dweep (Neill Island)  
(vi) Long Island   

20 
 
(vii) Guwahati Riverfront  
(viii) Umrangso Reservoir  
(ix) Nagarjuna Sagar Dam   
(x) Prakasam Barrage   
(xi) Minicoy   
(xii) Kavaratti  
8.2 Further, it is also decided to upgrade the Agatti & Port Blair aerodromes in addition to 
the above 12 water aerodromes. Seaplane operations between Sabarmati River Front & Statue 
of Unity have been commenced from 31 st October, 2020 under NSOP. To ensure necessary 
amenities matching up to international standards for seaplane operations, a Memorandum of 
Understanding (M oU) was signed on 15.06.2021 between MoCA and Ministry of Ports 
Shipping and Waterways for development of Seaplane due to its expertise in port related 
works. Syama Prasad Mookerjee Port Trust has to undertake the work relating to 
development of water aerodrome.  
 
Intra State Connectivity 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee feels that much more nee ds to be done to improve intra -State air 
connectivity and to cater to the ever increasing demand. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should chalk out a strategy, after due consultation with the State Governments, in 
order to give significant boost to intra -State air connectivity. The Ministry should also 
engage with the tourism and industry stakeholders, in this regard. 
(Para 15.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 After repeal of the Air Corporation Act in March 1994, the Indian domestic aviation 
market was deregulated. Consequently, airlines are free to induct capacity with any aircraft 
type for selecting whatever markets and network they wish to service and operate across the 
country subject to compliance with the extant guidelines in this regard. Thus, i t is up to the 
airlines to provide air services to specific places depending upon the traffic demand and their 
commercial viability, in compliance with the extant guidelines. However, the Ministry 
regularly interacts with the stakeholders from time to time  with an aim to improve air 
connectivity.  
9.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation has launched Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - 
UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) on 21 -10-2016 to stimulate regional air connectivity for 
making air travel affordable to the masses. UDAN is a market driven scheme. Interested 

21 
 
airlines based on their assessment of demand on particular routes submit their proposals at the 
time of bidding under UDAN. The Implementing Agency has awarded 948 valid routes 
across the country. Out of these 948 awarded routes, 403 routes have been operationa lized 
involving 65 airports including 8 heliports and 2 water aerodromes. These routes also include 
tourism routes suggested by MoT. 1,55,776 UDAN flights have taken off and 80.12 Lakh 
passengers till 14.11.2021 have flown under UDAN. UDAN is ongoing Schem e and periodic 
bidding is conducted by the Implementing Agency for awarding routes for operationalization 
of UDAN flights.  
 
Global Hubs 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee takes note of the immense possibilities which exist in the country, 
which if properly explored, will enable India to rise up as a global aviation hub. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should give proper thought and deliberation to this 
aspect and take necessary concrete action to tackle the hurdles posed in this regar d. The 
Committee highlights the need for change in the policies of traffic flow in such a way that 
India captures the air space for hub and spoke mechanism. 
(Para 18.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Air India is a network carrier and implements hub and spoke model of operations. 
Since commencement of Delhi Airport T -3, Air India has developed Delhi as its primary hub 
in India, which enables it to provide convenient one stop connectivity from large source 
markets to various international destinations on its network. 
10.2 This Ministry aspires to transform India into a global hub for international air travel. 
To enable India to develop as an international hub, it is necessary to increase international 
travel of passengers by Indian carriers and reduction of 6th f reedom carriage by foreign 
carriers. However, this is being hindered by the following factors: 
1. Excess traffic rights given to countries neighboring India 
2. Big aviation hubs have emerged around India 
3. All these hubs are using 6th Freedom Rights 
4. Our Airlines have not expanded to long-haul flights 
10.3 There is a need to incentivize the induction of long -haul aircraft by Indian carriers. 
This Ministry is also examining the existing bilateral Air Service Agreements (ASA) with a 
view to incorporating enabling provisions which will help develop India as a global hub. 
 

22 
 
Encouraging aviation leasing and financing activities in India 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to 
encourage Indian fi nancial institutions to enter into the aircraft leasing and financing 
business. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to examine the regulations existing in the 
country in this field, identify the bottlenecks and modify the regulations, as per the present 
and future requirements. 
(Para 19.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Coupled with strong demand fundamentals and high liquidity in aircraft financing, 
airlines in India are expanding their fleet.The buoyant demand for aircraft by Indian carriers 
underlines the importance of leasing channel for airlines as a funding tool. A number of tax 
and regulatory changes have been provided through Union Budget 2020 -21 to create an 
enabling ecosystem for such activities in IFSC and to bring the IFSC in India at par with 
similar IFSCs in other countries. The game -changing tax concessions included exemption 
from corporate tax for leasing units in IFSC. Further, a new tax regime introduced w.e.f. 1 
April 2020 makes Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) inapplicable to domestic companies. 
Similarly, MAT provisions would not apply to units in the IFSC. Also, exemption has been 
provided from corporate tax for a block -period of 10 years within the first 15 years for 
leasing units. In a significant development, licenses to conduct operations fr om GIFT -City 
Gujarat have been issued to 6 aircraft leasing entities with 3 applications under process. 
 
Role of State Governments 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee is of the view that incentives by State Governments in the form of 
financial support such as VAT reduction, sharing of viability gap funding with airlines and 
non-financial incentives such as providing security and fire services free of cost to airport 
operators are required. The Committee feels that States which are apprehensive o f revenue 
loss, need to think about the enhancement of economic activities which would result due to 
increased air connectivity to the region, in the long run. States may adapt their relevant 
schemes relating to tourism, health and insurance for supporting  air connectivity, in order to 
supplement the objectives of regional connectivity. 
(Para 20.2) 
 
 

23 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The Ministry has been pursuing with the State Governments to reduce VAT on ATF 
across all the airports. So far, the following States / UTs have responded and reduced VAT on 
ATF: 
a. Andaman & Nicobar Islands: From 10% to 1%  
b. Haryana: From 20% to 1%. 
c. Jammu & Kashmir: From 26.25% to 1% 
d. Ladakh: From 26.25% to 1% 
e. Uttarakhand: From 20% to 2% 
f. Himachal Pradesh: From 25% to 2% 
g. Tripura: From 16% to 1% 
h. Madhya Pradesh: From 25% to 1-4% 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. Land acquisition is a major problem due to land scarcity and huge capital 
requirement. The Committee feels that there are many regional airports which can be 
developed by States on their own or in collaboration with the Airports Authority of India 
(AAI) and that the State Governments should explore the setting up of “no-frill airports”. 
(Para 20.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Government of India (GoI) has formulated a Greenfield Airports (G FA) Policy, 2008 
which provides guidelines, procedure and conditions for establishment of new Greenfield 
Airports in the country. As per Policy, an airport developer, including the State Government, 
willing to establish an airport is required to send a pro posal to the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(MoCA). There is a 2-stage process for approval of the proposal i.e., 'Site Clearance' and 'In -
Principle' approval stage. In accordance with this policy, MoCA receives proposals from the 
State Governments or Airport Developers from time to time for establishment of airports. 
After due examination, the approval for development of a new Greenfield Airport is granted. 
The responsibility of implementation of airport project including funding of the project rests 
with the concerned airport developer. Generally, land for airport projects is provided by 
concerned State Government/ Union Territory (UT) Administration to AAI free of cost and 
free from all encumbrances. As per the AAI Act, in case a State Government wishes to 
facilitate setting up of the airport, it could provide the following incentives to an Airport 
Company: 
(a) land, concessional or otherwise; 

24 
 
(b) real estate development rights in and around the airports; 
(c) airport connectivity; rail, road; 
(d) fiscal incentives by way of exemptions from State taxes; and 
(e) any other assistance that the State Government deem fit. State Governments may 
evolve their respective policies for providing any or all of the aforesaid incentives to an 
Airport Company. If the sel ection of a private entity or JVC partner is to be made by the 
State Government or its entity it shall be done through open competitive bidding. While 
granting land and other benefits, the State Government may, if it deems fit, stipulate the 
rights and obl igations of the Airport Company as conditions of such grant. State 
Governments can also provide land to AAI for development of greenfield airports through 
concessions to be granted to private entities in accordance with the provisions of the AAI 
Act. State s may also provide any of the above concessions to AAI for facilitating the 
development of airports in their respective States. 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee understands that major airports find it difficult to allocate slots to 
regional airlines, which mostly fly turboprop aircraft that take longer to land and take off. 
This forces some of the regional airlines to depend on larger aircraft, which do not have 
adequate demand. The Committee is of the view that if the States tie up with the to urism 
boards and other tourism stakeholders and formulate packages in order to market potential 
tourist destinations under the RCS scheme, it would attract more passengers, thereby, 
enhancing the demand for air travel. 
(Para 20.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 RCS-UDAN is market driven scheme. Interested airlines depending upon their 
assessment of demand on a particular route submit proposal at the time of bidding under 
UDAN. MoCA has been working in association with the Ministry of Tourism  (MoT) and 
offered t ourist destinations suggested by MoT under UDAN for bidding. To facilitate the 
allied sector of tourism, RCS -UDAN introduced the concept of Tourism RCS routes in 
collaboration with Ministry of Tourism. These were routes connecting airports in line with 
the aspirations of MoT to boost tourism and connect iconic tourist destinations. So far, 48 
Tourism RCS routes awarded to SAOs and out of these 48 tourism routes, 31 routes have 
been operationalized. Prominent tourist destinations viz. Dimapur, Agra, Bhopal, Bengaluru, 
Mysuru, Amritsar, Jaipur, Kolkata, Patna, Bhubaneswar, Varanasi, Rajamundri, 
Vishakhapatnam, Calicut, Delhi etc. have been connected under RCS.  MoCA has also been 
interacting with the MoT, tour operators and other stakeholders to promote tourism  
destinations and offering under bid.  
 
 

25 
 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that requisite synergy is achieved 
between/amongst the concerned Ministries/D epartments, so that airports are well connected 
with other means of transport and tourists/flyers reach their destinations, from the airports in 
a smooth and safe manner. The Ministry should collaborate with the State Governments and 
other stakeholders to ensure that better road and rail connectivity is available from the 
airports. 
(Para 24.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), Ministry of 
Commerce. Govt. of India has undertaken the task of combining all the connectivity 
infrastructure existing and proposed in one map under the project “National Master Plan”. On 
behalf of Ministry of Civil Aviation, AAI is also contributing data on Airports to the project. 
The project of “National Master Plan” incorpor ates the existing and proposed airports, 
Roadways, Railways, Shipping, Power lines, Telecom. This Master Plan will help in 
synchronizing the development of airports with deve lopment of its connectivity vis-a-vis 
road, Railways and Shipping. 
 
Shortage of availability of slots for turboprop aircrafts 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee expresses its concern on this issue and desires that the Ministry 
should take urgent timely action to address this concern. 
(Para 26.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Presently, there are no restrictions on slots for smaller turboprop aircraft operations at 
AAI airports. 
 
Pilot Training Institutes 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. Keeping in view the growth in the Indian aviation industry and shortage of pilots 
faced in I ndia, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should give serious thought to 
setting up of new Institutes for Pilot Training and to revamp the existing ones by providing 

26 
 
modern simulators and also augment the capacity intake of students in the existing Institutes. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should envisage setting up of Pilot Training 
Institute adjacent to the airport, at least in one airport, in each State. The Ministry should 
also take necessary steps to ensure that sufficient numbers o f trainers are made available, by 
offering incentives which would attract them to this field. 
(Para 28.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 (a) There are 34 DGCA approved FTOs in the country.  IGRUA at Amethi (UP) is 
under the administrative control of the Centra l Government. Eight FTOs are under 
State Governments and 25 are owned by the private sector.  
b) Indian FTOs have 229 aircraft for flying training as on 30 Nov 2021.   
c) The number of Commercial Pilot Licenses (CPL) issued in India over the last five 
years is as follows:  
 
d) India issued 787 CPLs by 30 Nov 2021, an all -time high.  This is despite severe 
disruptions in Apr -Jun 2021 due to the Covid second wave, Cyclone Yaas, 
Cyclone Tauktae, early onset of monsoons and a rising cost of imported aviation 
fuel. 
e) The number of CPLs issued in India to cadets from Indian and foreign FTOs is as 
follows:  
Commercial Pilot Licenses issued in India 
Year CPL issued to 
cadets from 
Indian FTOs 
CPL issued to 
cadets from 
foreign FTOs 
Total Share of 
cadets from 
foreign FTOs 
2016 376 161 537 30% 
2017 358 194 552 35% 
552
640
744
578
787
2017 2018 2019 2020 Till 30 Nov 21
Figure 1: CPLs issued 

27 
 
2018 415 225 640 35% 
2019 430 314 744 42% 
2020 335 243 578 42% 
Till 30 Nov 21 470 317 787 40% 
f) The number of CPL holders produced by Indian FTOs as on 30 Nov 2021 - 470 - 
is an all-time high.   
g) It is, however, a matter of concern that 40% of CPLs have been issued to cadets 
who have undergone their flying training in a foreign FTO. We are expanding t he 
capacity of Indian FTOs with a view to reduce the dependence on foreign FTOs.  
h) FTOs are regulated by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). The 
Aircraft Rules, 1937, require that the flying experience required for issue of 
private pilot and c ommercial pilot licenses shall be acquired only at a DGCA -
approved FTO.   
i) DGCA follows a five-phase certification process for setting up a FTO to check all 
the laid down rules and regulations. The Directorate of Flying Training (DFT) at 
DGCA conducts sched uled annual inspections and unscheduled spot checks at 
FTOs.  
 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent steps to ensure that 
the facilities available at IGRUA are optimally utilized and that more facilities may be added 
to cater to the increasing demand. 
(Para 29.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 (a) IGRUA, established in 1985, is India’s largest FTO, located at Amethi (UP).  It is 
an autonomous body under the control of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of 
India.  
b) IGRUA’s fleet and operational performance over the last decade is shown in the 
table below.   
IGRUA’s fleet and operational performance 
S No Financial Year Fleet Flying Hours CPL issued 
1 2016-17 24 14,614 55 

28 
 
2 2017-18 23 15,465 58 
3 2018-19 23 14,039 70 
4 2019-20              20 14,830 67 
5 2020-21             18 13,282 62 
6 1 Apr – 30 Nov 21 18 12,694 26 
c) Despite the Covid pandemic and with a smaller aircraft fleet of 18 aircraft, 
IGRUA produced 62 CPLs in FY 20 -21 as compared to 67 CPL in the pre -Covid 
year (FY 19-20).   
d) IGRUA has done around 12,694 hours during 1 April to 30 Nov 2021 which is 
nearly 85% of the 14,830 hours clocked in the entire pre -Covid year (FY 2019 -
20).  
e) The performance improvement at IGRUA in 2021, despite a smaller fleet and 
severe disruptions due to  Covid, Cyclone Tauktae and early monsoons is due to 
various efficiency improvement measures undertaken by the IGRUA leadership.   
f) As part of the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav in March 2021, IGRUA has started 
flying training on all days of the week.  This has bo osted its operational hours 
significantly.  
g) IGRUA is targeting 19,000 hours in FY 2021 -22 (with 18 aircraft), which will be 
an all-time high.  This is despite adding no additional aircraft or employees.  The 
previous high was 18,776 in FY 2013-14 with 24 aircraft.  
h) IGRUA has expanded its operations at Gondia (Maharashtra) and Kalaburgi 
(Karnataka) to address the challenge of poor visibility at Amethi during winter 
season. 
i) IGRUA has signed an MoU with National Aerospace Laboratories (NAL), 
Bengaluru as the l aunch customer for NAL’s Hansa NG trainer aircraft. The 
aircrafts are likely to be delivered in 2022-23. 
 
Flying Training Organizations (FTOs) 
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry and urges upon the 
Ministry to take necessary action to ensure that world class facilities are available at the 
FTOs. 
(Para 30.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 

29 
 
19.1 (a) There are 34 DGCA approved FTOs in the country.  IGRUA at Amethi (UP) is 
under the administrative control of the Cen tral Government. Eight FTOs are under 
State Governments and 25 are owned by the private sector.  
b) Indian FTOs have 229 aircraft for flying training as on 30 Nov 2021.   
c) The number of Commercial Pilot Licenses (CPL) issued in India over the last five 
years is as follows:  
d) India issued 787 CPLs by 30 Nov 2021, an all -time high.  This is despite severe 
disruptions in Apr -Jun 2021 due to the Covid second wave, Cyclone Yaas, 
Cyclone Tauktae, early onset of monsoons and a rising cost of imported aviation 
fuel. 
e) The number of CPLs issued in India to cadets from Indian and foreign FTOs is as 
follows:  
Commercial Pilot Licenses issued in India 
Year CPL issued to 
cadets from 
Indian FTOs 
CPL issued to 
cadets from 
foreign FTOs 
Total Share of 
cadets from 
foreign FTOs 
2016 376 161 537 30% 
2017 358 194 552 35% 
2018 415 225 640 35% 
2019 430 314 744 42% 
2020 335 243 578 42% 
Till 30 Nov 21 470 317 787 40% 
 
f) The number of CPL holders produced by Indian FTOs as on 30 Nov 2021 - 470 - 
is an all-time high.   
g) It is, however, a matter of concern that 40% of CPLs have been issued to cadets 
who have undergone their flying training in a foreign FTO. We are expanding t he 
capacity of Indian FTOs with a view to reduce the dependence on foreign FTOs.  
h) FTOs are regulated by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA).  The 
Aircraft Rules, 1937, require that the flying experience required for issue of 
private pilot and commercial pilot licenses shall be acquired only at a DGCA -
approved FTO.   
i) DGCA follows a five-phase certification process for setting up a FTO to check all 
the laid down rules and regulations. The Directorate of Flying Training (DFT) at 
DGCA conducts sche duled annual inspections and unscheduled spot checks at 
FTOs.  
 

30 
 
Maintenance Engineering Training School 
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee recommends in this regard that the Ministry should undertake suitable 
policy initiatives for Pilot Trainin g Institutes, Flying Training Organizations and 
Maintenance Engineering Training Schools in the country. The Committee desires that these 
initiatives should positively address the noticeable shortage of pilots and type rated 
commanders; and other technical  personnel, for the civil aviation sector in the country. The 
Committee exhorts the Ministry to facilitate the Pilot Training Institutes, Flying Training 
Organizations and Maintenance Engineering Training Schools, in tapping the manpower 
potential and skilled workforce available in the country. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 a) At present there are 49 Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
approved AME Institutes in India and more than 3200 candidates pass out every two years 
from these institutes. 
b) Government is working upon finding the opportunities, assessing challenges and the 
way forward for AME Schools.  
c) New regulations CAR 147 (Basic) seek to align the Indian regulations with those of 
leading global aviation regulators. 
d) The students will be eligible for issue of AME license in four years under CAR 147 
(Basic) instead of seven years as per the earlier CAR. 
e) Keeping in view the Covid 19 pandemic, the training organisations (AME institutes) 
have been permitted to conduct training through distance learning also. 
f) Upgradation of AME schools will also be undertaken inter -alia by affiliating them 
with Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU), India's only Aviation University.  
g) An AME school is expected to commence at IGRUA in Academic Session 2022. 
h) Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has introduced “online on -demand 
examination” (OLODE) for aircraft maintenance engineers (AME) and flight crew (FC) 
candidates. These will be in addition to the existing regular online examinations. 
 
Biojet Fuel 
Recommendation/Observation  

31 
 
21. The Committee recommends that the Government should encourage the use of Biojet 
fuel and envisage a policy in this regard. The Ministry should also engage necessary 
technological innovations to ensure that the use of Biojet fuel in aviation sector is promoted, 
wherever possible. 
(Para 34.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG), Govt. of India, has constituted a 
Committee to take ahead the Bio -ATF prog ramme. DGCA being a member of this 
committee, has provided its input on SAF and CORSIA. The report is in the finalization stage 
and is expected to be completed shortly. 
 
Optimal utilization of the Indian airspace 
Recommendation/Observation  
22. The Committ ee hopes that the optimal utilization of Indian airspace will lead to 
reduction in flight time, fuel consumption and carbon emission. The Committee desires that 
the Ministry should explore more steps in this direction and implement the same. 
(Para 35.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 AAI is continuously exploring more steps in improving the efficiency in optimising 
the utilisation of Indian airspace through collaborative process involving all stakeholders. Till 
14.12.2021, 116 Conditional Routes (CDR) have been  promulgated. The airlines have 
indicated cumulative savings of about 131 crore due to implementation of Flexible Use of 
Airspace (FUA). Further, about 34000 tonne carbon footprint saving has been reported by 
various airlines. 
 
Air Sewa 
Recommendation/Observation  
23. The Committee recommends that the grievances of passengers should be addressed 
effectively in a time-bound manner. The Committee desires that the Air Sewa Platform should 
be upgraded periodically, so that it fulfills the dynamic requirements of the air passengers. 
(Para 36.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 

32 
 
23.1 a) AirSewa 3.0 web platform has been made live on 02 Oct 2021. The new 
features of AirSewa 3.0 are as below: 
1) Grievance escalation by users or on Service Level Agreement (SLA) expiry 
2) Grievance transfer among stakeholders 
3) Enhanced roles and permissions for nodal officers 
4) Enhanced flight information and tracking of flights 
5) Public forum for discussions 
6) Mobile app for nodal officers 
b) The AirSewa QR code has be en displayed through standees, Flight Information 
Display System (FIDS) etc at strategic locations at over 80 airports to promote the 
AirSewa Portal.   
c) AirSewa QR code has been printed on the boarding cards and tickets of the airlines. 
d) The names of top 6 stakeholders with largest number of pending grievances are being 
shown prominently on MoCA website along with the daily date regarding pending 
and resolved grievances. 
e) Pending grievances on AirSewa portal has been reduced from 1,354 on 20 Jul 2021 to 
59 on 15 Dec 2021 (96% reduction). 
 
Air Travel Safety Concerns 
Recommendation/Observation  
24. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should accord due priority to the 
safety and security of air travelers, in the light of such incidents and exam ine the reasons 
behind such incidents and take necessary remedial action. 
(Para 37.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1. AAI established Safety Management System (SMS) in place at each airport, 
administered through Corporate Safety Management (C -SMS) Manual and airport -level 
Safety Management (SMS) Manual and monitored by AAI. Regular inspections and audits 
are conducted by AAI to ensure the safety of aircraft operation and passengers at airport 
followed by safety recommendation and remedial action. The Safety Assessment of any 
Project/Change that affects aircraft operation at airport is conducted prior to start of work. 
Regular Safety Trainings and Safety Committee Meetings are conducted. In addition to 

33 
 
above, all facilities are installed maintained as per ICAO Standards and Recommended 
Practices (SARPs) and DGCA regulations. 
 
 
Role of BCAS in ensuring that international security standards are adhered to 
Recommendation/Observation  
25.  The Committee takes note of the steps taken by BCAS to ensure that international 
security standards are adopted in the country. The Committee recommends that BCAS should 
take periodic steps  to ensure that the international best practices with respect to air safety 
standards, are followed in the country. The Committee recommends that proper mechanisms 
to ensure individual’s privacy be laid down in the DigiYatri Policy and such measures should  
be disclosed to the public at large. 
(Para 43.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) is designated by 
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) as Appropriate Authority for development, 
implementation and maintenance of National Civil Aviation Security Programme of India in 
line with Annex 17 of Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation. BCAS lays down 
AVSEC norms in accordance with ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization) Annex -
17 for Airport Oper ators, Aircraft operators, Regulated Agents, Caterers, Ground Handling 
Agents, Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)/Aviation Security Group (ASG) and Airport 
Security Unit (APSU)/ State/UT Police personnel. 
1.1. In accordance with MoU signed between India a nd ICAO, as per the Universal 
Security Audit Programme -Continuous Monitoring Approach (USAP -CMA) on-site 
audit of India was conducted from 7th to 15th March, 2018.  
1.2. This USAP -CMA audit was conducted to assess India’s aviation security 
performance by focusing on India’s compliance and oversight capabilities and also 
included the review of regulatory provisions, aviation security policies and 
programme and national level quality control documentation and records.  
1.3. ICAO reviewed the CAP submitted by BCAS and gave remark vide its 
correspondence dated 17.09.2018 that “Your CAP has been carefully reviewed by the 
Aviation Security Audit Section and was found to be generally satisfactory”. 
1.4. Implementation of security rules and regulations is monitored by BCAS through 
Quality Control activities which include security audits and inspections, security 
surveys and security tests to check professional efficiency and alertness of secu rity 
staff and mock exercises to test efficacy of contingency plan and operational 
preparedness.  

34 
 
1.5. AVSEC training is imparted to security personnel of all agencies concerned with 
civil aviation. BCAS is also responsible for Planning and Coordination of AVSE C 
matters. 
25.2 Digi Yatra uses a central platform for identity management which is a  Mobile wallet-
based identity management system similar to the Travel Pass being developed by IATA. This 
method uses decentralized identifiers and hence  avoids the need fo r a central storage of Data 
including Biometric. All the Verifiable Credential (VC) data is encrypted and stored in secure 
wallet in the passenger’s DYCE app. This addresses the issues concerning Data Privacy and 
Protection. Moreover, instead of central platform for storing data, this app based system holds 
the data with the passengers themselves. 
 
New Normal – Public Health Safety Measures in Aviation Sector 
Recommendation/Observation  
26. The Committee appreciates the public safety measures adopted in the  civil aviation 
sector. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that such measures are 
periodically updated in tune with international best practices in this regard. 
(Para 44.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 There have been few positive effects of the pandemic disruption on aviation. To brace 
themselves from the devastating impacts, Airlines, Airports have adopted innovative 
solutions which have become ‘New Normal’. 100% web check -in was a distant dream which 
has reached almost 90% from dismal 10 % pre -Covid. Similarly touch free baggage drop, 
minimum contact security check, seamless movement of passenger through Digi Yatra, etc. 
will go a long way to ensure operational efficiency in the sector.  
• Due to COVID -19 pandemic, domestic scheduled operations were suspended from March, 
2020 to May, 2020. Thereafter, introduction of new normal, scheduled domestic operations 
started in calibrated manner with 33% capacity of the approved summer schedule w.e.f. 25 
May 2020 with air fare cap. Scheduled domestic operations has been restored w.e.f. 
18.10.2021 without any capacity restriction subject to strictly adherence to COVID 
appropriate behavior.  
•   Airport Authority of India issued detailed guidelines/SO Ps in view of the various safety 
measures necessitated. 
•    It included protocols to be followed - From Place of Origin to Airport, At Airport, In the 
Aircraft and From Airport to Destination. 
•   Contact less travel promoted through web check -in, e-Boarding pass, face masks, Aarogya 
Setu, safety kits, face shields etc. 

35 
 
•    RT -PCR [Gold Standard - RT-PCR/ TrueNat/CBNAAT(including GeneXpert)] test 
facility at the entry airport for all arriving international passengers. 
 
Post-COVID scenario 
Recommendation/Observation  
27. The Committee is aware of the grim fact that the aviation sector has been hit hard by 
global economic slowdown and the COVID -19 pandemic. The Committee understands that 
the adverse effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, on the airlines operating in the country, which 
were already reeling under heavy losses, was unprecedented. The Committee takes note of 
the steps taken by the Ministry to tackle the pandemic. While acknowledging the resilience 
shown by the civil aviation sector in t he country during such trying times, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should envisage immediate and long term measures, to 
strengthen the civil aviation sector in the country and to enable its resurgence. 
 (Para 45.7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 a) The aviation sector in India has been affected due to severe disruption caused 
by the COVID -19 pandemic. The estimated losses incurred by airlines in India is around 
Rs.19,564/- crore and airports in India is around Rs. 5,116 crores in the financial year  2020-
21. 
b) Due to the outbreak of COVID 19, scheduled domestic operations were suspended 
w.e.f. 25.03.2020. These were subsequently resumed in a calibrated manner w.e.f. 25.05.2020 
with 33 percent of the capacity and fare capping (lower and upper limit o n different sector) to 
ensure that airlines do not charge excessive fare. Evaluating the emerging scenario of the 
Covid-19 pandemic, the capacity restrictions have been relaxed  w.e.f. 18.10.2021, and the 
domestic operations have been restored without any restrictions on the capacity deployed. 
c) The Government has taken several steps to strengthen the aviation industry keeping in 
view the safety and health of the passengers. Steps taken include: 
i. Adoption of Covid protocols, use of protective gear, contac t-less passenger handling 
processes like 100% online check -in, submission of self -declaration forms and self -baggage 
drop etc. 
ii. Benefits under Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) 3.0 extended to 
civil aviation sector. 
iii. Exclusive air-links or 'Air Bubbles' have been established with 31 countries. 
iv. AAI has taken up development of new airports and upgradation of existing airports at 
around Rs. 25,000 crores in the next 4 -5 years which includes expansion and modification of 

36 
 
existing termina ls, new terminals, expansion or strengthening of existing runways, aprons, 
Airport Navigation Services (ANS), control towers and technical blocks etc. 
v. Three Public Private Partnership (PPP) airports at Delhi, Hyderabad and Bengaluru 
have undertaken a ma jor expansion plan to approximately Rs. 30,000 Crores by 2025. 
Additionally, Rs. 36,000 Crores have been planned for investment in the development of new 
greenfield airports across the country under PPP mode. 
vi. Government of India (GoI) has accorded 'in -principle' approval for setting up of 21 
greenfield airports across the country. So far, eight greenfield airports namely, Sindhudurg 
and Shirdi in Maharashtra, Durgapur in West Bengal, Pakyong in Sikkim, Kannur in Kerala, 
Orvakal in Andhra Pradesh, Kalabu ragi in Karnataka and Kushinagar in Uttar Pradesh have 
been operationalized. 
vii. Under Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS), also known as the Ude Desh ka Aam 
Nagrik (UDAN) Scheme, as on 14 Dec 2021, 403 routes have commenced connecting 65 
unserved and underserved airports, including two water aerodromes and six heliports. 
viii. Goods and Services Tax (GST) rate has been reduced to 5% from 18% for domestic 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services. 
ix. A conducive aircraft leasing and financing environment has been enabled. 
x. The freighter aircraft deployed by Indian carriers has increased from seven in 2018 to 
28 in 2021. As a result, share of Indian carriers in international freighter movements 
increased from 2% to 19% over the last two years. 
xi. Airports Authority of India (AAI) has issued award letters on 31 May 2021 and 29 
October 2021 for nine FTOs to be established at five airports - Belagavi (Karnataka), Jalgaon 
(Maharashtra), Kalaburgi (Karnataka), Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh) and Lilabari (Assam). 
Recommendation/Observation  
28. The Committee desires that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure short 
term waiver or short term put off, in terms of aviation charges, for sustaining a viable 
aviation industry. The Committee is of the view that all airlines and aviation-related business 
must be treated as priority sector lending. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should provide a sectoral fund, which is professionally managed and which can provide 
structured debt to the airlines industry. 
(Para 46.2)  
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 The National Credit Guarantee Trust Company Ltd. (NCGTC) have provided 
Guarantee support to extend of Rs. 349 crore till 16 th July, 2021 to borrowers belonging to 
aviation sector. Benefits under Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) 3.0 have 

37 
 
been extended to civil aviation sector.  ln respect of Traffic Billing, AAI Credit Policy has 
been amended as under: 
(i) Credit period to the domestic airlines has been increased from 10 to 15 days w.e.f. 
01.04.2021. 
(ii) The rate of interest on delayed payments (beyond credit period) has been revised 
from: 
a) 18% to 12% for the period for 01.04.2021 to 30.09.2021 & 
b) Further reduced from 12% to 10% the period for 01.10.2021 to 31.03.2022. 
 
Unmanned Aircraft System (Drone) 
Recommendation/Observation  
29. The Committee takes note of the steps taken to establish an UTM Ecosystem in India 
and hopes that the formulation of UTM Policy would facilitate Drone Traffic Management 
Services for operation of Drones within the air traffic environment, in our air space, and that 
the UAS Rules would provide the requisite regulatory framework Beyond Visual Line of Sight 
(BVLOS) operations, in the country. 
(Para 49.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 a) In order to make India a gl obal hub for the research and development, testing, 
manufacturing and operation of drones, the Central Government has notified the Drone Rules 
2021 on 25 Aug 2021. 
b) To promote domestic manufacturing of drones, Government has notified the 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for drones and drone components on 30 Sep 2021. 
c) DigitalSky Platform is being updated which will regulate the entire gamut of activities 
pertaining to drone operations. The airspace map for drones has been released on digita l sky 
platform on 24 Sep 2021 which will help the drone pilots to plot their proposed flight plan 
and easily identify the zone within which it falls so as to assess whether or not they need to 
make an application for prior approval. DigitalSky Platform wil l be the single window online 
platform to ensure smooth functionality of the applications. 
d) The DSP enables inter alia the following: - 
1) Type Certification of drones. 
2) Registration of Unique Identification Number (UIN) 

38 
 
3) Transfer or deregistration of UAS 
4) Operation of UAS 
5) UAS Traffic Management (UTM) 
6) Issue of Remote Pilot License 
7) Authorisation of Remote Pilot Training Organisation (RPTO) 
8) Fees, Insurance, Offences, Penalties, Appeals; etc. 
e) As on 15 Dec 2021, 22 models have been provis ionally approved and 185 Unique 
Identification Numbers (UIN) have been issued. The number of Drone Acknowledgment 
Numbers (DAN) issued through DigitalSky Platform till 3o Nov 2021 is 29,459. Nine drone 
schools have been approved. The number of organization s exempted for drone operations 
under Aircraft Rules 1937, UAS Rules 2021 and Drone Rules 2021 stands at 90. 
f) In order to enable complex operations of drones, increase the overall safety in the 
UTM airspace and provide situational awareness to stakeholders, Unmanned Aircraft System 
(UAS) Traffic Management (UTM) Policy framework, 2021 has been released on 24 Oct 
2021. 
 
 
 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Airport Infrastructure  
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that basic amenities are 
available at all the airports and that periodic maintenance is carried out efficiently. The 
Committee recommends that t he Ministry should ensure sufficient space for commercial 
shops, while granting approval for new airports. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should consider mandatorily earmarking minimum 100 acres of land, while making 
plans for future airports. Further, 5 Star/3 Star hotels and multiplexes should be constructed 
near the new airports. The Committee also desires that extra land, if any, should not be sold 
and should be kept for future aviation developmental activities. 
 (Para 7.8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 There are in -built provisions under the Greenfield Airport Policy and National Civil 
Aviation Policy (NCAP) - 2016 for earmarking a portion of the airport land for commercial 
utilization. All the developments have to be done in accordance with  the approved Master 
Plan.  NCAP has specific provision for sufficient space on city side for commercial use as per 
applicable law.  Further, Airports Authority of India earns revenues from Aeronautical and 
Non-Aeronautical resources. Non-Aeronautical resources include earmarking 10-15% area of 
a Terminal building for Offices, Retail and F&B. In addition, city side land is leased for non -
Aeronautical activities as identified in the AAI Act, which include hotels, restaurants, 
warehouses etc. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.2  The Committee notes that in its reply, the Ministry has only enumerated the 
provisions of the Greenfield Airport Policy, NCAP 2016 and the sources of revenue. 
However, the Ministry has not spelt out the actual airport amenities, inf rastructure or 
plans or land allocation for setting up hotels. The Committee desires complete and full 
details of all such actual infrastructure created by the Ministry at all new airports. It also 
desires to know whether plans are made in advance to inclu de such amenities & 
infrastructure during the construction stage of airports.  
 
 
 

40 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme  
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee notes that although the airlines industry got a huge fillip with the 
launch of RCS, which is aimed at making flying affordable for the masses and facilitating/ 
stimulating regional air connectivity and the passenger traffic has shown a rising trend due 
to low cost aviation, air connectivity is largely confined to routes connecting State capitals 
and lar ge towns and some parts of the country still remain unconnected by air services. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take urgent 
effective steps to ensure balanced growth of connectivity in different parts of the country 
under RCS. The Committee also desires that the benefits under the Regional Connectivity 
Scheme, currently restricted to three years, should be extended by another two years, to give 
airlines an opportunity to transform a fledgling route into a stro ng and revenue -generating 
one. 
(Para 9.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 RCS-UDAN Scheme was launched by MoCA on 21.10.2016. RCS -UDAN is market 
driven scheme. Interested airlines depending upon their assessment of demand on a particular 
route submit proposal at  the time of bidding under UDAN. UDAN has transformed the way 
the people travelled in Tier -II and III cities. Regional airports like Jharsuguda in Eastern 
region, Kishangarh in Western region, Belgaum in Southern region, Dharbhanga in Northern 
region etc. have been witnessing exponential growth in air traffic. Further, Helicopter 
Operations have been promoted under UDAN in Priority Areas namely Hilly States, North 
Eastern States and Islands. AAI, the Implementing Agency awarded Helicopter routes 
involving 3 6 heliports in priority areas. Selected Airline Operators (SAOs) Operations 
(SAOs) have operationalized helicopter routes from eight Heliports namely Srinagar, New 
Tehri , Gaucher, Sahastradhara, Haldwani, Chinyalisaur, Mandi and Rampur under Non -
Scheduled Operator Permit (NSOP) as on 14.12.2021.In 4 rounds RCS -UDAN bidding 
conducted so far, 948 valid routes have been awarded to ensure balanced growth of 
connectivity in different parts of the country. 403 routes connecting 65 unserved and 
underserved airpor ts (including 8 heliports & 02 water aerodromes) have been 
operationalized so far. With regard to recommendation of the committee for extension of 
benefits under the Regional Connectivity Scheme by another two years in order to give 
airlines an opportunity  to transform a fledgling route into a strong and revenue -generating 
one. Extension of the initial 03 -year tenure of RCS routes or networks by additional 01 year 
for all routes completing their tenure on or before 31 st December, 2021 have been granted 
considering the adverse impact of COVID-19 pandemic. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.3   The Committee notes with dismay that out of 948 valid routes for RCS -UDAN 
Scheme, only 403 routes have been operationalized aft er elapse of 5 years, since the 
launch of scheme in October, 2016. The Committee also notes that an extension of 

41 
 
benefits has been granted for a period of one year only to routes completing three years 
tenure. The Committee feels that helping hand should b e given to the fledging RCS -
UDAN routes considering the low number of operationalized routes and adverse impact 
of Covid -19 pandemic, which has resulted in lower passenger traffic and therefore, 
strongly reiterates its recommendation that benefits should b e extended by another two 
years, instead of one year as granted by Ministry now. 
 
Development, Upgradation and Modernization of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee observes that direct air connections to tourist destinations and 
cultural sites can massively promote the tourism industry which will lead to employment 
opportunities and faster economic growth. There is, therefore, an imperative need for close 
co-ordination between the Ministry of Civil Aviation, and the Ministries of Tourism a nd 
Culture, in matters regarding air connectivity to important tourist destinations and cultural 
sites in the country. Hence, the Committee recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation, to 
work in tandem with the Ministries of Culture and Tourism, in order to  open up India’s vast 
tourism potential and ensure greater harmony among the concerned Ministries, who are vital 
stakeholders in this regard. 
 (Para 9.8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 RCS-UDAN is market driven scheme. Interested airlines depending upon their 
assessment of demand on a particular route submit proposal at the time of bidding under 
UDAN. MoCA has been working in association with the Ministry of Tourism  (MoT) and 
offered tourist destinations suggested by MoT under UDAN for bidding. To facilitate the  
allied sector of tourism, RCS -UDAN introduced the concept of Tourism RCS routes in 
collaboration with Ministry of Tourism. These were routes connecting airports in line with 
the aspirations of MoT to boost tourism and connect iconic tourist destinations. So far, 48 
Tourism RCS routes awarded to SAOs and out of these 48 tourism routes, 31 routes have 
been operationalized. Prominent tourist destinations viz. Dimapur, Agra, Bhopal, Bengaluru, 
Mysuru, Amritsar, Jaipur, Kolkata, Patna, Bhubaneswar, Varanasi, Ra jamundri, 
Vishakhapatnam, Calicut, Delhi etc. have been connected under RCS. Representatives of 
MoT is included in the Steering Committee  to review the implementation of Scheme from 
time to time and issuance of necessary directions on RCS implementation/course correction. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.2 The Committee expresses satisfaction that out of 48 Tourism RCS routes, 31 
have been operationalized. The Committee desires to know the efforts made to 
expeditiously operationali se the remaining 17 r outes, through renewed efforts and 
effective coordination between the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Tourism to boost the 
tourism potential of iconic destinations.  

42 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee feels that at this juncture, the issues that need to be addressed are lack 
of infrastructure of civil airports due to non -availability of land, delay related to compliance 
of the regulations by the airport operators, lack of road connectivity to the airports etc. The 
Committee takes note of the step s taken by the Ministry to address the issues faced under 
RCS. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent remedial steps to 
address these concerns. The Committee also notes that the promotion of regional air 
connectivity under RCS critic ally hinges on the support from the State Governments in the 
shape of multimodal connectivity, utilities, land availability, security etc. The Committee 
would, therefore, like the Ministry of Civil Aviation to impress upon the State Governments to 
form a d edicated mechanism mandated to offer one -stop solutions to airline and airport 
operators with the objective of promoting regional air connectivity under RCS.  
(Para 11.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 MoCA has signed a tripartite MoU with State Govts./UTs and AAI, the Implementing 
Agency, for implementation of RCS -UDAN in the respective States/UTs. As per the 
provision of the MoU, the State Govt./UTs besides other concessions are required to provide 
minimum land, if required, free of cost and free from all encu mbrances for development of 
RCS Concession Airports and also provide multi -modal hinterland connectivity (road, rail, 
metro, waterways, etc.). Ministry has also been interacting with the stakeholders including 
States/UTs to expedite development of infrastr ucture and operationalization of UDAN 
flights.  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.2 The Committee desires specific details of the State-wise efforts made  by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation  to improve connectivity of airports and the result of its 
interaction with various stakeholders including States/ UTs.  
 
Helicopter operations 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee is of the considered view that much more attention needs to be give n 
to helicopter operations in the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
address the issues of proper maintenance of helicopters, replacement of aged helicopters and 
training of the crew, on priority basis. The Committee emphasizes the need for simulator 
module training for helicopter pilots for offshore landing. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should take urgent steps to ensure a network of heliports, in order to give 
necessary boost to the helicopter operations in the countr y. The Committee underlines the 
need for greater co -operation between the Ministry and State Governments for building 
heliports in the country. 

43 
 
 (Para 13.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation has released ‘Policy for promotion of Helicopt er 
Operations’ on 8 th October, 2021 to encourage helicopter operations creating demand and 
growth. This policy has been framed to address the difficulties being faced by helicopter 
operators. States have been encouraged to develop infrastructure for promot ion of helicopter 
operations. Few salient features of Helicopter Policy are as under:- 
(i) Allowed Helicopter Operators of NSOP Category to undertake self-handling services at 
their own discretion on all airports 
(ii) No parking deposit but a non -refundable and nonadjustable application fee for night 
parking will be levied @50,000/ - plus taxes per helicopter at all AAI airports except Juhu 
airport 
(iii) No Landing charges for helicopters for period of two years at all airports from the 
date of promulgation of the policy.  
(iv) Service Charges at airports may be decided as per the policy of airport operator. 
However, Helicopter operator may economise space for extending services to passengers. 
Helicopter operators may also explore to extend online services to passengers 
(v) All non -scheduled helicopter operations either can be on cash and carry basis or 
Helicopter Operators to deposit in advance projected two months billing with AAI.  
(vi) AAI to train its ATC officials for various requirements regarding helicopter operations 
to create conducive environment, thereby exploiting inherent Vertical Take -Off and 
Landing (VTOL) capability of helicopters optimally at the airports to save precious fuel 
and time.  
(vii) State Governments/Union Territories encourage to r educe the VAT on ATF to 
promote helicopter operations in their States/ UTs. 
(viii) State Governments/ UTs to set up Institutional Mechanism to facilitate Helicopter 
Operations to obtain permissions, approvals, clearances, etc.  
(ix) Separate enclosures at airports to minimize conflict with scheduled operations at 
airports.  
(x) DGCA to make guidelines/ regulations for roof top helipads for helicopter operations 
(xi) Exclusive enclave for helicopter operations in future Green Field Airports including 
Greenfield projects under construction.  
(xii) AAI to develop Heli -Hubs at 3 Green Field Airports being developed at Hirasar 
(Rajkot), Hollongi (Arunachal Pradesh) and Dholera (Gujarat).  

44 
 
(xiii) AAI to improve the existing infrastructure and develop Heli -Hub at Juhu airport, 
Mumbai.  
(xiv) AAI to explore to provide dedicated corridors for Helicopter operations.  
(xv) AAI to explore to develop Heliports at 50 locations for helicopter operations, where 
schedule aircraft movements are limited, using existing infrastructure of Apron and 
Terminal Buildings. 
(xvi) Heli-Sewa portal has also been launched on 8th October, 2021 to provide seamless 
single-window digital access to the operator to share information and request permission 
for helipad operation.  
(xvii) The matters related to training of Helicopter cre w and simulator module training for 
Helicopter Pilot for offshore landing have been addressed by DGCA by promulgation of 
comprehensive requirements for training of pilots at CAR Section 8 Series H Part II Issue 
II, 25th September, 2018. Simulator training of offshore pilots for night medical evacuation 
are addressed through Joint SOP for night medical evacuation Issue 1 Rev 1 dated 27 Feb 
19 approved by DGCA. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.2 The Committee notes that in its reply, the Ministry has onl y noted the salient 
features of the ‘Policy for promotion of helicopter operations’. The Committee desires 
to know the actual steps taken by the Ministry to ensure the ground level 
implementation of the policy in various States, especially the States which  do not have 
the benefit of airport connectivity so far. 
 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) prices and aviation taxes 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee is happy to note the steps taken by State Governments in reducing the 
VAT on ATF for the flights operated under UDAN Scheme. The Committee observes that ATF 
prices in India are currently under VAT regime which is under the purview of individual 
States and the variation in the taxes ranges from 1% to 30%. Since fuel cost accounts for 
nearly 40% of the op erating cost of the airlines industry, even a small relief in the pricing 
will be a boon for the industry. However, the Committee is concerned to note that the State 
Governments have shown reluctance to reduce the VAT on ATF for flights other than those 
operated under UDAN scheme. The Committee is of the view that reduction in VAT on ATF 
would be a notional revenue loss for the States, which can be offset by enhanced economic 
activities, which would be the result of increased air connectivity to the region.  The 
Committee desires that the Ministry may pursue this issue with the State Governments, in 
order to rationalize and minimize the State level taxes/surcharges on ATF and bring much 
needed relief and help, to the airline sector. 

45 
 
 (Para 16.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The Ministry has been pursuing with the State Governments to reduce VAT on ATF 
across all the airports. So far, the following States/ UTs have responded and reduced VAT on 
ATF: 
a. Andaman & Nicobar Islands: From 10% to 1%  
b. Haryana: From 20% to 1%. 
c. Jammu & Kashmir: From 26.25% to 1% 
d. Ladakh: From 26.25% to 1% 
e. Uttarakhand: From 20% to 2% 
f. Himachal Pradesh: From 25% to 2% 
g. Tripura: From 16% to 1% 
h. Madhya Pradesh: From 25% to 1-4% 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.2  The Committee notes with satisfaction that through the Ministry’s efforts, eight 
States have reduced the VAT on ATF substantially. The Committee stresses upon the 
importance of reduced VAT rates on the financial viability of airlines keeping in view 
the negative impact of Covid-19 and urges the Ministry to take up the issue of VAT rate 
reduction with other State Governments as well.  
Recommendation/Observation  
7. As regards high aviation taxes, the Committee feels that the Indian aviation industry 
is laden with very high operating and fixed costs, in view of which there is a need for 
considering aviation sector for priority sector lending, so that the industry could get access 
to funds at cheaper rates. The Committee also underlines the need for unbund ling of product 
and pricing to the customer. 
 (Para 16.8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The National Credit Guarantee Trust Company Ltd. (NCGTC) have provided 
Guarantee support to extend of Rs. 349 crore till 16 th July, 2021 to borrowers belonging to 
aviation sector. Benefits under Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) 3.0 have 
been extended to civil aviation sector.   
 

46 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.2 The Committee feels that the Civil Aviation Sector is reeling under the burden of 
high aviatio n sector taxe s on one hand and huge losses due to Covid -19 on the other 
hand. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that Civil Aviation 
Sector should be considered for priority sector lending as to enable it to get access to 
funds at chea per rates. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Ministry in this regard and whether the proposal has been taken up with the Ministry 
of Finance. The Committee also desires to know the break-up of the ECLGS 3.0 benefits 
which have been extended to the Civil Aviation Sector.  
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO)  
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee observes that India has the potential to be an MRO hub due to 
locational advantage, growing aircraft fleet, low labour costs and the  natural talent to drive 
innovation. However, the country has not yet been able to fully exploit the opportunities 
available in this sector and a major deterrent for growth of the MRO industry is high 
taxation of MRO components. Aircraft MRO services are c ritical in aviation value chain and 
it would be of a huge loss for the country, if we do not tap the vast technical and skill base 
available in the country. The Committee takes note of the various steps taken by the Ministry 
to rationalize the tax regime f or MROs and promote MRO activities in the country. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should give requisite focus on the issues 
presently faced in the MRO sector and remove the remaining policy distortions and address 
regulatory limitations to ensure that India evolves into a key international player in offering 
MRO facilities. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps to 
ensure that MRO workshops are set up in all the metro cities in the country, in order to 
attract international business. The Committee also emphasizes the need for enhanced 
collaboration between defence and civil MROs. 
 (Para 17.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Investment decisions in any industry including MROs are dependent on various 
factors whic h include market forces and regulatory environment. Government has taken 
several measures for a more congenial regulatory environment. In September 2021, Ministry 
of Civil Aviation (MoCA) announced a new MRO policy, which includes leasing of land 
through open tenders and abolishing royalty charged by the Airport Authority of India (AAI) 
for the Maintenance Repair and Overhaul (MRO) business for ease of doing business and to 
provide further incentive to the sector. Other key measures undertaken for supportin g the 
growth of the Indian MRO sector include the following:  
(i) GST on MRO has been reduced from 18% to 5% with full Input Tax Credit from 1 
April 2020. 

47 
 
(ii) Custom duty has been waived on tools, toolkits and spares imported by MROs. 
(iii) Transactions sub-contracted by foreign OEMs/MRO to domestic MRO are treated as 
“exports” with zero-rated GST from 1 April 2020. 
(iv) Relaxed restriction on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years. 
(v) The Airports Authority of India (AAI) has come up with a business -friendly 
proposal for MRO with zero airport royalty charges and significantly rationalized 
land rentals for eight AAI airports (Begumpet, Bhopal, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, 
Juhu, Kolkata and Tirupati). 
(vi) Stay of foreign aircraft for MRO in India permitted till co mpletion of MRO work or 
six months, whichever is earlier. 
(vii) Rules simplified for export of leased aircraft in complete or knocked -down 
conditions, opening up new opportunities in redelivery checks and aircraft 
component recycling. 
(viii) Aircraft lessors are being encouraged to carry out their end-of-lease checks in India. 
(ix) Foreign manufacturers are being encouraged to set up their MRO facilities on their 
own or through joint ventures with Indian players.  
8.2 The Government is facilitating civil -military MRO converg ence by fostering greater 
technical and business collaboration between leading MRO companies in India and the 
defense establishment. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.3 The Committee desires to know the impact of the measures undertaken to 
support the Indian MRO sector and the resultant increase, if any, in MRO services. The 
Committee reiterating its recommendation, stresses upon the urgent need for growth in 
MRO services keeping in view the existing technical manpower, low labour cost and the 
expected growth in the aviation sector.  
 
Krishi Udan 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee recognizes the fact that Krishi Udan has benefitted the local farmers 
and villagers  whose products have higher value outside the region. This would boost the 
connectivity and thereby, economy in the region. The Committee appreciates this Scheme and 
hopes that it would contribute to the welfare of the people in remote regions of the count ry. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to remove the 
existing bottlenecks at airports and in the supply chain. The Committee hopes that this 
Scheme would provide the much needed quick cargo services to cater to the huge demand in 
the domestic and international markets, for the farm products of the North -Eastern region 
and other remote areas of the country. The Committee is happy to note that the Scheme 
would ensure that perishable products find good markets and market val ue, in and outside 
the country, which would otherwise have gone wasted, owing to lack of storage and 
connectivity. 

48 
 
 (Para 21.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 While the Krishi Udan Scheme introduced by Govt. of India is yielding much 
attention in movement of perishable cargo from the remote area, AAICLAS on its part 
expanding its presence at more airports and have plan to create 33% of more domestic cargo 
terminals by the FY 2023-24.  
• AAICLAS has further taking steps to increase the number of cold storages in the air 
cargo terminals from the existing cold storage facilities at 22 airports.  
• In coordination with MoCA and BCAS, domestic cargo movement through d omestic 
passenger terminals have been facilitated at 12 airports namely Adampur, Dibrugarh, 
Gwalior, Jabalpur, Prayagraj, Rajkot, Udaipur, Darbhanga, Dimapur, Hubballi, 
Rajahmundry and Tuticorin. BCAS approval received for Lilabari Airport to move cargo 
through Domestic Passenger Terminal. 
• These facilities will help enhanced movement of agricultural & other perishable 
products from all interior of Indian states including at NER 
9.2 Krishi Udan Scheme was launched on international and national routes to as sist 
farmers in transporting agricultural products so that it improves their value realization. Krishi 
Udan Scheme 2.0 was launched on 27th October 2021 enhancing the existing provisions, 
mainly focusing on transporting perishable food products from the hi lly areas, northeastern 
states and tribal areas. The scheme aims to ensure seamless, cost -effective, time -bound air 
transportation and associated logistics for all Agri -produce originating especially from 
Northeast, hilly and tribal regions of the country.  Under the Krishi Udan Scheme, Airports 
Authority of India (AAI) provides waiver of Landing, Parking, Terminal Navigational 
Landing Charges (TNLC) and Route Navigation Facility Charges (RNFC) for Indian 
freighters and P2C (Passenger -to-Cargo) Aircraft prim arily around 25 airports focusing on 
North Eastern Region, Hilly and Tribal region and 28 airports at other areas. Krishi Udan 
Scheme is a convergence scheme where eight Ministries/Departments namely Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, Department of Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare, Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying, Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Food Processing Industries, 
Department of Commerce, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Development of North -
eastern Region (DoNER) would leverage their existing schemes to strengthen the logistics for 
transportation of Agri -produce. E -KUSHAL (Krishi Udan for Sustainable Holistic Agri -
Logistics) will be a single platform which will provide relevant information. It will also assist 
in coordination, monitor ing and evaluation of the scheme, with integration of E -KUSHAL 
with E -National Agriculture Market (e -NAM). Implementation of E -KUSHAL would be 
done in a phase wise manner in collaboration with the stakeholders. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
9.3 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry on coordination with 
seven other Ministries/ Departments namely Department of Agriculture & Farmer ’s 

49 
 
Welfare; Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying; Department of Fisheries; 
Ministry of Food Processi ng Industries; Department of Commerce; Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs; and Ministry of Development of North-eastern Region (DoNER), to successfully 
implement the Krishi Udan Scheme for transportation of agri -produce. The Committee 
desires to know the progress of plan to create 33% of more of domestic terminals by FY 
2023-24 and the increase in volume of cold storages at airports. The Committee would 
also desire to know the status of implementation of e -Kushal (Krishi Udan for 
Sustainable Holistic Agri Logistics ) and the result of planned collaboration with the 
stakeholders.   
 
Connectivity to North East and other remote areas 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee notes that most of the places in the North Eastern Region are 
inaccessible due to inadequate  road and rail facilities and the only viable means of 
transportation is by air. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should give 
due attention to air connectivity to North East and other remote areas of the country. The 
Ministry should e ngage with State Governments, regulators and air carriers to increase air 
connectivity to such regions. 
 (Para 22.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1  To increase the air connectivity in the North Eastern Region (NER) to remote/ 
inaccessible areas due to inadequ ate road and rail facilities, AAI has completed and 
operationalised various airports in NER, like Tezu Airport in Arunachal Pradesh and 
Pakyong Airport in Sikkim. The work for new Greenfield airport at Hollongi in Arunachal 
Pradesh is in progress.  
10.2 In addition, the existing airport at Rupsi in Assam has also been operationalized. To 
increase the capacity of various existing airports, AAI has undertaken/completed following 
development works in NER. Following Airports / Heliports/ Water Aerodromes have b een 
identified/awarded in NER under UDAN scheme: 
● Airports: Passighat, Tezu, Rupsi, Jorhat, Lilabari, Tezpur, Shillong, Tura, Dimapur & 
Pakyong.  
● Water Aerodromes: Guwahati River Front (WA), Umrangso Reservoir (WA). 
● Heliports: Daparizo. Itanagar, Tuting, Walong, Ziro, Yinghiong, Nagaon, Misa, 
Geleki, Jiribam, Moreh, Parbung, Tamenglong, Thanlon, Sohra, Dawki & 
Williamnagar  
10.3 120 valid Fixed wing and Helicopter routes have been awarded in NER under UDAN. 
As per Sum mer Schedule 21, air connectivity in the NER Is placed at Annexure -B. Besides 

50 
 
above, Alliance Air has been operating in NER on nomination basis under “Providing Air 
Connectivity in NER” Scheme to strengthen the air connectivity of the region.  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.4 The Committee has time and again stressed upon the need for  increasing 
connectivity at inaccessible locations in the NER, especially the Hollongi Airport in 
Arunachal Pradesh. The Committee notes that work of a new Greenfield a irport at 
Hollongi is in progress and desires to know the status of work completion and the 
tentative date to operationalise the airport. The Committee also stresses upon the need 
for renewed efforts in development of water aerodromes and heliports as it r equires less 
space and less capital as compared to airports. 
 
Shortage of Pilots 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee strongly feels that with the huge manpower potential and skilled 
workforce available in the country, it is important that these resources are tapped into. The 
Committee recognizes the fact that the Indian aviation industry is one of the fastest growing 
markets in the world which has witnessed exponential growth of airline fleets. Though India 
has a vast talent pool of skilled manpo wer, it has not been able to match the requirement of 
pilots. The Committee, therefore, underlines the need for proactive action for skill 
development/training in the country, to augment the skills of available manpower. The 
Committee recommends the Minist ry to formulate futuristic plans for devising tailor -made 
technical courses for skill development, training and research, in consultation with the 
private sector also. The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Ministry should 
incorporate international best practices, in the area of skill development. 
 (Para 27.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Presently, out of the total Commercial Pilot License (CPL) issued by Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), share of foreign trained cadets is about 40 % . The 
Government has, however, taken following steps to achieve self -sufficiency in trained Indian 
pilots: 
a) Airports Authority of India (AAI) has, on 25 September 2020, come up with a 
liberalized Flying Training Organisations (FTO) policy wherein the concept of airport royalty 
(revenue share payment by FTOs to AAI) has been abolished and land rentals have been 
significantly rationalized. 
b) AAI has issued award letters on 31 May 2021 and 29 October 2021 for nine FTOs to 
be established at five airports at Belagavi (Karnataka), Jalgaon (Maharashtra), Kalaburagi 

51 
 
(Karnataka), Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh) and Lilabari (Assam). Soft launch of two FTOs at 
Kalabuargi was done on 15 August 2021 under the liberalised policy. 
c) Directorate General of Civil Aviation  (DGCA) has introduced new Online On 
Demand Examination (OLODE) for the AME and flight crew (FC) candidates with effect 
from November 2021. These license examinations provide an opportunity to the candidates to 
choose date and time to appear in the examina tion as per his/her choice on the available slots 
of the examinations. 
d) DGCA has modified its regulations to empower Flying Instructors with the right to 
authorise flight operations at FTOs. This will help increase the flying hours and aircraft 
utilization at each FTO and lead to faster completion of the CPL requirements. 
e) India's largest flying academy - Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) at 
Amethi (Uttar Pradesh) - has been permitted to carry out pilot training in Gondia 
(Maharashtra) and Kalaburagi (Karnataka) to enhance its flying hours and aircraft utilization, 
which get severely affected during winter months due to visibility issues. 
f) IGRUA has started operating on all weekends and holidays in order to enhance its 
flying hours. Other private FTOs are also encouraged to do so. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
11.2 The Committee notes the reply. It also desires specific information regarding the 
progress of establishment of nine FTOs at five airports and the timeline set for it. The 
Committee also recommends that a space should be allocated at each airport for the FTOs 
to enable them to keep their training equipments. 
 
Aero Club of India 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 291 st Report, that ACI 
should be supported by the Government in retrieval of all such underutilized or unutilized 
aero sports assets provided by it for FTOs and development of aero sports, since they are 
Government property. 
(Para 31.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 ACI, in the past, was given project   specific grants -in-aid by Ministry of Civil 
Aviation for procurement of   trainer aircraft and other   aero sports equipment etc. for 
development of aero sports subject to the   conditions of the grant –in-aid. The order 
sanctioning grant-in-aid   contains the framework for management including   distribution/ 
utilization of assets procured out of Government grants. The conditions for sanction specifies 

52 
 
that ACI was required to take back the aircraft/ equipment in ca se not properly utilized/ 
underutilized and redistribute it to other flying clubs for its optimal utilization.  
12.2 ACI on a specific query by the Ministry of Civil Aviation seeking clarification 
whether the aircraft procured out of Government grants has been utilized as intended and 
whether a mechanism has been put in place to monitor such utilization, had informed vide 
their letter dated 05.04.2021 that re -allotment of assets has been done as and when feasible. 
However, some FTOs to whom ACI allotted the  trainer aircraft have not utilized them 
optimally for the last few years and in spite of best efforts of ACI, it is not able to re -allot 
these aircraft to other clubs, main reason being reluctance of respective state governments in 
the matter. ACI has fur ther informed that it constantly monitors the utilization of the trainer 
aircraft and issues appropriate instructions to the FTOs who are not utilizing/ under utilizing 
the aircraft to hand over the same to other FTOs for optimal utilization.  
12.3 The Ministry had sought clarification in August 2021 observing that there appears an 
absence of concrete mechanism for monitoring of the optimal utilization of aircraft procured 
out of Government grants. A response from ACI is awaited. Action with regard to suppo rt 
from Government in retrieval of unutilized/ underutilized aerosports equipment would be 
taken by this Ministry as and when a request and requisite information as sought by this 
Ministry is received from ACI.  
12.4 The Ministry of Civil Aviation has not provided any grants-in-aid to ACI since 2014 -
15. A new head of account for Promotion/Development of Aero Sports of India has recently 
been opened for the FY 2021 -22 and a token budgetary provision of Rs. 1.00 crore has been 
kept in the B.E. for the said pu rpose. The Ministry has framed a Draft aero -sports policy, 
NASP-2022 for development of aero-sports activities in India. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
12.5 The Committee understands that the Draft aero -sports policy for development of 
aero-sports activities in India has been published for public feedback on 1 st January, 2022. 
The Committee is surprised that while the Ministry is replying to the subject, it has not 
notified that the policy has been framed and put for public circulation. Therefore th e 
Committee observed that the proposal may be brought over for discussion and 
recommendation of the committee prior to the notification at the policy level. The 
Committee also t ook note that such policies, which are being formulated by the 
Government, are approved and thereafter subject to examination of the committee which 
is not a reasonable practice. The C ommittee would like to state that the aero -sports policy 
must be first put up for examination of the Standing Committee prior to seeking its 
recommendation before it is notified as a policy. 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the building of Aero Club of India which 
was used administratively by ACI for promoting Aero Sports and coordinating for Flying 
Training organizations, including giving infrastructure support to FTOs through the gr ants 
by Government of India, should be restored to the Aero Club of India at the earliest for its 

53 
 
smooth functioning. The Board of AAI should restore the building through an appropriate 
resolution, restoring its original status. 
(Para 31.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 There is acute shortage of space in Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan and AAI is optimally 
utilizing the vacated premises for its operations and functional use. Further, land measuring 
17400 sq.ft. (120 ft. x145 ft.) was allotted to Aero Club of India (ACI)a t Safdarjung Airport 
by DGCA for period of 30 years from the date of taking over possession of said land i.e. from 
19.9.1983 at a nominal rate of Re.1/ - per annum for construction of their office complex. 
Agreement between DGCA & Aero Club of India(ACI) wa s executed for the said allotment, 
which expired on 18.9.2013.After formation of National Airports Authority in the year 1985 
by Act of Parliament, all assets of DGCA stood transferred to the National Airports Authority 
and further by the Airports Authority of India Act 1994 all the assets got vested with Airports 
Authority of India by virtue of Section 13 of Parliament Act of 1994.As per the decision of 
the AAI Board in its 107th meeting, held on 21.02.2007,Category -1 Flying Clubs were 
charged @ 10% of the  normal license fee w.e.f.21.02.2007 including Aero Club of India, 
whereas other Private Flying clubs were liable to pay normal rate of licensee fee in addition 
to royalty @13% on gross turnover/as specified in tender document. Due to non -payment of 
outstanding dues, Eviction and Recovery Proceedings were initiated before the Eviction 
Officer, Safdarjung Airport, AAI and Eviction Officer passed the order for eviction on 
16/06/2017 holding Aero Club of India as unauthorized occupant of the said Land/Premise s. 
Aero Club of India challenged the Order dated 16.06.2017 passed by the Eviction Officer, 
AAI in the Court of Hon’ble Delhi High Court vide WP No.5403/2017. The Hon’ble High 
Court of Delhi vide its order dated 04.07.2018 dismissed the case holding the pe titioner (i.e. 
Aero Club of India) as an unauthorized occupation of the subject land.AAI took over the 
possession of the subject land on 13.07.2017 from Aero Club of India. However, an amount 
of Rs.4,35,15,628/- is outstanding against Aero Club of India an d Aero Club of India has not 
paid any amount till date. Petition No.18/2021 was filed before the Hon'ble High Court of 
Delhi for recovery of outstanding dues of AAI and for execution of the Decree/Order dated 
01.07.2017passed by the Eviction Officer, Airports Authority of India, Safdarjung Airport, in 
Recovery Case no. 03 of 2016, for payment of Rs. 6,06,98,603/ - (Rs. 4,35, 15,628/ - + Rs.1, 
71,82,975/-) up to 30.09.2020 along with 12% interest from 01.10.2020 till the actual 
payment is made. Matter is pending in the Hon’ble High Court and the next date of hearing is 
fixed on 14.01.2022. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
13.2 The Committee has taken note of the explanation and it is felt that the real issue has 
not been addressed which relates to issue of allotment of Land by the Ministry of Urban 
Development. The Committee would like to understand that once the nature of allotment 
to the Aero Club of India was in the form of license agreement dated 27.12.1984 which was 
irrecoverable in the nature as specified in section 60 (b) of the Indian Easement Act, 1882. 
The Committee observes that the basic issue of cancellation of allotment of a license plot 
on which the Aero Club of India has  constructed its building as per the norms and the 

54 
 
Committee does not find justifiable reason for its Cancellation.  
 
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 291st Report that urgent, 
substantive steps should be taken to allay the widespread concern/fear regarding serious 
adverse implications of CORSIA on the airlines in India. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to ensure that Indi a’s interests are protected at any cost, keeping in view the vital 
role played by the civil aviation sector in the development and growth of our economy. The 
Committee desires that the concerns of India in this regard, should be raised at the 
diplomatic level, effectively. 
 (Para 33.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 With regard to Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation, it 
is to be submitted that recognizing the fact d at CORSIA has an adverse implications on the 
growing aviation industry of developing nations. MoCA is raising its concern through various 
platforms to ICAO including at council level. Permanent Representative of India to ICAO –
council is also taking this matter forum and working with like minded countries to prevent 
the economic-interests of the developing countries. The next review of CORSIA scheme will 
take place in the next Assembly session in the year 2022 wherein the matter can be raise at 
diplomatic level.  In order to raise this concern, MoCA may take up the matter  with Ministry 
of External Affairs. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
14.2  The Committee stresses upon the need for protecting India’s interests on the 
adverse implication of CORSIA. It approves the proposal of the Ministry to take up the 
matter at diplomatic level through Ministry of External Affairs and hopes that all  efforts 
would be made to bring on board like-minded developing countries, so that a unified effort 
can be made to review the CORSIA scheme in favour of our country.  
 
Cancellation charges 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee expresses its deep con cern that there is no uniformity in the 
cancellation charges levied by the airlines. The Committee emphasizes the need for 
rationalizing the cancellation charges and prescribing an upper limit of cancellation charges 
that can be collected from the passenge rs. The Committee reiterates its recommendation in 

55 
 
this regard, made in its 276th and 291st Reports, requiring the airlines to restrict not more 
than 50% of the base fare as cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge collected 
should be refunded to the passengers on cancellation of tickets. The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry would be able to persuade the airlines for such rationalization in the interest of the 
passengers. 
(Para 39.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 It is submitted that cancellation char ges are not regulated by the Government. With 
regard to cancellation charges are not more than 50% of base fire. However DGCA has issues 
Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) SECTION 3 SERIES M Part 11 titled “Refund of 
Airlines Tickets to passengers of Public  transport undertakings” wherein the following 
provisions in respect of cancellation charge has been laid down as follows: 
● “Cancellation charges must be indicated at the time of booking.”  
● The airline shall refund all statutory taxes and user development fee (UDF)/ Passenger 
Service Fee (PSF) to the passengers in case of cancellation /non –utilisation of tickets 
/ no show this provision shall also be applicable for all type of fares offered including  
promos/ special fares and where the basic fare is non-refundable. 
● Under no circumferences, the airline or its agent shall levy cancellation charge more 
than the basic fare plus fuel surcharge. This will execute any charges levied by the 
travel agent, which have been fully disclosed at the time of booking, It s hall be the 
responsibility of the airline to ensure this through their contacts with travel 
agents/portals. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
15.2  The Committee notes with concern the reply of the Ministry that cancellation 
charges are not regulated by Government, which has resulted in no uniformity in 
cancellation charges levied by different airlines. The Committee feels that it defies logic 
that flights of different airlines on a particular sector having the same starting and 
destination points, and wh ere the duration of the flight is also the same, should have 
different cancellation charges. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
there should be uniform cancellation charges across all airlines.  
 
Cancellation or delaying of flights 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that designated holding 
area should be made available at all airports to accommodate passengers who are stranded 
at the airport due to cancellation or rescheduling of flights.  The Committee impresses upon 
the Ministry to urge upon the airlines to make sure that facilities such as food, water, medical 
help and accommodation are available to stranded passengers. 

56 
 
 (Para 40.2)  
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 In order to ensure appropri ate protection for the air travelers in case of flight 
cancellation, DGCA has issued Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) SECTION 3 Air 
Transport, Series M part IV titled “Facilities to be provided to passengers by airlines due to 
denied boarding, cancellatio n of flights and delays in flights” wherein the provision have 
been specified for compensation /facilitation including meals/snacks for the affected 
passengers. Further, in order to facilitate the passengers, particularly senior citizens expectant 
mothers, passengers with disability, first time travelers etc. DGCA has issued Air Transport 
Circular 02 of 2019 titled “Facilities/courtesies to esteemed travelling public at airports” 
wherein the provision have been specified to protect the travellers against an y form of 
discrimination and to ensure that all esteemed travellers should receive all possible assistance 
during their travel. Further, based on direction of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture in the la st meeting; DGCA was 
requested to communicate to all the airlines/airports for extending necessary facilitation in the 
event of cancellation/delay of flights, as per CAR. Accordingly, DGCA also sensitized to 
airlines & airports. A copy of MoCA’s communication to DGCA is attached at Annexure C. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
16.2  The Committee notes with appreciation that based on the directions of the 
Committee, the Ministry has issued guidelines to all airlines/ airports to extend facilities 
to passengers in case of cancellation or delay of flights. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the ground level implementation of the Ministry’s orders and the number of 
airports and airlines which have implemented it and the details of facilities extended 
and the number of  passengers who have availed the facilities, airport-wise and airlines-
wise.  
 
 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the ‘Accessible India Campaign’ 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee appreciates the sensitivity and empathy s hown by the Ministry, 
towards the genuine needs and concerns of the differently abled people. The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry will be able to fulfill the objective of the campaign to ensure a barrier 
free and conducive travel environment for differently abled people. 
 (Para 41.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Noted. As per RPwD Act 2016, accessibility standards/guidelines are required to be 
notified by Ministry of Civil Aviation. In this regard, ‘Accessibility Standards and Guidelines 
for Civil Aviation’ containing all the details on Accessible Airport Infrastr ucture has been 

57 
 
prepared and placed in public domain for comments/suggestion by stakeholders after due 
consultation with Chief Commissioner of Persons with Disability (CCPD). Recently, 
comments/suggestions from stakeholders have been deliberated and final guidelines are 
expected by year end. Accessibility data for 67 airports has already been uploaded on the 
MIS portal of AIC and data of other airports is being uploaded. Further, AAI has initiated the 
procurement process of Ambulifts at 20 Airports having C ode C or above Aircraft Operation 
wherein aerobridge facility is not available to ensure seamless transfer of Divyang 
passengers. The work order has been awarded for procurement of 20 Ambulift on 
19.02.2021. Ambulifts for two locations (Dehradun & Gorakhpu r Airports) have been 
installed and at remaining 18 are likely to be completed by March, 2022. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
17.2  The Committee notes that ‘Accessibility Standards and Guidelines for Civil 
Aviation’ containing all the details on Accessible Airport Infrastructure has been 
prepared and placed in public domain for comments/suggestion by stakeholders after 
due consultation with Chief Commissioner of  Persons with Disability (CCPD) and that 
comments/suggestions from stakeholders have been deliberated and final guidelines are 
expected by year end. The Committee desires to know the present status of issues of 
guidelines for a ssisting the differently abled people and the timeline set for its 
implementation at all airports.  
 
Inefficiency of hangars 
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee is of the considered view that since the Ministry is taking 
commendable steps to ensure air connectivity to remote areas also, it is an essential corollary 
that well equipped hangars are also built in such places, in order to ensure proper and time 
efficient maintenance of aircrafts and helicopters. 
 (Para 48.1)  
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Noted. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
18.2  The Committee desires to know the plans of the Ministry to build well equipped 
hangars at remote places.   
 
 
 
 

58 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-N i l - 
 
**** 
 
 
  

59 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Airport Infrastructure  
 
The Committee notes that in its reply, the Ministry has only enumerated the provisions of 
the Greenfield Airport Policy, NCAP 2016 and the sources of revenue. However, the 
Ministry has not spelt out the actual airport amenities, infrastructure or plans or land 
allocation for setting up hotels. The Committee desires complete and full details of all 
such actual infrastructure created by the Ministry at all new airports. It also desires to 
know whether plans are made in advance to include such amenities & infr astructure 
during the construction stage of airports.  
(Para 1.2) 
Regional Connectivity Scheme  
 
The Committee notes with dismay that out of 948 valid routes for RCS -UDAN Scheme, 
only 403 routes have been operationalized after elapse of 5 years, since the launch of 
scheme in October, 2016. The Committee also notes that an extension of benefits has been 
granted for a period of one year only to routes completing three years tenure. The 
Committee feels that helping hand should be given to the fledging RCS -UDAN routes 
considering the low number of operationalized routes and adverse impact of Covid -19 
pandemic, which has resulted in lower passenger traffic and therefore, strongly reiterates 
its recommendation that benefits should be extended by another two years,  instead of one 
year as granted by Ministry now. 
(Para 2.3) 
Development, Upgradation and Modernization of Airports 
 
The Committee expresses satisfaction that out of 48 Tourism RCS routes, 31 have been 
operationalized. The Committee desires to know the effo rts made to expeditiously 
operationalise the remaining 17 routes, through renewed efforts and effective 
coordination between the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Tourism to boost the tourism 
potential of iconic destinations.  
(Para 3.2) 
The Committee desires specific details of the State -wise efforts made by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation to improve connectivity of airports and the result of its interaction with 
various stakeholders including States/ UTs.  
(Para 4.2) 
Helicopter operations 
 
The Committee notes that in its reply, the Ministry has only noted the salient features of 
the ‘Policy for promotion of helicopter operations’. The Committee desires to know the 
actual steps taken by the Ministry to ensure the ground level implementation of the policy 

60 
 
in various States, especially the States which do not have the benefit of airport 
connectivity so far. 
(Para 5.2) 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) prices and aviation taxes 
 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that through the Ministry’s effort s, eight States 
have reduced the VAT on ATF substantially. The Committee stresses upon the 
importance of reduced VAT rates on the financial viability of airlines keeping in view the 
negative impact of Covid -19 and urges the Ministry to take up the issue of  VAT rate 
reduction with other State Governments as well.  
(Para 6.2) 
The Committee feels that the Civil Aviation Sector is reeling under the burden of high 
aviation sector taxes on one hand and huge losses due to Covid -19 on the other hand. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that Civil Aviation Sector should be 
considered for priority sector lending as to enable it to get access to funds at cheaper 
rates. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard 
and whether the proposal has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee also desires to know the break -up of the ECLGS 3.0 benefits which have been 
extended to the Civil Aviation Sector.  
(Para 7.2) 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO)  
 
The Committee desires to know the impact of the measures undertaken to support the 
Indian MRO sector and the resultant increase, if any, in MRO services. The Committee 
reiterating its recommendation, stresses upon the urgent need for growth in MRO 
services k eeping in view the existing technical manpower, low labour cost and the 
expected growth in the aviation sector.  
(Para 8.3) 
Krishi Udan 
 
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry on coordination with seven 
other Ministries/ Departments name ly Department of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare; 
Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying; Department of Fisheries; Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries; Department of Commerce; Ministry of Tribal Affairs; and 
Ministry of Development of North -eastern Re gion (DoNER),  to successfully implement 
the Krishi Udan Scheme for transportation of agri -produce. The Committee desires to 
know the progress of plan to create 33% of more of domestic terminals by FY 2023 -24 
and the increase in volume of cold storages at a irports. The Committee would also desire 
to know the status of implementation of e -Kushal (Krishi Udan for Sustainable Holistic 
Agri Logistics) and the result of planned collaboration with the stakeholders.   
(Para 9.3) 
Connectivity to North East and other remote areas 
 
The Committee has time and again stressed upon the need for increasing connectivity at 
inaccessible locations in the NER, especially the Hollongi Airport in Arunachal Pradesh. 

61 
 
The Committee notes that work of a new Greenfield airport at Hollongi is in progress and 
desires to know the status of work completion and the tentative date to operationalise the 
airport. The Committee also stresses upon the need for renewed efforts in development of 
water aerodromes and heliports as it requires less s pace and less capital as compared to 
airports. 
(Para 10.4) 
Shortage of Pilots 
 
The Committee notes the reply. It also desires specific information regarding the progress 
of establishment of nine FTOs at five airports and the timeline set for it. The Commit tee 
also recommends that a space should be allocated at each airport for the FTOs to enable 
them to keep their training equipments. 
(Para 11.2) 
Aero Club of India 
 
The Committee understands that the Draft aero -sports policy for development of aero -
sports activities in India has been published for public feedback on 1 st January, 2022. The 
Committee is surprised that while the Ministry is replying to the subject, it has not notified 
that the policy has been framed and put for public circulation. Therefore the Committee 
observed that the proposal may be brought over for discussion and recommendation of the 
committee prior to the notification at the policy level. The Committee also took note that 
such policies, which are being formulated by the Government, are approved and 
thereafter subject to examination of the committee w hich is not a reasonable practice. The 
Committee would like to state that the aero -sports policy must be first put up for 
examination of the Standing Committee prior to seeking its recommendation before it is 
notified as a policy. 
(Para 12.5) 
 
13.2 The Committee has taken note of the explanation and it is felt that the real issue has 
not been addressed which relates to issue of allotment of Land by the Ministry of Urban 
Development. The Committee would like to understand that once the nature of allotment 
to the Aero Club of India was in the form of license agreement dated 27.12.1984 which was 
irrecoverable in the nature as specified in section 60 (b) of the Indian Easement Act, 1882. 
The Committee observes that the basic issue of cancellation of allotment of  a license plot 
on which the Aero Club of India has constructed its building as per the norms and the 
Committee does not find justifiable reason for its Cancellation.  
(Para 13.2) 
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) 
The Committee stresses upon the need for protecting India’s interests on the adverse 
implication of CORSIA. It approves the proposal of the Ministry to take up the matter at 
diplomatic level through Ministry of External Affairs and hopes that all efforts w ould be 
made to bring on board like -minded developing countries, so that a unified effort can be 
made to review the CORSIA scheme in favour of our country.  
(Para 14.2) 
Cancellation charges 

62 
 
The Committee notes with concern the reply of the Ministry that cancellation charges are 
not regulated by Government, which has resulted in no uniformity in cancellation 
charges levied by different airlines. The Committee feels that it defies logic that fl ights of 
different airlines on a particular sector having the same starting and destination points, 
and where the duration of the flight is also the same, should have different cancellation 
charges. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that there should be uniform 
cancellation charges across all airlines.  
(Para 15.2) 
Cancellation or delaying of flights 
 
The Committee notes with appreciation that based on the directions of the Committee, 
the Ministry has issued guidelines to all airlines/ airports to extend facilities to passengers 
in case of cancellation or delay of flights. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
ground level implementation of the Ministry’s orders and the number of airports and 
airlines which have implemented it and the de tails of facilities extended and the number 
of passengers who have availed the facilities, airport-wise and airlines-wise.  
(Para 16.2) 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the ‘Accessible India Campaign’ 
 
The Committee notes that ‘Accessibility Standards and Guidelines for Civil Aviation’ 
containing all the details on Accessible Airport Infrastructure has been prepared and 
placed in public domain for comments/suggestion by stakeholders after due consultatio n 
with Chief Commissioner of Persons with Disability (CCPD) and that 
comments/suggestions from stakeholders have been deliberated and final guidelines are 
expected by year end. The Committee desires to know the present status of issues of 
guidelines for as sisting the differently abled people and the timeline set for its 
implementation at all airports.  
(Para 17.2) 
Inefficiency of hangars 
 
The Committee desires to know the plans of the Ministry to build well equipped hangars 
at remote places.   
(Para 18.2) 
*** 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

 
  
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st January, 2022 in Committee Room 
- '4', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Dr. Sonal Man Singh 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
10. Shri Margani Bharat 
11. Shri Tapir Gao 
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Shri Prince Raj 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following Reports:- 
 
A.        Draft Action Taken Report on - 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
as contained in its Two Hundred Ninety Third Report on the subject ‘Status of 
Aviation Connectivity in the country’. 
63

 
(ii) *   *   *   * 
(iii) *   *   *   * 
(iv) *   *   *   * 
(v) *   *   *   * 
(vi) *   *   *   * 
B.        *   *   *   * 
(i)         *   *   *   * 
(ii)        *   *   *   * 
(iii)       *   *   *   * 
(iv)       *i   *   *   * 
 
 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
  
                                                           
* Relates to other matters 
64

65

66

67

68

 
Annexure-B 
 
OPERATIONS TO/FROM NORTH-EAST REGION (SUMMER SCHEDULE 2021) 
Airline Routing Frequency/Week 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Air India 
Kolkata-Dibrugarh-Kolkata 5 
Kolkata-Dimapur-Kolkata 6 
Kolkata-Imphal -Aizawl & VV 3 
Kolkata-Imphal -Kolkata & VV 2 
Delhi-Guwahati-Imphal & VV 7 
Kolkata-Imphal -Aizawl -Kolkata 1 
Kolkata-Aizawl-Kolkata 5 
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata 7 
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata 4 
Delhi-Guwahati-Delhi 7 
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata 14 
Delhi-Agartala-Delhi 7 
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata 7 
Alliance 
Air 
Kolkata-Gauwahati-Dimapur-Imphal & vv 7 
Kolkata-Lilabari-Kolkata 7 
Kolkata-Gauwahati-Passighat-Tezpur-Gauwahati-Kolkata 3 
 
 
Go Air 
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata 14 
Delhi-Guwahati-Delhi 14 
Kolkata-Bagdorga-Kolkata 7 
Delhi-Bagdogra-Delhi 7 
Delhi-Bagdogra-Guwahati-Delhi 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SpiceJet 
Bangalore-Bagdogra 7 
Bagdogra-Bangalore 7 
Mumbai-Bagdogra 3 
Bagdogra-Mumbai 3 
Kolkata-Bagdogra 7 
Bagdogra-Kolkata 7 
Delhi-Bagdogra 14 
Bagdogra-Delhi 14 
Bagdogra-Chennai 3 
Chennai-Bagdogra 3 
Mumbai-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Mumbai 7 
Delhi-Guwahati 14 
Guwahati-Delhi 14 
Guwahati-Jaipur 7 
Jaipur-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Chennai 7 
Chennai-Guwahati 7 
69

 
 Guwahati-Patna 7 
Patna-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Pakyong 7 
Pakyong-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Durgapur 7 
Durgapur-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Varanasi 7 
Varanasi-Guwahati 7 
 
Vistara 
Bagrdogra-Dibrugarhrugarh-Bagdogra 7 
Delhi-Bagdogra-Delhi 7 
Delhi-Guwahati-Delhi 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indigo 
Ahmedabad-Bagdogra 7 
Bagdogra-Ahmedabad 6 
Bangalore-Bagdogra 7 
Bagdogra-Bangalore 7 
Mumbai-Bagdogra 7 
Bagdogra-Mumbai 7 
Kolkata-Bagdogra 14 
Bagdogra-Kolkata 14 
Delhi-Bagdogra 21 
Bagdogra-Delhi 21 
Guwahati-Bagdogra 7 
Bagdogra-Guwahati 8 
Hyderabad-Bagdogra 7 
Bagdogra-Hyderabad 7 
Bagdogra-Chennai 7 
Chennai-Bagdogra 7 
Kolkata-Shillong 6 
Shillong-Kolkata 6 
Imphal-Shillong 3 
Shillong-Imphal 3 
Agartala-Shillong 3 
Shillong-Agartala 3 
Silchar-Shillong 3 
Shillong-Silchar 3 
Aizawl-Kolkata 3 
Kolkata-Aizawl 3 
Aizawl-Delhi 3 
Delhi-Aizawl 3 
Aizawl-Guwahati 3 
Guwahati-Aizawl 3 
Aizawl-Agartala 3 
Agartala-Aizawl 3 
Kolkata-Jorhat 7 
70

 
 Jorhat-Kolkata 7 
Guwahati-Jorhat 4 
Jorhat-Guwahati 4 
Kolkata-Dimapur 14 
Dimapur-Kolkata 14 
Delhi-Dimapur 3 
Dimapur-Delhi 3 
Dibrugarh-Dimapur 7 
Dimapur-Dibrugarh 7 
Bangalore-Silchar 4 
Silchar-Bangalore 4 
Kolkata-Silchar 7 
Silchar-Kolkata 7 
Guwahati-Silchar 7 
Silchar-Guwahati 7 
Bangalore-Agartala 7 
Agartala-Bangalore 7 
Kolkata-Agartala 49 
Agartala-Kolkata 49 
Delhi-Agartala 7 
Agartala-Delhi 7 
Guwahati-Agartala 14 
Agartala-Guwahati 14 
Imphal-Agartala 7 
Agartala-Imphal 7 
Guwahati-Ahmedabad 1 
Bangalore-Guwahati 14 
Guwahati-Bangalore 14 
Mumbai-Guwahati 14 
Guwahati-Mumbai 14 
Kolkata-Guwahati 35 
Guwahati-Kolkata 35 
Delhi-Guwahati 28 
Guwahati-Delhi 28 
Dibrugarh-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Dibrugarh 7 
Guwahati-Hyderabad 7 
Hyderabad-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Imphal 7 
Imphal-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Lucknow 7 
Lucknow-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Chennai 14 
71

 
 Chennai-Guwahati 14 
Guwahati-Patna 6 
Patna-Guwahati 6 
Bangalore-Dibrugarh 3 
Dibrugarh-Bangalore 3 
Kolkata-Dibrugarh 14 
Dibrugarh-Kolkata 14 
Delhi-Dibrugarh 14 
Dibrugarh-Delhi 14 
Kolkata-Imphal 14 
Imphal-Kolkata 14 
Delhi-Imphal 7 
Imphal-Delhi 7 
 
 
 
 
 
Air Asia 
Kolkata-Bagdogra 7 
Delhi-Bagdogra 7 
Delhi-Guwahati-Imphal 7 
Kochi-Delhi-Guwahati 7 
Guwahati-Imphal-Delhi 7 
Delhi-Guwahati 7 
Srinagar-Delhi-Bagdogra 7 
Bagdogra-Delhi-Pune 7 
Bangalore-Bagdogra 7 
Bangalore-Guwahati 21 
Kolkata-Guwahati 4 
Flybig Guwahati-Rupsi-Kolkata &VV 4 
Guwahati-Agartala-Dibrugarh & VV 3 
Total 1314 
 
72

73