Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadrapada , 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDREDTH REPORT
Development of Tourism, National Highways and Water
Transport in Kerala and Cochin Shipyard Limited
REPORT NO. 
200
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th August, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

59
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDREDTH REPORT
Development of Tourism, National Highways and Water
Transport in Kerala and Cochin Shipyard Limited
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th August, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—34
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ............................... 35—43
6. A NNEXURES (I&II) ............................................................................................................. 45—52
7. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 5 3—58

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
12. Yogi Adityanath
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
17. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
18. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
19. Shri S. Pakkirappa
20. Shri Prabodh Panda
21. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
23. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
24. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
25. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Rakesh Singh
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
29. Shri K. Sudhakaran
30. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, do hereby present on its behalf this Two Hundredth Report  on ‘Development
of Tourism, National Highways and Water Transport in Kerala and Cochin Shipyard Limited’.
2. Kerala, with its uniqueness has become one of the major popular tourist destinations of the
world. The tourism industry’s contribution to the state’s economy is also commendable. However,
a need was evident to channalise Kerala’s tourism potential into a customized revenue harnessing
source without disturbing natural environment and by enhancing the cultural integrity of local
people. The Committee, in continuation to its special focus on promotion of Tourism in various
regions of India, took up the study visit to a few of tourist destinations in Kerala i.e., Kochi,
Munnar and Thekkady, between 24
th to 31 st May, 2013. The Committee made similar studies
previously on North-East region and Jammu and Kashmir.
3. The Committee examined various issues such as Cruise, Wellness, Medical, Wildlife, Tea
and Eco tourism of Kerala, Spice route and Muziris heritage projects, Rationalization of Inter-State
tourist permits, Heavy taxation, Comprehensive waste management, National Highways issues, River
tourism and linking of ports on NW3, IWT connectivity to ICTT. The Committee noted the
difficulties in achieving these objectives viz., Non-availability of Visa-on arrival, Promoting of
tourist destinations of Kerala nationally and internationally, Limited air connectivity, Maintenance and
construction of national highways, Rail-road-waterway linkages, Maintenance dredging, etc.
4. The Committee also took up the study of Cochin Shipyard Limited and examined the
challenges it is facing in Shipbuilding and Ship repair sectors.
5. The Committee expresses its gratitude to the officers of the Ministry of Tourism, Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways, Ministry of Shipping, National Highways Authority of India,
Inland Waterway Authority of India, Cochin Shipyard and Officers of State Government of Kerala,
Tour-Travel and Hotelier Associations of the State and others for their cooperation in furnishing the
required feedback and information in connection with the examination of the subject and also for
making valuable suggestions for improving the tourism scenario in these States.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 23
rd August, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
23 August,  2013 Department-related Parliamentary
1 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AD Amphibian Dredger
ASI Archaeological Survey of India
AYUSH Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy
BOT Build, Operate and Transfer
BPCL Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited
CAD Computer-aided Design
CALA Central Authority of Land Acquisition
CAM Computer-Aided Manufacturing
CDs Compact Disks
CFA Central Financial Assistance
CIFNET Central Institute of Fisheries, Nautical and Engineering Training
CISF Central Industrial Security Force
CSEZ Cochin Special Economic Zone
CSL Cochin Shipyard Limited
DCI Dredging Corporation of India
DPP Defence Procurement Policy
DTVs Domestic Tourist Visits
EDC Eco-Development Committees
EXIM Export-Import
FACT The Fertilizer and Chemicals Travancore Limited
FAM Familiarization Tours
FITUR International Tourism Trade Fair
FSI Fisheries Survey of India
FTVs Foreign Tourist Visits
GRSE Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited
GSI Geological Survey of India
GSL Goa Shipyard Limited, Goa
HPCL Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited
HSL Hindustan Shipyard Limited
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturers
PAP Project Affected Persons
PA TA Pacific Asia Travel Association India Chapter
PSU Public Sector Undertaking
PTR Periyar Tiger Reserve
(iv)

R&R Rehabilitation and Resettlement
ROW Right of Way
SALUs S tate Land Acquisition Units
SCI Shipping Corporation of India
TEUs Twenty Foot Equivalent Units
TRIBON Naval Architecture Programme Originally Developed by Kockum Computer System
TVOA T ourism Visa on Arrival
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization
USP Unique Selling Point
V A T Value Added Tax
V oA Visa-on-Arrival
(v)

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
TOURISM IN KERALA
Kerala is slender strip of land in the southern tip of Indian subcontinent. Beautiful and
benign, this Indian state lies along a sun drenched coastline flanked by the Arabian Sea on the West
and mountains of the Western Ghats on the east. Sun blanched, white seashore, endless beaches,
incessant blue waves mostly clam but sometimes boisterous clamouring and vanishing among white
splashes, green groves of coconuts just stop short and border the beaches with frills. Lurking in
the backdrop a network of lagoons and backwaters, boats and country crafts moving along, quite
a lot of rivers and countless rivulets flowing through hills and paddy fields of the midland,
emptying themselves into the backwater, cascading delicately down the hills to the golden coasts
covered by verdant coconut and spice groves and thick forests and the far off dark blue
mountains. This is what the eyes meet about Kerala.
2. With the Arabian Sea in the west, the Western Ghats towering 500-2700 m in the east and
networked by 44 rivers, Kerala enjoys unique geographical features that have made it one of the
most sought after tourist destinations in Asia. An equable climate, a long shoreline with serene
beaches, tranquil stretches of emerald backwaters, lush hill stations and exotic wildlife, magnificent
waterfalls, sprawling plantations and paddy fields, ayurvedic health holidays, enchanting art forms,
magical festivals, historic and cultural monuments, an exotic cuisine... All of which offer a unique
experience. Its unique culture and traditions, coupled with its varied demography, has made Kerala
one of the most popular tourist destinations in the world. The tourism industry is a major
contributor to the state’s economy. The vital statistics of the State’s economy reveal that it has
a GDP growth rate of 9%; the revenue generated from Tourism in 2012 is Rs. 20430 crore
showing a growth of 7.32% over the previous year; Foreign Exchange Earnings in 2012–
Rs. 4571.69 crore (growth of 8.28% over the previous year); Employs about 12 lakh persons, etc.
3. Due to its unique climatic conditions, cultural diversities and natural advantages, Kerala was
able to transform itself into one of the prime tourist destinations in India. The tag line “Kerala-
God’s Own Country” was adopted in its tourism promotions and became a global superbrand.
Kerala is regarded as one of the destinations with the highest brand recall. Kerala is an established
tourist destination for both Indians and non-Indians alike. Kerala is famous especially for its
ecotourism initiatives, which focuses on the local culture, wilderness adventures, volunteering and
personal growth of the local population. Efforts are taken to minimize the adverse effects of
traditional tourism on the natural environment, and enhance the cultural integrity of local people.
4. The Government’s New Tourism Policy, 2012 envisages to ensure quality visitor experience,
focus on benefits for the community from tourism, create enabling environment for investment,
market Kerala as a visible global brand in domestic and international markets and to develop quality
human resources in tourism and hospitality. The materialization of these ideal objectives are,
however, mired with growth related challenges viz., availability of Visa-on-Arrival (V oA) service at
only two airports in Kerala (Thiruvananthapuram and Kochi); Applicability of V oA to tourists only
from 11 countries (Japan, Singapore, Finland, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Philippines, Cambodia,
Laos, Vietnam, Myanmar and Indonesia); Kerala is also competing with Asian countries like
Maldives, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, etc; Promotion of international destinations aggressively by the
International Tourism Boards in India; Seasonality factor – limited occupancy during off-season;

2
Non-widening of the geographical spread especially Western Europe, Middle East, Scandinavia, etc;
Infrastructure Development (Regular Road Maintenance and Basic amenities); Cleanliness and
Hygiene; Waste Management, Limited air connectivity to key cities in India and European sectors,
etc.
5. To look into these aspects relating to tourism in Kerala, the Committee decided to take up
the issue relating to development of tourism in the State in detail for consideration and report. The
Committee conducted on-the-spot study and visited Kochi, Munnar and Thekkady between 24
th to
31st May, 2013. The Committee had detailed interaction with the representatives of travel, tour,
transport and hoteliers associations and other stakeholders in the private sector as well as with the
Ministries of Tourism, Road Transport and Highways, Shipping and organizations like Cochin Port
Trust, Cochin Ship Yard Ltd., Inland Waterways Authority of India, National Highways Authority
of India and the Tourism Department and PWD of Government of Kerala and concerned officials
of the State Government. It also heard various stakeholders of the Tea Industry.
6. During the deliberations, the Ministry of Tourism informed the Committee that the
development and promotion of tourism is primarily the responsibility of the respective State
Government/Union Territory (UT) Administration. The Ministry of Tourism functions as the nodal
agency for the development of tourism in the country. It plays a crucial role in coordinating and
supplementing the efforts of the State/Union Territory Governments, catalyzing private investment,
strengthening promotional and marketing efforts and in providing trained manpower resources. It
provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for tourism infrastructure development projects
identified in consultation with them, subject to availability of funds, inter-se-priority and adherence
to Scheme Guidelines.
Tourist Arrivals
7. Kerala encompasses only 1.18% of the country’s land but attracted 1,00,76,854 domestic
tourist arrivals in 2012 (recording a growth of 7.41% over the previous year) and 7,93,696
international tourist arrivals in 2012 (a growth of 8.28% over the previous year). The data on
Domestic Tourist Visits (DTVs) and Foreign Tourist Visits (FTVs) to Kerala for the last 5 years
is as under:–
Year DTVs FTVs
2007 6642941 515808
2008 7591250 598929
2009 7789378 548737
2010 8595075 659265
2011 (Provisional) 9381455 732985
Tourism Projects in Kerala
8. Details were also provided of the tourism development projects/Centrally Sponsored
Schemes sanctioned during last three years viz., 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13, projects submitted
for revalidation during 2013-14 and Status of projects prioritized for the year 2013-2014. The
tabulated data is given in Annexure-I.
9. Development of Muziris Circuit Project, Development of Munnar into a tourist destination,
Development of Cruise Passenger Facilitation Centre at Cochin Port, Kochi, Development of
Backwater Circuit in Alappuzha, etc. are some of the projects financed by the Ministry of Tourism.

3
Tourist Circuits identified for development
10. The Committee was informed that the following circuits have been identified by the National
Level Consultant (NLC) for integrated development during the Twelfth Five year Plan:–
(i) Northern Regional Circuit : Kozhikode – Malappuram – Nilambur – Wayanad – Kannur-
Bekal – Kozhikode.;
(ii) Central Regional Circuits : Kochi-Kumarakom-Vagamon- Thekkady-Munnar – Kalady –
Thrissur – Guruvayoor – Palakkad – Kochi (or Kozhikode);
(iii) Southern Regional Circuit : Thiruvananthapuram – Kovalam – Ponmudi – Thenmala –
Varkala – Kollam – Pathanamittha – Alappuzha – Kochi.
Cruise Tourism
11. It was informed that ‘Cruise Shipping’ is one of the most dynamic and the fastest growing
components of the leisure industry worldwide. It is fast emerging as a new marketable product. India
with its vast and beautiful coastline, undisturbed idyllic islands, rich historical and cultural heritage,
can be a fabulous tourist destination for cruise tourists. With the Indian economy developing at a
steady pace, middle class growing in number and increasingly possessing disposable incomes which
could be spent on leisure activities, Indians could also take on cruise shipping in a big way.
12. The Cruise Shipping Policy of the Ministry of Shipping was approved by the Government
of India on 26
th June, 2008. The objectives of the policy are to make India an attractive cruise
tourism destination with the state-of-the-art infrastructure and other facilities at various parts of the
country to attract the right segment of the foreign tourists to cruise shipping in India and to
popularize cruise shipping with Indian tourists.
Cruise Tourism Facilities at Cochin Port
13. Tourists visiting Cochin Port essentially arrive by luxury cruise liners and the Cochin Port
has made available necessary hardware (cruise terminal infrastructure) and software (single window
facilitation centre) to ensure that the tourists are not put to any hassles while they are at Kochi
and make most of their visit. The details of the facilities available to tourists at Cochin Port are
as follows:–
· A dedicated cruise terminal ‘Samudrika’ has been created admeasuring 1500 sq.m. This
terminal is fully air-conditioned and is equipped with modern amenities such as X-Ray
scanner, Customs and Immigration Counters, rest room, waiting lounge, etc under one
roof. This terminal has been built with the financial assistance provided by the Ministry
of Tourism and the Kerala Tourism Department.
· This terminal is at close proximity of the BTP berth which has been identified as the
dedicated berth to handle cruise ships upto 250m LOA (Length Overall).
· Cochin Port has dedicated cruise facilitation cell which is a single window facility
intended to address the requirements of cruise liners and tourists, tour operators,
vessel agents, tour guides, taxi-auto-rickshaw pre-paid counter, money exchange, etc.
· Cochin Port is ably supported by the Cochin Customs, Port Health Organisation,
Tourism Police and Local Police, CISF and Immigration Department in providing a
swift and convenient service to the cruise liners/tourists, in order to ensure that the
tourists visiting the Port are not put to any inconvenience and they can make most of
their short stay at the port.

4
· Cruise vessels are accorded walk-in priority berthing and neat and clean berth is made
available (there are times when the Port receives more than one cruise ship at the Port)
· CISF provide security to the cruise vessel both on land and water side during the stay
of the vessel at the Port. The cruise Terminal is under camera surveillance to increase
safety profile.
· A dedicated boat terminal has been built to exclusively cater to the cruise passengers
opting for backwater boat ride.
· There is a marina within the port limits operated by Kerala Tourism Development
Corporation where luxury yachts visit. This has been developed through Central
Financial Assistance provided by Ministry of Tourism.
14. The Committee visited the dedicated Cruise Terminal ‘Samudrika’ built at the
Cochin Port. Though non-operational during the time of Committee’s visit, it was built for
providing all the amenities for cruise passengers viz. , Immigration, Customs, waiting
lounge, rest rooms, facilitation cell, security, dedicated boat terminal, Marina for luxury
yachts etc. The Committee feels that this is the potential area of tourism development for
Cochin as well as other ports. The Committee recommends that the cruise potential of
Cochin Port may be included in the ‘Incredible India Campaign’ to give maximum publicity
to attract cruise tourists. Further, the Committee emphasizes that more training/workshops
should be organised by concerned ports to train the employees/agents in cruise tourism so
that the ports are equipped to deal in this new opportunity. Further, Government can
contemplate to extend this new avenue to other major ports as well.
Development of Backwater Tourism in Kerala (River Cruise)
15. Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned an amount of Rs. 4762.48 lakh to the Government of
Kerala for the Development of Back Water Circuit in Alappuzha as a Mega Circuit in Kerala. The
various components of work covered under this project include the development of House Boat
Terminals, Development of night halt terminals, development of micro destination connected with
the circuit, development of beaches connected with the circuit, scheme for development of
Alappuzha town as the central destination of the circuit and establishing sewerage treatment plants.
16. The Committee notes that Alappuzha  and the adjoining regions have great potential
in backwater cruise tourism. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India should give all out efforts to provide adequate infrastructure for
backwater tourism and provide the necessary finances for the purpose.
Wellness Tourism
17. Wellness Tourism is about travelling for the primary purpose of achieving, promoting or
maintaining maximum health and a sense of well-being. It is about being pro-active in discovering
new ways to promote a healthier, less stressful lifestyle or finding balance in one’s life. Health
Tourism holds immense potential in India. The Indian systems of medicine, that is Ayurveda, Yoga,
Panchakarma, Rejuvenation Therapy, etc, are among the most ancient systems of medical treatment
in the world. Kerala is termed the ‘Home’ of Ayurveda and wellness tourism has been the USP of
the State. In order to address the issue concerning the mushrooming of wellness centres, the
guidelines for accreditation of wellness centres were developed by National Board for Accreditation
of Hospitals and Healthcare Providers (NABH) in consultation with the Department of Ayurveda,
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (AYUSH) and released during the workshop
on wellness tourism organized by the Ministry of Tourism in February, 2011. The Ministry of

5
Tourism organized a sensitization workshop in August, 2011 in Kochi to encourage wellness centres
to adopt the accreditation. The Government of Kerala also has a system of approving the wellness
centres.
18. The Ministry of Tourism also provides financial assistance under the Market Development
Assistance Scheme (MDA) to approved wellness centres i.e., representatives of wellness centres
accredited by NABH or the State Governments. The MDA assistance is for participation in medical/
tourism fair, medical conferences, wellness conferences, wellness fairs and allied road shows.
Under the scheme, the following Wellness Tourism Service Providers from Kerala have availed
support:–
· Amala Ayurvedic Hospital and Research Centre, Thrissur has participated in FITUR,
International Tourism Trade Fair, Madrid held from 30 January – 3 February, 2013.
· M/s. Rajah Beach Ayurveda Hospital, Akalad, Thrissur has participated in PATA India
Chapter Road Show – 2012 at Auckland, Sydney and Melbourne Held from October
1-5, 2012.
19. In addition, the steps taken by the Government to promote medical/health tourism include
promotion in overseas markets through road shows, participation in travel marts and production of
brochures, CDs, films and other publicity material. Wellness tourism has been specifically promoted
at various international platforms such as World Travel Mart, London, ITB, Asia, Arabian Travel
Mart, Dubai, PATA India Chapter Road Show, Australia in October, 2012, etc. Yoga/Ayurveda/
Wellness have been promoted in the past years in the print, electronic, internet and outdoor medium
under the Ministry of Tourism’s “Incredible India Campaign”.
20. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Central/State Governments
for providing wellness tourism and accreditation of wellness centres. The responsibility of
the Government and stakeholders adhering to the conditionalities speaks volumes about the
importance being accorded to tourists’ safety and clean business ethics by the tourism
fraternity in Kerala. Further, the drive undertaken for providing financial assistance under
the Market Development Assistance Scheme (MDA) and giving exposure to Wellness
Tourism Service Providers shows the pro-local people and pro-entrepreneurial approach. The
Committee would like the State/Central Governments and all concerned to come up with
such solution-providing ideas so that the wellness tourism in Kerala is developed as brand
of its own to attract tourists from world over.
Medical Tourism and Medical Visa
21. Ayurveda is one of the well developed disciplines in the State of Kerala and it is practised
everywhere. Qualified doctors are plenty; the potential is immense. Therefore, Ayurveda and
wellness tourism has great potential. It should be explored to the maximum.
22. One of the emerging tourism products in the state of Kerala is Medical Tourism. But
large scale support from the Union Government is required to develop this potential. There
have to be efforts from the Ministry of Tourism to promote Medical Tourism including
Ayurveda, Sidha, Unani etc. in association with Kerala Tourism. The issues relating to
issuing Medical Visa also need to be addressed.
Wildlife and Eco-tourism
23. The Committee was informed that the growing tourist demand is already exerting pressure
on our natural and other resources. Unless, attention is paid now for developing tourism in
ecologically sustainable manner and maintaining environmental integrity, it may cause irreparable

6
damage. Ecotourism (also known as ecological tourism) is responsible travel to fragile, pristine and
usually protected areas that strives to be low impact and (often) small scale. It purports to educate
the traveller, provide funds for ecological conservation, directly benefit the economic development
and political empowerment of local communities and foster respect for different cultures and for
human rights. Eco-tourism is held as important by those who participate in it so future generations
may experience aspects of the environment relatively untouched by human intervention.
24. The Ministry has been laying a lot of stress on maintenance of environmental integrity
considering the importance of developing tourism in an ecologically sustainable manner. The
Ministry recognizes the following cardinal principles for development of ecotourism:–
· It should involve the local community and lead to the overall economic development
of the area.
· It should identify the likely conflicts between resource use for eco-tourism and the
livelihood of local inhabitants and attempt to minimize such conflicts.
· The type and scale of eco-tourism development should be compatible with the
environment and socio-cultural characteristics of the local community; and
· It should be planned as a part of the overall area development strategy, guided by an
integrated land-use plan while avoiding inter-sectoral conflicts and ensuring sectoral
integration associated with commensurate expansion of public services.
25. Development, promotion and implementation of tourism projects including eco-tourism
projects at identified tourism spots, are primarily the responsibility of State Government/Union
Territory (U.T) Administrations concerned. The Ministry of Tourism, grants Central Financial
Assistance to projects promoting eco-tourism, to the State Governments/UT Administrations in
consultation with them, subject to availability of funds, utilization of funds sanctioned earlier, inter-
se priority and adherence to Scheme Guidelines. Details of the two eco-tourism projects in Kerala
for which Central Financial Assistance was provided are as follows:
Year Name of project Amount sanctioned
(Rs.in lakh)
2007-08 Development of Eco-Tourism Programme in Gavi, 20.05
Pathanamthitta District.
2008-09 Malabar Mangrove Eco-Tourism circuit in 349.36
Malappuram, Kozhikode, Kannur and Kasargode Districts
26. The Committee visited Gavi Eco-tourism Project conceived and implemented by the Kerala
Forest Development Corporation Ltd. (KFDC) in the reserved forests of the Periyar Tiger Reserve.
The Committee was impressed by the institutional mechanism under the aegis of Eco-Development
Committees (EDC), wherein the partnership of forest dependent communities. The Forest
Department has successfully developed a replicable working model of managing natural resources
for livelihood improvement. The Committee also observed that the visitation is managed within the
carrying capacity of the forest location, a task that poses challenges elsewhere.
27. The cardinal principles for development of eco-tourism are really laudable. The
Committee appreciates the efforts of Kerala Government in maintenance of environmental
integrity and development of tourism in an ecologically sustainable manner. During its visit
to Eravikulam National Park, Munnar, Periyar Wild Life Sanctuary and Gavi National Park,
Thekkady, the Committee got a first-hand experience of the functioning module as to how

7
the pristine beauty of the locations were maintained and development of eco-tourism’s way
was paved.
Thekkady
28. Snuggled in the Western Ghats, one of the world’s richest bio-diversity spot, is the
fascinating natural wildlife sanctuary of Thekkady—the protected Periyar Tiger Reserve (PTR).
Noted for its geomorphology, diversity of wildlife and scenic beauty, the reserve attract visitors
from all over the world. The very sound of the word “Thekkady” conjures up images of elephants,
unending terrain of hill and spice-scented plantations. Periyar forests of Thekkady is one of finest
wildlife reserves in India and spread across the entire district of Idukki are picturesque planations
and hill towns that hold great opportunity for treks and mountains walks.
29. The splendid artificial lake formed by the Mullaperiyar Dam across the Periyar River adds
to the charm of the park. This is the only sanctuary in India where one can have the unique
experience of viewing wildlife at close quarters from the safety of a boat. The greatest attractions
of Periyar, however, are the herds of wild elephants that come down to play in the lake.
30. Periyar Tiger reserve with an area of 925 Km
2 is the real representative of the Western
Ghats and has all the elements of tropical biodiversity with high species riches and endemism. It
is the oldest and largest protected area (PA) in Kerala, zealously guarded and efficiently managed.
Originally constituted as Nellkampetty Game Sanctuary in 1934, it evolved as Periyar Wildlife
Sanctuary in 1950 and Periyar Tiger Reserve in 1978. Through the implementation of India eco-
development projects from 1996 to 2004, PTR has emerged as a national role model for
participatory conservation.
31. PTR is located in Idukki, Pathanamthitta and Kottayam Revenue districts of Kerala State.
PTR has undulating terrain with a chain of rolling hills and forested valleys. The highest peak is
Kottamala (2019m.) and the lowest elevation is 100 m at Pambavalley. Most of the area lies
between 750m-1500m.
32. PTR is one of the single largest compact forest blocks in the Southern Western Ghats and
plays a key role in maintaining regional connectivity with other forest tracts. It forms one of the
richest assemblages of evergreen forests in the entire Western Ghats which is rich in biodiversity
with a high degree of endemism. Rivers originating from the forested tracts of PTR, namely,
Periyar, Pamba and Azhutha form the lifeline for millions of people of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. The
unique man-made Periyar Lake (26 Km
2) is an important water source for Tamil Nadu for
irrigation, drinking and power generation. PTR is a globally renowned tourism destination. Sighting
of wild animals in close quarter from the boats is a memorable experience for tourists. Apart from
providing sizeable revenue to the State Government, the livelihood of thousands of people is also
dependent on tourism in Periyar. The Lord Ayyappa shrine at Sabarimala and Mangaladevi Shrine
on the northern boundary of PTR are the two temples of enormous religious significance, attracting
millions of pilgrims annually.
33. The presence of diverse animal groups with as many as 63 species of mammals, 323
species of birds, 44 species of reptiles, 28 species of amphibians, 38 species of fishes and 160
species of butterflies make this part of the world extremely rich in faunal diversity. Elephant, Gaur,
Tiger, Panther, Sambar, Barking deer, Wild boar, Sloth bear, Nilgiri langur, Lion-tailed macaque,
Otter, Malabar giant squirrel, Wild dog. etc. are the major mammals. Fourteen endemic species of
brids have been reported from Southern Western Ghats including the Malabar grey hornbill (Tockus
griseus), the Nilgiri wood pigeon (Columba elphinstoni) Bluewinged parakeet (Psittakula
columboides), Crimson throated barbet (Megalaina rubricapila) Rufous babbler (Turdoides
sabrafous) and Whitebreasted laughing thrush (C. Cachinnas). The Black and orange flycatcher

8
(Muscicapa nigrorulfa), Nilgiri flycatcher (M. albicaudata), Whitebellied blue flycatcher (M.pallipes),
Broadtailed grass warbler (Schoericola plotyura) Nilgiri pipit (Anthus nilghirienses) Whitebellied
shortwing (Brachypteryx major) and small sunbird (Nectarinia minima) are also found in the
Reserve. PTR is the only home for seven fresh water fishes namely Nemacheilus menonii,
Nemacheilus periyarensis, Puntius ophicephalus, Hypselobarbus micropogon periyarensis,
Lepidopygopsis tyus, Crossocheilus periyarensis and Garra periyarensis.
34. The tribal communities of the Reserve include Mannans, Paliyans, Uralis, Ulladans,
Malampandarams and Malarayans. Around 58 villages are situated on the fringes of the Tiger
Reserve. It is estimated that around 2.25 lakhs of people live within the 2 km radius of the Tiger
Reserve. These communities have partial or complete dependency on the forests. About 22 estates
situated along the boundary of Tamil Nadu harbour nearly 3000 labourers, with more than 1000
of them having been identified as dependent on the Tiger Reserve for various purposes. To
empower these communities and to reduce the dependencies on forests, various eco-development
activities were launched in the mid 1990s. Now due to these initiatives, PTR has become national
model in participatory management of Protected Areas.
35. The Committee interacted with the stakeholders, hotelier associations, representatives of the
Government of Kerala and Ministry of Tourism, Government of India at Thekkady.
36. One of the main problems brought before the Committee was that Thekkady has saturated
itself and there is no space for further development. The stakeholders demanded that there are
umpteen number of satellite areas which can be developed as tourist destinations but the
Government is not doing much to develop those areas. Another problem brought before the
Committee was that there is lack of parking space in the Periyar Sanctuary. And due to the
overcrowding of vehicles inside the sanctuary the pollution levels are increasing and there are lot
of disturbance. As a suggestion, the stakeholders informed the Committee that there is a need to
restrict the vehicle movement inside the Periyar sanctuary.
37. There is heavy rush for getting tickets for boat ride as the number of tickets are limited
due to the limited number of boats.
38. Waste management in and around Kumily is another problem the stakeholders are facing:
Sewage water from Kumily town and surrounding areas are discharged in to the Periyar Tiger
Reserve (Periyar Lake.)
39. Thekkady is the Centre of spice plantations and there is a need to develop a botanical
garden to exhibit all the spice plants available in the region to give a first hand experience to the
tourists. Yet another requirement of the region was a Musuem which can be a repository of
information on all the social, cultural, traditional and historical aspects of the region. The Museum
should educate the visitors.
40. On the basis of interaction with various stakeholders and its first-hand experience,
the Committee feels that various satellite towns adjoining Thekkady have immense tourism
potential. In view of the fact that Thekkady and the adjoining Kumily towns are already
saturated, the Committee emphasises the need to develop the satellite towns/villages as
tourist destinations. The Committee further recommends that the Union Ministry of
Tourism and Government of Kerala should cooperate with each other to ensure that satellite
villages of Thekkady are provided with adequate infrastructure to develop as tourist
destinations.
41. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to establish a full fledged museum
in Thekkady to have first hand experience to the tourists about the social, cultural,
traditional and historical aspects of the region. This will give authentic information on the

9
people and culture of the area. The Committee also recommends that museums should be
established at all the tourist destination.
42. The Committee was told that there is a state-owned vegetable farm near Kumily. The
Committee recommends that a Botanical Garden may be established in Kumily, if need be,
the State owned farm may be converted into a Botanical Garden.
43. The Committee further recommends that vehicular traffic may be restricted inside
Periyar Wild Life Sanctuary. The present parking area which is inside the forest area may
be shifted out of the sanctuary. Only the battery operated vehicles may be permitted from
the parking lot to the sanctuary/boat landing area. At Eravikulam National Park, Munnar,
the Committee observed that battery operated vehicles are used for transporting tourists to
the National Park. The same model can be adopted in Periyar Sanctuary also.
44. The Committee also recommends that comprehensive waste management system may
be introduced in Kumily and Thekkady. At no stage the sewage may be allowed to be
dumped in the Periyar Tiger Reserve (Periyar lake). The Government of Kerala and the
Ministry of Tourism Government of India should take initiative in this regard.
45. The Committee also recommends that adequate number of modern boats which are
pollution free and less noisy may be provided at the Periyar sanctuary so that the wild life
is not disturbed. This will also avoid the mad rush for boat tickets. Ministry of Tourism
should cooperate in this regard.
46. The Committee was informed that the tourists were being charged exorbitantly and
the authorities of Periyar Tiger Reserve were permitting the tourists arbitrarily. In case of
boat-tickets also, there are great variations in price between those bought from the counter
and the online bookings. The representations received in this regard have been forwarded
to the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India and Kerala Tourism for appropriate
remedial measures. The Committee hopes that the appropriate authorities will look into
these complaints and take remedial measures.
47. The Committee recommends that necessary efforts may also be made for training of
a team of naturalists recruited from the local Eco-development Committees; Setting up of
training facilities for forest dependent communities in responsible tourism initiatives;
setting up of eco-shops for marketing of value added products developed by local
communities; developing nature trails as an integral part of jungle camping linking spices
gardens and hamlets, etc.
48. The Committee feels that there is a need for establishment of Tribal Culture and Art
Museum at Kumily and developing the existing Rajiv Gandhi Museum of Flora and Fauna
at Kumily into a full fledged museum. The Committee found that the Forest Department
has tried its best to preserve the folk culture of the area by providing a platform to the
folk artists of the region and encouraged the musicians and dancers to carry on the
precious legacy. This gesture is appreciated by the Committee as this initiative enabled
them to retain their talents without disturbing their livelihood. The Committee feels that
this initiative could be further encouraged and many more artists would be benefitted if it
is taken up in a large scale. The Government is not only bound for development of tourism
but also for preservation and transfer of the knowledge of wild, natural and cultural
heritage to the future generations. The Committee wants them to take a considerate view
on the problems being faced by the stakeholders in these Park/Sanctuaries. The Committee
directs the Ministry of Tourism to offer patronage and extend necessary financial support
for the proposals. It also recommends that they should study the feasibility of introducing
ropeways without hindering the ecology at Thekkady and Munnar.

10
Tea Tourism
49. The old tea plantations, stretched over thousands of acres, now remain part of the hill
stations across the country, including Kerala. Being situated at high altitudes with cool climates,
these warm and welcoming places can be ideally promoted as a special experience to the tourists.
Today, connectivity to such properties has also increased and this is paving the way for converting
the “bunglows” of the owners and managers of tea and coffee plantations as alternate places of
stay so as to experience the lifestyles and legacy of a bygone era.
50. Many of the plantations and homesteads are over a century old with the bunglows
possessing fine wood work and furniture, while others are mid-twentieth century pieces of good
architecture, very often build along the same lines and located in the scenic locales. Besides
providing a special lodging experience, these tea estates also offer a wide range of experience to
tourists to take part in activities like tea picking, tasting and processing of the plantation crops like
Tea in the Nilgiris and Munnar, in Southern India.
51. The Ministry of Tourism promotes tea and plantation tourism through its Incredible India
campaign.
52. The Committee visited the Tea plantations, Tea Museum and Tea Factory of Kanan
Devan Hills Plantations Company Private Limited (KHDP) at Munnar. The Committee felt
that the spread of tea plantations from top to bottom of the hillocks really offered a special
experience to tourists, which instantly makes it as its Unique Selling Proposition. The tea
estates and bungalows just add another tweak to this perfect serenity. The Committee
observes that this experiential tourism would certainly carve a niche for itself, the State /
Central Governments have to make concerted efforts to coordinate with each other in
maintaining the pristine beauty of the area and campaign hard at every level to promote
Munnar as one of the prime tourist destination of India.
Spice Route and Muziris Heritage Projects
53. Secretary, Kerala Tourism during his presentation before the Committee submitted that the
Spice Route is perhaps the most historic trade route ever navigated by mankind. More than a
century before the Christian era, pepper was the preferred cargo that sailed in the route from India
to Africa. For a long period, the Romans considered India as their destination for spices. Indian
ports were home for spices traded between China and Arabs. The spice route so developed also
touched the Kerala coast.
54. Kerala is well-known for the exotic spices it owns. Cardamom, pepper, nutmeg, tea, coffee,
clove, ginger, turmeric etc. are abundantly available in Kerala. It has historically generated an
international interest and trade relations due to the abundance of varied spices. Kerala Tourism has
proposed to explore the opportunity to redevelop the ancient spice route for the modern travellers
across the globe by connecting 31 identified spice destination countries in Europe, Asia and Far
East to create a new experience of travel. UNESCO and UNWTO have endorsed and are helping
mount this global project.
55. The Spice Route proposes to adapt the theme of ‘Silk Route’, which collaborated nations
across the world which traded silk. The proposed Spice route destination countries identified in the
‘Spice Route’ includes Afghanistan, Myanmar, China, Denmark, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, France,
Germany, Greece, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mozambique,
Netherlands, Oman, Pakistan, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Syria, Turkey,
United Kingdom and Yemen, with which it had maritime relations for trade of spices.

11
56. This Committee fully supports this global Spice Route Tourism initiative proposed by
Kerala Tourism which not only revives India’s glorious heritage as a destination for
travellers and traders but would give a larger foothold for garnering world tourism revenue.
The Committee further calls upon all the related Ministries of the Government of India to
fully support this initiative. Especially, Ministry of Tourism is recommended to endorse the
project by taking a leeway.
Muziris Heritage project
57. Muziris (the present day Kodungalloor and the adjoining areas) is reputed to be the
ancient world’s greatest trading centre in the East. As the focal point of commerce for over
2500 years, this bustling sea port traded in everything from spices to precious stones with
the Greeks, Romans and the rest of the world. It was also the doorway to India for varied
cultures and races: Buddhists, Arabs, Chinese, Jews, Romans, Portuguese, Dutch and even
the British.
58. The representatives of Kerala Tourism informed the Committee that the Muziris
Heritage project is in the active stage of implementation and they are planning to link it
with the spice route project. The Committee is fully in agreement with the Kerala Tourism
initiative to club it with the Muziris Heritage project, one of the biggest conservation
projects in India showcasing a culture of 3000 years or more, which is already partnered by
various departments of State Government of Kerala, Central Government and the UNESCO.
This would make Kochi, Muziris and Malabar the Heritage Circuit of Kerala. The
Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism, Government of India should give all the
support required for promoting spice route and Muziris Heritage Project.
Ropeway and Railway System in Munnar
59. The Committee was informed that there existed a railway system and ropeway connecting
many hills and areas of Munnar. The place called Top Station was connected by the Ropeway with
many parts of Munnar till the 1920s. Due to various reasons like floods, etc., this became extinct.
60. The Committee recommends that the Ropeway and the Railway System can be
revived by the Government on its own or with the help of KDHPL which is the owner of
most of the land in Munnar. The Ropeway can offer a unique experience to the tourists
without interfering with the environment.
Munnar - Eravikulam Ropeway
61. Lofty mountain ranges with misty peaks, sprawling tea estates and a serene climate make
Munnar one of Kerala’s most remarkable tourist spots. This little sleepy village atop the Western
Ghats is situated at the confluence of three mountain streams, namely Mudrapuzha, Nallathanni and
Kundala. Panoramic views of low-flying clouds and mist-filled valleys make it a pretty little haven
with a cool, bracing climate. Munnar is also famous for the wild orchids locally called Neelakurinji
which blooms once in 12 years.
62. Eravikulam National Park is a 97 sq. km. national park located just 15 km. away from
Munnar town. The Park holds the largest viable population of the endangered Nilgiri Tahr
(Hemitragus hylocrius ). Apart from Tahr, the Park is the abode of other little known fauna such
as Nilgiri marten, ruddy mongoose, small clawed otter, dusky striped squirrel etc. Eravikulam is the
most visited tourist spot in Munnar.
63. The Kanan Devan Hills Plantations Company Private Limited (KDHP) succeeded Tata Tea
Limited on 1st April 2005, when the latter exited most of its plantations in Munnar to focus on

12
the growth of its branded tea business. With its 7 extensive gardens covering approximately 24,000
hectares, the company is today the largest tea corporate in South India with an annual production
of 21 million kg of tea. The company owns almost a major share of land available in Munnar
region and has plans to get into tourism activities as part of diversifying its activities.
64. It is understood that KDHP Company is planning to construct a Ropeway from Munnar to
Eravikulam. The Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala is willing to support the project.
While the Ropeway will be an additional attraction to Munnar, it will also help in decongesting the
Munnar central area.
65. The Committee was apprised of the tea plantation history by Kanan Devan Hills
Plantations Company Private Limited (KHDP) which was the pioneer of tea plantation in
Munnar. The Tea Museum showcased the traversity of the Company from materialisation of
the streak idea of an enterprenuer to full-fledged company of today. It was brought before
the Committee that the Kanan Devan Hills Plantations Company Private Limited (KDHP)
succeeded Tata Tea Limited on 1st April 2005, when the latter exited most of its plantations
in Munnar to focus on the growth of its branded tea business. The Committee recommends
the Ministry of Tourism to consider the proposal of the Ropeway connecting from Munnar
to Eravikulam, suitably. This can be constructed by the Government agencies or in
collaborations with KDHPL. The Ropeway will be an added attraction in Munnar. It may also
reduce human intervention inside the Eravikulam National Park.
Rationalisation of Inter-state Tourist Permit Charges
66. Promotion of Domestic Tourism is the established policy of Government of India as it
encourages national integration through mutual understanding of people and their cultures.
Therefore, both Government of India as well as the States encourages domestic tourism. But many
of the southern states knowingly or unknowingly follow a regressive policy of interstate taxation
which is seriously affecting domestic tourist traffic in the southern region.
67. The tourism industry in Kerala brought to the notice of the Committee, the disparity and
irrational approach followed by different south Indian states vis-a-vis inter-state tourist permit. An
example given below will explain the irrationality of the tax structure:-
68. While operating a South India package, tourists have to pay heavy tax on entering each
state–eg. : the vehicle has to pay the following tax :
Entry to Karnataka charges Rs.745/- per seat + 1050 per coach
To Tamil Nadu charges Rs.660/- per seat + 350 per coach
To Andhra charges Rs.745 /- per seat + 1050 per coach
69. Hence, a 35-seat coach has to pay Rs. 77,700/- for a round trip irrespective of the number
of tourists travelling in that coach. Also instead of counting the number of passengers, the
authorities are charging the inter-state tax based on the number of seats in the vehicle. This places
additional burden on the tourist, apart from the higher rates they charge individually. An interesting
factor is that Kerala is not charging any entry fee for the tourist vehicles.
70. This is a serious issue having larger connotations in the promotion of tourism.
Ministry of Tourism is requested to convene an urgent inter-state discussion on the subject.
The Committee feels that tourism is not a high end product only for the rich domestic and
foreign tourists; it could be made easily affordable to the rising upper and lower middle
classes of the neighbouring states. Resolution of these smaller issues will lead to tourism
development.

13
71. The Committee further emphasise that all the southern states should join hands to
promote tourism. The “Golden Triangle Module” as existing in north India for promotion of
Tourism can be replicated as a “Golden Quadrangle” in southern region. Further, Ministry
of Tourism should strive to replicate the successful tourism modules of Kerala in other
southern states as well. The matter may be taken up with the Chief Secretaries of all the
Southern States.
Heavy Taxation in Tourism
72. Tourism contributes 9% of the GDP of Kerala. The revenue from tourism in the State
during 2012 was Rs. 20430 crore with a foreign exchange earnings of Rs. 4,548.66 crore. Tourism
provides employment to over 15 lakhs persons in the state. These figures indicate the need for
encouraging tourism in the state by both Government of Kerala and the Government of India.
Unfortunately the taxation policy followed by the Government has invited severe criticism from the
tourism trade of Kerala. The following are the major issues that need attention.
Higher Luxury Tax
73. At present, the taxation via luxury tax which comes to nearly 25%, overburdens the
tourism trade in the state. 19.92% tax for rooms (Luxury tax + service tax) + 3.09 % service tax
on packages for tour operators make it a total of Rs. 23.01% tax for tour packages. In short, a
tourist who chooses a package for Rs.10,000/- needs to pay Rs.2,310/- tax which is very high and
needs to be reduced considerably in order to sustain the tourism industry.
74. There is no luxury tax for properties with less than 04 rooms. As Kerala Tourism has a
scheme of approval of “Serviced Villa” properties up to 06 rooms, it would be helpful if Serviced
Villas are exempted from luxury tax. This will encourage more boutique properties to come up at
tourist destinations.
Bundling of Service tax
75. Tour operators are allowed an abatement of 75% on tour packages and the remaining 25%
is taxable @ 3.09%. Normally a tour package is the bundling of hotel room product and transport
charges, with the tour operator paying service tax on this product. Recently there has been an
additional tax on hotels, with 7% service tax on hotel rooms and 5% service tax on transportation.
Hence, a tour operator pays an additional 3.09% tax on the total product, even after both products
are taxed separately.
Wrong Taxation practices affecting MICE Tourism
76. Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Events (MICE) segment is highly taxed and the
biggest hurdle to promote MICE tourism is the exorbitant tax structure. 24.86% is the tax for
Banquet hall (luxury tax 12.5% and 12.36% service tax) and banquet food has 22.15% tax (13.5%
Vat and 8.65% service tax). Together, the tax comes to 47.01% and this is one of the highest in
the country. This is another serious issue affecting the MICE sector in the state including
investment.
77. The Committee found that presently the Central and State Governments are levying
different taxes on hotel industry. This disincentive of high expense of stay compared to
other states may hinder the tourism prospects. The cost accounting to visit to Srilanka,
Malaysia, Singapore, etc. works out less as it comes to Kerala. The Committee requests the
State and the Central Governments to make an effort to re-workout their respective
taxation structures so that the tourism of state of Kerala is not a causality.

14
78. On the issue of bundling of service tax, the Committee observed that a customer is
taxed 3 times for a single product. Since this tour product is taxed on the first part, the
Committee feels that the second part i.e., tax paid by the tour operator may be exempted
to avoid the product being taxed three times. Kerala Tourism should take initiative to
ensure that multiple taxes are not acting as a stumbling block for growth of Tourism in
Kerala.
79. Regarding granting of bar license to eligible three star hotels and above, the
Committee observes that the matter has already been heard by the Supreme Court and
directions have been issued, State Government is bound by these directions.
Comprehensive Waste Management Schemes at Tourist Locations
80. One of the major challenges faced by Kerala Tourism is the waste management at the
tourist destinations which is not only a mandatory requirement for the success of tourism but also
for enhancing the quality of life of the inhabitants in terms of sanitation and public health.
81. Kerala Tourism has initiated comprehensive waste management programmes at few
important tourist locations, but need active support from the state and Central Government.
82. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may
come out with a special scheme to support the waste management projects of the States at
the tourist destinations. Waste management collection, disposal and management may also
be included in the works to be taken under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS).
83. Representatives of Kerala tourism informed the Committee that they have a
proposal to supply empty bags to collect wastes generated by the tourist vehicles once they
enter a particular tourist location on payment of a security deposit. The security deposit will
be returned to the vehicle on their return journey after the vehicle return the bag
containing the waste generated by them.
84. The Committee notes that it is a novel idea which can be implemented with
cooperation of the stakeholders. The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may
promote such initiatives whole heartedly through advertisements which may add to their
efforts of “Clean India Campaign”.
‘Visa on Arrival’ at International Airports in Kerala
85. Secretary Tourism, Government of Kerala informed that Government of India have recently
announced a scheme of granting “Tourist Visa on Arrival” for citizens from Japan, Finland,
Luxemburg, New Zealand, Singapore, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Laos, Indonesia and
Myanmar who arrive at Thiruvananthapuram and Cochin Airports in Kerala. This visa is aimed at
foreign tourists from these countries who plan their trips on a short notice. The scheme is valid
for citizens of the countries mentioned above who plan to visit India on single entry strictly for
the purpose of tourism and for a short period of up to 30 days. But these countries are not big
markets of Kerala Tourism not many tourists from these countries are visiting Kerala. Therefore
the use of VOA facility granted for the citizens of these countries is not much help to the tourism
sector in Kerala.
86. Tourism Visa on Arrival (TVOA) scheme of the Government continuous to be popular with
foreign tourist. It registered a growth of 23.5% during April, 2013 as compared to April, 2012.
Kerala witnessed around 7.5 lakhs international arrivals in 2012 and the tourist arrival rate has
increased by 8.28 % compared to 2011. The State could record a sustainable growth in the

15
international tourist arrivals even during the period of economic recession. It has been estimated
that around 40% of the international tourists are arriving in Kerala through any one of the three
airports in the State. Kerala’s prominent tourism markets in the world are basically from UK and
other European countries, and USA, more countries from this sector would be ideally to be
included in the VOA facility. According to tourist statistics, UK, USA, France, Germany, Australia,
Malaysia, Canada, Netherland, UAE and Italy are the first ten countries in the top list of
international tourist arrivals to the state of Kerala and are not covered in the Visa on Arrival
scheme.
Reducing the time required for procuring Indian Visa
87. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the foreign traveller has to deposit the
passport 15 days to 20 days with the Indian Consulate to obtain a Visa. For business travellers,
this is a big problem as they are frequently travelling and their passport is blocked in embassies.
This especially affects the Gulf traffic as they frequently travel between the Gulf countries. If we
adopt a paper visa system just like what Singapore and Dubai are issuing now, this holding time
of passport can be avoided.
88. The Committee evidently observed that the present Visa on Arrival (VOA) provides
only a limited advantage to the State. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a second
list of countries needs to be considered for inclusion in the VOA facility extending it to the
said European countries USA, UK, France, Germany, Australia, Malaysia, Canada,
Netherland, UAE and Italy which are in the top list of international tourist arrivals to the
state of Kerala. The Ministry of Tourism and the Government of Kerala may take up the
matter with Ministry of External Affairs to initiate suitable action in this regard. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Home
Affairs should take appropriate favourable action on the relaxation of visa norms suggested
by the Government of Kerala for the sake of development of tourism.
89. On the issue of reducing the time required for procuring Indian Visa, Ministry of
Tourism may take up the matter with the Ministries of Home and External Affairs. If
necessary, the present procedure of issuing visa may be reviewed to reduce time and the
embassy officials may be sensitized to the requirements of foreign tourists.
Permission to State Level Tourist Guides to Enter into ASI Monuments:
90. The Committee was apprised by the Secretary, Kerala Tourism that the Department of
Tourism, Government of Kerala is conducting local/state level guide training programme in the state
through the Kerala Institute of Tourism and Travel Studies (KITTS), established in 1988 under the
Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala. KITTS has conducted several state/local level guide
training programmes as per the guidelines issued by the Department of Tourism, Government of
Kerala. The certificates were to be issued after it is endorsed by the Director of Tourism,
Government of Kerala and Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Thrissur Circle Office so that
they can take tourists at locations including ASI monuments in the state. But, ASI Thrissur Circle
Office has refused to endorse the certificates.
91. Meanwhile, the Kerala Tourist Guide Association has submitted representation to KITTS
informing the stand taken by Superintendent Archaeologist, Thrissur Circle Office, for permitting
only the regional level guides approved by the Indian Tourism inside ASI monuments. This results
in restricting the services of state level guides licensed by the Dept. of Tourism, Government of
Kerala. It is also stated in the letter issued by the Superintending Archaeologist, ASI, Thrissur
Office that it has been decided to refer the matter to the Director General, Archaeological Survey
of India, New Delhi for further clarification in this regard and till such time a clarification is

16
received from the Directorate, they have requested the Asst. Superintending Archaeologist, ASI,
Mattanchery Palace Museum to permit only the Indian Tourism approved guides inside the museum
and to put up the matter on the notice board. Hence, the state level tour guides approved by the
Dept. of Tourism, Government of Kerala, feel that the stand taken by ASI, Thrissur Circle Office
is totally unfavourable to them and they would not be allowed from entering the said monuments
as guides. In this context, KITTS had submitted a request to the Director General of Archaeological
Survey of India, Government of India to intervene in the issue and allow the approved guides by
the state also to enter the ASI monuments.
92. The Committee observes that in the scenario of acute shortage of trained guides,
this is a serious omission on the part of ASI. The Director General, Archaeological Survey
of India may be directed to intervene in the issue to enable the approved state level guides
by the State Department of Tourism to undertake guiding activities in all ASI monuments
as in the case of Government of India approved guides.
Promoting Kerala for Film Shooting
93. Kerala has one of the most beautiful landscapes enchanting and mesmerising scenic beauty
in the country with evergreen hill stations, the world heritage site of western ghats, unique
backwaters and serene beaches and qualifies as one of the best locations for promoting film
shooting. Thousands of areas of tea plantations are another attraction. This will indirectly help in
promoting the destination and in attracting more visitors. Unfortunately, not may film shootings take
place in Kerala.
94. The Committee recommends that the state should come out with a directory of
potential locations for film shooting. The state should also hold workshops/FAM tours to
film production executives. There should be a single window clearance for film shooting.
95. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of
India should support film shooting as a special scheme.

17
CHAPTER-II
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN KERALA
96. The Committee was apprised by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and NHAI
authorities that there is 1534 km length of National Highways traversing through the State of Kerala
which is 2.18% of total length of National Highways in the Country. Out of this, the two major
National Highways (old No. NH-17 and 47) with a length of 829 km is entrusted to National
Highways Authority of India for widening of 4 lane under NHDP Phase-II and III. (The
combination of old NH-17 and part of old NH-47 with a length of 669 km connecting Karnataka
Border at north and Tamil Nadu border at south is re-numbered as NH-66 and the remaining portion
of NH-47 which connects Edappally at Kochi with Walayar at Tamil Nadu Border is re-numbered
as NH-544.) Development of these 2 National Highways by NHAI is far behind the schedule due
to issues related to land acquisition. Further, it was also submitted that a new 4-lane road
connectivity to International Container Transhipment Terminal (ICTT), Vallarpadam has also been
entrusted for widening to NHAI under NHDP.
NDHP Projects in Kerala
Programme Length (km.)
NHDP Phase-II (North-South Corridor) 149
NHDP Phase-II 616
Port Connectivity 34
T
OTAL: 799
Overview of State’s National Highways
97. Out of the remaining 7 National Highways in the State, two are NH-47A and NH-47C, with
short length of 5.92 km. and 17 km. and the following 5 are major National Highways traversing
across the State:-
· NH-49 (new NH-85) Kundannor – Bodimettu : 167.67 km. in Kerala  : The NH-49
is a National Highway from the Coast in Kochi, Kerala to Coast in Rameswaram, Tamil
Nadu. A portion of this highway traverse through high range areas in Kerala and one
of the famous tourism destination “Munnar” Length of this Highway in Kerala is
167.67 km.
· NH-208 (new NH-744) Kollam – Kazhuthuruthy  81.28 Km. in Kerala  : The NH-208
links Madura in Tamil Nadu with Kollam in Kerala. Most of its length in Kerala is
through hilly terrain.
· NH-212 (new NH-766) Kozhikode – Muthanga : 117.60 Km. in Kerala  : NH-212
connects Kozhikode in Kerala with Kollegal in Karnataka via Mysore. At Kollegal, it
joins National Highway 209, which connects Bengaluru and Dindigal. Hence, it
provides easy accessibility for people in Kerala to Mysore and Bangaluru.
17

18
· NH-213 (new NH-966) Kozhikode – Palakkad : 125.304 Km. in  Kerala : The NH
213 connects Palakkad, Malappuram and Calicut district head quarters in Kerala. At
Ramanattukara, near Calicut, it joins NH-17. NH-47 also passes through Palakkad,
which connects Coimbatore and Cochin through Palakkad. In effect, NH-213 connects
NH-47 and NH-17.
· NH-220 (new NH-183) Kollam – Theni : 190.30 Km. in  Kerala: It connects Kollam
in Kerala with Theni in Tamil Nadu. Starting from NH 47 in Kollam it runs northwards
and turns east at Kottayam and runs along the northern border of Periyar Wildlife
Sanctuary before crossing the border into Tamil Nadu and end at Theni, where it joins
NH-49 (Kochi-Rameswaram) and NH-45 (Chennai-Theni).
98. All the above 5 National Highways are connecting the State with neighbouring States of
Tamil Nadu and Karnataka and with many tourism destinations. These highways are of 2 lane roads
with narrow bridges, passing through hilly terrain and lacks in road safety measures. The present
traffic intensity is much more than the permissible limit in 2 lane highways. Fatal road accidents
are common in these highways.
Development of National Highways
99. Two major issues which are blocking the development of National Highways in Kerala at
present are the problems related to land acquisition and decision of Ministry on stopping of funds
for IRQP/PR/FDR/OR from this financial year onwards for those National Highways transferred to
NHAI for development under NHDP.
Land acquisition scenario
100. During the meeting at Kochi, NHAI submitted before the Committee that it has been
mandated to take development of National Highways-17 and 47 in the State of Kerala for widening
them from existing 2-lane highway to 4/6 lanes. Obviously, for this, additional land is inevitably
required to be acquired.
101. Presently, only 3 packages on NH-47 from Walayar to Edappally have been possible for
implementation that too consequent upon much of public resistance for years together still going
on resulting in non-vacating the possession and not willing to pay the toll fee.
102. 3 packages on NH-17 from Karnataka/Kerala Border to Kannur Section, Kannur-Vengalam-
Kuttipuram Package-I and Kannur-Vengalam-Kuttipuram Package-II were awarded to the
Concessionaires on 13.05.10 and 20.07.09 and Concession Agreements have also been signed on
14.2.10 and 16.04.12 respectively. But it has not been possible to actually take up the work on
ground for these long years due to non-acquisition of required land for RoW. The other 4 packages
of Kuttipuram-Edappally on NH-17 and Cherthali-Ochira, Ochira-Thiruvananthapuram and
Thiruvananthapuram to Kerala/Tamil Nadu Border are yet to be bidded out for want of land
acquisition. No response was either received in these projects or withdrawn due to land acquisition
problems in 2009-10.
103. The land acquisition process has remained too slow despite taking up the matter at various
levels of the Kerala Government by the NH-AI. Desired progress in this regard has not been
achieved, resulting in non-implementation of projects. Only 3 stand alone bypass projects have
recently been approved by the Ministry for which land was acquired many years back by the
Government of Kerala. But this step cannot mitigate the problems of traffic congestion on NH-17
and NH-47 and will only help in easing the traffic in local pockets. Particularly, the 3 projects on
NH-17 which stand awarded to the concessionaires and Concession Agreements have also been

19
signed required focused attention to avoid contractual complications and exiting out of the
concessionaries from these projects.
Land acquisition status from 2004-2012
· Salem – Cochin section of NH-47 was included as part of NHDP Phase-II (North-
South Corridor);
· Initially in 2004-05, land acquisition process in the stretch from Walayar (Tamil
Nadu/Kerala border) to Angamaly was initiated with 60.0m Right–of-Way (ROW) as
per the guidelines of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways;
· In January 2006, Ministry has approved reduction of ROW to 45.0m for Kerala State
based on the request of Government of Kerala, due to unique geographical condition
and thick population;
· Subsequently, LA process for NHDP Phase-II with 45.0m ROW was initiated except
in the Stretch from Vadakkancherry to Thrissur which was proposed for six laning;
· It took nearly 7 years to achieve the completion of the LA process for this section
with lot of resentment and resistance from the public and work taken up for 3
packages;
· In the year 2009, LA process was initiated for NHDP Phase-III Projects (NH-17 and
Chertala – Thirvananthapuram – Kerala/TN Border section of NH-47) with 45.0 ROW;
· Notifications under section 3A(1) of the NH Act published in the Gazette of India
during October, 2009 to March, 2010;
· However, there was public resentment against adoption of 45.0m ROW and
implementation of projects under BOT Scheme due to which further process of land
acquisition could not be carried out;
· In the All Party Meeting held on 20.04.10, Government of Kerala decided to request
Government of India to adopt 30.0m ROW in the State and stop all LA activities;
· In the subsequent All Party Meeting held on 17.08.10, Government of Kerala accepted
to adopt 45.0m ROW and also implementation of NHDP projects under BOT Scheme;
· However, the State Government proposed an R&R package to pay higher compensation
to the Project Affected Persons (PAP) and a Memorandum on these lines submitted to
Government of India on 07.09.10;
· On 26.10.10, Hon’ble Union Minister of Road Transport and Highways informed
Hon’ble Chief Minister of Kerala that compensation for land as fixed by the Competent
Authority, who is appointed by the State Government, be paid to the land owners as
per the prevalent practice in the entire country;
· Though on 26.10.10 itself, State Government issued orders to resume the LA process
with 45.0m ROW, on 09.11.10, fresh orders were issued to all District Collectors to
suspend the LA process until the R&R package is sanctioned by Government of India;
· In a meeting held by Hon’ble Union Minister of Road Transport and Highways with
Hon’ble Chief Minster of Kerala on 19.11.10, it was made clear that no separate
rehabilitation package for the State is possible and desired that CALA may fix the
compensation on realistic grounds;

20
· Third All Party Meeting was held on 10.01.11 wherein it has been decided to discuss
the issue of R&R package with Hon’ble Union Minister of RT and H. However, no
decision regarding resumption of LA process taken in the meeting;
· Due to stoppage of LA process by Government of Kerala in April 2010, all 3A(1)
Notifications published earlier got lapsed;
· After 1½ years of suspension, Government of Kerala lifted the ban on LA on 09.11.11
and LA activity resumed;
· Consequently, fresh 3A(1) Notifications published in the Gazaette during early 2012;
· However, further process to publish 3D Notification could not be initiated by
Government of Kerala during the last 1½ years, which resulted in lapse of 3A(1)
Notification for the second time.
Status of deployment of special staff for LA for NHDP Phase-III
· Since 2009, following establishment of special revenue staff is functioning for
acquisition of land for NHDP Phase-III Projects in Kerala
No. of CALAs - 14
No. of SLAUs - 25
Total No. of staff - 430
· Total expenditure incurred by NHAI towards establishment expenditure of CALAs and
SLAUs – Rs. 9.50 Crore.
104. The Committee would like to know whether the CALA staff is deliberately delaying
the process to cling on to the posts. They should be terminated immediately if no activity
is undertaken. This will avoid wastage of resources.
Progress of LA achieved from 2009-2013
· Total extent of land to be acquired-1337.54Ha
· Extent for which possession taken-8.770 Ha
· Extent for which 3D published-245.285 Ha
· Extent for which 3A(1) lapsed for second time-750 Ha
Major Problem in implementation of the NHDP Projects
· Abnormal delay in completion of the Land Acquisition Process;
· Fixation of value of land by the District Level Purchase Committee (DLPC) constituted
by Government of Kerala, which is in violation of the provisions of the National
Highways Act, 1956;
· Demands from public for change in the alignment and for deletion or addition of
Bypasses, Flyovers, VUPs, PUPs, Service Roads, etc;
· Resistance from the public to vacate the land and structures even after receipt of
compensation awarded by CALA, demanding higher compensation;

21
· Though, Government of Kerala announced one R&R Package for giving more
compensation to the project affected facilities, Government of India has been requested
to bear the expenditure towards implementation of the package which is not as per
provisions of NH Act.;
· Implementation of vital road infrastructure projects costing more than Rs. 8000 crore
(as per original cost) held up;
· Cost of land acquisition and other preconstruction activities escalated by more than 300%;
· Civil cost of the Projects is expected to increase considerably due to escalation in the
cost of material, machinery and manpower;
· Facilitate early completion of the LA process for 3 Packages on NH-17 from
Karnataka/Kerala border to Kuttipuram section for which contracts already awarded;
· For other projects, LA process to be expedited in a time bound manner before inviting
fresh bids;
Funds for maintaining NH-17 and NH-47 (new NH-66 and 544)
105. Even though the National Highways from ‘Thalappadi to Parasala’ and ‘Walayar to Kochi’
has been transferred to NHAI for 4 laning vide Government of India Gazette Notification, the
development works in these stretches has not yet started due to the issues related to LA. The
length of National Highways in Kerala constitutes only 2.3% of the total National Highways
network, whereas it carried about 40% of the total traffic in the State that too heavily loaded and
multi-axle vehicles. This results to frequent deterioration of the road surface and hence continuous
maintenance of the NHs is highly necessary. During discussions with the officials of the Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways, Government of India, it has been revealed that from this
financial year onwards funds for the routine maintenance works like IRQP/PR/FDR/OR will not be
granted for the above NHs by the Ministry and the responsibility for maintaining these NHs shall
be vested with NHAI only by way of executing these works directly by NHAI or considering the
State as their agency for doing it. In this context, it is observed that even in stretches where NHAI
have commenced the works; they are not being maintained to good trafficable condition like
Mannuthy – Vadakkenchey stretch of NH-554.
106. The following written comments/suggestions were forwarded to the Committee by the State
Government of Kerala:
(i) Land acquisition for widening of National Highways
107. The major stumbling block in the development of National Highways in the State is the
issues related to Land Acquisition. The Government have already decided that the State will go
ahead with 45 metres development of National Highways, as this falls in the premises of religious
structures like temples, mosques, churches, etc. and some serious complaints regarding fixing of
alignment to save some affluent persons/institutions at the cost of poor house owners. State
Government have made arrangements to look into the land value fixed by DLPC comparing the
value with the current market value and to examine the award of competent authority for LA.
Further, State Government have constituted a Committee with Chief Secretary as Chairman and
Secretary, Public Works Department, Secretary Revenue, Local Self Government Department, Chief
Engineer (National Highway), District Collectors concerned, Project Directors of NHAI concerned
as members for rectifying the mistake in the alignment fixed, if any, at places, where there is
serious problems and for protecting the places of worship from demolition. NHAI may be directed
to resolve the problems in the Land Acquisition in consultation with the State Government.

22
(ii) Maintenance of National Highways
108. It has been observed that those National Highways which have been transferred to NHAI
for development are not maintained properly by them. This invites large public criticism and much
inconvenience to the commuters. During the past years, Ministry was allotting meagre funds for
maintaining these roads assuming that NHAI will start development works in NH-47 and NH-17 in
the near future. Even though these roads are very heavily loaded and continuous maintenance is
very much warranted, the MORTH allocation for these roads in the current year is negligible.
109. Urgent action is warranted for attending timely repairs for making the roads trafficable. It
may be noted that in Mannuthy – Vadakanchery stretch of NH-47, Government of Kerala was
forced to allot Rs. 5.19 crores for attending urgent pot hole filling works at ‘Kuthiran’ to make
the road trafficable, even though this stretch has already been transferred to NHAI concessionaire
for development. Further, the torrential rain during the last three to four weeks created heavy
damage to National Highways making the situation vulnerable. NHAI may be directed to attend
routine maintenance works in these roads and making them trafficworthy.
(iii) Funding of roads projects through PPP model vis-à-vis  undertaking NHDP by
Government of Kerala itself with the help from NHAI
110. The policy of NHDP is to develop the NH’s by them as it has to be developed as per their
specification and is to be maintained as such for a long period since these roads are being tolled
perpetually. Recently, they have permitted to construct the balance length of Kollam Bypass and
Alappuzha Bypass as stand alone project to develop them by Government of Kerala. This was
possible only because the entire land of 45m width for this project was available with us.
Government of Kerala has recently requested Ministry to delink five National Highways such as
NH-49, NH-208, NH-212, NH-213 and NH-220 from NHDP Phase 4A due to the following reasons:
(1) The proposal of the Ministry was to develop these roads to two line with paved
shoulders and with tolling;
(2) Most of the stretches in these roads were already developed into two line with paved
shoulders wherever land was available;
(3) The condition of NHDP Phase 4 A was that Right of Way (ROW) should be maintained
to 18 metres throughout;
(4) Since the major portion of these roads are traversing through forest and hilly terrain
it was more difficult to acquire land at 18 metres width;
(5) As per the prevailing political and social scenario, tolling of roads without much
development will invite protest until such roads are developed with divided carriage
ways and shoulders.
(iv) Details of Rehabilitation and Resettlmenet (R&R) packages contemplated and
expectations from Central Government in this regard:
111. State Government have taken decision to make applicable the new comprehensive
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) package of the State for LA in the case of NH widening
also. Government have also decided that the State would bear the expenses for the items which
NHAI/MORTH would not meet. As per the D.O. letter dated 19.12.11 from the then Chief
Secretary, State Government have requested MORTH to examine the R&R policy of Government
to determine what items of R&R policy could be met by NHAI/MORTH. Further, Government of
Kerala requested the NHAI to commission a social impact study to determine the number of project

23
affected persons in accordance with R&R Policy so as to enable to determine how much alternate
land needs to be required for rehabilitation and also to determine the financial burden of the State
due to R&R package. But there is no response in this regard from NHAI/MORTH so far.
(v) Reluctance of the public to pay toll fee
112. NHAI has completed their development works in certain reaches of the National Highways
and started collecting tolls from two toll plazas, namely Paliyekkara and Kumbalam. The pot holes
developed in these reaches are not being attended timely. This invited huge public criticism from
different sections of the people. Reluctance in paying toll is observed only where the toll rates are
very high and the roads are not maintained properly. NHAI may be directed to take timely action
to keep these stretches of the road in good trafficable condition with all agreed facilities before the
commencement of toll collection.
113. Moreover, Kerala Government is undertaking certain transport development projects viz.,
construction of metro rail and mono rail in certain cities. The alignment for these projects falls
along/intersects with that of NHDP Schemes. Therefore, NHAI may be directed to provide
necessary sanction/approval for undertaking the construction of these projects along the NHAI
alignment.
114. After going through the submissions made to the Committee especially on the topics
of ‘Land Acquisition status from 2004-12’ by the NHAI and the ‘Land Acquisition for
widening of National Highways’ and ‘Funding of road projects through PPP model vis-à-vis
undertaking NHDP by Government of Kerala with the help from NHAI’ by the State
Government of Kerala, the Committee feels that the Kerala Government is neither
interested in funding of road projects through PPP model nor wants to take up the projects
themselves. It further implies that the State Government does not want to fully gear up to
the prevailing situation. It should understand that with half-hearted efforts full results
cannot be achieved. If the State Government wants highways (which is on ‘Union’ list) for
holistic development of the State in general and tourism development in particular, it has
to evolve a middle-path between appeasing the general public, bearing burden on the
exchequer in terms of R&R Package and working with NHAI and MORTH under NHAI Act.
A clear intent of reaching at a workable proposition to the problem is the only solution
available here. National Highways Authority of India has already incurred an expenditure of
Rs.9.50 crores for establishing the paraphernalia and it also has to bear the burnt of
escalations in land acquisition and civil costs. This cannot go on perpetually. Ministry of
RTH is recommended to take up the issue with the State Government of Kerala accordingly.
115. The Committee notes that the condition of roads in Kerala is very poor. The
Committee also notes that the State of Kerala is 10 year behind the schedule compared to
other States as regards construction of roads are concerned. This has happened mainly
because of the problems related to land acquisition for widening and construction of roads.
Initially there were problems with the width of the roads. Now it has been settled at 45m.
Then, there are problems of alignment and design of roads. NHAI needs to do their work
on a professional way rather can coming under pressure from the rich and powerful as far
as alignment and design are concerned. The issue need to the settled in close coordination
with the Government of Kerala.
116. The Committee observes that Kerala has a peculiar pattern of demographic
settlement and most of the land is heavily cultivated and both sides of the roads are heavily
constructed and inhabited by the people. Therefore, any road widening project has to be
supported by adequate compensation and resettlement package. The principles adopted at
the National level for compensation and resettlement should not be applied to Kerala due

24
to the very peculiarities available in Kerala. Government of Kerala should be the best
authority to decide on such matters and the NHAI and the Ministry of RTH should liberally
cooperate with the State in finding solutions.
117. Another aspect brought to the notice of the Committee was that NHAI is not
maintaining the NH-47 and NH-17 properly. The climatic condition of Kerala is that
throughout the year there will be rain and during Monsoon it will be heavily raining for
months together. Therefore, the Committee feels that it is the duty of the NHAI to make
the life line of Kerala-NH-47 and NH-17- traffic worthy throughout the year. The Committee
recommends that NHAI should allocate adequate funds for the repair and maintenance of
NH-47 and NH-17.
118. Yet another aspect brought to the notice of the Committee is that public is refusing
to pay toll fee wherever there are poor maintenance and repair of the roads or the toll fee
is high. The Committee, therefore, opines that NHAI has to blame themselves for the
refusal of toll payment by the public.
119. Yet another aspect noticed by the Committee is that the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways is giving only meagre allocations for maintenance of National Highways in
Kerala. The Committee feels this is highly inappropriate and it is the duty of Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways to maintain the National Highways traffic worthy. The
Committee recommends that adequate allocation may be made for maintenance of National
Highways in Kerala.
120. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture had earlier raised the issue of delay in acquisition of land for national highways
projects and release of share of central funds to Kerala in its 193
rd Report for which Action
Taken Replies from Ministry of Road Transport and Highways are still awaited.
Gaps in Road Connectivity
121. W illingdon island, where the main Port facilities of the Cochin Port are located, is connected
to NH-47 (Kanyakumari-Kochi-Salem) and NH-49 (Kochi-Madurai) through NH-47-A. The
Committee had identified the following gaps in the road connectivity to Port area.
(a) Widening of existing 2-lane carriageway of the link NH-47A (Kundannoor-CoPT)
in to 4-lane and strengthening of existing 2-lane
122. The Cochin Port area on Willingdon island is linked to the NH-47 through the link highway
NH-47A. The existing highway is only of two lane width. As this being the main connection of
the Port area to NH-47 and NH-49, it is essential for widening to 4-lane and strengthening of
existing 2-lane carriageway taking into consideration of forthcoming Port developments like
Development of General Cargo Berth, Re-construction of Q1 to Q3 berths, Free Trade Warehousing
Zone and ever growing Cruise Tourism in Cochin Port.
(b) Upgradation of existing two lane NH-17 (Cochin-Panavel) in to IRC/NHAI standards
123. NH-17 is considered as coastal highway running from Mumbai to Cochin. Since major cities
of Kerala situated in coastal, this perhaps is the only highway connecting all major cities. As of
now, this highway is totally undeveloped, not even meeting the standard of 2 lane in most of its
stretch in Kerala. Development of this highway is extremely essential to facilitate cargo movement
from the northern cities of Kerala to Cochin Port Trust.

25
(c) Upgradation of existing two lane NH-49 (Cochin-Madurai) in to IRC/NHAI
standards
124. NH-49 connects Cochin with Madurai, which is an important cargo centre. As the existing
NH-49 is not conforming to the standards, this has to be upgraded to meet the IRC/NH standards.
d) Flyovers at Kundannoor (NH-47–NH-49), Vyttila (NH-47), Palarivattom (NH-47) and
Edappally (NH-17–NH-47) Junctions to ease out traffic congestion
125. The four busiest junctions identified in the NH-47 are at Kundannoor (NH-47-NH-49),
Vyttila (NH-47), Palarivattom (NH-47) and Edappally (NH-17–NH-47).
126. The Committee recommends that in order to solve traffic congestions in the road
connectivity to the Port, these four fly-overs are essential to be constructed. For a better
port connectivity, the Committee also recommends the followings:–
➢ To provide last mile connectivity to the Cochin Port with NHDP Grid from
Kundannoor to Willingdon Island, Committee recommends that the length of
about 5.9 Km is required to be widened to 4 lane.
➢ The Committee feels that it may also facilitate to establish good land link between
State ports like Beypore, Azhikal etc. NH-17 meets the NH-47 at Edappally.
➢ The Committee observes that such upgradations will facilitate industrial
developments in the adjoining areas of highway and generate cargo to the Port.
➢ The Committee came to know that the Government of Kerala has initiated
action in this regard. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and NHAI may
provide active financial support for the development of these projects before
further proceeding in the matter.

26
CHAPTER-III
NATIONAL WATERW AYS IN KERALA
127. There are six National Waterways in India. The National Waterway no. 3 i.e., West Coast
Canal System (205 km.) which falls in Kerala comprises of West Coast Canal between Kottappuram
– Kollam (168 km.), Udyogmandal Canal between Kochi – Eloor (23 km.) and Champakkara Canal
between Kochi – Ambalamugal (14 km.). This is the only waterway in Kerala which can be
developed as a lifeline and alternative mode of transportation in Kerala.
128. The development works in NW-3 for providing fairway of 2m Least Available Depth (LAD),
width of 38/32 m with 24 hours navigational facilities and terminals equipped with mechanical
cargo handling equipments are being carried out by Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI)
in a phased manner.
River Tourism on NW-3
129. Kerala is one of the most preferred tourism destinations. Tourism in Kerala cannot be seen
detached from the unique house boats of the State. The tourists get an opportunity to experience
the scenic beauty, village life and traditional food of Kerala during their cruise along the
backwaters. The National Waterway stretching from Kottappuram to Kollam (NW-3) is host to
nearly 90% of house boats of Kerala.
130. Apart from IWAI developing and maintaining the National Waterway to certain standards of
minimum width and depth and providing navigational aids to facilitate day and night navigation all
along the National Waterway, it has notified and circulated among all waterway users two central
regulations namely; (i) Rules and Regulations for Prevention of Collision on NWs and (ii) Rules and
Regulations for Safety in Navigation in NWs. More importantly, the Government of Kerala, in
consultation with the IWAI, has made rapid strides towards notifying its updated and unified Inland
Vessels Act applicable to the whole state, aimed at achieving orderly and safe navigational practices.
It is felt that a renewed commitment to create awareness on safety aspects and preservation of
the natural streams from pollution combined with systematic enforcement of regulations is the most
important need of the hour for sustainable water brone tourism.
131. IW AI is willing to share its cargo terminals located at strategic places along the NW-3 for
tourist operations also. The impetus in systematic development of navigation provided by IWAI
through the National Waterway-3 will open up immense business opportunities in tourism, water
sports and allied spheres.
Linking Ports with NW-3
132. IWT linkage to the Ports is one the thrust areas to give boost to the water transport system
in Kerala, which will also encourage the environment friendly mode of transport.
133. The State of Kerala in the South-West corner of the Indian Peninsula has a coastal length
of 585 Km. In this coast line one major port at Kochi and 17 non major ports (Annexure-II) are
being considered for development, whereas the major port is under the administration of Ministry
of Shipping, Government of India and non-major ports are under the administration of Government
of Kerala. Geographically, the State of Kerala is having an advantage that the International Steamer
26

27
route is very close to the Kerala Coastal line. The status of connectivity of Ports with IWT also
has been mentioned in Annexure-II.
134. W ith the framing of Rules of River-Sea vessel criteria by Ministry of Shipping, the IWT
interlinkage with ports will have significant growth where the minor / medium sized coastal vessel
can directly go into the hinterland through rivers, estuaries and canals. The eco-friendly water
transport system will get major boost when such linkages are firmed up and considered for
development. However, the linkage from port side and the waterway side should have a
synchronized development, so as to have the effective interlinkage.
135. The major port in Kerala i.e., Kochi is already well connected with NW 3. IWT linkage
with non-major Ports of Kerala within the stretch of NW-3 are Munambam (Kottappuram),
Kayamkulam and Kollam/Neendakara. The status of these three non-major port with regard to the
IWT linkage is given below:
MUNAMBAM (KOTTAPPURAM)
136. Kottappuram (Munambam is the port and the sea opening is connected to the NW 3 and
Kottappuram IWT Terminal). IWT terminal has already been developed with the required
infrastructure by IWAI as river port on the river Periyar. This can be used with additional required
infrastructure for River Sea Vessel handling.
137. In 1341 A.D., the profile of Pariyar river basin in the coast had a major transformation due
to flood/earthquake and the port of Muzris was dropped off the map. The excavations by Kerala
Council for Historical Research (KCHR) in 2007 and 2008 unearthed a huge information. It is
found that, through the Muziris trade channels, the people of South India were afforded
connections and opportunities with many civilizations in Western Asia, the near East, Europe and
further. This excavation project has proved to be a turning point, as the wealth of information, now
available is not only on the port, but also on its hinterland, the whole Periyar Basin and the historic
town of Kodungallor, Pattanam and Paravur. These sites are near Kottapuram IWT Terminals and
well connected with NW 3.
KAYAMKULAM
138. Kayamkulam sea mouth is well connected with National Waterway. A fishing harbour is
under consideration for development.
KOLLAM/NEENDAKKARA
139. Kollam Port at Thangassery is presently under operation with the required infrastructure and
the operation will be effectively considered. The interlinkage of IWT is possible with open canal
of 240 m length to connect to Kollam Thodu, which is presently being developed by Govt. of
Kerala.
140. The Neendakara Port is already connected with National waterway.
141.  Backwater experience is one the most sought after tourism products in Kerala. The
southern side of Alappuzha has been not tapped fully linking it with the mainstream
tourism destinations and circuits. It is essential to expedite the development of NW-3 and
is also necessary to connect this stretch to the nearest tourist attractions. Especially the
Kodungalloor – Muziris area needs to be well connected by the waterway and necessary
development work needs to be taken up. The Committee notes that the entire NW3 is not
fully navigable as per IWAI standards. It is a fact that Kerala is facing acute road
connectivity problem and construction of national highways is not coming up to appreciable

28
levels, in this context, if the waterways is cleared for substantial chunk of traffic then it
could considerably reduce the pressure on the roads.
142. The Committee recommends that IWAI and Ministry of Shipping may look into
connecting Kodungalloor, the Centre of Muziris Heritage project with NW 3, assistance of
State Government on this issue could be sought.
143. The Committee also recommends that with regard to IWT interlinkage with ports,
the linkages from port side and waterway side should have a synchronized development, so
as to have the effective interlinkage.
Fairway Development and Capital and Maintenance Dredging:
144. National Waterway No. 3 (NW-3) is a tidal canal. At present, out of 205 Km length of the
waterway, 2m LAD has been made available for 155 Km {(Kottappuram – Kochi – 30 km. +
Udyogmandal Canal – 23 km. + Champakkara Canal – 14 km. + Kochi- Thakazhi (South of
Alappuzha) – 88 km.)} continuous stretch after dredging a length of 73.4 km. (31 lakh Cu.M). In
the balance sections (50 km.), there are 13.80 km. shallow/narrow patches to be improved for
mechanized barge movement. The capital dredging for deepening of the canal and widening work
is in progress in these sections to provide a minimum width of 32 mtr and minimum depth of 2
mtr. The balance capital dredging (9.4 Lakh Cu.M) is expected to be completed by December,
2013. Often the dredging and widening work is hampered due to resistance by local fishermen as
they place their fishing nets in the fairway. Disposal of dredged material poses problem due to the
resistance from the local residents, who oppose dumping of material on the banks of the canal.
145. The Committee was informed by IWAI at Alappuzha that Capital Dredging work at
Kottapuram-Kochi has been completed. At the Udyogmandal Canal/Champakkara Canal/Kochi-
Allappuzha Stretch, development activities are completed and maintenance dredging is being
attended on need basis. Maintenance dredging at Thevara on Chapakkara canal is to be taken up.
The Committee was informed that at the Edappallikotta – Kollam Stretch, hard patches at certain
locations have been a problem. A pilot project to remove the hard strata by High Pressure Gas
(CO2) was not found viable. In order to mitigate the problem of hard strata, IWAI procured an
Amphibian Dredger (AD) Manimala and deployed in this stretch, which is working with Hydraulic
Hammer to crumble the hard strata. In order to expedite the activity one more Amphibian Dredger
Narmada has been procured and deployed apart from departmental dredgers.
146. Through a subsequent communication, the Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee
that the problems being faced in the completion of the National Waterways-3 at various sectors
are:–
(i) Non availability of adequate space along the banks of the canal for disposal of dredged
materials.
(ii) Frequent stoppage of dredging work by local people due to infighting over sharing of
dredged soil. The District Administration is also finding it difficult to resolve the
issues.
(iii) Objections frequently raised by local people demanding disposal of dredged soil in their
small courtyards. This is causing frequent interruption in the dredging process thereby
reducing the efficiency of the dredgers.
(iv) High incidence of litigations relating to the work being done on NW-3.
(v) Demanding bank protection beyond the contract provision in areas where no dredging
is being carried out by IWAI. A meeting was convened on 14
th June, 2013 by the

29
Additional Chief Secretary, Government of Kerala wherein all pending issues relating
to dredging and bank protected work were discussed with the concerned district
collectors.
Navigational Aids
147. Navigational aids comprising navigational buoys and solar operated navigational lights have
been installed on the entire stretch of NW-3 covering 205 Km to facilitate 24 hours navigation. This
is the first National Waterway in the country having 24 hours navigational facilities on the entire
stretch.
148.  The Committee feels that IWAI is actively undertaking the dredging work and it
has also done a commendable work in installation of navigational aids and fairway
development. National Waterway No. 3 has an excellent potential in cruise tourism, cargo
shipment, linking ports, international steamer route, etc. Ministry of Shipping should strive
to reap all the potential revenue sources anticipated with the Waterway No. 3. The
Committee recommends that M/o. Shipping should take proper measures to depute adequate
staff for IWAI.
149. Further, Ministry of Shipping should also look into the aspect of dredging and
widening work being hampered due to resistance by local fishermen by placing their fishing
nets in the fairway. Also, the problem pertaining to the disposal of dredged material on the
banks of canal without raising the local sentiments also needs an apt solution. The
Committee recommends the Ministry of Shipping to give impetus to the progress of
dredging work as it is essential for the development of NW-3.
Terminals
150. Permanent terminals at 11 locations viz., Kottappuram, Aluva, CSEZ (Kakkanad), Maradu,
Vaikkom, Thanneermukkom, Chavara and Kollam are proposed on NW-3, out of which eight (8)
terminals at Kottappuram, Aluva, Maradu, V aikkom, Thanneermukkom, Thrikkunnapuzha,
Kayamkulam and Kollam have already been constructed. The land acquisition process for the 9
th
terminal at Alappuzha has been completed during December 2010 and Terminal construction is in
progress. The remaining 2 terminals at Chavara and CSEZ (Kakkanad) will be taken up
subsequently after assessing the utilization of terminals which have already been constructed.
IWT Connectivity to ICTT
151. In view of the development of International Container Transshipment Terminal (ICTT) at
Vallarpadam in Cochin Port Area, tremendous potential was anticipated for transport of
containerized cargo through NW-3. To capture this potential, terminals at Willingdon and Bolgatty
Islands have been constructed at a cost of Rs.16.60 Cr with RO-RO (Roll On – Roll Off) and LO-
LO (Lift on – Lift Off) facilities specially for transportation of containers between ICTT
Vallarpadam and Willlingdon Island (3.5 Km). The operation of RO-RO service has been
commenced from 23
rd February, 2011. Till March, 2013, 70,541 Twenty Foot Equivalent Units
(TEUs) has been moved.
152. The IWT terminals at Willingdon and Bolgatty Islands are providing the linkage of NW-3
to the port logistics chain. This mode of water bridging avoids a road transit of 35 Kms through
the very congested Kochi City road to Vallarpadam.
153. Further, the Govt. of India has notified SEZ status for Puthuvypeen and Vallarpadam. An
industrial cluster with thrust on energy related units focusing on value added exports are planned

30
in the SEZ area. Some of the units like LPG project have already been allotted land. A modern
logistics park is also planned in the proximity to the ICTT, where supply chain consolidation and
warehousing activities will take place. These developments will generate demand for transit of
containerized goods through waterways.
Cargo Movement
154. The major cargo being moved at present through NW-3 are sulphur, Rock Phosphate,
Phosphoric Acid, Salt, Coal, Zinc, Furnace oil and Fertilizers from FACT to Kochi Port along
Udyogmandal Canal (23 Kms) and Champakkara Canal (14 Km).
155. However, once the developmental work being undertaken in NW-3 are complete, cargo such
as POL products from IOC, HPCL and BPCL, Rare Earths and mineral sand from M/s IRE Ltd
and KMML, coir products, cashew Kernel and container cargo are expected to move in NW-3.
156. During 2011-2012, 13.44 Lakhs Tonne of cargo was moved through NW 3, which is the
highest record in 20 years of the mobility. The same has been reduced to 12.36 Lakhs Tonne of
cargo during 2012-13. The reduction mainly due to the reduction in the container volumes moved
through ICTT, Vallarpadam.
157. The Committee notes that the development of terminals along the National
Waterways is progressing well. There is a need to give adequate publicity to the advantages
of moving containers through NW so that it can regain the container volumes. The
terminals also need to be equipped to handle all types of cargos. Committee hopes that the
Government of India and Government of Kerala will coordinate together to ensure that the
entire NW3 is navigable.

31
CHAPTER-IV
COCHIN SHIPYARD LIMITED
158. Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL) is a fully owned Government of India company which is
the major player in shipbuilding and ship repair industries.
Business Profile – Ship Building
159. Since inception, the CSL has been pursuing a diversified business profile consisting of
Shipbuilding and Ship Repair. Marine Engineering Training was added since 1993. The products in
shipbuilding range from Double Hull Tankers, Bulk Carriers to Port Crafts, Offshore Supply
Vessels, Passenger Ships, Dredgers and Tugs. Recently, shipyard has delivered high end Offshore
Support Ships to discerning clients from Western Europe, US and Shipping Corporation of India.
Presently, the yard has orders for 25 ships consisting of 3 Platform Support Vessels for
international owners, 20 Fast Patrol vessels for the Indian Coast Guard, the prestigious Aircraft
carrier for the Indian Navy and buoy tender vessel for the Department of Lighthouses and
Lightships.
160. CSL moved into the International Market in a modest way by building a Jacket Launch
Barge for National Petroleum Construction Company, Abu Dhabi, in the year 2002. Since then CSL
has built and delivered 40 ships for owners based at various parts of the world viz., Bahamas,
Norway, Netherlands, Greece, USA and Saudi Arabia.
161. Cochin Shipyard has one of the best infrastructures in India. It has 80 cranes with
capacities ranging from 10T to 300T, two of the biggest dry docks in the country which can take
in Aframax tankers, two marine coating shops for quality painting under controlled conditions,
modern steel cutting facilities, TRIBON design software and CAD/CAM facilities are some of the
major infrastructures which give Cochin Shipyard its unique competitive edge. These facilities add
quality to construction and go a long way in ensuring customer satisfaction. Other facilities like
transporters, movable outfit shops, etc. have enhanced the efficiency and productivity of the yard.
Recently, CSL has set up separate facilities for construction of small commercial ships. This facility
help the yard to undertake concurrent construction of small commercial ships with the Indigenous
Aircraft Carrier Project thus providing the flexibility to pursue a diversified product profile.
162. Regarding placing of orders on Cochin Shipyard by PSUs and Shipping Corporation of
India, it has submitted the following issues:–
(i) In order to sustain the force levels of Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard, Ministry
of Defence, Government of India has time and again placed Orders on nomination
basis for building front line warships and submarines on Defence PSU shipyards such
as Mazagon Dock Limited, Mumbai (MDL), Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers
Limited (GRSE), Kolkata, Goa Shipyard Limited, Goa (GSL) and Hindustan Shipyard
Limited (HSL). Similarly Cochin Shipyard is building the indigenous Aircraft Carrier
(IAC-Project-71) for the Navy on nomination basis. However, given the sheer diversity
and number of warships which are required by both Navy and Coast Guard, there is
a definitive case for considering Cochin Shipyard on par with other Defence PSU
shipyards by Ministry of Defence as mentioned above and be provided with orders for
31

32
building warships and fleet auxiliary vessels on Nomination basis, so as to maximize
utilisation of the capacity and capability of Cochin Shipyard in the service of the nation.
(ii) Inclusion of CSL as an entity amongst Indian companies for invoking 30% Offset
clause as per Defence Procurement Policy (DPP) guidelines would certainly help CSL
in bidding for defence contracts. At the moment this facility has been extended to only
Defence PSUs by the Government. CSL being a PSU should also be included for
invoking 30% offset clause.
(iii) Given the down turn in world-wide shipbuilding scenario, there is a need to support
the indigenous shipbuilding industry with confirmed orders by other PSUs, SCI and
Government entities. Price discovery can be on transparent process using Open Book
Estimate (OBE) method.
(iv) CSL be given the right of refusal to match L1 price/delivery period, if CSL is within
10% of L1 price, discovered through open tendering process, before proceeding with
final award of contract on the tender.
(v) Exim Bank/other Commercial Banks to be urged to provide soft loans on long term
basis to Indian Shipping companies including SCI and DCI for placing orders on
Indian shipyards. Similar approach exists in most countries.
163. The Committee recommends that PSUs and Government entities viz. SCI, DCI Ports,
Ministry of Earth Sciences, DRDO, Fisheries Survey of India (FSI), Geological Survey of
India (GSI), etc, be encouraged and advised to place order with CSL on nomination basis,
if the yard meets experience, infrastructure and technical requirements. CSL should be
included for invoking 30% offset clause as part of DPP, applicable to other Defence PSUs.
Long-term loans are another issue where Government intervention is required and
necessary directions is issued to EXIM/commercial banks.
Ship Repair
164. CSL entered into the ship repair business in the year 1981 and since then has gained
expertise in undertaking complex and sophisticated repairs to various types of ships including bulk
carriers, tankers, passenger ships, oil rigs, etc. CSL’s main clients in ship repair are Oil and Natural
Gas Corporation of India Ltd., Indian Navy, Coast Guard, Shipping Corporation of India and
Administration of Union Territory of Lakshadweep. CSL has successfully completed two major ship
conversion projects, one for a Singapore based owner and the other for National Institute of
Oceanography, Goa.
165. On the issue of tax concessions to ship manufacturing vis-à-vis  import of ship, CSL
informed the Committee that:–
 (i) Ship construction and delivery is a “manufacturing” activity as per Central Excise Act
and a “sale” as per V AT Act. Until 31.3.2011, there was no excise duty on indigenous
sale of ships and as per Central Excise Tariff Chapter heading 89, rate of duty was
‘Nil’. From 1
st April, 2011 excise duty was introduced at 5% as per Tariff, on
indigenous sale of ships and for the year 2012-13, the rate was increased to 6%. For
the year 2013-14, indigenous sale of ship has been extempted from Excise Duty.
Export of ships is extempted from excise duty. Excise Duty is payable on the raw
materials and components procured indigenously for shipbuilding, except for steel. As
per Kerala Vale Added Tax Act, the sale of ship is subject to levy of V AT@5%. Though
the item imported for construction of ships in Bond under section 65 of the Customs
Act are exempted from payment of custom duty (Prevailing exemption, vide

33
notification No.12/2013 cus., dated 01.03.2013, Sl. No.469), the Customs Department
is insisting for payment of customs duty and additional duty on the items imported in
respect of the vessels sold to owners within India, deeming the same as “sale to
Domestic Traff Area”. CSL also submitted that while the Department is insisting for
payment of customs duty in such cases, at the same time vide item Sl. No.461 of the
above referred notification, ships and other vessels falling under Chapter heading
Nos.8901, 8902 00 10, 8905 10 00, 8906, 8907 10 00 when imported into India, are
exempted from the whole of customs duty. This is in stark contradiction to the stand
taken by the Customs Department in the case referred previously. Capital goods
imported for shipbuilding including renewals and replacement of yard facilities are
presently not exempted from levy of Customs Duty.
166. In view of the various problems faced by the Cochin Ship Yard Ltd., (CSL),  the
Committee recommends the following:-
(i) Consideration of an amendment to Central Excise Tariff to make the rate of
duty as “Nil” as per Tariff for ships and other vessels.
(ii) Excise duty exemption on all materials procured for shipbuilding, from
indigenous sources.
(iii) T otal exemption from levy of V AT on sale of ships.
(iv) Recommend issuance of a notification clarifying exemption of Customs duty and
additional duty on the items imported for manufacturing of the vessels sold to
owners within India.
(v) Consideration of Customs duty exemption for the capital goods imported for
shipbuilding activities.
(vi) Invoking ‘shipbuilding subsidy’ as prevalent earlier to foster shipbuilding
activities in the country.
167. The extant procedures related to customs clearance for release of cargo either for
shipbuilding or for ship repair also need to be analyzed and fine-tuned for early release of
the same and thus provide an impetus to both shipbuilding and ship repair activities in the
country.
Marine Engineering Training
168. In the Marine Engineering training front, the Committee was apprised that CSL trains
graduate engineers to be Marine Engineers who later join ships, both Indian and foreign, as fifth
engineers. The yard has a capacity to train 140 graduate engineers every year. CSL’s Marine
Engineering Training Institute has been rated excellent by Credit Rating Agency (CARE) since 2004.
Concessions to CSL
169. On being queried on the concession given to CSL for increasing its competitiveness with
Colombo Dockyard, Srilanka, its direct competitor in ship repair business segment, CSL informed
that following are admissible taxes for undertaking repairs of ships at CSL:
(a) Kerala Value Added Tax: Ship repair is a work contract activity under Kerala Value
Added Tax Act/Rules and works contract V AT is applicable on the taxable turnover
(i.e. value of materials transferred by the repairer to the ship owners in the course
of ship repair) @14.5%

34
(b) Service Tax: Ship Repair will fall under the head “Maintenance or Repair Service”
under the Service Tax Act and service tax is payable @12.36% on the value of
services excluding the value of materials involved in the services on which V AT is
paid.
Government of India has introduced levy of service tax on all services except those
services specifically exempted vide Notification No.25/2012-S dated 20 June 2013
(Negative List of services) with effect from 1 July, 2012. As per Sl. No.25(b) of the
above Notification, the services provided to Government by way of repair or
maintenance to Government vessels are exempted from levy of Service Tax. Hence,
Service Tax is not applicable on the repair of vessels belonging to Government(such
as Navy, Coast Guard, Fisheries Survey of India, CIFNET, Ports, LDCL etc.)
(c) while executing the ship repair works on the exempted vessels, certain works are
outsourced by the yard to sub-contractors. Since the vessel is exempted from levy of
service tax and the services are rendered by the sub-contractors on the Government
vessels, such services are eligible for exemption.
(d) The ship repair services rendered on vessels owned by the private parties and PSUs
(owned by the Government of India) are not exempted from levy of service tax.
170. Further, Sl.No.29(h) of the notification provides exemption to “the services provided by
sub-contractor by way of works contract to another contractor providing works contract services
which are exempt,”.
171. The Central Excise Department is refusing to grant the above benefits to the sub-
contractors.
172. The Committee observed that ship repair market is highly competitive and in order
to secure orders against stiff international competition, the prevailing tax provisions
negatively impacts the competitiveness of CSL . The Committee recommends that work
contracts related to ship repair may be exempted from V AT and ship repair activities may
be exempted from Service Tax, if otherwise it is not hampering the economy. The
Government of India and Government of Kerala should re-evaluate the various taxes
imposed on the ship repair industry to enable the Cochin Shipyard Limited to compete with
other major ship repair dockyards.
Cluster Concept
173. Cochin Shipyard authorities explained to the Committee that shipbuilding world over is
developed in a cluster concept. Most OEMS (Original Equipment Manufacturers) and raw material
suppliers are ideally located in and around a shipyard, which gives the yard logistical advantage and
competitive strength.
174. The Committee would like to know from the Ministry of Shipping why such cluster
concept could not take off in India. The Government should create a business environment
for the growth of Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMS) and raw material supplier in
nearby localities of the shipyards. The Committee sincerely feels that it would go a long way
in strengthening our ship building and ship repair industry.

35
35
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
Chapter – I : Tourism in Kerala
Cruise Tourism
The Committee visited the dedicated Cruise Terminal ‘Samudrika’ built at the
Cochin Port. Though non-operational during the time of Committee’s visit, it was built for
providing all the amenities for cruise passengers viz. , Immigration, Customs, waiting
lounge, rest rooms, facilitation cell, security, dedicated boat terminal, Marina for luxury
yachts etc. The Committee feels that this is the potential area of tourism development for
Cochin as well as other ports. The Committee recommends that the cruise potential of
Cochin Port may be included in the ‘Incredible India Campaign’ to give maximum publicity
to attract cruise tourists. Further, the Committee emphasizes that more training/workshops
should be organised by concerned ports to train the employees/agents in cruise tourism so
that the ports are equipped to deal in this new opportunity. Further, Government can
contemplate to extend this new avenue to other major ports as well. (Para 14)
Development of Backwater Tourism in Kerala (River Cruise)
The Committee notes that Alappuzha  and the adjoining regions have great potential
in backwater cruise tourism. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India should give all out efforts to provide adequate infrastructure for
backwater tourism and provide the necessary finances for the purpose. (Para 16)
Wellness Tourism
The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Central/State Governments
for providing wellness tourism and accreditation of wellness centres. The responsibility of
the Government and stakeholders adhering to the conditionalities speaks volumes about the
importance being accorded to tourists’ safety and clean business ethics by the tourism
fraternity in Kerala. Further, the drive undertaken for providing financial assistance under
the Market Development Assistance Scheme (MDA) and giving exposure to Wellness
Tourism Service Providers shows the pro-local people and pro-entrepreneurial approach. The
Committee would like the State/Central Governments and all concerned to come up with
such solution-providing ideas so that the wellness tourism in Kerala is developed as brand
of its own to attract tourists from world over. (Para 20)
Medical Tourism and Medical Visa
One of the emerging tourism products in the state of Kerala is Medical Tourism. But
large scale support from the Union Government is required to develop this potential. There
have to be efforts from the Ministry of Tourism to promote Medical Tourism including
Ayurveda, Sidha, Unani etc. in association with Kerala Tourism. The issues relating to
issuing Medical Visa also need to be addressed. (Para 22)

36
Wildlife and Eco-tourism
The cardinal principles for development of eco-tourism are really laudable. The
Committee appreciates the efforts of Kerala Government in maintenance of environmental
integrity and development of tourism in an ecologically sustainable manner. During its visit
to Eravikulam National Park, Munnar, Periyar Wild Life Sanctuary and Gavi National Park,
Thekkady, the Committee got a first-hand experience of the functioning module as to how
the pristine beauty of the locations were maintained and development of eco-tourism’s way
was paved. (Para 27)
Thekkady
On the basis of interaction with various stakeholders and its first- hand experience,
the Committee feels that various satellite towns adjoining Thekkady have immense tourism
potential. In view of the fact that Thekkady and the adjoining Kumily towns are already
saturated, the Committee emphasises the need to develop the satellite towns/villages as
tourist destinations. The Committee further recommends that the Union Ministry of
Tourism and Government of Kerala should cooperate with each other to ensure that satellite
villages of Thekkady are provided with adequate infrastructure to develop as tourist
destinations. (Para 40)
The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to establish a full fledged museum
in Thekkady to have first hand experience to the tourists about the social, cultural,
traditional and historical aspects of the region. This will give authentic information on the
people and culture of the area. The Committee also recommends that museums should be
established at all the tourist destination. (Para 41)
The Committee was told that there is a state-owned vegetable farm near Kumily. The
Committee recommends that a Botanical Garden may be established in Kumily, if need be,
the State owned farm may be converted into a Botanical Garden. (Para 42)
The Committee further recommends that vehicular traffic may be restricted inside
Periyar Wild Life sanctuary. The present parking area which is inside the forest area may
be shifted out of the sanctuary. Only the battery operated vehicles may be permitted from
the parking lot to the sanctuary/boat landing area. At Eravikulam National Park, Munnar,
the Committee observed that battery operated vehicles are used for transporting tourists to
the National Park. The same model can be adopted in Periyar Sanctuary also. (Para 43)
The Committee also recommends that comprehensive waste management system may
be introduced in Kumily and Thekkady. At no stage the sewage may be allowed to be
dumped in the Periyar Tiger Reserve (Periyar lake). The Government of Kerala and the
Ministry of Tourism Government of India should take initiative in this regard. (Para 44)
The Committee also recommends that adequate number of modern boats which are
pollution free and less noisy may be provided at the Periyar sanctuary so that the wild life
is not disturbed. This will also avoid the mad rush for boat tickets. Ministry of Tourism
should cooperate in this regard. (Para 45)
The Committee was informed that the tourists were being charged exorbitantly and
the authorities of Periyar Tiger Reserve were permitting the tourists arbitrarily. In case of
boat-tickets also, there are great variations in price between those bought from the counter
and the online bookings. The representations received in this regard have been forwarded
to the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India and Kerala Tourism for appropriate

37
remedial measures. The Committee hopes that the appropriate authorities will look into
these complaints and take remedial measures. (Para 46)
The Committee recommends that necessary efforts may also be made for training of
a team of naturalists recruited from the local Eco-development Committees; Setting up of
training facilities for forest dependent communities in responsible tourism initiatives;
setting up of eco-shops for marketing of value added products developed by local
communities; developing nature trails as an integral part of jungle camping linking spices
gardens and hamlets, etc. (Para 47)
The Committee feels that there is a need for establishment of Tribal Culture and Art
Museum at Kumily and developing the existing Rajiv Gandhi Museum of Flora and Fauna
at Kumily into a full fledged museum. The Committee found that the Forest Department
has tried its best to preserve the folk culture of the area by providing a platform to the
folk artists of the region and encouraged the musicians and dancers to carry on the
precious legacy. This gesture is appreciated by the Committee as this initiative enabled
them to retain their talents without disturbing their livelihood. The Committee feels that
this initiative could be further encouraged and many more artists would be benefitted if it
is taken up in a large scale. The Government is not only bound for development of tourism
but also for preservation and transfer of the knowledge of wild, natural and cultural
heritage to the future generations. The Committee wants them to take a considerate view
on the problems being faced by the stakeholders in these Park/Sanctuaries. The Committee
directs the Ministry of Tourism to offer patronage and extend necessary financial support
for the proposals. It also recommends that they should study the feasibility of introducing
ropeways without hindering the ecology at Thekkady and Munnar. (Para 48)
Tea Tourism
The Committee visited the Tea plantations, Tea Museum and Tea Factory of Kanan
Devan Hills Plantations Company Private Limited (KHDP) at Munnar. The Committee felt
that the spread of tea plantations from top to bottom of the hillocks really offered a special
experience to tourists, which instantly makes it as its Unique Selling Proposition. The tea
estates and bungalows just add another tweak to this perfect serenity. The Committee
observes that this experiential tourism would certainly carve a niche for itself, the
State/Central Governments have to make concerted efforts to coordinate with each other in
maintaining the pristine beauty of the area and campaign hard at every level to promote
Munnar as one of the prime tourist destination of India. (Para 52)
Spice Route and Muziris Heritage Projects
This Committee fully supports this global Spice Route Tourism initiative proposed by
Kerala Tourism which not only revives India’s glorious heritage as a destination for
travellers and traders but would give a larger foothold for garnering world tourism revenue.
The Committee further calls upon all the related Ministries of the Government of India to
fully support this initiative. Especially, Ministry of Tourism is recommended to endorse the
project by taking a leeway. (Para 56)
Muziris Heritage project
Muziris (the present day Kodungalloor and the adjoining areas) is reputed to be the
ancient world’s greatest trading centre in the East. As the focal point of commerce for over
2500 years, this bustling sea port traded in everything from spices to precious stones with

38
the Greeks, Romans and the rest of the world. It was also the doorway to India for varied
cultures and races: Buddhists, Arabs, Chinese, Jews, Romans, Portuguese, Dutch and even
the British. (Para 57)
The representatives of Kerala Tourism informed the Committee that the Muziris
Heritage project is in the active stage of implementation and they are planning to link it
with the spice route project. The Committee is fully in agreement with the Kerala Tourism
initiative to club it with the Muziris Heritage project, one of the biggest conservation
projects in India showcasing a culture of 3000 years or more, which is already partnered by
various departments of State Government of Kerala, Central Government and the UNESCO.
This would make Kochi, Muziris and Malabar the Heritage Circuit of Kerala. The
Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism, Government of India should give all the
support required for promoting spice route and Muziris Heritage Project. (Para 58)
Ropeway and Railway System in Munnar
The Committee recommends that the Ropeway and the Railway System can be
revived by the Government on its own or with the help of KDHPL which is the owner of
most of the land in Munnar. The Ropeway can offer a unique experience to the tourists
without interfering with the environment. (Para 60)
Munnar - Eravikulam Ropeway
The Committee was apprised of the tea plantation history by Kanan Devan Hills
Plantations Company Private Limited (KHDP) which was the pioneer of tea plantation in
Munnar. The Tea Museum showcased the traversity of the Company from materialisation of
the streak idea of an enterprenuer to full-fledged company of today. It was brought before
the Committee that the Kanan Devan Hills Plantations Company Private Limited (KDHP)
succeeded Tata Tea Limited on 1st April 2005, when the latter exited most of its plantations
in Munnar to focus on the growth of its branded tea business. The Committee recommends
the Ministry of Tourism to consider the proposal of the Ropeway connecting from Munnar
to Eravikulam, suitably. This can be constructed by the Government agencies or in
collaborations with KDHPL. The Ropeway will be an added attraction in Munnar. It may also
reduce human intervention inside the Eravikulam National Park. (Para 65)
Rationalisation of Interstate Tourist Permit Charges
This is a serious issue having larger connotations in the promotion of tourism.
Ministry of Tourism is requested to convene an urgent inter-state discussion on the subject.
The Committee feels that tourism is not a high end product only for the rich domestic and
foreign tourists; it could be made easily affordable to the rising upper and lower middle
classes of the neighbouring states. Resolution of these smaller issues will lead to tourism
development. (Para 70)
The Committee further emphasise that all the southern states should join hands to
promote tourism. The “Golden Triangle Module” as existing in north India for promotion of
Tourism can be replicated as a “Golden Quadrangle” in southern region. Further, Ministry
of Tourism should strive to replicate the successful tourism modules of Kerala in other
southern states as well. The matter may be taken up with the Chief Secretaries of all the
Southern States. (Para 71)
Wrong Taxation practices affecting MICE Tourism
The Committee found that presently the Central and State Governments are levying

39
different taxes on hotel industry. This disincentive of high expense of stay compared to
other states may hinder the tourism prospects. The cost accounting to visit to Srilanka,
Malaysia, Singapore, etc. works out less as it comes to Kerala. The Committee requests the
State and the Central Governments to make an effort to re-workout their respective
taxation structures so that the tourism of state of Kerala is not a causality. (Para 77)
On the issue of bundling of service tax, the Committee observed that a customer is
taxed 3 times for a single product. Since this tour product is taxed on the first part, the
Committee feels that the second part i.e., tax paid by the tour operator may be exempted
to avoid the product being taxed three times. Kerala Tourism should take initiative to
ensure that multiple taxes are not acting as a stumbling block for growth of Tourism in
Kerala. (Para 78)
Regarding granting of bar license to eligible three star hotels and above, the
Committee observes that the matter has already been heard by the Supreme Court and
directions have been issued, State Government is bound by these directions. (Para 79)
Comprehensive Waste Management Schemes at Tourist Locations
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may
come out with a special scheme to support the waste management projects of the states at
the tourist destinations. Waste management collection, disposal and management may also
be included in the works to be taken under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS). (Para 82)
Representatives of Kerala tourism informed the Committee that they have a
proposal to supply empty bags to collect wastes generated by the tourist vehicles once they
enter a particular tourist location on payment of a security deposit. The security deposit will
be returned to the vehicle on their return journey after the vehicle return the bag
containing the waste generated by them. (Para 83)
The Committee notes that it is a novel idea which can be implemented with
cooperation of the stakeholders. The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India may
promote such initiatives whole heartedly through advertisements which may add to their
efforts of “Clean India Campaign”. (Para 84)
Reducing the time required for procuring Indian Visa
The Committee evidently observed that the present Visa-on-arrival (VOA) provides
only a limited advantage to the State. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a second
list of countries needs to be considered for inclusion in the VOA facility extending it to the
said European countries USA, UK, France, Germany, Australia, Malaysia, Canada,
Netherland, UAE and Italy which are in the top list of international tourist arrivals to the
state of Kerala. The Ministry of Tourism and the Government of Kerala may take up the
matter with Ministry of External Affairs to initiate suitable action in this regard. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Home
Affairs should take appropriate favourable action on the relaxation of visa norms suggested
by the Government of Kerala for the sake of development of tourism. (Para 88)
On the issue of reducing the time required for procuring Indian Visa, Ministry of
Tourism may take up the matter with the Ministries of Home and External Affairs. If
necessary, the present procedure of issuing visa may be reviewed to reduce time and the
embassy officials may be sensitized to the requirements of foreign tourists. (Para 89)

40
Permission to State Level Tourist Guides to Enter into ASI Monuments
The Committee observes that in the scenario of acute shortage of trained guides,
this is a serious omission on the part of ASI. The Director General, Archaeological Survey
of India may be directed to intervene in the issue to enable the approved state level guides
by the State Department of Tourism to undertake guiding activities in all ASI monuments
as in the case of Government of India approved guides. (Para 92)
Promoting Kerala for Film Shooting
The Committee recommends that the state should come out with a directory of
potential locations for film shooting. The state should also hold workshops/FAM tours to
film production executives. There should be a single window clearance for film shooting.
(Para 94)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of
India should support film shooting as a special scheme. (Para 95)
Chapter – II : National Highways in Kerala
The Committee would like to know whether the CALA staff is deliberately delaying
the process to cling on to the posts. They should be terminated immediately if no activity
is undertaken. This will avoid wastage of resources. (Para 104)
After going through the submissions made to the Committee especially on the topics
of ‘Land Acquisition status from 2004-12’ by the NHAI and the ‘Land Acquisition for
widening of National Highways’ and ‘Funding of road projects through PPP model vis-à-vis
undertaking NHDP by Government of Kerala with the help from NHAI’ by the State
Government of Kerala, the Committee feels that the Kerala Government is neither
interested in funding of road projects through PPP model nor wants to take up the projects
themselves. It further implies that the State Government does not want to fully gear up to
the prevailing situation. It should understand that with half-hearted efforts full results
cannot be achieved. If the State Government wants highways (which is on ‘Union’ list) for
holistic development of the State in general and tourism development in particular, it has
to evolve a middle-path between appeasing the general public, bearing burden on the
exchequer in terms of R & R Package and working with NHAI & MORTH under NHAI Act.
A clear intent of reaching at a workable proposition to the problem is the only solution
available here. National Highways Authority of India has already incurred an expenditure of
Rs.9.50 crores for establishing the paraphernalia and it also has to bear the burnt of
escalations in land acquisition and civil costs. This cannot go on perpetually. Ministry of
RTH is recommended to take up the issue with the State Government of Kerala accordingly.
(Para 114)
The Committee notes that the condition of roads in Kerala is very poor. The
Committee also notes that the State of Kerala is 10 year behind the schedule compared to
other States as regards construction of roads are concerned. This has happened mainly
because of the problems related to land acquisition for widening and construction of roads.
Initially there were problems with the width of the roads. Now it has been settled at 45m.
Then, there are problems of alignment and design of roads. NHAI needs to do their work
on a professional way rather can coming under pressure from the rich and powerful as far
as alignment and design are concerned. The issue need to the settled in close coordination
with the Government of Kerala. (Para 115)

41
The Committee observes that Kerala has a peculiar pattern of demographic
settlement and most of the land is heavily cultivated and both sides of the roads are heavily
constructed and inhabited by the people. Therefore, any road widening project has to be
supported by adequate compensation and resettlement package. The principles adopted at
the National level for compensation and resettlement should not be applied to Kerala due
to the very peculiarities available in Kerala. Government of Kerala should be the best
authority to decide on such matters and the NHAI and the Ministry of RTH should liberally
cooperate with the State in finding solutions. (Para 116)
Another aspect brought to the notice of the Committee was that NHAI is not
maintaining the NH-47 and N.H.-17 properly. The climatic condition of Kerala is that
throughout the year there will be rain and during Monsoon it will be heavily raining for
months together. Therefore, the Committee feels that it is the duty of the NHAI to make
the life line of Kerala-NH 47 and NH 17- traffic worthy throughout the year. The Committee
recommends that NHAI should allocate adequate funds for the repair and maintenance of
NH 47 and NH 17. (Para 117)
Yet another aspect brought to the notice of the Committee is that public is refusing
to pay toll fee wherever there are poor maintenance and repair of the roads or the toll fee
is high. The Committee, therefore, opines that NHAI has to blame themselves for the
refusal of toll payment by the public. (Para 118)
Yet another aspect noticed by the Committee is that the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways is giving only meagre allocations for maintenance of National Highways in
Kerala. The Committee feels this is highly inappropriate and it is the duty of Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways to maintain the National Highways traffic worthy. The
Committee recommends that adequate allocation may be made for maintenance of National
Highways in Kerala. (Para 119)
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture had earlier raised the issue of delay in acquisition of land for national highways
projects and release of share of central funds to Kerala in its 193
rd Report for which Action
Taken Replies from Ministry of Road Transport and Highways are still awaited. (Para 120)
Gaps in Road Connectivity
The Committee recommends that in order to solve traffic congestions in the road
connectivity to the Port, these four fly-overs are essential to be constructed. For a better
port connectivity, the Committee also recommends the followings:–
➢ To provide last mile connectivity to the Cochin Port with NHDP Grid from
Kundannoor to Willingdon Island, Committee recommends that the length of
about 5.9 Km is required to be widened to 4 lane.
➢ The Committee feels that it may also facilitate to establish good land link
between State ports like Beypore, Azhikal etc. NH17 meets the NH47 at Edappally.
➢ The Committee observes that such upgradations will facilitate industrial
developments in the adjoining areas of highway and generate cargo to the Port.
➢ The Committee came to know that the Govt. of Kerala has initiated action in
this regard. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and NHAI may provide
active financial support for the development of these projects before further
proceeding in the matter. (Para 126)

42
Chapter III – National Waterways in Kerala
Linking Ports with NW3
Backwater experience is one the most sought after tourism products in Kerala. The
southern side of Alappuzha has been not tapped fully linking it with the mainstream
tourism destinations and circuits. It is essential to expedite the development of NW-3 and
is also necessary to connect this stretch to the nearest tourist attractions. Especially the
Kodungalloor – Muziris area needs to be well connected by the waterway and necessary
development work needs to be taken up. The Committee notes that the entire NW3 is not
fully navigable as per IWAI standards. It is a fact that Kerala is facing acute road
connectivity problem and construction of national highways is not coming up to appreciable
levels, in this context, if the waterways is cleared for substantial chunk of traffic then it
could considerably reduce the pressure on the roads. (Para 141)
The Committee recommends that IWAI and Ministry of Shipping may look into
connecting Kodungalloor, the Centre of Muziris Heritage project with NW 3, assistance of
State Government on this issue could be sought. (Para 142)
The Committee also recommends that with regard to IWT interlinkage with ports,
the linkages from port side and waterway side should have a synchronized development, so
as to have the effective interlinkage. (Para 143)
Navigational Aids
The Committee feels that IWAI is actively undertaking the dredging work and it has also
done a commendable work in installation of navigational aids and fairway development. National
Waterway No. 3 has an excellent potential in cruise tourism, cargo shipment, linking ports,
international steamer route, etc. Ministry of Shipping should strive to reap all the potential
revenue sources anticipated with the Waterway No. 3. The Committee recommends that
M/o. Shipping should take proper measures to depute adequate staff for IWAI. (Para 148)
Further, Ministry of Shipping should also look into the aspect of dredging and
widening work being hampered due to resistance by local fishermen by placing their fishing
nets in the fairway. Also, the problem pertaining to the disposal of dredged material on the
banks of canal without raising the local sentiments also needs an apt solution. The
Committee recommends the Ministry of Shipping to give impetus to the progress of
dredging work as it is essential for the development of NW-3. (Para 149)
IWT Connectivity to ICTT
The Committee notes that the development of terminals along the National
Waterways is progressing well. There is a need to give adequate publicity to the advantages
of moving containers through NW so that it can regain the container volumes. The
terminals also need to be equipped to handle all types of cargos. Committee hopes that the
Government of India and Government of Kerala will coordinate together to ensure that the
entire NW3 is navigable. (Para 157)
Chapter IV – Cochin Shipyard Limited
Shipbuilding:
The Committee recommends that PSUs and Government entities viz. SCI, DCI Ports,

43
Ministry of Earth Sciences, DRDO, Fisheries Survey of India (FSI), Geological Survey of
India (GSI), etc, be encouraged and advised to place order with CSL on nomination basis,
if the yard meets experience, infrastructure and technical requirements. CSL should be
included for invoking 30% offset clause as part of DPP, applicable to other Defence PSUs.
Long-term loans are another issue where Government intervention is required and
necessary directions is issued to EXIM/commercial banks. (Para 163)
Ship Repair
In view of the various problems faced by the Cochin Ship Yard Ltd., (CSL),  the
Committee recommends the following:-
(i) Consideration of an amendment to Central Excise Tariff to make the rate of
duty as “Nil” as per Tariff for ships and other vessels.
(ii) Excise duty exemption on all materials procured for shipbuilding, from
indigenous sources.
(iii) T otal exemption from levy of V AT on sale of ships.
(iv) Recommend issuance of a notification clarifying exemption of Customs duty and
additional duty on the items imported for manufacturing of the vessels sold to
owners within India.
(v) Consideration of Customs duty exemption for the capital goods imported for
shipbuilding activities.
(vi) Invoking ‘shipbuilding subsidy’ as prevalent earlier to foster shipbuilding
activities in the country. (Para 166)
The extant procedures related to customs clearance for release of cargo either for
shipbuilding or for ship repair also need to be analyzed and fine-tuned for early release of
the same and thus provide an impetus to both shipbuilding and ship repair activities in the
country. (Para 167)
Concessions to CSL
The Committee observed that ship repair market is highly competitive and in order
to secure orders against stiff international competition, the prevailing tax provisions
negatively impacts the competitiveness of CSL . The Committee recommends that work
contracts related to ship repair may be exempted from V AT and ship repair activities may
be exempted from Service Tax, if otherwise it is not hampering the economy. The
Government of India and Government of Kerala should re-evaluate the various taxes
imposed on the ship repair industry to enable the Cochin Shipyard Limited to compete with
other major ship repair dockyards. (Para 172)
Cluster Concept:
The Committee would like to know from the Ministry of Shipping why such cluster
concept could not take off in India. The Government should create a business environment
for the growth of Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMS) and raw material suppliers in
nearby localities of the shipyards. The Committee sincerely feels that it would go a long way
in strengthening our ship building and ship repair industry.  (Para 174)

ANNEXURES

47
ANNEXURE-I
Projects Sanctioned During Last Three Years
Sl. Name of the Name of the Date of Date of Current
No. project tourism project proposal status of
development submitted sanctioned the
scheme along with with project
amount amount
sought by allocated
State by
Government   Ministry
12 3 4 5 6
2010-11
1. Development Product 10.02.2010 17.05.2010 W ork in
of Muziris Infrastructure Progress
Heritage Circuit Development Rs.7200.00 Rs.4052.83
Connecting Destination lakh lakh
historically and and
archaeologically Circuit
important places (PIDDC)
of Kodungalloor
in Kerala
2. Development of PIDDC 27.09.2010 27.12.2010 An amount of Rs.147.77
Aruvikara and lakh has been adjusted in
Peppara Dam Rs.244.00 Rs.184.71 project Development of
Sites in to lakh lakh Kappil Beach and Boat
Tourist Club as tourist
Destination destination in Kerala
sanctioned during the
year 2012-13
3. Celebration of Domestic 28.09.2010 27.12.2010 Festival Completed
Utsavam 2010-11 promotion (Rs.96.00 lakh
and Nishangandhi Publicity and for Rs.50.00
Festival-2011 Hospitality Utsavam+
Rs.65.50 lakh (Rs.25.00
(DPPH)   for lakh for
Nishagandhi each
festival) festival)
2011-12
1. Development of PIDDC 13.09.2010 29.06.2011 W ork in Progress
Munnar into a
Tourist Rs.610.00 Rs.488.51
Destination in lakhs lakh
Kerala

48
1 2 345 6
2. Development of PIDDC 13.09.2010 29.6.2011 W ork in Progress
Neriamangalam
into a Tourist Rs.467.00 Rs.309.62
Destination in lakh lakh
Kerala
3. Developing Information 01.10.2010 29.6.2011 W ork in Progress
Mobile Based Technology
service and IT Rs.94.00 Rs.46.00
based projects (IT) lakh lakh
for the
Promotion of
Kerala
Tourism
4. Development Assistance to 23.08.2011 02.1 1.2011 Work in Progress
of Cruise Central
Passenger Agency Rs.700.00 Rs.491.53
Facilitation lakhs lakh
Centre at
cochin Port,
Cochin
5. Development PIDDC 30.8.2011 08.12.2011 W ork in Progress
of
Peruvannamuzhi Rs.648.00 Rs.500.00
and Kakkayam lakh lakh
Dam Sites in
Kozhikode
District in
Kerala
6. Developing of PIDDC 29.10.2011 08.12.201 1 Work in Progress
Karappuzha
Dam site and Rs.828.00 Rs.492.03
Surroundings lakh lakh
into a major
destination in
Kerala
7. Developing IT 29.09.2011 30.1 1.2011 Work in Progress
Mobile Based
Services and Rs.96.00 Rs.48.00
IT based lakh lakh
projects for
the promotion
of Kerala
Tourism

49
12 3 4 5 6
2012-13
1. Development PIDDC 29.10.2011 02.05.2012 Progress report yet to
of be received from the
Thumboormozhi Rs.184.00 Rs.146.99 State Government
Dam sites and lakh
Surrounding into
a major
destination in
Kerala
2. Grant of CFA DPPH 19.04.2012 18.06.2012 Progress report yet to
for First World be received from the
Drum Festival Rs.70.00 24.00 State Government
of India 2012 lakh
3. Development of Assistance to 04.08.2012 28.12.2012 Progress report yet to
dedicated cruise Central Agency be received from the
berthing Rs.2490.00 Rs.2243.32 Cochin Port Trust
facilities at lakh
Cochin Port
4. Development of PIDDC 30.08.2011 31.03.2013 Sanctioned recently
Back-water
circuit in Rs.7200.00 Rs.4762.48
Alappuzha in lakhs lakh
Back-water
Region as a
Mega Circuit
in Kerala
5. Development of PIDDC 13.02.2012 31.03.2013 Adjustment from
Kappil Beach Development of
and Boat Club Rs.349.00 Rs.322.70 Aruvikkara and Peppara
as a tourist lakh Dam Sites into a Tourist
destination in destination
Kerala
6. Development of PIDDC 29.10.2011 31.03.2013 Adjustment from
Palaikari Fish Development of
Farm and Rs.350.00 Rs.327.04 Muzhippilangad Beach as
surrounding lakhs lakh a major tourism
areas in destination
Chempu
Village into
a major
destination

50
Project for revalidation during 2013-14
Sl. Name of the Amount Amount Status
No. Project Sanctioned Released
1. Development of 324.39 64.87 File submitted to HM (T) for
Kochi as a tourist r evalidation
destination
2. Development of 235.04 47.08 File submitted to HM (T) for
Bhoothathankettu revalidation.
as a tourist
destination
Status of projects prioritized for the year 2013-14
Sl. No. Name of the projects Status
CARRY FORWARD PROJECTS
1. Development of Munnar Hill Clarifications sought from the State
Government is still awaited.
2. IHM at Alappuzha/Kottayam including hostel
facility, provided the land is transferred in
advance to the Department of Tourism, Kerala
or Society.
NEW PROJECTS
Integrated Mega Circuit
1. Northern Tourism Circuit Development, Kerala Not Received
subject to approval of competent Authority.
Mega Tourism Circuit
1. Vagmon-Thekkady Eco-Tourism Circuit Not received
Circuit
1. Spice Route Circuit-Malabar Zone Not received
2. Backwater Circuit-Varkala to Kottappuram Not received
3. Eco-Camping circuits and caravan parks Clarifications sought from the State
Government is still awaited
Destinations
1. Conservation of Heritage Properties-Mascot,
Bolghatty and Lake Palace Not Received
2. Kochi Marine Drive Water Front Development Not Received
3. Destination Fort Kochi Not Received
4. Destination Kumarakom Not Received
5. Destination Kannur Not Received

51
Rural Tourism
1. Rural Tourism Cluster at Idayar Island - Scheme yet to be approved by
(Thiruvallam, Kovalam and surrounding village Planning Commission
clusters)-subject to the approval of the Scheme.

52
52
ANNEXURE-II
Minor/Non-Major Ports in Kerala
1 Vizhinjam/Kovalam 1 km. away from State Waterway
2 Trivandrum (Valiathura) 400 m away from State Waterway
3 Kollam (Thankassery) Connected through Neendakara
4 Neendakara Well connec ted with National Waterway
5 Kayamkulam W ell connected with National Waterway
6 Alappuzha Alappuzha canal is very near
7 Munambam Well connected with National Waterway.
8 Ponnani Connected with State Waterway
9 Beypore Connected with State Waterway
10 Calicut Not connected with waterway
11 Badagara Not connected with waterway
12 Thalassery Connected with State Waterway
13 Kannur Connected with State Waterway
14 Azhikkal (Parassinikadavu) Connected with State Waterway
15 Kasargod Connected with State Waterway
16 Manjeswaram Connected with State Waterway
17 Neeleswaram Connected with State W aterway

53
MINUTES

54

55
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 20 th May, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
3. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
6. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
10. Shri S. Pakkirappa
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
13. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
14. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
16. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B, Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Indian National Ship-owners Association, Mumbai
Capt. Ranjeet Singh
2. * * *
55
*** Relates to other matter.

56
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The meeting adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. after some discussion on proposed study visit to the
Kochi-Munnar-Thekkedy-Kochi scheduled from 24 th to 31 st May, 2013.
*** Relates to other matter.

57
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the 23 rd August, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
10. Yogi Adityanath
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B, Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and requested them to offer their
comments/suggestions on the following draft Reports circulated to them:
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
(iii) 200
th Report on “Development of Tourism, National Highways and Water Transport in
Kerals and Cochin Shipyard Limited”.
57
*** Relates to other matter.

58
3. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports with minor modifications.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera, M.P.
to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and S/Shri Prabodh Panda, M.P. and M. Krishnaswamy,
M.P. to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha on the 27
th August, 2013.
5. * * *
6. The meeting adjourned at 4.10 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.