 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fortieth Report on Demands for Grants (2023 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
September , 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Report on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of Ministry 
of Culture  
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
356 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
24) of Ministry 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SIXTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fortieth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of Ministry of 
Culture  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-vii 
 4. REPORT                                1-85 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   86-90  
6. *MINUTES         
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
91-93

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha  
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. (vacant ) 
10. (vacant ) 
 
Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Raj Kamal Singh, Assistant Committee Officer  
 
 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifty Sixth Repor t on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Fortieth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of Ministry of Culture. 
2. The Three Hundred Fortieth Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was pre sented to the Parliament on the 13 th  
March, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fortieth Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on 4th  July, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 19 th  
September, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
September 19, 2023                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Bhadra 28, 1945 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
AKAM  Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav 
AMASR  Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
ASI  Archaeological Survey of India 
B.E.  Budget Estimate 
BISAG  Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Applications and Geo-Informatics 
CCRT  Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
CNA  Central Nodal Agency 
CPC  Centrally Protected Monuments 
CPMs  Centrally Protected Monuments 
CSR  Corporate Social Responsibility 
Cr  Crore (a unit of measurement in Indian numbering system) 
CFY  Current Financial Year 
DPC  Departmental Promotion Committee 
FY  Financial Year 
GDP  Gross Domestic Product 
IBC  Indian Building Congress 
IBC  Indian Buddhist Circuit 
ICH  Intangible Cultural Heritage 
IGNCA  Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
IGRMS  Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya 
LKA  Lalit Kala Akademi 
MAKAIAS  Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of Asian Studies 
MoF  Ministry of Finance 
MoM  Ministry of Minority Affairs 
MoT  Ministry of Tourism 
MoC  Ministry of Culture 
MoPR  Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
MoD  Ministry of Defence 
MoE  Ministry of Education 
MoHFW  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoD  Ministry of Defence 
MoRTH  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoC  Ministry of Culture 
MoPR  Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
MoM  Ministry of Minority Affairs 
MoT  Ministry of Tourism 
NAI ASI  National Archives of India, Archaeological Survey of India 
NCF  National Culture Fund 
NGO  Non-Governmental Organization 
NMCM  National Mission on Cultural Mapping 
NMML  Nehru Memorial Museum & Library 
NSD  National School of Drama 
NTCA  National Tiger Conservation Authority 
PPP  Public Private Partnership 
PSC  Parliamentary Standing Committee 
RE  Revised Estimate 
RFP  Request for Proposal 
SNA  Sangeet Natak Akademi 

iv 
 
SOPs  Standard Operating Procedures 
SSC  Staff Selection Commission 
SHGs  Self-Help Groups 
UNDP  United Nations Development Programme 
UT  Union Territory 
UPSC  Union Public Service Commission 
UTs  Union Territories 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture on the 
recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred Fortieth Report on „Demands 
for Grants (2023 -24) of Ministry of Culture‟ which was presented to both the Houses of 
Parliament on 13th March, 2023.   
2.      The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 6th July in respect of all 
the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been categorized as 
follows:- 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 24, 33, 38, 39, 43, 44, 48, 56, 61, 64, 69, 72, 
73, 78, 83, 84, 85, 87, 88, 89, 92, 93, 95, 99, 100, 143, 193, 197, 201, 208, 211, 213, 214, 
216, 218, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 232, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 243, 
245, 246, 250, 251, 252, 253, 257, 259, 260, 266, 270, 272. 
Total: 70 
  
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 37, 49, 55, 77, 103, 104, 105, 109, 110, 111, 112, 117, 119, 122, 124, 
125, 129, 130, 131, 132, 135, 138, 139, 150, 154, 156, 157, 158, 161, 163, 164, 165, 166, 
172, 176, 178, 179, 183, 184, 189, 221, 263, 264, 265. 
Total: 44 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 14, 41, 50, 58, 59, 60, 81, 82, 91, 118, 121, 142, 144, 168, 187, 188, 
194, 205, 220, 244, 258, 269. 
Total: 22 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil 
Total: 0 
 
 

2 
 
3. The Committee desires that final reply in respect of the recommendation/observation 
which has been categorized as interim reply by the Committee should be furnished at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
Chapter-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
B.E. 2023-24: Salient features and Projected Demand vs. Allocation 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the Ministry has been awarded 85 per cent of its projected 
demand for BE 2023-24. The shortfall in demand versus allocation has increased from 11 per 
cent at BE stage in 2022 -23 to 15 per cent  in 2023 -24. Moreover, the allocation made to 
various Central Sector Schemes is much lower vis -à-vis the demand of the Ministry. This 
includes allocations under Support to Akademies (63.9% of demand), Support to Museums 
(76.1%), Support to Libraries (70%) and Buddhist Tibetan Institutions and Memorials 
(62.8%). These heads support the expenditure of various a utonomous bodies such as Sangeet 
Natak Akademi, Indian Museum (Kolkata), Delhi Public Library, Central Institute of 
Buddhist Studies. The Committee desires to be apprised of the broad impact of the shortfall on 
the activities of the various autonomous bodies under these heads. 
(Para 13) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The Ministry has been allocated Rs. 3399.65 crore for FY 2023 -24. In light of the deficit 
in the approved budget allocation for the fiscal year 2023-24 and after examining the expenditure 
pattern of the fiscal year 2022 -23, the ministry ensured an efficient allocation of funds among 
different sectors. Allocation under Other Central expenditure has seen a shortfall of Rs 435 crore 
when compared to the projected demand for FY 2023 -24. However, there i s an augmentation of 
Rs.93.19 Cr to the Ministry's 33 Autonomous Bodies as compared to FY 2022 -23. Adequate 
provisions are being made for the regular activities as well as some of the stand alone projects 
planned to be funded though this sector. It is anti cipated that deficiency in funds would be 
adequately addressed by MoF through an advance from contingency fund of India/at 
supplementary stage/ at Revised Estimate stage of FY 2023-24. 

4 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
      
2. The allocation of Rs. 3399 crore for BE 2023-24 is 13 per cent higher than BE 2022-23 
and 1 per cent higher than RE 2022 -23. However, the Committee notes that the increase of 1 
per cent  as compared to RE 2022 -23 is not sufficient to cover the impact of inflation. The 
spending power of the Ministry will actually decrease in 2023- 24. 
(Para 15) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
2.1 There was a significant increase in the Revised Estimate (RE) for the fiscal year 2022 -23 
when compared to the Budget Estimate (BE) for the same period. This increase was attributed to 
the allocation of funds for various activities planned under the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav 
(AKAM), implementing projects such as the Parliament Art works, and the Lumbini project of 
IBC, and Re -development of Kedarnath, among others.  However in current fiscal year 
requirement under these projects have been considerabily reduced  and hence the augmented 
allocation of FY 2023 -24 as compared to BE 2022 -23 is allocated to the mandated works of the 
ministry. However, if required,  the Ministry would request for enhancement of funds at RE 
2023-24 stage.    
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. The Committee also takes note of the year -on-year change in the budgetary allocation 
of the Ministry. The budget of the Ministry has increased from ₹2169 crore in 2015-16 to ₹ 
3400 crore in 2023 -24, an increase of 57 per cent . In comparison, the total bud get of the 
Government in this period has risen from ₹17.77 lakh crore to ₹45.03 lakh crore, an increase 
of 153 per cent. 
                                                                                                                                         (Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Ministry has been raising annual projections of the budgetary demands to the Ministry of 
Finance on the basis of demands submitted by the programme divisions administering  various 
organizations /institutions and schemes of the Ministry for the activities /programmes  envisioned 

5 
 
for the year. However, keeping in view the priorities as emphasized by the Central Government, 
the Ministry has to make itself content with the allocation. Nevertheless, th e Ministry takes steps 
to ensure that the planned activities are not hindered by lack of funds, and additional resources 
are sought through the Contingency Fund/Supplementary Demand whenever necessary. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
4. In view of these observations, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
underscore the importance of its mandated duties to the Ministry of Finance for higher 
allocation at R.E. stage. The Ministry of Finance may be requested to minimize the shortfall 
in allocation vis -à-vis the proje cted demand. The Ministry may also ensure that the funds 
allocated to it are fully utilized to permit higher allocations at future stages. 
(Para 17) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1  This M inistry was consistently able to increase its budgetary outlays over the years 
except in the Covid pandemic period where priority was given to other social sector ministries. 
The Committee would appreciate the fact that allocation to the Ministries/departments depends 
on the prevailing factors, including calamities as has happe ned due to  COVID-19 and other 
priorities of the Government. The committee's observations are however  duly acknowledged for 
compliance to the best of this Ministry‟s capacity. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
5. The Committee agrees with the submission that a majority of the amount spent on art 
and culture in many countries is from non -government sources. The Committee suggests that 
the Ministry should increase its focus on encouraging private participation in the art and 
culture sector. 
(Para 18) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Suggestion of the Committee has been noted and necessary instructions have been issued 
to all program divisions for compliance. 

6 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
6. The Ministry should try to attract investment from private organizations und er 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds, besides seeking investments through Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) route. Private sector's active participation will help the Ministry 
reach the desired level of investment in India's Culture and Heritage s ector. This would 
enable much better preservation and development of monuments and museums in the country. 
It would also help India become a more attractive tourist destination. 
(Para 19) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 It has been decided by the Government to revamp the „Adopt a Heritage Scheme‟ as 
AAH 2.0 to encourage corporate sectors to provide, develop and maintain infrastructure to 
enhance visitors' experience at the monuments under Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR) in a 
planned and phased manner. Under this scheme various entities from public and private 
corporate sectors as „Smarak Saarathi‟ and „Smarak Saathi‟ can adopt and enhance the amenities 
basic in nature such as overall cleanliness of premise, drinking water, safety, neat washrooms, 
etc for visitors. 
 
6.2 The National Culture Fund established as a funding mechanism by the Ministry is distinct 
from the existing sources and patterns of funding for the preservation, promotion & protection of 
arts and cultur e of India. Since inception NCF has completed 54 projects and 22 are ongoing 
under PPP/CSR/Donation/Fundraising modes. In the last three years NCF has been successful in 
fostering partnerships with Public and Private Organisations  / Individual for the prot ection and 
preservation of Indian art and heritage projects like Conservation and restoration of Vishnu 
Temple, Bateshwar, Morena, MP; Setting up of Atmanirbhar Bharat Centre Design (ABCD) at 
L-1 Barrack, Red Fort, Delhi; Conservation work and providing to urist amenities at Sri Lakshmi 
Narasimha Temple Nuggehalli, Karnataka & Restoration and Development of National Heritage 
Site at Deobaloda, Chattisgarh, being funded by INFOSYS Foundation, SBI, Smt. 
Nagarathnamma and SAIL -Bhilai Steel Plant respectively. A nother project – Digital 
Upgradation of the ASI, Hampi Museum at Kamalapur, Karnataka to b e funded by Airports 
Authority of India is under consideration 

7 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
7. The Committee appreciates the assurance given by the Ministry that no activity will be 
compromised for want of funds. 
(Para 21) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The Ministry offers its gratitude to the Committee to acknowledge the assurance of the 
Ministry and would be energized to take up the activities with more zeal. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
8. The Committee notes that Capital investments generate future cash flows for the 
national economy. Capital figures are factored into macroeconomic indicators such as Capex -
to-GDP. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the expenditure made for capital 
purposes should be correctly reflected in the budget figures. The Ministry may ensure that this 
accounting anomaly is corrected as soon as possible. 
(Para 24) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 With the introduction of new heads in 2023-24, the expenditure incurred under the capital 
section would be more visible  as compared to the expenditure incurred till now under Capex. 
However, If any accounting anomaly is detected, it will be ensured to be rectified as soon as 
possible. 
 
Expenditure under various heads in the ongoing Financial Year 2022-23 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee observes that the Ministry has managed to spend just above two - third 
of its R.E. 2022 -23 allocation in the first ten months of the FY 2022 -23. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may make concerted efforts to ensure maximum permitted 
utilisation of available funds. This is crucially important in order to meet the various targets 
set for the ongoing financial year. The Committee notes the  issues that have affected the 

8 
 
quality of utilisation by the Ministry. Constrained fund utilization of the available budgets in 
any sector may be avoided through coordinated policy measures to ensure improved fund flow 
and utilization. The Committee hopes that the Ministry fully spends the balance 31.5% of its 
RE 2022-23 allocation in the next 2 months of FY 2022 -23. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may take suitable measures to avoid expenditure rush in the last quarter in FY 
2023-24. 
(Para 33) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The ministry made all efforts to bring in steady expenditure progress throughout the 
Financial Year 2023-24 so as to adhere to the cash management guidelines issued by MoF. Till 
3rd quarter of FY 2022 -23, an expenditure of Rs. 200 6.9 crs as against the allocation of 
Rs.3009.05 crore was incurred. Moreover, an amount of Rs. 107.37 crore was utilized by this 
time from the Contingency Fund of India, which had resulted in a total expenditure of Rs. 
2114.28 crore (70.26%). 
  
9.2 However, at the RE stage of FY 2022 -23, the budget of the ministry was revised and an 
additional Rs. 354.02 crore was approved. Consequently, there was an increased expenditure in 
the last quarter primarily as a result of the upward adjustment of funds in the Rev ised Estimate 
for the fiscal year 2022 -23. Even so, this ministry made a remarkable achievement of attaining 
97.65% of overall expenditure as against the RE 2022 -23, after obtaining requisite approvals 
from Min. of Finance for relaxation on the permissible  upper limit mandated in the cash 
management guidelines. All endeavors will be administered to carry forward the improved 
performance in CFY as well. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
10. It is evident that the Ministry has consistently utilized more than 90 per cent of its B.E. 
allocation in the last few years, except for the COVID -impacted FY 2019-20 and 2020-21. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may continue to ensure optimal utilisation of the 
funds available at its disposal in the upcoming years. 
(Para 38) 

9 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 As committed under para 33. above, the Ministry will always endeavor   to ensure 
optimum utilization of  the funds available at its disposal.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
11. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Finance may also factor in the consistent 
pattern of fund utilisation by the Ministry of Culture while deciding upon allocations to MoC 
in the future. 
                         (Para 39) 
     
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The Ministry of Finance demonstrated i ts generosity by providing necessary financial 
support to the Ministry whenever it was required, as witnessed in the fiscal year 2022 -23. During 
this period, funds were allocated to the Ministry through the Contingency funds to facilitate 
urgent activities, including the installation of NetaJi's statue at India Gate, to undertake activities 
under AKAM etc. The Ministry is hopeful for favorable allocations from MoF in future as well. 
 
Targets and Achievements of the Ministry vis-a-vis Output Outcome Framework for the 
year 2022-23 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
12. The Committee appreciates the good progress made by the Ministry in meeting a 
majority of the targets set under the Output Outcome Framework. The Committee notes that 
in many cases such as the number of gurus and artists financially supported, the Ministry has 
comfortably exceeded the set targets. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may duly 
factor in the achievements of the previous year and set higher targets for the next year, as may 
be permitted by the available allocations. 
(Para 43) 
 
 

10 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The Ministry is grateful to the Committee for acknowledging the efforts of the Ministry 
in this regard.  The program division has set realistic targets for providing support to  
Guru/Shishya of various organizations in the fiscal year 2023 -24. These targets are determined 
based on several factors, such as expenditure incurred in previous years, availability of funds, 
and the selection process under various schemes. With these fac tors in mind, higher targets are 
set to support approximately 7,000 Guru/Shishya from around 1,200 organizations during the 
CFY. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
13. The Committee notes that the pace of progress under some important output and 
outcome indicators has been slow in the ongoing FY 2022 -23. These include the number of 
new museums setup with financial assistance under the Museum Grant Scheme, number of 
Museum and Library professionals trained, number of programmes conducted for promotion 
of culture of science, and so on. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into 
the reasons for under -achievement of targets in each such case. The bottlenecks being faced 
in achieving the targets may be effectively addressed to ensure higher pace o f progress in the 
FY 2023-24. 
(Para 44) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 All efforts are being made to adhere to achieve the targets set. 
 
Issues related to Human Resources 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
14. The Committee notes that most of the organizations under the Ministry of Culture are 
functioning with a very high level of vacancies across Group A, B as well as C. Barring the 
Ministry of Culture (Establishment), all organizations have more than 35% vacan cies in 
Group A posts. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyze the impact of the 
high number of vacancies presently existing in all its organizations. The Ministry should take 

11 
 
urgent action to ensure that adequate staff is recruited to enabl e these organizations to fulfill 
their mandate in letter and spirit. 
(Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 Committees directions are noted for compliance. Ministry would like to apprise the 
committee on the actions taken by different organizations under MOC to fill the vacant posts:-  
ASI - Eleven (11) posts of Group -A have been revived and the process of recruitment for the 
same will be initiated soon.   The following steps have been taken for filling up the vacanci es in 
ASI:- 
  Steps have been taken to amend the RRs expeditiously. 
 Requisitions for filling up posts through UPSC and SSC have been submitted. 
 Steps have been taken to fill up promotion quota vacancies by holding DPCs. 
14.2 National Archives of India : Rec ruitment action is being taken up for the post of ADG 
(RM),ADG(IT)and joint Director general   and the case regarding revival of these posts have 
been submitted to MoF. Proposal for filling up of the post of Deputy Director (archives) has been 
taken up on d eputation basis due to non availability of eligible candidates in the feeder grade. 
Proposal for filling up the 03 posts of Assistant Director of Archives (R&P) has already been 
submitted in the UPSC for DPC. Vacancy of Library & Information Officer is to be filled by 
composite method; 5 applications have been received and are being scrutinized and follow up 
action will be taken after approval of competent authority. For filling up of the various Group B 
(Gazetted) post‟ such as; Administrative Officer, Arc hivist (General) -21, Archivist (OR) -
02,Microphotographist-03;Scientific Officer -03;Assistant Engineer -01 necessary action either 
has been started or is being started. For filling up of the 58 posts in various categories at group B 
(non- Gazetted), 59 at gr oup „C‟  and 68 posts of MTS have been taken up with the various 
agencies.  
14.3 Action for filling up of the vacancies in other  organizations such as AnSI, Nehru 
Memorial Museum & Library(NMML),   Asiatic Society, Kolkata, Indira Gandhi Rashtriya 
Manav Sang rahalaya (IGRMS) and MAKAIAS is being taken up by the respective 
organizations. 

12 
 
Central Reference Library, Kolkata - Action is in progress for revision of RRs and 
revival/creation of the posts at various levels.  
 
14.4 Gandhi Smriti Darshan Samiti (GSDS) h as intimated filling of vacancy of 01 Group „A‟ 
post namely „ Director‟. The interviews of shortlisted candidates have already been held  for 
fulfilling the vacancy of said post. 
The National School of Drama has advertised to fill up various vacancies and the same is under 
process. 
14.5 With regard to the 36 vacant posts in CCRT, advertisement has been published for 15 
Nos. of posts to fill in the Group  „A‟ and „B‟ category either on deputation or direct recruitment 
basis and for the remaining 21 Nos. of va cant posts, advertisement will be published shortly.  
Efforts are being made to fill the 30 vacant posts in Kalakshetra Foundation and Autonomous 
body of the Ministry.  
14.6 Lalit Kala Akademi and Sahitya Akademi are  in the process of filling up the vacant 
position in the organizations.  The Sangeet Natak Akademi is in the process of finalizing its own 
Recruitment Rules incorporating VII  CPC recommendations. As soon as these are finalized, the 
Akademi will initiate necessary action to fill up the posts. 
  
 Recommendation/Observation 
 
15. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that it is trying to evolve 
innovative methods to maximize the participation of non-government organizations in the field 
of promotion and conservation of art and culture. T he Committee feels that till the time a 
satisfactory level of investment is made by the private sector, the Ministry should ensure that 
adequate funds are available with ASI to perform its crucial duty of preservation of 
monuments. The Committee, therefore , recommends that the Ministry may seek additional 
funds to ensure that ASI’s projected demands are met at the R.E. 2023-24 stage. 
(Para 56) 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 The committee's recommendation is well acknowledged. The additional funds 
requirement of ASI in different budget sub heads would be collated and projected to MoF for 
allocation through Contingency Fund or during R.E.2023-24. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
16. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may request the Ministry of F inance to 
allocate sufficient funds under this head to enable ASI to carry out its planned activities for 
restoration of unprotected monuments 
           (Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 The observations/recommendations of the committee are noted for compliance. It is 
reaffirmed that additional budget requirements in the relevant ASI budget subhead will be 
projected on requirement basis to MoF at RE stage and the Ministry would be requested for issue 
of requisite re -appropriation order. An optimal util ization of funds would be ensured.   
 
Vacancies in ASI 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
17. The Committee notes that 37.5% of the total number of posts in ASI is presently 
vacant. The Committee recommends that the ASI may undertake urgent measures to ensure 
that it has adequate level of staff working towards the conservation and development of the 
Centrally Protected Monuments across the country. 
(Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 In this regard, it is to inform that 88 vacancies for the post of Senior Conserva tion 
Assistant and 342 vacancies for the post of Conservation Assistant have already been advertised.  
Further, the process of issuing appointment letters for the post of MTS has already been initiated. 

14 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
18. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take steps to assess the number of 
vacancies that would exist on account of senior employees retiring and junior ones getting 
promoted. The Committee, further, recommends that ASI may factor in the time it takes for a 
recruitment cycle to complete and start the process to fill at least some portion of its projected 
vacancies in advance.  
           (Para 69) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
Security Policy for Centrally Protected   Monuments (CPMs) 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
19. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may finalize the comprehensive security 
policy for all CPMs at the earliest, since ensuring their security cannot be postponed to a later 
date. The security policy should cover the requirements for physical security of monuments, in 
terms of requirements for boundary walls/fences, security personnel, CCTV cameras, and so 
on. 
(Para 72) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 The comprehensive security policy being prepared with IIT Delhi will enable ASI to 
identify short, medium, and long term security challenges as well as to form their solutions. 
Further, the on -site data along with an interim report will be submitted to ASI for institutional 
deliberation and consideration. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
20. The Committee is of the view that increasing public participation and awareness may 
be made a part of the Security Policy for CPMs. The policy should include measures to raise 

15 
 
public awareness about t he importance of historical monuments and the need for their 
protection and preservation. This may include educational programs for students, creative 
public outreach campaigns, and partnerships with local community organizations. 
(Para 73) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 The recommendations by the Committee are duly noted for raising public participation 
and awareness as a part of the Security Policy for CPMs and will be included while drafting the 
proposed policy document.   
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
21. India has a large number of archaeological sites in the country and thus, a high 
potential for archaeological excavation and exploration. In this light, the Committee feels that 
the present allocations being made for excavations is rather inadequate. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may make a fresh reassessment of the budgetary requirements 
for excavation and exploration once the policy thereon is finalized. 
(Para 78) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 The Central Advisory Board on Archaeology (CABA) considers the proposals for 
exploration and excavation based on expected result and its contribution to national/ regional or 
specific problems related to archaeology. Archaeological officers in ASI, State Archaeology 
Departments and Universities are encou raged to submit the proposals. As a result, increase in 
budgetary requirement and allocation is evident in the last 5 years. It is herein highlighted that 
ASI has projected and has been allotted a budget of Rs 20.00 Cr in ASI budget sub head 
16.01.49 Other  Revenue Expenditure (Exploration & Excavation) in B.E. 2023 -24.  Further, 
village to village surveys and problem based investigations are taken care of by the Circle 
Offices of ASI. 
 

16 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
22. ASI should start with strict implementat ion of these measures at UNESCO World 
Heritage Sites, extending the same to all other ticketed CPMs across the country afterwards 
within a set timeline. 
(Para 83) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 It is assured that the facility to register complaints is already in place. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
23. The Committee notes the need for renovation and restoration work at various 
monuments across the country. These inter alia include various Monuments/ protected sites of 
Kerala such as Bekal Fort, Palakkad Fort, Tha lassery Fort, Kannur Fort, Anchuthengu Fort, 
Vadakkunnathan temple, Kadavallur temple, Thriprayar temple, Thiruvarattukavu temple, 
Gopeshwar Temple (Chamoli) and Adi Badri Temple. 
(Para 84) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 Committees recommendation will be complied with and concerned circle of ASI will be 
asked to take up necessary conservation work on these monuments  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
24. The Committee recommends that the ASI may seek the active involvement of the local 
communities in the upkeep and maintenance of monuments. 
(Para 85) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 Committee's recommendation is well - accepted. Many  of ASI CPM‟s are living 
monuments and ASI involves all the local stakeholders at these living CPMs in planning and 
conservation work. 
 

17 
 
 
Preparation of monument-specific conservation plan for all CPMs 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
25. The Committee recommend s that ASI may come up with monument -specific 
conservation plans for each of the CPM under its protection. The conservation plan should 
outline the steps and strategies needed to preserve, restore, and maintain the particular 
monument. 
(Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 ASI is already undertaking the monument -specific conservation plans.  Annual 
Conservation Plan (ACP) is received from field offices as per the requirement of sites and are 
examined and approved by competent authority.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
26. It should include an assessment of the monument's current condition, an analysis of 
the potential threats and risks to the monument, and a set of specific actions that need to be 
taken to preserve and protect the monument. 
(Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 Committee's recommendation is acknowledged. However, most of the CPM are in a good 
state of preservation and conservation works are taken up with due planning 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
27. It should involve a comprehensive assessment of the environmental and physical 
factors that impact the monument's structural stability and longevity. 
(Para 89) 
 
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 ASI field offices are continuously monitoring the health of the monuments and neces sary 
conservation steps are taken up as per requirement and availability of resources.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
28. The Committee recommends that ASI may take a multi -pronged approach to 
increasing the footfall at its monuments. ASI may use social media  platforms to showcase 
historical monuments to potential visitors. It may develop an interactive mobile app that 
provides visitors with information on the historical significance of the monument, its 
architectural features, and the local culture. It should  work on improving the overall visitor 
experience by offering services such as audio guides, free Wi -Fi, comfortable seating areas, 
clean washrooms and drinking water and so on. 
(Para 92) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 Archaeological Survey of India in technical collaboration with BISAG – N. It is 
preparing an interactive mobile application incorporating all essential information on centrally 
protected monuments/sites aided with textual description aided by visuals and details of basic 
amenities like washrooms, drinking water, seating arrangements etc. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
29. The Committee further recommends that organizing cultural events such as music 
concerts, dance performances, and traditional festivals in and around the monument would 
also help ASI to attract visitors. In all the activities related to the promotion of Monuments, 
the Ministry of Culture may closely coordinate and interact with the Ministry of Tourism. ASI 
may ensure that the Centrally Protected Monuments are easily accessible by providing 
adequate parking spaces, public transportation and signages. The Committee feels that proper 
implementation of these steps would definitely help increase footfall at the CPMs. 
(Para 93) 
 

19 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 Archaeological Survey of India encourages various recognized organizations to organize 
cultural events at monuments/sites in collaboration with state agencies. Further, the Zonal 
Cultural Centers also organized various music concerts, dance festivals within the premises or at 
the backdrop of monuments identified for the purpose. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
30. The Committee recommends that ASI may make use of social media check - 
ins/mentions and survey exercises to determine approximate visitors who visit non - ticketed 
CPMs in the country. The Committee feels that having data pertaining to footfall is a must in 
order to enable ASI to decide whether to introduce ticketing to more CPMs or not. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may undertake suitable measures to gather 
approximate statistics regarding footfall received at its non- ticketed monuments. 
(Para 95) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 Archaeological Survey of India follows traditional means to determine the visitors at the 
non-ticketed monuments. However, the recommendations of the committee are duly noted and it 
will explore the feasibility to deploy appropriate ways to determine the v isitors footfall at non 
ticketed monuments. Archaeological Survey of India is already having a dedicated dashboard in 
its online ticketing portal to monitor visitors‟ footfall data and revenue on a real time basis. 
Encroachment in and around Monuments and Archaeological Sites 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
31. The Committee notes that 531 monuments i.e. about 14.4% of ASI’s total 3693 CPMs 
have been encroached till date. Encroachments from only 9 monuments have been removed 
since 2015. The Committee believes that part of the reason behind this situation is that after 
ASI issues demolition orders to tackle encroachments, it can only issue re minders to the 
relevant authority for appropriate action. This reflects the inadequacy of the powers that ASI 
has at present in order to deal with the encroachment of CPMs. Removing encroachments is 

20 
 
one of the foremost steps to ascertain the state of prese rvation and protection of the 
monument. 
(Para 99) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1 Encroachment in the premises of the protected monuments and protected areas of 
centrally protected monuments are removed as per the provisions contained in the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,1958 and Rules framed there under. 
31.2 In order to contain the encroachments and removing them, the Superintending 
Archaeologist in charge of the Circles have been vested with the powers of an Estate Officer to 
issue eviction notices/orders to the encroachers under public premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971. 
31.3 They are also authorized to issue show cause notices under the provisions of Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and Rules 1959 followed by a 
direction to the District Collector /Magistrate by Central Government to remove such 
encroachment under section 19 of the AMASR Act, 1958 and Rule 38 of the AMASR Rules 
1959. Assistance in containing and removing encroachm ents is also sought from the respective 
State Governments/Police force. Further, in addition to the regular watch and ward staff, private 
security personnel, State police guards and CISF have also been provided for the safety and 
security of selected monuments.” 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that ASI is granted effective 
powers to help it deal with encroachment of CPMs in a firm and speedy manner. 
           (Para 100) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1 Secretary (Culture) has briefed the Committee during the meeting about punitive 
provisions of AMASR Act, 1958 and proposed amendment. The endeavor of the Ministry is to 
introduce the Bill as soon as possible. 

21 
 
 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
33. The Ministry has made better progress as regards the pace of expenditure under North-
Eastern Areas vis -à-vis B.E. allocation in the ongoing FY 2022 -23. This head has received 
enhanced allocation at R.E. stage. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will be able to make 
optimal utilisation of the increased funds for North -Eastern Areas in the last quarter of FY 
2022-23. 
(Para 143) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 As submitted in the preceding para, this ministry was able to achieve an expenditure of 
90.11% of the RE 2022-23.       
 
CENTENARIES AND ANNIVERSARIES, CELEBRATIONS AND SCHEMES 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
34. The Committee applauds the various initiatives undertaken by the Ministry under the 
Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav celebrations. Many initiatives focused on  the participation of the 
common citizen, truly making them a part of the 75th independence year celebrations. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up with more innovative initiatives under 
AKAM till August 2023 to make full utilization of the funds allocated for this purpose. 
(Para 193) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 The Ministry is grateful to the Committee for acknowledging the efforts of the Ministry. 
Appropriate action will be taken for implementing the recommendations of the Committee for 
organizing more and more innovative programmes to propagate the achievements an d sacrifices 
by a large number of Indian Freedom fighters under AKAM till August, 2023. 
 

22 
 
KALA SANSKRITI VIKAS YOJANA 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
35. The Committee notes that the Kala Sanskriti Yojana has provisions for various 
important schemes of financial assistance for veteran artists, gurus and shishyas, the creation 
of cultural infrastructure, and so on. The BE 2023 -24 allocation, though, is higher than the 
previous year B.E. allocation of Rs. 186.85 crore. However, the Committee observes that the 
B.E. allocation made under this important head has decreased from Rs. 310.48 crore in 2017-
18 to Rs. 210.49 crore in 2023-24. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may target 
increasing the number of individu als/ organizations receiving assistance through the various 
schemes under this head. A reassessment of the budgetary requirements should be made to 
achieve this target at the R.E. 2023-24 stage. 
(Para 197) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 The suggestions of the  Committee are noted. The reassessment of the budgetary 
requirement would certainly be worked out keeping in view of the expenditure at RE 2023 -24 
stage.  
 
SCHEME FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO VETERAN ARTISTS (ERSTWHILE 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME) 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
36. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for the decrease (since 2018-19) in 
the number of veteran artists who are being supported under the Scheme for Financial 
Assistance to Veteran Artists. The Committee feels that India is a vast country with a lot of 
veteran artists who must be in need of this scheme but either aren’t aware of the scheme or 
cannot get someone to apply it for them. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
put sincere efforts towards incre asing the number of deserving beneficiaries under this 
Scheme. 
(Para 201) 

23 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 It has been the constant endeavor of the Ministry to extend financial support to all 
approved beneficiaries. However, release of financial assistance after selection to the 
recommended artists is subject to fulfilling certain conditions like submission of Digital Life 
Certificate in every year and Income Certificate in every five years. As these pre -requisite 
conditions are many times not fulfilled by t he beneficiaries in time, this often results in the non 
disbursal of funds to the beneficiaries in spite of best efforts by this Ministry. The Ministry has 
further simplified the guidelines to ensure hassle free submission of documents by the 
beneficiaries. Further efforts are being made to smoothen the monthly disbursal of financial 
support to the beneficiaries. 
 
GRANTEE BODIES 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
37. The Committee observes that the expenditure under ‘Grantee Bodies’ in the ongoing 
FY 2022-23 has been quite low. The Ministry had been allocated Rs. 120.49 crore at BE 2022-
23 under this head, which has been reduced to Rs. 50.19 crore at BE 2023 -24 due to the low 
pace of expenditure in the Lumbini project. The Committee desires to be apprised of the 
reasons for the low pace of expenditure and the steps being taken to ensure better progress in 
the project. 
(Para 208) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1 Earlier the project cost for "Construction of Building of lndia lnternational Centre for 
Buddhist Culture and Heritage (IICBCH) at Lumbini, Nepal was Rs.95.99 crore.   Rs.66.63 crore 
has been released so far and a provision of  Rs.30.00 crore has bee n made for the year 2023 -
24(BE). Now the IBC, the grantee body has revised the estimates for the construction of Lumbini 
Project to Rs.122.82 crore, IBC has sought additional funds amounting to Rs.26.83 for the same.  
IBC has been requested to submit the p roposal in DIB format as total cost of the project exceeds 
100 crore. As per D/o Expenditure OM dated 15.08.2016 projects with original cost estimates 
exceeding 100 crore and upto 500 crore require the approval of Minister in charge and need to be 

24 
 
appraised by the Delegated Investment Board chaired by Secretary of the Administrative 
Department (in this case Secretary, Culture).  
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON CULTURAL MAPPING 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
38. The Committee observes that the Ministry has not been able to make optimal utilisation 
of the funds allocated for the National Mission on Cultural Mapping since its inception. The 
expenditure incurred for NMCM in the ongoing FY 2022 -23 has been satisfactory. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the previous pattern of 
underutilisation of funds under NMCM does not continue in the future. 
(Para 211) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1 The recommendation made by the Committee is noted for future compliance. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
39. The Committee believes that the ‘Mera Gaon, Meri Dharohar’ initiative will empower 
rural communities and promote rural tourism. It would also help disseminate information 
about the rich variety of our rich cultural heritage to the masses. 
(Para 213) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1 The survey, titled „Mera Gaon, Meri Dharohar‟, will document the cultural identity at the 
village level by involving citizens to share what makes their village, block or district 
unique.Under the survey,  Village Level Entrepreneur VLEs will conduct meetings with citizens 
at the villages and then upload interesting facts about their village, its places of interest, customs 
and traditions, famous personalities, festivals and beliefs, art and culture, etc. 
 
 
 

25 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
40. The Committee is glad to note that the Ministry has made significant progress in 
collection and updation of village-level data as part of this initiative. Data for about 20% of all 
the villages in India have been covered. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
continue to work with the same vigor to process the data for the rest of the villages. 
(Para 214) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1 The ministry would like to express its gratitude to the committee for acknowledging  its 
work under NMCM.As submitted in the preceding para, the data collected and uploaded on the 
dashboard from the villages is shown as 1,20,000. As on 26.05.2023, data of 2,01,121 villages 
are  updated on the website. As such the Ministry is making all ef forts in collection of data and 
would continue the same. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
41. The Committee observes that even though the NMCM has already collected data 
related to 14.53 lakh artists, the Ministry has set a target of only 14 lakh for the next F Y 2023-
24. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for not setting higher targeted output 
under this head. 
(Para 216) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
41.1 NMCM had collected data of 14.53 lakh Artists from secondary sources till 2022-23 from 
inception of the scheme.  Thus, the targets projected for one single year 2023 -24 are higher and 
the Ministry will take all possible steps to achieve this target during the year under „Mera Gaon 
Meri Dharohar Project‟. 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Global Perspective for Better Preservation of Monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
42. The Committee notes that the National Policy for Conservation was brought out by ASI 
in 2014. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/ASI may review the policy from time to 
time in view of  the latest developments in the cultural and heritage sector around the world. 
The Committee believes that there are several global cues that can be incorporated into the 
policy for better preservation and development of tangible cultural heritage in India . These 
include enhanced community involvement, use of the latest technology (such as LiDAR scans 
and 3D mapping), sustainable tourism and adaptive reuse of heritage buildings. 
(Para 218) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
42.1 The present conservation policy 2014 is reasonably elaborate and is also based on many 
international conventions. However, the recommendations of the PSC for review from time to 
time are noted for consideration and compliance. Further, Modern techniques for 
documentation like LiDAR and 3D mapping are being considered by ASI 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
43. Strategic efforts to promote intangible cultural heritage could directly empower women 
and other disadvantaged groups. This could help establish a competitive handicraft sector by 
helping develop rural craft hubs, enhancing productivity and building sustainable market 
linkages. 
(Para 222) 
44. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may promote and showcase 
handicrafts and other products made by local artists under the Unity Malls  which will be set 
up under the ‘One District, One Product’ initiative of the Government. 
(Para 223) 
 

27 
 
45. By implementing such measures, the Committee believes that the Ministry can tap the 
potential of the cultural sector to generate employment, promoting  economic growth and 
cultural vitality at the same time. 
(Para 224) 
Reply of the Ministry 
45.1 The committee's recommendation from para 222 to para 224 has been noted. 
  
45.2 Ministry of culture through CCRT has already taken various measures wherein it support 
its Young Scholar Artist especially in the field of Handicrafts and also provides them the 
opportunities to put up their exhibition as well as stalls where artists are a ble to promote their 
respective art forms by providing training as Master Craftsmen and simultaneously they also get 
opportunities to sell their products in Crafts Mela organized by CCRT.CCRT has already signed 
MoUs with various institutions/universities as well as non- profit organizations who are working 
for the promotion of the local artists.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
46. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and ASI should prioritise hiring locals 
for conservation, preservation, maintenance, and  security-related works. This will not only 
provide employment opportunities but also create a sense of ownership and pride in the local 
community toward the historical sites. 
(Para 225) 
Reply of the Ministry 
46.1 To the best extent possible, ASI is carrying out outsourced hiring of local skilled human 
resource including craftsmen for conservation works following all extant GoI guidelines and 
instructions on the subject. Also, the outsourced agency/ firm assigned to  provide a security 
personnel at centrally protected monuments is also deploying local man power preferably. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
47. The Ministry should coordinate with departments concerned to provide training 
programs to locals for culture -related skills. This may include skills related to conservation, 

28 
 
preservation, and tourism. This will not only enhance their employability but also increase the 
quality of services provided to tourists. 
(Para 226) 
Reply of the Ministry 
47.1 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.   
Recommendation/Observation 
 
48. The Ministry should encourage entrepreneurship in the local community by providing 
support for setting up souvenir shops, handicraft stores, and other local businesses that cater 
to tourists. 
(Para 227) 
Reply of the Ministry 
48.1 Sale of Souvenir/ handicrafts and other activities are being envisaged at selected CPMs 
so that footfall can be increased. Shops for Sale of Souvenir and other gift items are also set up in 
most of the Museums of the Ministry.  
Recommendation/Observation 
49. The Committee suggests that the Ministry of Culture and ASI should collaborate with 
the Ministry of Tourism to promote heritage tourism in the region. This will increase the 
footfall of tourists, which in turn will create job opportunities for locals in the travel and 
hospitality industry. 
(Para 228) 
Reply of the Ministry 
49.1 As per mandate, MoT is providing Sound and Light Show and illumination at various 
monuments. The surrounding environs of the monuments are being taken up for development 
under various schemes of MoT as applicable.  
 
 
 

29 
 
Review and reorganization of the Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
50. The Committee notes that the CCRT is an important institution as it trains teachers for 
cultural integration in education. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
undertake a thorough review and reorganisation of the activities performed by CCRT. 
Corresponding changes may be brought out in order to ensure that CCRT performs to the best 
of its abilities and helps strengthen the cultural values of the nation among its young 
generation. 
(Para 232) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
50.1 In this regard, it is submitted that Ministry of Cult ure has already undertaken the above 
said measures and carrying out a thorough review and reorganization of the activities of not only 
the activities being performed by CCRT but also all Akademies as a whole by awarding the 
review impact study to the Quali ty Council of India . Recently the Ministry of Culture has 
organized „Chintan Shivir‟ on April 07 & 08, 2023 at Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay Institute of 
Archaeology, Noida , Uttar Pradesh in which 44 institutions / organisation of MoC had 
participated in the Shivir .  
Need for National Culture Policy 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
51. The Committee recommends that the National Cultural Policy should be inclusive and 
based on India’s multicultural and multi -ethnic values. It should aim to preserve and promote 
the diverse cultural heritage of the country, including the cultural practices, traditions of 
marginalized communities and all regional languages. 
(Para 234) 
 
52. The policy should promote cultural exchange and collaborations between different 
regions of the country as well as with other countries, to foster understanding and 

30 
 
appreciation of different cultures. It should provide incentives and support for artists an d 
cultural practitioners to innovate and experiment with new forms of expression and creativity. 
The policy should explore innovative public -private partnership models to support cultural 
initiatives and leverage private sector funding and expertise. 
(Para 235) 
 
53. The policy should address the economic sustainability of cultural practices and provide 
support for the development of sustainable cultural tourism initiatives that benefit local 
communities. 
(Para 236) 
 
54. The Committee further recommends that  the Ministry may ensure that it takes the 
views of all concerned stakeholders in order to come up with a robust, comprehensive policy. 
Such a policy will help guide the Indian Cultural and Heritage Sector in the right direction for 
many years to come. 
(Para 237) 
Reply of the Ministry 
54.1 The committee's recommendation in paras 234 to 237 has been noted for compliance. As 
was submitted during the meeting, it is a complex and   time consuming process since the policy 
needs to be carefully curated taking care  of innumerous aspects of Indian art and culture.The 
valuable recommendations given by the committee would be incorporated in the policy so 
developed. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
55. The Committee recommends that as a part of the policy, the Ministry may examine the 
possibility for ASI to extend help in the restoration of temples and other historical buildings 
built by Indian ancestors, which are in other countries such as Cambodia. 
(Para 238) 
 
 
 

31 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
55.1 The point raised by the Committee  has been noted for compliance. In fact ASI at the 
behest of MEA has been working in five countries, viz., Cambodia, Laos PDR, Vietnam, 
Myanmar and Maldives towards the conservation of their iconic monuments. Most of these 
monuments are Hindu temples that are also world heritage properties. ASI is assisting these 
countries by giving technical inputs as well capacity building of local officials. 
 
Establishment of a National Culture University with headquarters in Delhi and affiliated 
Colleges in each State 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
56. The Committee observes that India is a highly diverse and multi-cultural country. Each 
State and each village has its own distinct and unique identity. The Committee feels that in 
order to protect the unique culture of each v illage in each State, it is imperative and necessary 
to have one national university, with all States having affiliated colleges of national 
importance. Such educational institutions may also perform research work on Vedas, 
Upanishads and other historical texts and languages. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may carry out a feasibility study for establishing a National Culture University with 
affiliated colleges in each of the States and UTs. 
(Para 239) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
56.1 The recommendation of the Committee is duly supported by the Ministry. The Ministry 
has been running several Diploma/Certificate courses in the field of culture like Hindu Studies, 
Cultural management, Indian Literature, Cultural Management etc through its org anisations. 
Setting up of a National Cultural University with HQ in Delhi and its affiliated colleges in each 
state would definitely give a boost to the research work and intense studies on Vedas, 
Upanishads and other historical texts and languages.  
56.2 The Central Government decided to set up a world class institution called “Indian 
Institute of Heritage (IIH)” near Delhi which would offer Post graduate and Doctorate courses in 
History of Arts, Conservation, Museology and Archaeology.   In this direction The National 

32 
 
Museum Institute of History of Arts, Conservation and Museology, presently located in the 
National Museum, New Delhi is being rechristened  as IIH. Necessary process and approvals are 
being undertaken for setting up of IIH as deemed to be Unive rsity. The organisations; i.e. 
IGNCA, NAI ASI etc of the Ministry offering courses in the field of culture and heritage would 
be requested for merger of their academic programmes with IIH. The IIH may act as a National 
Cultural University in order to fulfi ll the desired objectives of the recommendations of the 
aforesaid recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC). 
 
Exploring the viability of replication of the Statue of Unity model in other States 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
57. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may assess the number of people who 
have visited the Statue of Unity in Kevadia, Gujarat. The Ministry may make joint efforts 
along with the Ministry of Tourism to analyze the viability of the construction of statues of 
important regional historical figures in other States. The Committee feels that if found viable, 
the development of tourist hubs around such statutes would serve the dual purpose of boosting 
tourism as well as educating the visitors about the significan t role played by important 
historical figures in shaping India’s destiny. 
                                                           (Para 240) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
57.1 In so far as Ministry of Culture is concerned the work related to erection of statues of 
various personalities, events etc in general does not figure in the mandate of the Ministry of 
Culture. The statue of Unity at Kevadia in Gujarat has been installed by the State and 
Government of India. The Ministry o f Culture has released part financial assistance of Rs. 300 
crore to the State Government of Gujarat. As regards work related to erection of Statues under 
various commemorations under the scheme of Centenaries and Anniversaries, the Ministry of 
Culture has  sanctioned financial assistance to some organizations/NGOs for erection of few 
statutes relating to personalities under the approved commemorations. 
 

33 
 
Status of the Monument Mitra – Adopt a Heritage Scheme 
 Recommendation/Observation 
                                
58. The Committee feels that the selection criteria for choosing the monuments for 
adoption should be robust and transparent. The Ministry should identify those monuments 
that are not being adequately maintained and are in need of attention. 
(Para 243) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
58.1 The guidelines were drafted keeping in mind that lesser known monuments should also 
require attention. Hence, apart from the ticketed monuments, more than 600 lesser known 
monuments have also been included into the program and the external partners will be motivated 
to pick monuments based on geo -location and strategically significant for their branding. Details 
of the process are being mentioned in the portal. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
59. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) are in place to ensure that the maintenance and revamping of the 
monuments are in line with the standards set by ASI and other professional bodies. The 
procedures should include regular inspections, monitoring and reporting mechanisms. It must 
be ensured that any new structures that might be set up by the private partners in or near the 
monuments complement the architecture and design of the particular monument. 
(Para 245) 
Reply of the Ministry 
59.1 The Directions Committee of the Adopt a Heritage Program will oversee the actions 
performed by the Monument Mitra on the monuments. Moreover, the MOU also has specific 
clauses with roles and responsibilities defined  for both ASI staff and Monument Mitra for 
maintaining the monuments as per standards.  
 
 

34 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
60. The performance of the private sector entities should be regularly reviewed to ensure 
that they are fulfilling their obligations as pe r the agreement. This would ensure that the 
adopted monuments are being maintained properly and are providing a good experience to 
visitors. 
(Para 246) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
60.1 A set of guidelines are already incorporated in the document of Adopt a Heritage 2.0 
Program. Further, recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee are noted for revisiting the 
document in the light of the above. 
 
Measures taken towards cultural diplomacy 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
61. The Committee observes that India is well-known across the world for its rich, diverse 
and vibrant culture and heritage. It is important to build soft power and good will through 
cultural diplomacy, which can help further India’s larger political, economic and foreign 
policy goals. The Commit tee is, therefore, pleased to note the steps being taken towards 
enhancing India's cultural diplomacy efforts. 
(Para 250) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
61.1 The Ministry is thankful to the Committee for acknowledging the efforts being taken up 
by the ministry towards enhancing the Cultural diplomacy of the country for furthering the 
country‟s larger political, economic and foreign policy goals.    
Recommendation/Observation 
 
62. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should focus on signing more Cultural 
Agreements & Cultural Exchange Programs with different countries to increase people -to-

35 
 
people contact and foster better understanding of each other's cultures. The Global 
Engagement Scheme should be expanded to showcase not only folk art but also contempor ary 
art, music, dance, literature, and cuisine to showcase the diversity of Indian culture. India 
should leverage digital platforms to reach wider audiences and engage with people around the 
world by creating more virtual events, online exhibitions, and we binars to promote Indian 
culture. The Ministry should establish more collaborations and partnerships with 
international museums to promote the exchange of knowledge, resources, and expertise. 
(Para 251) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
62.1 Noted for compliance. Dur ing the last FY 2022 -23 the Ministry has signed 11 Cultural 
Exchange Programmes with the following countries: Turkmenistan, Panama, denmark, Senegal, 
Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan , Romania, Vietnam, Thailand,Egypt, SlovakRepublic.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
63. The major challenges faced in cultural diplomacy efforts are language barriers, lack of 
awareness and understanding of Indian culture, and limited resources. India needs to address 
these challenges by investing in language training programs, cultural a wareness campaigns, 
and increasing funding for cultural diplomacy initiatives. 
(Para 252) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
63.1 Noted for compliance. The Global Engagement scheme is administered through Indian 
Missions abroad. As such language barriers in propagatio n of Indian Culture abroad are 
addressed. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
64. The Committee notes that in the past five years, Rs. 85.69 crore has been spent on 
activities under the Global Engagement Umbrella scheme. However, the Ministry can allocate 
more funds for more cultural diplomacy initiatives to achieve better results and e xpand its soft 
power and goodwill across the world. Doing so would promote Indian culture abroad, 

36 
 
strengthen international relations and create opportunities for increased overseas trade and 
investment. 
                    (Para 253) 
Reply of the Ministry 
64.1 With the resumption of Festival of India (FOI), a component under Global Engagement 
Scheme, the Ministry has received 40 proposals from Indian Missions for organizing FOIs there. 
An increase in allocation, if required,  would be sought for organizing F OIs in these countries 
which will result in promotion of Indian culture abroad.  
 
Fostering community participation and public awareness 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
65. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should encourage local communities to 
come forward and participate in cultural preservation projects by providing them with 
information about NCF's mission and objectives. It should develop targeted campaigns and 
outreach programs that engage local communities and raise public awareness about the 
importance of cultural heritage preservation. These campaigns can be run on various media 
platforms and social media to reach a broader audience. This is crucial to enable more 
potential donor individuals and institutions to know more about the NCF platform. 
 
(Para 257) 
Reply of the Ministry 
65.1 National Culture Fund has noted the recommendation of the Committee.   NCF has been 
taking steps for developing targeted campaigns for engaging local communities and raising 
public awareness about the importance of heritage preservation, within its limited financial and 
manpower resources.   NCF has a significant social media presence for studying NCF‟s 
objectives.  At present NCF is active on FaceBook, Instagram, Twitter, Koo and almost 1.85 
crore visits on NCF‟s website has been reported. 
 

37 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
66. The Ministry should focus on developing partnerships with local community 
organizations, NGOs, and other stakeholders to promote community participation and public 
awareness for cultural heritage preservation. This will help to leverage local resources and 
expertise to achieve better outcomes. 
(Para 259) 
 
Reply:   
66.1 National Culture Fund, in order to promote community participation, partners with 
various NGOs, SHGs, Trusts and other stakeholders  for promoting awareness for cultural 
heritage preservation.  As a part of this initiative National Culture Fund has given grant to NGO 
and Trust/Society for promoting Intangible Art & Culture related workshops/publication/events.   
The themes range include s Indian Magic,   The Legends of Jyotirlangam – Depicted through 
various Indian classical dance styles, Chatusshastikala Depiction and similar other projects.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
67. The Ministry should also consider allocating a portion of the National Culture Fund 
towards promoting community participation and public awareness for cultural preservation. 
This will provide a dedicated budget for these activities and help to ensure their sustainability 
over the long term.            (Para 
260)                                                                                                                   
 
Reply of the Ministry 
67.1 As and when relevant proposals are received, National Culture Fund considers the same 
and takes steps for allocating funds – either through PPP mode or through its own funds.   NCF 
will endeavor to move in this direction further. 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
 Creation of a mobile platform for classical dancers 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
68. A Member of the Committee noted that the various classical dances have a glorious 
history of being performed in temples and courts. In light of this, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may consider the creation of mobile platforms on which the classical dancers 
can showcase their rich heritage gr acefully during the Republic Day programme and other 
similar events. 
(Para 266) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
68.1 Classical art forms have to be showcased aesthetically to catch the spirit of the heritage 
and the richness of the grammar and culture.   A minimum of at least ten minutes is required to 
present a glimpse of the art form.   Bharatanatyam programs that are rich in tradition can be 
presented. The committee's recommendation has been communicated for necessary compliance 
by the Ministry. 
 
Delay in providing salary to staff in Uttarakhand 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
69. The Committee notes that some persons employed by ASI who take care of many 
temples in the State of Uttarakhand have not received wages for more than a year. The 
Committee recommends that ASI may urgently look into the issue and ensure timely payment 
of the salary dues to its personnel. 
(Para 270) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
69.1 ASI Dehradun Circle is engaging labour through outsourcing for maintenance and 
upkeep of ASI CPMs including temples. It is herein submitted that the outsourced firm/ agency 
pay the wages to the outsource staff and hereinafter submits the bills along with r elevant 
documents to the Circle for release of payment. The delay has primarily occurred due to delay in 

39 
 
payment by the outsourced firm/ agency. Notwithstanding, ASI Dehradun Circle has been given 
explicit instructions to expedite payment of wages to the o utsource staff and ensure no more 
delay in payment to outsource staff henceforth. 
 
Grant of permission for worshiping at temples under ASI 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
70. The Committee desires to be apprised of the policy regarding permitting religious 
activities at religious historical monuments under the protection of ASI. 
(Para 272) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
70.1 In this connection, it is submitted that as per policy decision, revival of worship is not 
being permitted/ allowed at ASI CPMs where it was not in vogue at the time of getting under 
ASI protection or abandoned since long. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
Chapter-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY: 
 
Optimal Utilisation of Funds 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
71. The Committee is glad to note that the Ministry has held Expert Committee meetings, 
NIC meetings and Appraisal meetings etc. on a regular basis to remove the backlog in the 
execution of schemes. 
(Para 37) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
71.1 The Ministry is grateful to the Committee for acknowledging the efforts of the Ministry 
in removing the backlog in execution of schemes. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
72. The Committee takes note of the initiatives being taken by various organizations to fill 
the vacancies. The Committee hopes that all concerned agencies including UPSC and SSC 
may ensure that the targeted recruitment schedule stays on track and the advertised vacancies 
get filled at the earliest. 
(Para 49) 
Reply of the Ministry 
72.1   The Ministry is grateful to the Committee for acknowledging the efforts of the Ministry 
in this regard 
 

41 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Allocation and Expenditure Pattern 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
73. The Committee is pleased to note that there has been a consistent pattern of utilisation 
of funds available with ASI in the recent years, barring the years impacted by the Corona 
virus pandemic. The Committee, however, observes that the allocation made to ASI at the B.E. 
stage has failed to reach the levels of the allocation made in 2020 -21. ASI has been allocated 
Rs. 1102.83 crore at B.E. 2023-24 stage, which is 91.8% of its projected demand. 
(Para 55) 
Reply of the Ministry 
73.1 The annual BE requirement o f ASI is being worked  based on utilization capacity. 
Allocation to the ASI is made as per B.E. allocation to the Ministry of Culture by MoF. It is 
further submitted that on the basis of utilization pattern in different ASI budget sub heads, 
additionality/savings of funds are projected to MoC during R.E. and the same is invariably being 
met by MoC through issue of Re -appropriation Orders. Hence, a consistent progressive pattern 
of utilization is being achieved by ASI over the years. Efforts will be to make m aximum 
utilization of funds before RE 2023 -24, so that ASI will be in a position to demand extra funds 
for next RE/BE. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
74. The Committee feels that having a National Policy on Archaeological Excavation and 
Exploration will give a major fillip to archaeological excavation and exploration in the 
country. The Committee hopes that the Ministry has made exhaustive consultations with 
various stakeholders for drafting this policy. The Committee recommends that the policy may 
include pro visions to permit/ license to more educational institutions and professionals to 
excavate and also involve local communities and civil society groups. 
 
(Para 77) 
 
 

42 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
74.1 The “National Policy for Excavation in India” has been approved and the same is 
operative in respect of archaeological explorations and excavations in India. The 
recommendation of the Committee was taken into consideration while forming the “National 
Policy for Excavation in India”. 
 
Capacity building in modern digital techniques 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
75. The Committee welcomes the initiatives being taken by the various different 
organisations under the Ministry of Culture to employ digital techniques to aid and assist in 
the activities that they perform. The Committee is of the view that more needs to be done, 
however, to ensure the best outputs with the latest available technology in their respective 
fields of work. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may organize training and 
workshops from time to ti me to educate the staff working in different organizations such as 
ASI, National Museum and the National Archives of India. This will allow the staff to keep 
themselves abreast of the latest technological advancements in digital techniques. 
(Para 103) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
75.1 A capacity building programme is being undertaken in ASI in collaboration with 
knowledge partner Deloitte, under Mission karmayogi. As far as a digital database is concerned, 
records of all the monuments are being built up under “He ritage App” as well as through Health 
card. An “annual health card” programme is introduced to assess their condition and 
conservation requirements. Heritage app also shall ensure the publication of details of 
sites/monuments also accessible to the general public.NAI has been providing training to its staff 
for the use of different modules of Abhilekh Patal and their comments were taken on a timely 
basis to upgrade the portal. Further, National Museum and other museums under the Ministry are 
using JATAN Sof tware for digitization of museum artifacts and have also launched several 
Virtual galleries on their portal and also have set up digital holographic exhibitions for enhanced 

43 
 
visitor experience. The Ministry hosts the portal named  India Culture portal which  is a vast 
repository of art and culture of our country.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
76. The Ministry should focus on the maintenance and user -friendliness of its digital 
platforms like the Indian Heritage Atlas and Abhilekh Patal portal since these platforms help 
in showcasing the rich depository of cultural wealth, collating important information under a 
single roof. User feedback may be collected and acted upon to make these digital platforms 
more useful over time. 
(Para 104) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
76.1 Ministry and its organizations do ensure that the digital platforms launched are user -
friendly keeping in mind the end user. Computerization and Digitization programme for an 
“Automated Retrieval System'' with department search portal i.e. Abhilekh P atal Portal 
(www.abhilekh-patal.in) for access to Archives and Learning is an initiative of NAI launched in 
2015 to make its rich treasure of Indian Archival Records available to one and all at the click of a 
button. Abhilekh Patal has service of DOD (Digi tal on Demand), POD (Page on Demand) 
through payment gateway for its worldwide users. It contains 1,49,487 Unique Visitors, 2,70,772 
Website Hits, 22,063 Registered Users 28,29,385 Reference Media ,1,43,167 Digitized Records 
and 80,09,473 digitized pages. NAI has also started digitization of 4.50 Crore pages through 
outsourcing for subsequent uploading on Abhilekh Patal. Archaeological Survey of India in 
technical collaboration with BISAG is preparing an interactive user friendly mobile application 
containing requisite information on centrally protected monuments/sites aided by textual 
information, images, basic infrastructure etc for visitors. Beta version of the application has 
already been launched for internal verification. For better visitor experience,  provision is also 
being made for user feedback, suggestions/complaints in the said application from the visitors.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
77. The Ministry may also encourage research and development in the field of digital 
techniques for cultural preservation. This will lead to the development of new and innovative 
techniques that can help in better preservation and management of cultural heritage sites. 

44 
 
                         (Para 105) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
77.1 The recommendations of the PSC are noted for compliance. It is further submitted that 
ASI is collaborating with renowned and premier institutions such as IITs, CBRI etc. for research 
and scientific approach to structural conservation. 
77.2 In the Museum sector, necessary action is alrea dy being taken. Museum collections of all 
the Museums are being digitized through JATAN Software and which are/will be available to 
researchers and cultural preservation as well which can be seen on the Govt. Museum‟s website. 
 
Enhancing research capacity and infrastructure 
Recommendation/Observation 
                                          
78. The Committee appreciates the measures that the Ministry and its organizations are 
taking to facilitate research in archaeological conservation and cultural preserv ation. The 
Committee feels that it is important to establish scientific laboratories similar to ASI’s Greater 
Noida scientific laboratory in other parts of the country to facilitate research in archaeological 
conservation and cultural preservation. This wi ll enable researchers to study the art objects 
and excavated materials of different nature in their specific contexts and help in preserving 
them. 
(Para 109) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
78.1 ASI is in the process of upgrading its scientific laboratories in various parts of the 
country like Dehradun, Aurangabad, Agra & Delhi to facilitate research in archaeological 
conservation and cultural preservation.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
79. The Ministry should allocate sufficient funds for establishing such facilities and 
upgrading the existing ones. ASI should collaborate with academic institutions, research 
organizations, and experts from different fields to facilitate research in archaeolo gical 

45 
 
conservation and cultural preservation. This will help bring in new ideas and expertise and 
provide a platform for interdisciplinary research. The Ministry should provide incentives for 
collaborations and partnerships and encourage knowledge exchange. 
(Para 110) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
79.1 ASI is already collaborating with IIT‟s, GSI & other institutes & organizations and 
experts from different fields to facilitate research in archaeological conservation and cultural 
preservation. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
80. The Committee appreciates the healthy expenditure pattern of ASI Science Branch in 
the last 5 years. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should allocate more funds for 
research in archaeological conservation and cultural preservation. This will enable 
researchers to carry out long -term studies and develop new methods and technologies for 
preserving historical monuments and artefacts. The funds should be utilised efficiently and 
effectively, and the research outcomes should be disseminated widely to benefit society. 
(Para 111) 
Reply of the Ministry 
80.1 ASI is allocating more funds for research activities in archaeological conservation & 
preservation. Further, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for c ompliance by 
ASI. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
81. The Committee is of the opinion that the structures which are being constructed today 
have no comparison to the ancient Monuments/ Forts/ Palaces/ Temples/ Structures which 
used to be constructed, which are  still sturdy and intact even today. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry carry out a comprehensive research on such structures and their 
composition. The research can aid in better conservation and restoration. 
           (Para 112) 
 

46 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
81.1 ASI conducts scientific studies on ancient monuments and will continue in future to carry 
out comprehensive research on ancient protected structures and their composition. 
 
Impact of Climate Change and Tracing Missing Monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
82. Historical monuments are an essential part of our cultural heritage, and climate 
change can have a devastating impact on them. The Committee may be apprised as to whether 
the conservation plans which are presently in force, f actor in the ill effects of climate change 
on the monuments. It is essential to regularly monitor historical monuments for signs of 
damage or degradation that may have been caused by climate change. Monitoring can help 
identify potential issues early on, a nd appropriate action can be taken to mitigate any adverse 
impact. The Committee feels that using climate - resilient materials during restoration or 
conservation work can help protect monuments from the effects of climate change. 
(Para 117) 
Reply of the Ministry 
82.1 ASI is aware of the growing impact of climate change on the monuments. This also 
includes local impact of pollution, changing weather patterns etc. The monitoring is being done 
by ASI at sensitive and fragile monuments such as Taj Mahal, Ajanta  Caves or coastal 
monuments wherein such climate change impacts can irreversibly damage them. For this 
purpose, ASI is in the process of developing Weather Station and Air Pollution Labs etc. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
83. The Committee further recommends  that regular physical surveys of all CPMs should 
be carried out from time to time. ASI should maintain digital log books that include textual 
and photographic/ video records of the monument’s physical state and location coordinates. 
This would also allow ASI to check encroachment, if any, of these CPMs at an early stage. 
                (Para 119) 
 
 

47 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
83.1 Monuments and sites are regularly inspected by officers and field staff of ASI. 
Accordingly conservation programmes are drawn and conservation measures are taken. In case 
any encroachment is noticed, action is initiated according to provisions of AMASR Act, 1958.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
84. The Ministry may also use the G20 Summit as a platform to initiate discussions on the 
repatriation of the valuable artifacts looted from India during the colonial period by various 
European countries. 
                           (Para 122) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
84.1 The Archaeological Survey of India under the Ministry of Culture has alread y taken 
initiative in this regard. An exhibition was organized on retrieved antiquities in Khajuraho during 
22nd-25th February, 2023 on the occasion of G -20 summit to sensitize the visitors in respect of 
illegal trade of antiquities. Further, it has been i nformed by the G -20 working group that an 
international webinar on „Protection and Restitution of Cultural Property has been organized on 
28th March 2023. 
 
Enhancing connectivity through PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
85. The Committee desires to know whether the data uploaded regarding CPMs includes 
information regarding the prohibited and protected limits of each monument. The Committee 
feels that such information would permit other Ministries and Departments to ensure th at 
their projects factor in the protected/prohibited areas of CPMs from the DPR stage itself. 
(Para 124) 
 
 
 

48 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
85.1 The details of prohibited and regulated areas have also been uploaded in the ISRO 
Bhuvan portal. Further, all the basic information pertaining to centrally protected 
monuments/sites under ASI uploaded in the Indian Heritage mobile application have already 
been shared and uploaded by BISAG in the PM Gati Shakti portal for reference to other 
ministries while formulating DPR for various departmental projects.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
86. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may coordinate with the Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways, Ministry of Railways, State Government Public Works 
Departments and any other Depar tment concerned, to improve the connectivity to the various 
CPMs across the country. 
(Para 125) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
86.1 The details of National, State Highways, railway routes etc along monuments are also 
included in the portal. The suggestions on the part of ASI have already been discussed with the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade. 
 
Progress made under National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
87. The Committee takes cognisance of the various challenges faced by NMMA in the 
documentation of antiquities and built heritage sites. The Committee, however, observes that 
the Ministry has been able to spend only about 61% of the allocation of Rs. 57.79 crore for 
NMMA from 2007 to 2023. The Committee t herefore recommends that the Ministry may look 
into the reasons preventing the optimal utilization of funds allocated to NMMA. The 
bottlenecks may be addressed at the earliest so as to make faster progress in the 
documentation of antiquities and built heritage sites in the country. 
(Para 129) 
 

49 
 
88. The Committee observes that the progress under NMMA has been slow. Only about 
16.8 lakh antiquities out of a total estimated 58 lakh antiquities have been documented till 
date. The Committee recommends that the NM MA may encourage and engage more 
Departments of State Archaeology and Museums, Universities and Non - Governmental 
Heritage bodies to get themselves recognized as Documentation Resource Centres (DRCs) to 
help expedite the documentation process. The use of advanced technology such as 3D imaging 
and virtual reality should be explored to create a comprehensive database of monuments and 
antiquities. 
(Para 130) 
 
89. NMMA should invest in capacity-building initiatives, such as training and hiring more 
young archaeologists and professionals, to increase the speed and accuracy of the 
documentation process. 
(Para 131) 
 
90. It should explore options to increase funding to expedite the documentation process 
and accomplish the targets in a timely manner. The Commit tee is of the view that by 
implementing these recommendations, the documentation process of monuments and 
antiquities under NMMA can be expedited, which will enable better preservation and 
protection of India's cultural heritage. 
(Para 132) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
90.1 Recommendations of the Committee in paras 129 to 132 are being considered for suitable 
implementation by ASI. 
 
ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
91. The Committee takes note of the upward trend in the budgetary alloc ation made to the 
Anthropological Survey of India. The Committee, however, notes that the Ministry has been 
able to utilise only 61.9 per cent of its allocation in the ongoing year 2022 -23, with only two 

50 
 
months remaining. The Committee feels that it is unlikely that AnSI would be able to make 
full use of the available allocation by the end of this FY. It may look into the reasons behind 
this underutilisation and to rectify the same to ensure better performance in the upcoming FY 
2023-24. 
(Para 135) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
91.1 Anthropological Survey of India (AnSI) has utilized 96.45 % of its allocation in the FY 
2022-23. In the FY 2023 -24, AnSI will try to tackle this underutilization and rectify the same to 
ensure better performance. 
 
GLOBAL ENGAGEMENT AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
92. The Committee appreciates the allocation of an increased amount under the head 
‘Global Engagement and International Cooperation’ in view of the G20 Summit to be hosted 
in India this year. The Committee desires to be apprised of its roadmap for using the G20 
Summit as a platform for the promotion of Indian Culture and Heritage across the world. 
(Para 138) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
92.1 The Culture Working Group (CWG) of India's G20 Presidency is bu ilt upon the idea of 
'Culture for LiFE' as a campaign for sustainable living. The Indian Presidency has set forth four 
priorities which will guide the work of our Culture Working Group in the coming months. i) 
Protection and Restitution of Cultural Propert y; ii) Harnessing, Living Heritage for Sustainable 
Future; iii) Promotion of Cultural and Creative industries and Creative Economy; iv) Leveraging 
Digital Technologies for the Protection and Promotion of Culture.   Four thematic webinars are 
being held to i nform the discussions of the Culture Working Group around the four priorities of 
the Indian Presidency. Exhibitions on each of the priority areas being held at the following 4 
venues:  

51 
 
i) Priority One - Re(ad)dress - Return of treasures at Khajuraho (held on 23-25 February 2023); 
ii)Priority Two - Sustain at Bhubaneswar; iii)Priority Three -Woven Narratives at Hampi: iv) 
Priority Four- Domains of Wonder at Varanasi.  
 
Other programs based on the theme of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam: i) Roots & Routes: Past, 
Present, Continuous (an exhibition showcasing India's civilizational expressions and 
achievements in a thematic non linear manner) ii) Culture Corridor: A Hybrid Digital Museum of 
G20 nations; iii) Together We Art: An Art Project & coffee Table Book; and iv) Su r Vasudha: 
G20 Orchestra. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
93. The Committee observes that there is a clear pattern of underutilisation under this 
head, year after year. In the ongoing FY 2022 -23 as well, the Ministry has managed to spend 
only about 40% of the BE 2022-23 allocation. The Committee opines that global engagement 
and international cooperation can help foster a sense of cultural diplomacy and goodwill 
between India and other countries. It can also have economic benefits for India. By 
showcasing its c ultural heritage on the world stage, India can attract more tourists and 
generate greater demand for its cultural products and services. It is therefore important to 
ensure optimal utilisation of funds under this head, especially in view of the upcoming G2 0 
Summit during FY 2023-24. 
(Para 139) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
93.1 Noted for compliance. It is kindly brought to the notice of the committee that  the 
expenditure of the scheme had improved and in FY 2023 -24 Global Engagement scheme had 
made 78.68% expenditure. For the FY 2023-24, under Global Engagement Scheme, 40 proposals 
have been received for organizing Festival of India abroad and 08 Grant in aid proposals for 
lndo-foreign friendship cultural societies from Indian Missions. The funds would be u tilized in 
the optimum way for organizing Festival of India abroad and grant to lndo -foreign friendship 
cultural societies for showcasing India's cultural heritage abroad. 
 

52 
 
NATIONAL MONUMENTS AUTHORITY 
 Recommendation/Observation 
                 
94. The Committee notes that as per AMASR (Competent Authority) Rules, ASI Regional 
Directors shall ensure that Heritage Bye -Laws (HBLs) are completed within 60 days of 
preparation of detailed site plans. These site plans are to be completed within 5 years w.e.f. 
02.01.2019. The Committee desires to be apprised of the progress made by ASI so far in this 
regard. The Committee recommends that ASI may ensure that the detailed site plans are 
completed on time so as to enable NMA to draft HBLs for the same. 
(Para 150) 
Reply of the Ministry 
94.1 As per the provisions of Rule 22 (4) of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites 
and Remains (Framing of Heritage Bye -laws and other Functions of Competent Authority) 
Rules, 2011, the heritage bye -laws (HBLs) in respect of each Centrally Protected Monuments 
and protected area shall be framed on the basis of the relevant site plan prepared by ASI under 
Rule 21 of the rules ibid. ASI has informed that as on March 01, 2023, it has prepared 618 site 
plans for Centrally Protected Monuments and Protected Areas.  The preparation of site plans for 
the remaining Centrally Protected Monuments and Protected Areas has been fast tracked by 
them. To expedite the process of preparation of HBLs, a Request for Proposal (RFP) document 
for the purpose of price discovery has been prepared by the NMA. Once the site plans are 
received from ASI  by NMA, this RFP along with site plans will be floated to a concerned 
notified expert heritage body. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
95. The Committee notes that NMA has covered 235 Centrally Protected Monuments 
through Heritage Bye-Laws (HBLs) so far. This means that since its inception in 2011, NMA 
has covered about 6.3% of the 3693 Centrally Protected Monuments in the country. With the 
present pace, it might take several decades to draft HBLs for all CPMs. The Committee notes 
that to expedite the process, the number of notified expert heritage bodies for consultation of 
HBLs is 47 as of now and would soon increase to 72. The Committee rec ommends that NMA 
may undertake a thorough assessment of additional steps required to ensure the timely 

53 
 
drafting of HBLs for all the CPMs in India. NMA may target a fixed timeline for the 
completion of this process and apprise the Committee of the same. 
                                                                                                                                   (Para 154) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
95.1 Till January 2023, 7 heritage bye -laws (HBLs) covering 33 Centrally Protected 
Monuments (CPMs) have been laid in Parliament. Further, NMA has received another 137 draft 
HBLs covering 221 CPMs from ASI, Regional Directors notified as Competent Authority under 
Section 20E of AMASR Act, 1958. These 137 draft HBLs are in the process of heritage 
consultations by notified expert heritage bodies. Therefore, NMA has covered 254 Centrally 
Protected Monuments (CPMS) so far for the purpose of HBLs. Further, as stated in reply to 
question no. 150, ASI has prepared 618 site plans for CPMs as on March 01, 20 23, including the 
254 CPMs already covered by NMA for the purpose of HBLs.  The immediate target for NMA is 
to prepare the Heritage Bye -laws (HBLs) for the balance 364 CPMs for which site plans have 
been prepared by ASI. To expedite the process of HBLs, th e total number of notified expert 
heritage bodies has been increased to 72. Further, NMA shall be floating the Request For 
Proposal (RFP) shortly for price discovery for preparation of Heritage Bye -laws (HBLs) for 
these 364 CPMs by the notified expert heri tage bodies. The Heritage Bye -laws (HBLs) will be 
completed within a period of sixty days as stipulated in Rule 22(5) of the AMASR rules ibid. As 
and when the remaining site plans are received from ASI, NMA shall similarly take up the 
process of preparation of HBLs for the CPMs in question.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
96. The Committee is of the view that categorization of the CPMs would enable ASI to 
come up with more suited monument conservation and development plans for all the CPMs. 
NMA has categorised about 25 per cent of the CPMs so far. The Committee recommends that 
NMA utilises the experience gained so far in this process to speed up the categorisation of the 
remaining CPMs. A strict timeline may be fixed in this regard. 
(Para 156) 
 
 
 

54 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
96.1 The NMA, in terms of Section 4A of Ancient Monuments and  Archaeological Sites and 
Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958, makes recommendations to the Government from time to time, 
for categorizing centrally protected monuments and protected areas of national importance as per 
categories prescribed under Schedule to Rule 6 of NMA Rules, 2011, having regard to the 
outstanding universal value including the historical, archaeological, architectural value and such 
other relevant factors. Categorization of 918 CPMs of six ASI Circles namely, Delhi, Bhopal, 
Chandigarh, Kolkata, Va dodara and Jabalpur had been completed and is under consideration of 
the Ministry on the recommendation of NMA. In the year 2022, an additional 870 CPMs in 10 
ASI Circles namely Jaipur, Nagpur Lucknow, Mumbai, Patna, Shimla, Sarnath, Trissur, Srinagar 
& Raipur have been categorized. A total of 1788 CPMs have been categorized by NMA so far.   
This is approximately 50% of the total CPMs.   The categorization of remaining CPMs shall be 
taken up by the NMA on a fast track basis. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
97. The Committee notes that the NMA website has the option to view the details regarding 
the categorisation of monuments covered so far. However, the details are not actually 
accessible at the time of writing. The Committee recommends that NMA may ensure timely  
updation and review of its website to enable wide dissemination of information in the public 
domain. 
(Para 157) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
97.1 The NMA, in terms of Section 4A of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958, makes recommendations to the Government from time to time, 
for classifying protected Monuments and protected areas of national importance as per categories 
prescribed under Schedule to Rule 6 of NMA Rules, 2011, having regard to the outstanding 
universal value including the historical, archaeological, architectural value and such other 
relevant factors. The Central Government thereafter notifies the same in the official gazette and 
also exhibits it on its official web -site and also in such other manner as it may deem fit, for the 
benefit of the public and agencies in the interest of protection and preservation of these protected 

55 
 
monuments and protecte d areas of national importance.   As has been stated in the preceding 
ATN, the categorization of 918 CPMs in 6 ASI circles are under the consideration of the 
ministry and will be uploaded on the NMA website once they are approved.   NMA monitors its 
website on a regular basis to ensure that the contents are regularly updated.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
98. The Committee may also be informed of the broad factors that NMA considers during 
the categorisation process. 
(Para 158) 
Reply of the Ministry 
98.1 The NMA, in terms of Section 4A of Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958, makes recommendations to the Government from time to time, 
for classifying protected Monuments and protected areas of national importance as per categories 
prescribed under Schedule to Rule 6 of NMA Rules, 2011, having regard to the outstanding 
universal value including the historical, archaeological, architectural value and such other 
relevant factors. 
LIBRARIES AND ARCHIVES 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
99. The Committee notes that the reason for the substantial increase under the head 
‘Libraries and Archives’ is the provision for a new building of the National Archives of India 
(NAI). The NAI is the custodian of the records of the enduring value of the G overnment of 
India. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the new building has 
provisions for state -of-the-art preservation and storage facilities for the safekeeping of 
records. 
(Para 161) 
Reply of the Ministry 
99.1 In the plan of the proposed building of the NAI, adequate provisions have been made for 
providing state -of-the-art treatment to rare archival material, modern storage facilities for 
housing different kinds of archival material, as well as for ease of access to NAI‟S collection.The 

56 
 
plan has been developed by the HCP Design in consultation with NAI keeping in view the latest 
standards followed in different advanced archival repositories, around the world. 
Mechanism for preservation of books/ manuscripts at National Library, Kolkata 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
100. The Committee appreciates the various mechanisms being employed for the 
preservation of books/ manuscripts at the National Library, Kolkata. The Committee notes 
that this library is a permanent depository of all reading and printed materials produced in 
India, or written by any foreigner, wherever published and in whatever language. In view of 
this, the Committee feels that more steps can be taken to further improve the existing 
mechanisms. 
(Para 163) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
100.1 Views of the Committee have been noted and necessary improvement in the mechanism 
for preservation of books and manuscripts in the organization will be initiated. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
101. The Committee recommends that the Library should ensure regular maintenance of all 
preservation facilities, including the Reprography Division, Preservation (Binding) Division, 
and Rare Book Division. This will help in ensuring that the equipment and facilities are in 
good working condition and can help in preserving the documents for a longer period of time. 
(Para 164) 
Reply of the Ministry 
101.1 Noted for compliance, the Library will take all initiatives to deploy state -of-art 
equipment. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
102. The Prese rvation (Binding) Division is responsible for binding, mending, and other 
related works for the preservation of books and newspapers. It is recommended to upgrade the 

57 
 
division with modern equipment and techniques that can help in preserving the documents f or 
a longer period of time. This will also help in reducing the workload on the division and 
increase the speed of the preservation process. 
(Para 165) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
102.1 The Library is in the process of deploying state -of-art equipment to increase the capacity 
of binding division and also the Library engaged the outsourcing agency for binding of the 
document.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
103. The Committee notes that the Rare Book Division of the National Library is 
responsible for storing the general rare books in compactor alcoves and over -sized books in 
almirahs. It is recommended to increase the storage capacity for rare books to accommodate 
the growing collection of old and rare documents and manuscripts. This will also help in 
maintaining the relative humidity and temperature of the Rare Books stack area. 
          (Para 166) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
103.1 Yes, at present the sufficient almirahs according to the need is available and shall procure 
as and when required. 
  
MUSEUMS 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
104. The Committee observes that the allocation under the ‘Museums’ head has increased 
consistently over the years. The Committee appreciates the good level of utilisation under this 
head, even during the pandemic years. The Min istry may ensure optimal utilisation of funds 
during FY 2023-24 as well. 
(Para 172) 
 
 

58 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
104.1 The ministry would like to express its gratitude to the committee for acknowledging its 
good utilization under „Museums‟ and it would be the earnest endeavor of this ministry to ensure 
optimal utilization during FY 2023-24. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
105. The Committee is pleased to note that the PM Sangrahalaya has been inaugurated and 
is receiving footfall from both domestic and foreign visi tors. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may analyze the long -term viability of replicating the development of similar 
unique, state-of-the-art museums in other parts of the country. Opportunities may be explored 
to implement the development of such museums on a Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis. 
(Para 176) 
Reply of the Ministry 
105.1 Committees recommendations are noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
106. The Committee welcomes the efforts being taken by the Ministry to organize an 
International Museum Expo and to create a comprehensive directory of Museums in the 
country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may make efforts to collect relevant 
meta-information about the museums as well, such as location and contact details. 
 
(Para 178) 
 
107. The Ministry may list the museums along with location details on its website. The 
directory may also be shared with the Ministry of Tourism for promotion thereof. This would 
help increase footfall to museums across the country. 
(Para 179) 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
107.1 Committee direction in para 178 and 179 are noted. However, it is kindly informed that 
the Directory of Museums has already been developed and published in the Museum Expo. India 
Culture Portal has all the digitized images of MoC Museums.  
 
Development of Museums 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
108. The Committee notes that there has been a general trend of low utilisation of funds 
under ‘Development of Museums’ in recent years. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may analyze the reasons for this under-utilisation and rectify the same. 
                                                                                                                               (Para 183) 
Reply of the Ministry 
108.1 Noted, needful will be done.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
109. The Committee recommends that under the Museum Grant Scheme, the Ministry 
should consider extending both financial and technical assistance to all States/UT 
Governments for the development of a model Museum. This model Museum may incorporate 
the experience of the best Central Museums in the country in terms of curation, architecture, 
and visitor amenities. The State Governments can then be pursued to utilize the Museum 
Grant Scheme to emulate the model Museum in other parts of the States. 
          (Para 184) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
109.1 Noted, needful will be done.  
 
 
 
 

60 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
110. All Museums under the Ministry of Culture may come up with programs to arrange 
free visits to museums for local school children, with a special focus on Government schools. 
State Governments may also be requested to carry out similar exercises. The Committee feels 
that such visits would leave a lasting impression on the students from a young age and help 
increase interest in museums in the long term. 
(Para 189) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
110.1 All the museums have been directed to do the needful with Subsidized & free entry for 
school/College. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
111. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may encourage the creation of cultural 
businesses and startups, providing funding, mentoring, and other resources to support the 
growth of creative industries. The Ministry should offer training and education programs in 
cultural fields, developing a skilled workforce and creating employment opportunities in areas 
such as arts administration, event management, and cultural tourism. The Ministry may 
apprise the Committee regarding its plans to be part of the Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas 
Yojana 4.0 to impart skill development to the youth in the culture and heritage sector. 
(Para 221) 
Reply of the Ministry 
111.1 Akademies under the Ministry have, from time to time, organized various activities in 
remote rural areas thereby enhancing the local participation and reaching the artist inter lands. 
Autonomous Bodies are supporting Tribal Artisans and Craft Persons espec ially from rural & 
remote areas by providing honorarium for their valuable services and performances. Sahitya 
Akademi established a North East Centre for Oral Literature (NECOL) in Agartala especially 
theoretical as well as skill based practical classes fo r the trainees. Teachers participate in tribal 
and oral literature and a Centre for Oral and Tribal Literature (COTLit) in Bhubaneswar has been 
developed. CCRT invites scholars and experts from rural and remote areas to conduct CCRT 
Training Programmes als o come from various parts of the country including from rural and 

61 
 
remote areas. In CCRT Training programmes, teachers are encouraged to promote their local 
culture including Tribal and Folk Art & Culture during the session on regional culture 
presentation. Lecture/lecture-demonstration session/practical classes are also conducted on 
Traditional Folk or Tribal arts as well as craft forms including music & dance with special 
reference to their origin and history. Scholarship and fellowship schemes have been s et up across 
the country including tribal and rural areas for preservation and promotion of diverse, varied and 
rich Indian cultural heritage which is being manifested through various performing, literary and 
visual art forms. The Sangeet Natak Akademi has  three Constituent Units, two of which are 
dance teaching institutions Jawaharlal Nehru Manipur Dance Academy and Kathak Kendra and 
five regional centres Kutiyattam Kendra, Sattriya Kendra, Guwahati for promoting the Sattriya 
traditions of Assam. North -East Centre, Guwahati for preserving the traditional and folk 
performing art traditions of north -eastern India, North -East Documentation Centre, Agartala for 
festival and field documentation in the North -east, Chhau Kendra, Chandankiyari for promoting 
the Chhau dances of eastern India. Sangeet Natak Akademi is on the verge of inaugurating its 
Regional Centre in Hyderabad. NSD provides theatrical training to children between age of 8 to 
16 years through, one of its two performing wings, the „Theatre -In-Education Company‟ 
(Sanskar Rang Toli) which was established on October 16, 1989, and is one of the most 
important theatre education resource centres in the country. The major focus of the TIE 
Company is to perform creative, curriculum -based and participatory play s in schools, specially 
designed and prepared for children of different age groups. The major thrust of the plays is to 
create an atmosphere that encourages children to raise questions, make decisions and make 
choices with an awareness of themselves within the larger social context. 
 111.2 The TIE Co. organises following Festivals for children:- 
Bal Sangam: Every alternate year the TIE Company organizes a national festival, Bal Sangam, 
which is essentially a cultural mela with an educational objective.  
 Jashn-e-Bachpan: Every alternative year TIE Co. organises Jashn -e-Bachpan which showcases 
the works of different theatre groups working with and for children, representing various regions 
and languages from across the country.  
111.3 The annual intake of stu dents is limited at NSD and a vast majority of theatre artists in 
various States, with diverse languages and cultural background cannot be benefited by the 
facilities provided by NSD. To reach these theatre workers and also to create theatre awareness 
all over India, NSD established a short -term Teaching & Training Programme titled “Extension 

62 
 
Programme” in the local language in 1978. As a part of this programme, Production Oriented 
Theatre Training Programmes in Theatre etc. are organized in collaboration with local agencies. 
Further, The Museum Division under the Museums Division of the Ministry of Culture has 
organized a three -day International Museum Expo 2023 from 18th – 20th May, 2023 at Pragati 
Maidan, New Delhi to celebrate the International Museum Day. The Museum Expo included the 
following four broad components: 
111.4 Museum Expo Sessions: This component included Master classes on Museum 
Architecture, Light Installations in Museums, Museums in Metaverse, Scientific Storage in 
Museums and Digital Mark eting of Museums by global experts, Panel Discussions showcasing 
75 Museums from across India and the World, including village and community based 
Museums, Talks, Workshops and Case Studies on financial sustainability of Museums, Disaster 
Management for Mu seums, and SHRI like Schemes for encouraging research and art of 
storytelling around Museums and a Roundtable on the Museum Grant Scheme administered by 
the Ministry. 
111.5 Exhibitions & Film Shows: Books on art and artifacts from Indian & select Internati onal 
Museums under two main exhibitions – a) Iconic Hero Objects from across the country and b) 
Books on Museums were showcased. The exhibition was designed in physical, digital and 
holographic form for an immersive experience. 
111.6 Technical Expo: An exp eriential display of Museum related vendors & equipment 
including light, sound & conservation, along with other futuristic technologies will make up this 
component. This part will also showcase Museum related toys, merchandise, online Games and 
Start-ups to allow for networking opportunities.  
111.7 Conservation Laboratory: Recreated in -situ lab with hands -on training across all genres 
of artefacts & meet-the-expert sessions.  
111.8 With the presence of a diverse audience of 1000+ museum professionals, academicians 
and museum-goers at the International Museum Expo 2023, the aim was for an all- inclusive 
training, exposure and creativity in the field of Museum. 
 
 
 

63 
 
Special measures to protect rural and tribal culture 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
112. The Committee appreciates the various initiatives being undertaken by the various 
organisations under the Ministry to protect rural and tribal culture. The Committee notes that 
the Anthropological Survey of India (AnSI) has been working on several projects rel ated to 
the protection of rural and tribal culture, such as study on community health, study on de -
notified, nomadic and semi -nomadic communities. Encouraging more research in these areas 
can help in understanding the culture and customs of these communiti es better, allowing the 
development of effective strategies for their preservation. IGRMS has been collecting 
ethnographic objects and documenting the traditional knowledge systems of rural and tribal 
communities through fieldwork, demonstrative workshops,  and cultural performances. 
Promoting these knowledge systems can help in preserving the cultural heritage of these 
communities and generate awareness about their customs and practices. 
 
(Para 263) 
Reply of the Ministry 
112.1 The Ministry offers its gratitude to the Committee for acknowledging the initiatives taken 
by the ministry in protecting and preserving rural and tribal culture. 
AnSI, under the aegis of the Ministry of Culture is working to promote these knowledge systems 
through outreach progra mmes which can help in preserving the cultural heritage of these 
communities and generate awareness about their customs and practices. 
Since its inception, IGRMS has been making systematic and sincere efforts to preserve and 
spread awareness about the rich  cultural traditions of India. The main functions like collecting 
ethnographic objects and documentation of knowledge systems, demonstrative workshops and 
organizing the educational activities for various age groups including youth and women will be 
continued during the FY 2023-24. 
Recommendation/Observation 
  
113. Rural and tribal youth are often forced to move away from their cultural roots due to 
the lack of financial security. The Ministry should focus on organizing cultural events 

64 
 
showcasing their uniq ue culture which will empower them and give them a sense of pride in 
their cultural heritage. This can help in preserving the cultural traditions of these 
communities. 
(Para 264) 
Reply of the Ministry 
113.1 To protect, promote and preserve various forms of  folk & tribal art and culture 
throughout the country, the Government of India has set up seven Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) 
with headquarters at Patiala, Nagpur, Udaipur, Prayagraj, Kolkata, Dimapur and Thanjavur. 
These ZCCs conduct a number of activitie s viz. cultural programmes, seminars, workshops, 
exhibitions and craft fairs on a regular basis in their member States for which annual grant -in-aid 
is released to them. 
113.2 To preserve the cultural traditions of these communities, all the ZCCs organize regional 
festivals and programmes according to their annual calendar of events which are decided by their 
Programme Committees. Besides, this Ministry also organizes Rashtriya Sanskriti Mahotsavs 
(RSMs) for which folk and tribal artists are engaged by thes e ZCCs to perform during these 
programmes enabling them to showcase their unique culture which empowers them and give 
them a sense of pride in their cultural heritage. These RSMs aim at bringing together the cultural 
diversity of India and reconnecting the  younger generation including rural and tribal youth to 
their roots and also make them aware about cultural heritage and ancient cultural values of the 
country by way of providing an effective platform to a large number of artists from all over 
India. Sinc e 2015, the Ministry has organized 14 RSMs through its seven ZCCs up till now. 
Outreach programmes are also organized by these ZCCs in rural and tribal areas for this purpose. 
All the seven ZCCs organize a North East Festival viz. OCTAVE to promote and pro pagate the 
rich cultural heritage of the North East Region comprising eight States namely Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim, Nagaland, Manipur and Tripura to the rest of 
India.  
113.3 IGRMS, an autonomous organization has devised and org anized programmes like fusion 
of traditional, tribal, folk, classical and modern music and fashion show in their traditional attire 
to attract youth towards their culture and provide them a platform to walk with art and design 
schools to innovate their art  and craft items. Such activities will be continued during the FY 

65 
 
2023-24. IGRMs also has initiated a P.G. Diploma in Museology in which any graduate can take 
admission and know how to collect, conserve, promote and display their culture. 
113.4 Creation of Rural Employment (CRE) through cultural economy - In this regard, IGRMS 
makes efforts to create the platform to train rural and tribal youth through the activities like 
traditional occupation related to art and crafts. The youth will be trained not only o n techniques 
of art and craft but also be self-motivated by community experts or cultural experts to understand 
the importance of the respective traditions and values.  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
114. The Committee notes that VMH has organized various events such as Chhau dance 
theater and interactive sessions on empowering regenerative livelihood in Santal tribal 
communities. These events can be replicated in other parts of the country to create awareness 
about rural and tribal culture and customs. IGN CA has been organizing webinars and 
documentaries on various aspects of rural and tribal culture. Using technology to document 
and showcase the cultural heritage of these communities can help in preserving their 
traditions and reaching out to a wider audience. 
(Para 265) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
114.1 The Committee has rightly observed that the tribal dance and performance may be 
replicated in all parts of the country to create awareness about rural and tribal culture and 
customs.  Therefore, IGNCA through it s 9 Regional Centres has been organising webinars and 
documentations on various aspects of rural and tribal culture.   In fact, the audio/visual 
documentation of different aspects of the cultural heritage and traditions of different tribes and 
communities of North East and other parts of the country have been preserved in digital files.   
These audio/visual documentations are also available for dissemination to stakeholders in order 
to reach out to a wider audience. As the tribal population accounts for about  9% of the total 
population in the country, art and craft related to tribal heritage needs to be given a priority for 
cultural development of the country. 
 

66 
 
114.2 All the seven Zonal Cultural Ccentres (ZCCs) implement a number of schemes viz. 
Award to Young  Talented Artistes, Guru Shishya Parampara Scheme, Theatre Rejuvenation 
Scheme, Research & Documentation Scheme, Shilpgram Scheme, OCTAVE, J&K Festivals and 
National Cultural Exchange Programme (NCEP) for promotion & preservation of cultural 
heritage and to create awareness about rural and tribal culture and customs of tribal communities 
in the country and reaching out to a wider audience. These ZCCs also undertake documentation 
to preserve, promote and propagate vanishing visual and performing art forms in cluding folk, 
tribal and classical in the field of music, dance, theater, literature, fine arts etc. in print/ audio – 
visual media. The art form is finalized in consultation with State Cultural Departments.  
114.3 Further, Centre for Cultural Resources an d Training (CCRT)   organizes a variety of 
training programmes for in -service teachers and educators in various parts of the country and 
sessions on creating awareness about rural & tribal culture and customs are regularly included in 
these programmes.  CCRT has developed audio -visual material on the cultural heritage of these 
communities, which has been digitized using the latest technology and made available online so 
that it can help in preserving their traditions and reaching out to a  wider audience. 
114.4 National School of Drama (NSD) conducts Adirang Mahotsav – National Tribal Festival 
of Theatre, Dance, Music, Seminar; Crafts in tribal areas in different parts of the country from 
time to time wherein local folk dance and music is promoted. More than 400 tribal artist; 
craftsmen from different parts of the country participate in it. NSD had organized 
Adirang/Adiparb Mahotsav in a village namely Dwaronda, predominantly inhabited by Santhal 
Tribes from 2014 to 2020.The Festival provides a much needed pla tform to the Tribal Artists to 
exchange their techniques and witness different productions and performances.Further, it is 
mentioned that in NSD‟s Bharat Rang Mahotsav organized every year, there is a separate section 
of the Festival for folk performances which includes Chhau dance theater as well. 
114.5 The Lalit Kala Akademi has organized several art camps, Art Festivals and exhibitions 
with tribal artists from Rural & Urban areas across the country. Lalit Kala Akademi has given 
the opportunity to Tribal artists to showcase their talents Nationwide and abroad. The Akademi 
also provides its Galleries to artists which gives them a platform not only to showcase their 
talents but also provide a place where they find buyers and collectors.   The Akademi has 
preserved Tribal artist‟s artworks in its Permanent Collection. 

67 
 
Chapter-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE: 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
115. The Ministry of Culture shoulders the crucial responsibility of the preservation, 
development and promotion of the country's tangible as well as intangible heritage. Keeping 
this in mind, the Committee is convinced that the BE allocation of 3399.65 crore for 2022-23 
does not suffice the fund requirements of the Ministry. This is likely to adversely affect the 
vital projects, activities and schemes planned by the Ministry for 2023-24. 
(Para 14) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
115.1 The Ministry would seek the enhan ced amount of funds on the basis of the pace of 
expenditure at RE stage. Programme divisions in the Ministry would be asked to prioritize their 
activities in such a way that the expenditure at RE stage would be at optimum level to justify the 
demand of the  Ministry for the enhancement of the funds to avoid activities being pruned on 
account of availability of insufficient funds during the year.  
Further recommendation/observation 
115.2 The Committee further suggests that the Ministry should adequately plan out the 
pace of expenditure in such a way that it gives a clear picture about the fund requirement 
at RE stage. Expenditure monitoring may be accorded top priority by the Ministry, if more 
fund is requires to be placed at RE stage.  The Committee desires to know about the details 
of funds required by the organisations under the Ministry in the Financial Year 2023 -24 
and funds allocated to them. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
116. The Committee notes the various new projects planned by the Ministry for the FY 
2023-24. The Committee desires to be apprised of the expected completion date for the 

68 
 
National Experimental Site Museum at Vadnagar. The Ministry may ensure that a strict 
timeline is formulated for all the new projects to be taken up in the upcoming Financial Year. 
(Para 41) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
116.1 Expected completion year of project is 2024 -25. Timeline for all projects will be adhered 
to. 
Further recommendation/observation 
116.2 The Committee desires to know about the expenditure incurred till now on the 
aforesaid project and whether the pace of construction is as per the scheduled timeline. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that the construction of the national project 
remains at the top of the Ministry’s priority  in the interest of the expeditious completion of 
the project. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
117. The Committee takes special note of the fact that all 5 posts of Whole Time Members 
(WTMs) of National Monuments Authority are vacant at present. It may be difficult for the 
NMA to work to its full potential without any in -position WTMs. The Committee recommends 
that the appointment of the WTMs may be expedited so as to enable NMA  to effectively work 
on the important functions under its purview. 
(Para 50) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
117.1 NMA had been diligently pursuing the matter of filling up the vacant posts of Whole 
Time Members (WTMs). Sh T N Tiwari, formerly from Indian Legal Service, was appointed and 
joined NMA on 26 May 23. Processes for appointment of the remaining WTMs are  under 
process and efforts will be to complete the appointments at the earliest. 
Further recommendation/observation 
117.2 The Committee desires to know the reason for the inordinate delay in the 
appointment of WTMs of NMA and reiterates that the appointment process be expedited 

69 
 
to fill up the 04 vacant post of WTMs  to enable NMA to work effectively on the important 
functions under its purview. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
118. The Committee notes that under the head ‘Restoration of Unprotected Monuments - 
Minor Works’, the Ministry has been allocated an amount of Rs. 2.50 crore at BE 2023 -24 
against its projected demand of Rs. 5.00 crore to meet anticipated expenditure for restoration 
of unprotected monuments such as Badrinath. 
(Para 58) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
118.1 It is submitted in this connection that ASI undertakes restoration of unprotected 
monuments subject to the overall criticality/ importance of the monument and as per manpower 
availability with ASI. The budget allocation of Rs 2.5 Cr ore for restoration of unprotected 
monuments is considered sufficient in respect of presently ongoing work at Badrinath Temple.  
Further recommendation/observation 
118.2 The Committee desires to know about the quantum of ongoing work undertaken  at 
Badrinath Temple and the expected timeline of its completion. The Committee would like 
to elicit the information regarding the expenditure made out of the total fund, till date. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
119. In its 294 th Report on the subject ‘Development and Conservation of Museums and 
Archaeological sites - Challenges and Opportunities’, the Committee had noted that in 2007, 
National Mission on Monuments & Antiquities aimed to list 500,000 heritage buildings. The 
Committee notes that about 3,693 monuments fall under the protection of the Central 
Government while around 4,500 monuments are protected by the State/UT Governments. It is 
evident that a large number of valuable historical monuments are presently not under any sort 
of protection by the Government. 
                                                                                                                                         (Para 59) 
 

70 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
119.1 ASI evaluates the proposal following due procedures and accordingly undertakes 
conservation/ preservation of other than ASI heritage buildings. 
Further recommendation/observation 
119.2 The Committee would like to know the criteria governing the recognition of a 
monument that require s any kind of protection. Further, the Committee also desires  to 
know how categorization of monuments is being effected for its protection at Central/State 
level. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
120. The amount of Rs. 5 crore sought by ASI for restoration of unprotected monuments is 
in itself a minor amount given the huge number of such monuments. 
(Para 60) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
120.1  As stated in the preceding ATN, ASI undertakes restoration of unprotected monuments 
subject to the overall criticality/ importance of the monument and as per manpower availability 
with ASI. Although the current allocation is considered to be sufficient, additional budget 
requirements as and when the need arises will be demanded from MoC. 
Further recommendation/observation 
120.2 The Committee would like to know the expenditure incurred by the Ministry on the 
restoration of unprotected monuments in the country by the ASI during the last three 
years, year -wise. The Committee further desires to know the procedure through which 
request for restor ation of unprotected monuments is made to ASI and how many such 
requests are pending before ASI, at present. 
 
 

71 
 
Need for renovation, promotion and better tourist facilities at various ASI monuments, 
temples and forts 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
121. The Committee recommends that ASI may undertake a special drive to ensure that 
basic tourist amenities are available at all the ticketed Centrally Protected Monuments. ASI 
may also explore the feasibility of providing well -maintained basic amenities at non -ticketed 
CPMs. ASI may devise a mechanism to ensure clean and hygienic washroom facilities at all 
the CPMs. The contact number of the regional ASI officials may be displayed t o permit 
tourists to complain in case of lack of maintenance. 
(Para 81) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
121.1 ASI has already populated information on various basic amenities available at various 
centrally protected monuments along with the necessary contact details in the Indian Heritage 
mobile application. Provision is also made in the Indian Heritage mobile application for the 
visitors to provide feedback, suggestions on their overall experience at the monument and submit 
complaints in the event of lack of maintenance, lapses etc. for effective monitoring supervision 
and further improvement. 
 
 
122. ASI may also develop a mechanism to permit tourists to post complaints on its mobile 
app. The option to provide such feedback may be suitably promoted for visitors who visit ASI 
monuments. ASI may ensure that strict action is taken against the accountable officials in 
case lapses are frequently reported. 
(Para 82) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
122.1 As submitted in the preceding para, provision for registering comp laint is facilitated 
through Indian Heritage mobile application 
 
 

72 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
122.2 The Committee further recommends that ASI should promote the usage of Indian 
Heritage mobile application among the common masses as most of them are unaware of it. 
The Committee also desires to know as to how the Ministry/ASI plans to disseminate the 
information and benefits of the Mobile Application so as to encourage its greater usage 
among the stakeholders. 
 
Footfall at Centrally Protected Monuments 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
123. The Committee notes that the number of visitors to ASI Monuments has significantly 
decreased since the onset of the Coronavirus pandemic. Although there has been a reversing 
trend since then the present footfall is much below the pre -COVID footfall. Further, it can be 
seen that the footfall at ASI monuments has actually dec reased from FY 2015 -16 onwards. 
The Committee recommends that ASI may make a detailed examination of the reasons for the 
decrease in footfall since FY 2015-16 and take suitable remedial action. 
(Para 91) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
123.1 The recommendations of the committee are noted. Archaeological Survey of India is 
proactively engaged to attract more number of visitors to the monuments and sites through multi-
pronged approach like illumination, sound and light shows, later opening of monuments to 
promote night tourism etc. 
Further recommendation/observation 
123.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make an assessment of the 
cumulative impact of all the ASI efforts towards attracting more number of visito rs to ASI 
monuments and examine  these efforts vis -à-vis the best global practices.  S tate-of-the-art 
technologies being adopted by other countries in promotion of culture need to be studied so 
that the same could be replicated in India as well. 

73 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
124. The Committee further notes that the CAG had declared 92 Centrally Protected 
Monuments as "missing". ASI has located 42 of these monuments. The remaining 50 
monuments are either affected by rapid urbanization, submerged under reservoirs/dams or are 
untraceable. The Committee observes that monuments once lost cannot ever be retrieved. The 
Centrally Protected Monuments (CPMs) are a vital piece of our historical heritage. ASI 
should, therefore, give the highest priority to ensuring the physical security of all CPMs across 
the country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may conduct a survey of all 
remaining monuments to ensure their physical existence. 
 
                                                                                                                                         (Para 118)  
Reply of the Ministry 
124.1 Taking up survey or exploration to identify and document antiquarian remains, 
monuments of ancient sites is a continuous phenomenon taken up by ASI through its field 
offices. On notice of any potential monuments or ancient site during the survey or exploration, it 
is considered for central protection only after evaluating the same on the basis of criterion 
specified in AMASR Act, 1958. 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
124.2 The Commit tee desires to know about the fate of 50 missin g Centrally Protected 
Monuments and recommends the Ministry to direct ASI  to initiate an urgent survey of 
CPMs in light of the lack of physical security and missing of monuments  instead of making 
it ‘as and when’ matter based on the inputs of ASI field officers. 
 
Recovery of stolen/ illegally exported antiquities 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
125. The Committee commends the efforts being made by the Ministry for the retrieval of 
stolen and illegally exported antiquities back to India. The Committee, however, feels that the 
Ministry needs to make more efforts towards using diplomatic channels to seek  the 

74 
 
repatriation of India’s priceless antiquities which were taken away by force during colonial 
times. It is the right of Indian citizens to be able to see their rich historical antiquities without 
having to visit a foreign nation and to feel proud of their cultural heritage. 
(Para 121) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
125.1 The Archaeological Survey of India is committed to repatriate the antiquities of Indian 
origin which were taken away from India. Archaeological Survey of India takes up the matter 
through the Indian Embassies and Missions through MEA for their retrieval. Total numbers of 
251 antiquities have been retrieved from foreign countries till date, out of which 238 have been 
retrieved since 2014. Archaeological Survey of India is in regular touch with t he Indian 
Embassies and Missions for repatriation of antiquities of Indian origin. 
 Further recommendation/observation 
125.2 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the ASI in retrieval of antiquities. Further, 
the Committee would like to be briefed about  the Standard Operating Procedures being 
followed  in this regard, especially the responsibility of upkeep and preservation of the 
repatriated antiquities including the role of respective states, the involvement of Museum 
authorities, etc.  
 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
Allocation and Expenditure Pattern 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
126. The Committee notes that the average expenditure under North -Eastern Areas in the 
last few years has been lower than the overall expenditure of the Ministry. The Committee is 
not convinced with the reasons furnished by the Ministry for this pattern of underutilisation. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may allocate a portion of the funds under this 
head for promotion and awareness of the Ministry's schemes in North -Eastern Areas. This 
would allow more organizations / individuals to benefit from the scheme of the Ministry. 
(Para 142) 

75 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
126.1  Ministry would like to submit that in the FY 2022 -23 the schemes made a commendable 
performance under NER and as a result the total expenditure booked under this head was 90.11% 
of the RE. This was achieved despite the fact that RE allocation for FY 2022 -23 was augmented 
by Rs. 30 crore as compared to BE 2022 -23. The Ministry of Culture itself and through its 
various organizations/ZCCs/Akademis, etc., all possible efforts are made to create awareness 
throughout the country including North -Eastern Areas abou t various schemes/missions being 
implemented by it. 
Further recommendation/observation 
126.2 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry must endeavour to put in all 
efforts to allocate adequate funds to North Eastern States. The Ministry should strive make 
an effort for 100% utilization of the budget grants available for promotion and awareness 
of the Ministry's varied  schemes being implemented in North-Eastern areas. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
127. The Committee notes that there has been considerable decrease in the allocation made 
for North-Eastern Areas since 2020 -21. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons 
behind this, along with the activities/schemes impacted because of the decreased allocation. 
                                                                                                                   (Para 144) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
127.1 Allocation to North -Eastern Areas is a proportionate of the amount allocated under 
“central sector schemes” of the Ministry. The  Ministry of Culture is mandated to keep 10% of 
the scheme allocation for  the programme/activities to be undertaken in North Eastern areas. The 
Ministry has been allocating the funds accordingly. The table below depicts the same.  
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year 
Scheme Allocation 
(BE) 
Allocation Under 
NER 
2018-19 657.86 65.07 

76 
 
2019-20 778.23 52.03 
2020-21 578.32 57.80 
2021-22 455.20 45.52 
2022-23 532.55 53.25 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
127.2 The Committee further reiterates that there is a consistent decrease in the funds 
allocated to the North-Eastern States as evident from the above table. The Committee feels 
that the 10% mandatory allotment should be revised as per the  demands raised by 
individual State in North-Eastern areas. The Ministry must increase the said amount as per 
the requirements of States and cultural organisati ons for the proper promotion of  the 
programme/activities to be undertaken in North-Eastern areas. 
Development of Libraries and Archives 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
128. The Committee observes that even excluding the COVID impacted FY 2019 -20 and FY 
2020-21, the utilisation of funds under ‘Development of Libraries and Archives’ has been 
consistently low. This head bears the expenditure for extending financial assistance to 
State/UT Government archival repositories, Government libraries and museums. The state of 
affairs of State Government’s libraries and museums often leaves a lot to be desired. The 
financial assistance provided under this head acts as a nudge to the State Government to focus 
on the development of libraries and museums under their purview. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons behind the lack of utilisation under 
this head. The Ministry should seek feedback from State Governments and voluntary 
organisations to gauge the reasons behind their apparent lack of interest in the schemes. 
(Para 168) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 

77 
 
128.1 The works of National M ission on Libraries (NML) in Raja Rammohan Roy Library 
Foundation (RRRLF) are implemented with the active co -operation of the respective State 
Governments/UT authorities. It has been observed that even after optimum level of persuasion, 
follow up from this  end to execute the pending works on behalf of the part of State/UT 
authorities, in the several cases, the concerned State/UT authorities turned a deaf ear to us and 
refrain from sending the bills/claims within stipulated time. 
 
128.2 After the rampant curse of COVID, in 2022-23, when NML started with a vibrant boost 
up in respect of receiving claims from nationwide concerned library authorities, introduction of 
CNA account pulled the rein in the flow of remittance of funds. Ambiguities in respect of the 
operational part of the CNA accounts still exist in several cases and State/UT authorities as well 
as RRRLF is unable to sort out those instantly. Sometime it takes 03-04 months time to make 
those accounts operational and accordingly it takes time. 
Further recommendation/observation 
128.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministry must identify the ambiguities in the 
operational aspect of the Central Nodal Agency (C NA) accounts. Further, the Ministry 
must attempt to reduce the delay in operation of accounts along with focusing on 100% 
utilisation of funds under ‘Development of Libraries and Archives’. 
 
Attracting higher footfall at museums and improving facilities  
Recommendation/Observation 
 
129. The Committee suggests that the Ministry may come up with an effective, creative 
strategy for promotion of these museums through both online and offline channels. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may allocate specific allocation for the purpose of 
promoting museums across the country. 
(Para 187) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 

78 
 
129.1 Directory of Museums has been published in the Museum Expo. India Culture Portal has 
all the digitized images of MoC Museums. 
Further recommendation/observation 
129.2 The Committee believes that a lot can be done in this direction. Particularly, hosting 
of programmes on online platforms, documentary shows depicting origin of items, their 
excavation, methods adopted for their preservation, etc can be showcased on TV and other 
OTT platforms. Fu rther, the Committee reiterates that the Ministry may allocate specific 
funds for the purpose of promoting museums across the country. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
130. The Museums should conduct outreach programs to engage with schools and colleges 
to attract students. They should organize workshops, interactive sessions, and events to 
encourage students to visit and learn. 
(Para 188) 
Reply of the Ministry 
130.1 Museums are already involved in  activities such as organizing workshops, interactive 
sessions etc for students and would continue the activities in this financial year as well. 
Further recommendation/observation 
130.2 The Committee further recommends that there is a need for designing exhibits that 
are interactive and hands -on, allowing  the students to actively engage with the content. 
Interactive displays, simulations, and learning stations can make the museum experience 
lasting and memorable for students. 
130.3 The Museums must establish long -term partnerships with  the community  schools, 
offer special discounts or free admission for student groups and collaborate on joint 
projects, exhibitions, or events. Interactive interface of school going children will go a long 
way in creating a community of museum lovers who can take pride in the c ountry’s rich 
culture and heritage. 
 

79 
 
Need for increased focus on commemoration and celebration of female freedom fighters 
and historical figures 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
131. The Committee observes that Indian female freedom fighters contributed immensely to 
the Indian freedom struggle. The Committee recommends that the priceless contribution of 
female freedom fighters in the Indian freedom struggle may be celebrated and commemorated 
in a grand manner, on equal footing with the male freedom fighters. This w ould serve as an 
inspiration to all young girls and women across the country. 
           (Para 194) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
131.1 Ministry of Culture has been giving due weightage to Indian female freedom fighters 
while organizing programmes to propagate the achievements and sacrifices of the Indian 
freedom fighters under AKAM as recommended by the Parliamentary Committee and will 
continue to give sufficient coverage to female freedom fighters in various programmes to be 
organized under AKAM in future as well. 
Further recommendation/observation 
131.2 The Committee also reco mmends that educational programme  targeted at schools 
and colleges should be so developed so as to emphasize the role of women in the struggle for 
freedom. These program mes can include workshops, seminars, and interactive sessions to 
engage students in learning about these extraordinary women. Further, the preservation 
and sharing of oral histories from families and communities should be encouraged that 
have stories of women freedom fighters. These personal accounts can add depth and 
emotion to their narratives. 
131.3 The Ministry should also partner with schools and universities to incorporate the 
stories of women freedom fighters into the curriculum. Further, collaboration  with 
women's rights and advocacy organizations can jointly promote the legacies of women 
freedom fighters. Such collaborations can lead to more extensive outreach and engagement. 
 
SUPPORT TO ACADEMIES 

80 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
134. The Committee notes a  satisfactory pattern of expenditure under this head in the last 
few years, except for COVID -struck FY 2019 -20 and FY 2020 -21. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may ensure optimal utilization of funds under this head during 
FY 2023 -24. The Committ ee also desires to be apprised of the projected date and cost of 
completion of the project ‘Art work in new Parliament Building’. The Committee suggests that 
the Ministry may consider setting up regional centers of the various Akademis to enhance 
their reach among artists of all regions. 
(Para 205) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
134.1 The Ministry makes all endeavour for optimal utlisations of the budgetary allocations and 
would certainly ensure to do the same in 2023-24 also. As far as the projected date of completion 
of the project  „Art work in new Parliament Building‟ is concerned, the first phase of the art work 
in the New Parliament Building has been completed successfully by the IGNCA and the new 
Parliament Building has recently been inaugurated on 28.05.2023 by the Hon‟ble Prime Minister 
of India. The IGNCA has committed to ensure optimal utilisation of funds during the FY 2023 -
24.  The Ministry is also working on setting up more regional hubs of all akademies in regions 
where there is no presence as of now. Details of the regional centres of the various akademies at 
present are as follows; 
Details of Regional Centres  
SL. 
No. 
Akademies No. of 
Centers 
Place 
1. Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) 
9 Varanasi, Guwahati, Bengaluru, Ranchi, 
Baroda, Goa, Thrissur, Puducherry, 
Kashmir 
2. Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA) 7 Bhubaneshwar, Chennai, Garhi, 
Kolkata, Lucknow, Agartala, Ahmedabad 
3. Sangeet Natak Akademi 
(SNA) 
7 Imphal, Guwahati (2), Agartala, 
Bokaro, Thiruvananthapuram, Delhi 

81 
 
4. Sahitya Akademi (SA) 5 Kolkata, Banglore, Mumbai, Chennai, 
Agartala 
5. National School of Drama 
(NSD) 
5 Kolkata, Banglore, Mumbai, Chennai, 
Agartala 
6. Centre for Cultural 
Resources and Training 
(CCRT) 
4 Udaipur, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Damoh 
  
Further recommendation/observation 
134.2 The Committee further notes that Akademis are unevenly located in the country. 
Many of the culturally rich states like Rajasthan  and North  East states are not well 
represented as indicated above in the table. The Ministry must identify such regions and 
invest into the promotion of art and culture in nooks and corners of the country, espec ially 
in rural India. 
Employment generation in the Cultural Heritage sector 
Recommendation/Observation 
135. The Committee notes that a large number of manpower is deployed at CPMs for 
various activities such as conservation, maintenance and housekeeping. However, the 
Committee feels that there is a pressing need for a systematic assessment of the opportunities 
available for employment generation in the overall cultural heritage sector. Following such an 
assessment, the Ministry should set targets for creat ing employment opportunities in the 
cultural heritage sector. 
(Para 220) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
135.1 As stated by PSC, employment at various monuments of ASI for works pertaining to 
conservation maintenance, housekeeping, security etc. However, systematic  assessment of 
comprehensive opportunities for employment including ancillary services as well as indirect 
employment can be made by Ministry of Tourism. 
Further recommendation/observation 

82 
 
135.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should hold a meeting 
with the Ministry of Tourism at regular intervals in order to resolve the issue of shortage of 
manpower. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
136. Experts from the fields of archaeology, heritage conservation, and tourism should be 
involved in the pr ocess of selecting and maintaining the monuments. This would ensure that 
the monuments are being maintained in line with established standards. 
(Para 244) 
Reply of the Ministry 
136.1 The core conservation is the key activity of ASI and will be performed by  its own 
resources. However, the external partner will take up development, operation and maintenance of 
amenities only. 
Further recommendation/observation 
136.2 The Committee is of the view that Public Private Partnership is the need of the hour  
to impart much needed professionalism to ASI.  More PPP  options should be explored by 
ASI and the Ministry of Culture for better preservation and m aintenance of cultural 
heritage, besides management of the allied activities of ASI. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
137. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry/ ASI should involve local 
communities in decision -making processes related to cultural preservation projects. This will 
help build trust and foster a sense of ownership among local communities, thereby pro moting 
long-term sustainability. It should create opportunities for local communities to participate in 
the preservation process through workshops, training programs, and hands -on activities. This 
will help build capacity among local communities and enable  them to take a more active role 
in cultural preservation efforts. 
(Para 258) 
Reply of the Ministry 

83 
 
137.1 Archaeological Survey of India as part of various activities like excavation, conservation 
works involves local communities not only to provide employment opportunities but also for 
creating awareness on our tangible heritage for sustainability, capacity building and posterity. 
Besides, various local academic institutions are also involved in the heritage awareness programs 
conducted by ASI on World Heritage day/week, Museum day and other important occasions. 
Further recommendation/observation 
137.2 The Committee further recommends ASI to establish community advisory boards 
or committees that provide input and guidance on cultural preservation initiatives. It must 
be ensured that diverse voices and perspectives are represented in decision -making 
processes. 
Financial Assistance to Artisans who manufacture Aranmula Kannadi (Mirror) 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
138. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may extend financial assistance to the 
families which have been keeping the traditional art of making Aranmula Mirrors alive for 
centuries. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should take initiative to 
popularize the Aranmula Mirrors through various publicity measures. 
(Para 269) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
138.1 The Ministry received a request from Aranmula Heritage Trust to include the cultural 
heritage of Aranmula in the national list of ICH. Accordingly, the Ministry has directed SNA, the 
nodal agency for promoting Intangible Cultural Heritage under UNESCO, to consider the 
Aranmula Mirror making in the national inventory so as to make it eligible for possible future 
inscription in UNESCO ICH. 
Further recommendation/observation 
138.2 The Committee further iterates that the required financial assistance may be 
provided to Aranmula Heritage Trust for promotion  of making of Aranmula Mirrors , in 

84 
 
the interest of creating a conducive ecosystem for its promotion as UNESCO intangible 
cultural heritage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

85 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil- 
**** 
  

86 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS- AT A GLANCE 
Chapter-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE: 
 
The Committee further suggests that the Ministry should adequately plan out the pace  of 
expenditure in such a way that it gives a clear picture about the fund requirement at RE 
stage. Expenditure monitoring may be accorded top priority by the Ministry, if more fund 
is requires to be placed at RE stage.  The Committee desires to know about  the details of 
funds required by the organisations under the Ministry in the Financial Year 2023 -24 and 
funds allocated to them. 
(Para 115.2) 
The Committee desires to know about the expenditure incurred till now on the aforesaid 
project and whether the pace of construction is as per the scheduled timeline. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that the construction of the national project 
remains at the top of the Ministry’s priority in the interest of the expeditious completion of 
the project. 
(Para 116.2) 
The Committee desires to know the reason for the inordinate delay in the appointment of 
WTMs of NMA and reiterates that the appointment process be expedited to fill up the 04 
vacant post of WTMs  to enable NMA to work effectively on the impor tant functions under 
its purview. 
(Para 117.2 ) 
The Committee desires to know about the quantum of ongoing work undertaken at 
Badrinath Temple and the expected timeline of its completion. The Committee would like 
to elicit the information regarding the expenditure made out of the total fund, till date. 
(Para 118.2) 

87 
 
The Committee would like to know the criteria governing the recognition of a monument 
that requires any kind of protection. Further, the Committee also desires to know how 
categorization of monuments is being effected for its protection at Central/State level. 
(Para 119.2) 
The Committee would like to know the expenditure incurred by the Ministry on the 
restoration of unprotected monuments in the country by the ASI during the last three 
years, year -wise. The Committee further desires to know the procedure through which 
request for restoration of unprotected monuments is made to ASI and how many such 
requests are pending before ASI, at present. 
(Para 120.2) 
Need for renovation, promotion and better tourist facilities at various ASI monuments, 
temples and forts 
The Committee further recommends that ASI should promote the usage of Indian Heritage 
mobile application among the common masses as most of them are unaware of it. The 
Committee also desires to know as to how the Ministry/ASI plans to disseminate the 
information and benefits of the Mobile Application so as to encourage its greater usage 
among the stakeholders. 
(Para 122.2) 
Footfall at Centrally Protected Monuments 
The Committee recommends that th e Ministry should make an assessment of the 
cumulative impact of all the ASI efforts towards attracting more number of visitors to ASI 
monuments and examine these efforts vis -à-vis the best global practices.  State -of-the-art 
technologies being adopted by other countries in promotion of culture need to be studied so 
that the same could be replicated in India as well. 
(Para 123.2) 
The Committee desires to know about the fate of 50 missing Centrally Protected 
Monuments and recommends the Ministry to direct AS I to initiate an urgent survey of 
CPMs in light of the lack of physical security and missing of monuments instead of making 
it ‘as and when’ matter based on the inputs of ASI field officers. 

88 
 
(Para 124.2) 
Recovery of stolen/ illegally exported antiquities 
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the ASI in retrieval of antiquities. Further, the 
Committee would like to be briefed about the Standard Operating Procedures being 
followed  in this regard, especially the responsibility of upkeep and preservation o f the 
repatriated antiquities including the role of respective states, the involvement of Museum 
authorities, etc.  
(Para 125.2) 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
Allocation and Expenditure Pattern 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry must endeavour to put  in all efforts 
to allocate adequate funds to North Eastern States. The Ministry should strive make an 
effort for 100% utilization of the budget grants available for promotion and awareness of 
the Ministry's varied  schemes being implemented in North-Eastern areas. 
(Para 126.2) 
The Committee further reiterates that there is a consistent decrease in the funds allocated 
to the North -Eastern States as evident from the above table. The Committee feels that the 
10% mandatory allotment should be revised as per th e demands raised by individual State 
in North -Eastern areas. The Ministry must increase the said amount as per the 
requirements of States and cultural organisations for the proper promotion of  the 
programme/activities to be undertaken in North-Eastern areas. 
(Para 127.2) 
Development of Libraries and Archives 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry must identify the ambiguities in the 
operational aspect of the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) accounts. Further, the Ministry 
must attempt to reduce the delay in o peration of accounts along with focusing on 100% 
utilisation of funds under ‘Development of Libraries and Archives’. 
(Para 128.3) 

89 
 
Attracting higher footfall at museums and improving facilities  
The Committee believes that a lot can be done in this directio n. Particularly, hosting of 
programmes on online platforms, documentary shows depicting origin of items, their 
excavation, methods adopted for their preservation, etc can be showcased on TV and other 
OTT platforms. Further, the Committee reiterates that th e Ministry may allocate specific 
funds for the purpose of promoting museums across the country. 
(Para 129.2) 
The Committee further recommends that there is a need for designing exhibits that are 
interactive and hands -on, allowing the students to actively e ngage with the content. 
Interactive displays, simulations, and learning stations can make the museum experience 
lasting and memorable for students. 
(Para 130.2) 
The Museums must establish long -term partnerships with the community schools, offer 
special dis counts or free admission for student groups and collaborate on joint projects, 
exhibitions, or events. Interactive interface of school going children will go a long way in 
creating a community of museum lovers who can take pride in the country’s rich cultu re 
and heritage. 
(Para 130.3) 
Need for increased focus on commemoration and celebration of female freedom fighters 
and historical figures 
The Committee also recommends that educational programme targeted at schools and 
colleges should be so developed so as  to emphasize the role of women in the struggle for 
freedom. These programmes can include workshops, seminars, and interactive sessions to 
engage students in learning about these extraordinary women. Further, the preservation 
and sharing of oral histories from families and communities should be encouraged that 
have stories of women freedom fighters. These personal accounts can add depth and 
emotion to their narratives. 
(Para 131.2) 
The Ministry should also partner with schools and universities to incorporate the stories of 
women freedom fighters into the curriculum. Further, collaboration with women's rights 

90 
 
and advocacy organizations can jointly promote the legacies of women freedom  fighters. 
Such collaborations can lead to more extensive outreach and engagement. 
(Para 131.3) 
SUPPORT TO ACADEMIES 
The Committee further notes that Akademis are unevenly located in the country. Many of 
the culturally rich states like Rajasthan and North East states are not well represented as 
indicated above in the table. The Ministry must identify such regions and invest into the 
promotion of art and culture in nooks and corners of the country, especially in rural India. 
(Para 134.2) 
Employment generation in the Cultural Heritage sector 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture should hold a meeting with the 
Ministry of Tourism at regular intervals in order to resolve the issue of shortage of 
manpower. 
(Para 135.2) 
The Committee is of the view  that Public Private Partnership is the need of the hour to 
impart much needed professionalism to ASI.  More PPP options should be explored by ASI 
and the Ministry of Culture for better preservation and maintenance of cultural heritage, 
besides management of the allied activities of ASI. 
(Para 136.2) 
The Committee further recommends ASI to establish community advisory boards or 
committees that provide input and guidance on cultural preservation initiatives. It must be 
ensured that diverse voices and perspectives are represented in decision-making processes. 
(Para 137.2) 
Financial Assistance to Artisans who manufacture Aranmula Kannadi (Mirror) 
The Committee further iterates that the required financial assistance may be provided to 
Aranmula Heritage Trust for promotion of making of Aranmula Mirrors, in the interest of 
creating a conducive ecosystem for its promotion as UNESCO intangible cultural heritage. 
(Para 138.2) 
***** 

91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2023-24) 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  3:00 P .M. on  Tuesday, the 19th September, 2023 in Committee 
Room-D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri A.A. Rahim 
3. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 Lok Sabha 
4. Shri Anto Antony 
5. Shri Tapir Gao  
6. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
7. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
12. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
13. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. 
He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt t he following 
Reports:- 
(i) ****** 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee 
contained in its Three Hundred Fortieth Report on Demand s for Grants (2023 -24) of 
Ministry of Culture; 
(iii)  ****** 
(iv) ****** 

93 
 
(v) ******1 
 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one . After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid five draft Reports and authori sed the Chairman 
to carry out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting , if need be in 
all the Reports. 
 
3.       The Committee authorised Dr. C. M. Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A.A. Rahim, 
M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 21st September, 2023. The Committee 
also authorised Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Prince Raj, M.P. to lay the Reports 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
 
4. ****** 
 
5. ****** 
 
6. ****** 
 
7. The Meeting adjourned at 4:00 P.M.                                                                                     
                                          
New Delhi,                                                                                                 Monica Baa 
19th September, 2023                                                                                    Additional Director  
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 