118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE
 COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
 GRANTS  (2007-08) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON        4.3. 2008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON      4.3.2008)
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
 GRANTS (2007-08) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON              4.32008)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON      4.3.2008)
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
PAGES
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                      (i) - (ii) 
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                               
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                    
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                             
 
 
                                                                                                           
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury             - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
3.   Shri Naresh Gujral
4.   Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5.      Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9.      Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.  Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.  Shri Joachim Baxla
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Smt. Priya Dutt
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri P. Karunakaran
21.  Dr. P.P. Koya
22.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
23.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
24.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
25.  Shri Hemlal Murmu
26.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27.  Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh
29.  Shri Suraj Singh
30.  Shri Prahlad Joshi
31.  Shri Rakesh Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
 (i)
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
         I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having
 been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Twenty Seventh
 Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 contained in its One Hundred and Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Department of Road Transport
 and Highways.
 
2.    The One Hundred and Eighteenth Report on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Road Transport and
 Highways was presented to the Parliament on the 14
th May 2007.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendation of
 the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Eighteenth  Report were received from the Department of Road
 Transport and Highways on 11th September, 2007.  The Committee considered the Action Taken Replies in its meeting
 held on the 24th December, 2007 and decided to hear the Secretary, Department of Road Transport and Highways in this

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 regard.   A Questionnaire based on the ATR was also forwarded to the Department and replies were obtained from them.
 
3.    Accordingly, a meeting was held on 10 th January, 2008 with the Secretary, and other representatives of the
 Department of Road Transport and Highways in which clarifications on certain points were sought.
 
4.    The draft report was prepared on the basis of action taken replies and the subsequent feedbacks.  The Committee
 considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 18th January, 2008.
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI ;                                                                           SITARAM YECHURY
January 18, 2008                                                                       Chairman
     Pausa 28, 1929 (Saka)                                       Department-related Parliamentary Standing
                                       Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
 
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Road Transport and Highways on
 the observations/recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred and Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants
 (2007-08) of Department of Road Transport and Highways, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on
 14th May, 2007.
2.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Department on the 11th  September,  2007 in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorised as follows:—
 
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Department:
 Para Nos. 9,22,41,42,48,51,55,59,68,72,74,80,83,88,93,104 Total-16
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
 the Department replies:
 Para No.   — Total-Nil
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Department have not been
 accepted by the Committee:
 Para Nos. Total-Nil
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Department are still
 awaited:
 Para Nos. 96, 100 Total-2
 
3.      The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.      On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of Action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Department. The recommendations of the Committee contained in the One Hundred
 and Eighteenth Report, action taken thereon by the Department and recommendations/observations of the Committee on
 each item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
THE TENTH PLAN PROVISIONS AND ANNUAL PLAN 2006-07:
(Recommendation at Para 9)
5.         The Committee notes that trend of fund utilization pattern of the Department has been fluctuating as is evident
 from the above that Department utilized 98.16% of allocated fund whereas it could utilized only 52.08% of fund during

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 2004-05.  This in turn has bearing on the performance of the Department of Road Transport and Highways.  The
 Committee hopes that the Department will take corrective measures to utilise the funds to the maximum extent possible
 during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee also strongly recommends that the Department should evolve a
 mechanism to monitor the utilization of funds periodically so that any shortcoming could be noticed and solved
 immediately.  The Department may also set up a coordination unit with all its Units and also with the State Governments,
 so that the funds earmarked for a particular year are spent timely.
Reply of the Government:
6.         The expenditure level of funds during the year 2006-07 under Plan and Non-Plan works was as under:
a)         Plan works:
                                                                        (Rs in crores)
Scheme Final allocation
of funds
Amount
utilized
%age of
utilization
Plan works excluding  
 Permanent Bridge Fee
 Fund (PBFF)
11452.68 11146.29 99.03
PBFF 90.00 66.75 74.16
Central Road Fund States /
 UTs including schemes of
 Economic Importance &
 Inter-State Connectivity
1706.07 1555.89 91.20
 
b)         Non 
Plan works:
                                                                        (Rs in crores)
Scheme Final allocation
of funds
Amount
utilized
%age of
utilization
Maintenance & Repairs 814.38 777.70 95.50
 
 
7.         The total final allocation of funds during the 10 th Plan period for Plan works was Rs 37715.56 crore. Out of this,
 expenditure was incurred to the tune of Rs 35662.89 crore, thus, making the expenditure level of funds during the 10 th
 Plan period up to 91.47%.
8.         The Department of Road Transport and Highways makes all possible full efforts for utilization of allocated funds
 to the maximum extent possible. The Department has already evolved a mechanism to monitor the utilization of funds
 periodically. The physical and financial progress of the work is monitored by the concerned Chief Engineer of the Project
 Zone of this Department in consultation with Chief Engineer (NH) of State PWDs by conducting critical reviews and
 steps are taken to resolve the shortcoming / bottleneck noticed if, any immediately.
 
 9.      To ensure optimum utilization of funds, effective institutional mechanisms are already in place in NHAI both at the
 Project Implementation Units (PIUs) as well as in the Head Office, to constantly monitor the progress of the projects
 under implementation. In order to make the Project Directors more responsive and responsible, guidelines have been
 issued detailing the duties and responsibilities of Project Directors in-charge of the Project Implementation Unit.
10.
                          The Regional Officers of this Department are regularly reviewing the works on National Highways with the
 State PWDs.
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
11.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  The Committee feels that though the expenditure level
 of funds stood at 91.47% of the total allocated fund, there is a scope for further improvement to ensure that there
 is uniformity in the expenditure pattern during the 11
th Plan period.
 
THE TENTH PLAN PROVISIONS AND ANNUAL PLAN 2007-08:

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
(Recommendation at Para 22)
12.       The Committee observes that the budgetary allocation of the Department of Road Transport and Highways was
 substantially increased from 2005-06 (revised estimates) of Rs 13293.25 to Rs 14995.21 crore during 2006-07 and for
 2007-08 (budget estimates) the allocation has again been increased to Rs 16193.70 crore. The Committee, therefore,
 reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Department should devise strategies in such a way that they are able to fully
 utilize the funds placed at their disposal.  They should also evolve some mechanism to identify bottlenecks causing
 delays and work towards resolving all such hindrances in coordination with the all concerned agencies.   This would help
 them to avoid time overrun and consequential cost overrun of the projects to be executed by them.   The Committee
 desires that the State Governments may be requested to send their plan for road projects well in time in order to spend the
 allocated outlay within the particular year.  The Committee also feels that since a large number of roads are being
 identified for up- gradation or inclusion in the NHDP, the Department should ensure that funds are utilized well in time
 for better road connectivity and also to generate good revenue by completing the projects in time.
 
Reply of the Government:
 
13.       The budgetary allocation of Rs 13293.75 crore (RE for the year 2005-06), Rs 14995.21 crore (BE for the year
 2006-07) and Rs 16193.70 crore (BE for the year 2007-08) is the total budgetary allocation of the Department of Road
 Transport & Highways.  Out of this, the Plan outlay for road sector is Rs 9738.45 crore (RE for the year 2005-06), Rs
 11452.68 crore (RE for the year 2006-07) and Rs 12440.00 crore (BE for the year 2007-08).
 
14.       The Plan outlay for road sector, the expenditure incurred and the percentage thereof in respect of the above is as
 under:
                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                (Rs in crores)
 
Year Plan outlay for
 road sector
Expenditure %age
2005-06 9738.45 8975.28 92.16
2006-07 11452.68 11146.29 97.32
2007-08 12440.00  2978.26* 23.94
 
* Up to 30-6-2007.
 
15.       This Department makes all possible efforts for utilizing allocated funds by conducting time to time inspection of
 the on-going works by executing agency, i.e., State PWD and National Highway  Authority  of  India.  Critical   reviews 
 are carried out  by concerned  Project Zone Chief   Engineer    of   this   Department    with   Chief   Engineer (NH)   of  
 State PWDs and bottlenecks / hindrances causing delays are identified and resolved. The cost and time over run of the
 projects are watched in these reviews on monthly basis. The monitoring of sanction of revised cost estimates are done
 quarterly.
 
16.       Further the State Governments are always requested to finalize their Annual Plans well in advance at the verge of
 starting of the financial year and submit the technical proposals / estimates to this Department as per provisions of
 Annual Plan. The monitoring of sanction of these technical proposals / estimates is carried out by respective Chief
 Engineer of the Project Zone on monthly basis and concerned Additional Director General of this Department quarterly.
 
17.       The level of utilization of funds under NH (O) during the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 was as under:
                                                                             (Rs in crores)

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
Year Final allocation     
 of funds
  Amount utilized %age of
 utilization
2005-06 1577.00 1570.34 99.57
2006-07 1586.89 1577.28 99.39
 
18.       The National Highways Authority of India fixes comprehensive month-wise and project-wise monitorable targets
 both for the physical and financial progress. The actual achievement against these targets is constantly monitored and the
 reasons for slippages are critically analyzed to avoid their recurrence and to improve the progress of work. Dy. Chairman,
 Planning  Commission also hold  meetings on quarterly basis to review the progress against the monitor able targets. The
 projects are awarded by adopting a mix of EPC and BOT projects for NHDP Phase-II and for NHDP Phase-III onwards in
 PPP mode as per the policy decision taken by the Govt. that all future projects would be awarded only on BOT basis (either
 based on the toll or annuity), with EPC award being made in specified exceptional cases only. 
 
19.   Effective institutional mechanisms are already in place in NHAI to ensure optimum utilization of funds, both at the
 Project Implementation Units (PIUs) as well as in the Head-office to constantly monitor the progress of the projects
 under implementation. Necessary guidelines have been issued to Project Directors to make them more responsible and
 responsive.
 
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
20.  The Committee notes the reply of the Department
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAY  DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NHDP):
(Recommendations at Para 41 and 42)
21.       The Committee expresses concern over the fact that there are 7 stretches of Golden Quadrilateral still pending; out
 of these, four stretches are of more than 50 kms in length.   It indicates a sorry state of affairs that Golden Quadrilateral
 project which was scheduled to be completed by the end of 2003 have extended over four more years and now stretched
 upto 2007-08.  Still, the Department has not chalked out strategies to deal with contract defaulters or legal wrangles.  The
 Committee also notes that five road stretches of N-S Corridor and E-W Corridor are also pending. The Committee
 strongly recommends that all these works should be completed at the earliest.
22.       The Committee notes that 94.77% of the Golden Quadrilateral Project has been completed by February, 2007. 
 The Committee expresses its concern over the slow progress of this project and rescheduling of target of completion of
 the project more than 5 years. Though the Department of Road Transport and Highways has enumerated a number of
 steps taken to ensure early completion of the NHDP, like monitoring of contracts at various level, appointing of nodal
 officers by State Governments, constitution of Committee of Secretaries, simplification of procedure of land acquisition,
 action against non-performing contractors and improving cash flow problems of contractors. However, when it comes to
 the implementation of the projects, it appears that things have not improved. The construction of flyover at Delhi -
 Badarpur border can be sighted as an example as how the procedural hurdle delaying in projects leading to cost overrun
 and time escalation.   The project was approved by the Department of Road Transport and Highways on 31
st March,
 2005, however the project is yet to be finalised for want of a number of clearances. This project forms part of Golden
 Triangle of Agra, Delhi and Jaipur where lakhs of domestic and foreign tourists visit on it. The project could have been
 taken on priority basis particularly taking into account in the Commonwealth Games, 2010. The Committee recommends
 that the steps enumerated by the Department for the early completion of the project should be implemented in letter and
 spirit so that there is not cost overrun and time overrun. The Committee hopes that the Department would take necessary
 precautions in future while finalizing such type of projects which require huge amount of investment.   In this context the
 Committee reiterates its recommendation made in the 102
nd Report that "proper verification of bank guarantees
 submitted by contractors should be undertaken at the initial stage itself to avoid termination of the contracts at a later
 stage.  The Committee notes that increasing numbers of contracts are under implementation and being awarded. 
 Therefore, it is recommended that the Department should be vigilant in respect of each contract and should strictly
 enforce the compensation conditions in the contracts in respect of non-performing contractors. The Committee, further,
 recommends that the Department should not wait for the targeted date of completion to initiate action but should fix
 short-term targets for the contractors so that the projects can be monitored constantly and immediate and early remedial

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 action may be taken in case of anticipated delays. The Committee also feels that the Department should draw-up a
 database of the performance of the contractors involved in NHDP and encourage outstanding contractors, who strictly
 comply with the construction standards and quality control and also complete the projects well within the targeted date,
 to undertake more and more projects as incentives". 
Reply of the Government:
23.       There have been some delays in the completion of some contracts pertaining to GQ, due to problems associated
 with acquisition of land, shifting of utilities, difficulties in environment and forest clearances, poor performance of some
 contractors and termination of some contracts etc. The recommendations of the Committee are noted for further
 compliance.
24.       The Department has further submitted that there has been inordinate delay in acquisition of land in some States
 mostly due to procedural formalities, court cases and low level cooperation from the State Government officials.   there
 have been delays in disbursement of compensation by the competent Authority to the affected land owners although
 NHAI deposits the compensation amount determined by the competent authority well in advance.   The procedure of
 Land Acquisition has now been simplified.   Earlier all the notification under NH Act were vetted by the Ministry of
 Law.  Recently, an amendment has been made to the allocation of business rules by which these notifications are not
 required to be sent to the Ministry of Law.  The Ministry of Law has approved the standard formats of various
 notifications keeping in view the similar nature of the notifications of Land Acquisition.
25.       The Department has also submitted that environment and forest clearances, clearance of Railways for ROB
 designs, shifting of utilities, local law and order problems and poor performance by some contractors are the other factors
 which are affecting timely execution of the projects.
26.       To a specific query regarding the action taken to expedite the completion of project, the Department has stated that
 the Authority in its 65
th Meeting held on 15.10.2007 had reviewed the progress of Golden Quadrilateral. On completion
 of balance work, it was decided as under:
i)          GQ: Contractors to be put on notice for completion of the remaining work by June, 2008.
ii)         North-South & East-West Corridor under NHDP Phase I by June 2008.
iii)         Port connectivity and others:                 a)         by Dec. 2007 - 42 Km.
b)
                  by Dec. 2008 - 17 Km and
c)                  by Dec. 2009 - 147 Km.
 
27.       It has been also decided that action will be taken against those contractors who do not complete their work as per
 above schedule and/or who continue the work in tardy manner by terminating their contracts with NHAI and re-awarding
 the work on their risk and cost.
28.       Status of progress in respect of Badarpur elevated highway is as under:
a)
                  The project was approved by National Highway Authority of India Board on 12-4-2005;
b)                  Detailed Project Report was completed in August, 2005;
c)                  RFP document based on old MCA was prepared in January, 2006;
d)                  RFP document based on new MCA was submitted to MoSRT&H in September, 2006;
e)                  Approval of PPPAC to take up the project on BOT (toll) basis was obtained on  19-12-2006  and 
 approval  of  competent  authority  was  obtained  on   3-4-2007;
f)                    Short listing of the bidders has been completed;
g)                  Approval of Delhi Urban Arts Commission, Delhi Development Authority and Department of
 Archeology, GNCTYD is awaited for invitation of bids.  Constant liaison for early approval / clearance of
 the project by these agencies is being done by National Highway Authority of India.
 
29.       The Department has also stated that the Secretary, Department of Road Transport and Highways took a meeting

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 on 31.10.2007.  It was apprised by the Secretary that Common Wealth Games are to be held in October/November 2010. 
 During a recent meeting taken by Cabinet Secretary in this connection, it has been desired that to relieve the traffic
 congestion on Badarpur, effort be made to complete the project by August, 2010.  PPPAC during its meeting on
 2.11.2007 has allowed Financial Closures by the concessionaire in 5 months in place of 6 months.
Accordingly, following time schedule towards completion of the project by September, 2010 is indicated here under:-
1. Pre-qualification of concessionaires 2 months
2. Receipt and acceptance of bids on BOT basis 3 months
3. Preliminary preparations including signing of the
 concession agreement
2 months
4. Financial close and arranging of funds by the
 Concessionaire
5 months
5. Construction/implementation of the project 24 months
 Total: 36 months
As per revised schedule, the construction work of Badarpur flyover is to start by September 2008and is to complete by
 September, 2010.
30.       The procedure for conformation of bank guarantee has been streamlined.   The officials have been directed that
 before opening the financial proposals (in case of bid security), signing of the contract (in the case of performance
 security), release of payment (in case of bank guarantees for mobilization advances / against retention money), etc as the
 case may be:
a)
                  The confirmation from the issuing branch of the bank is obtained in writing through registered post /
 speed post / courier.   The bank should be advised to confirm the issuance of the bank guarantee (s)
 specifically quoting the letter of NHAI on the printed official letter-head of the bank indicating address
 and other details (including telephone Nos) etc of the bank and the name, designation and code number of
 the officer(s) confirming the issuance of the bank guarantee;
b)
                  Confirmation is also obtained with the help of a responsible officer (not below the rank of Manager) at
 PIU / HQ, which is close to the issuing branch of the bank who should personally obtain the confirmation
 from issuing branch of the bank and forward the confirmation report to the concerned Technical Division
 at HQ;
c)
                  As a matter of abundant precaution, the confirmation from the controlling office of the bank may also be
 separately obtained by the concerned Technical Divisions.
31.              Regarding non-performing contractors, a Committee of Chief General Managers has been constituted to look into
 the performance of contractors.  Action is being taken against non-performing contractors.
32.       Regarding encouraging the outstanding contractors, there is a provision in the contract agreements for providing
 incentives for early completion of projects.       
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
33.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the works will be completed as per
 schedule drawn by the Department.    The Committee recommends that the Department should take up with
 appropriate authorities the factors delaying the projects and convince them the need for streamlining various
 procedures in such a way that it should not become an impediment in timely execution of projects.
34.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  The Committee hopes that the Badarpur flyover project
 may be completed by 2010 as per schedule   so that the traffic congestion at Badarpur is eased drastically.   The
 Committee notes that a project needs almost three years to get an approval from the competent authority from
 the date of conception of the project.  The Committee believes that many of the stages of approval can be done
 away with if a single high powered agency is constituted to give approval of all stages from conception to final
 approval of the project.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take up with the
 Cabinet the need for creating a single high powered agency for approval of such project.

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 
ROADS OF  INTER-STATE CONNECTIVITY & ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE:
(Recommendation at Para 48)
35.       The Roads of Inter State connectivity and economic importance as evident by its projects are very crucial for
 interstate connectivity and should be handled with good spirit.  The Committee again finds that two important projects
 could not be taken-up for want of completion of one or the other formalities.   However sufficient fund should be
 allocated therefor.  The Committee hopes that the projects sanctioned under this head in the year 2005-06 and 2006-07
 are completed as per their scheduled dates of completion as these roads are vital in giving connectivity to destinations of
 economic and tourist importance.
Reply of the Government:
36.       The progress of works sanctioned under EI & ISC is at present being reviewed at the quarterly meetings with the
 officers of the State Government. The removal of bottlenecks, if any and action to expedite the progress of works are also
 decided. Nevertheless, following provisions have been included under the CRF Rules, 2007, recently notified on 10
th
 July, 2007:
 
(i)         Project monitoring shall be done at regular interval in a methodical manner to avoid time and cost over run.
 
(ii)        The Central Government or any officer appointed by it as regional officer for the State or Union territory or any
 other officer or agency authorized by it shall periodically inspect the work during the execution and exercise such
 checks as may be necessary to ensure observance of the time schedule and proper implementation.
           
(iii)       The periodicity, intervals or the procedure for such inspection and exercising of checks shall be decided by the
 Central Government.
 
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
37.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  The Committee, however, is constrained to note that the
 projects which were sanctioned under this head in 2005-06 and 2006-07 are progressing very slowly.  The
 Committee recommends that the Department should monitor these projects as these roads are important for
 providing connectivity to important tourist destinations and also cities of economic importance.
 
QUALITY CONTROL:
(Recommendation at Para 51)
38.       The Committee desires that there is a need for indigenization of norms regarding designing of roads and bridges
 taking into account the local site conditions.  The Committee hopes that there should be uniform norms / guidelines in the
 country for highway projects.   The Committee recommends that an independent agency should be appointed to monitor
 and inspect the quality of all works carried out by both the Governmental and also the private agencies. There are reports
 that Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi has made third party checks mandatory by a panel of institutes
 i.e., Delhi College of Engineering, CRRI and IIT Delhi for all road works like strengthening and resurfacing.   The
 Committee desires that the Department may also involve similar mechanism to check the quality of repair work carried
 out on the National Highways and this independent audit should be made part of the contract while awarding it which
 will also ensure that works carried out are at par with international standards or norms.
Reply of the Government:
39.       Design codes /  manuals / standards and Ministry’s Specifications for Road & Bridge Works, 2001 (4
th Revision)
 published by Indian Roads Congress are indigenous and take into account the local site conditions. The specifications are
 evolved keeping in view the international norms and practices. As far as National Highway projects are concerned,
 almost uniform norms / guidelines are followed throughout the country incorporating certain changes warranted by local
 site conditions.  In order to ensure the quality, various executing agencies, viz, National Highway Authority of India
 (NHAI), State Public Works Departments (PWDs), Border Roads Organization (BRO) have quality control system in

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 place.  For projects under National Highways Development Project, NHAI has engaged supervision consultants to ensure
 the quality of its roads / bridges according to desired standards / specifications for National Highways.  For NHAI
 projects, quality audit is also being done by Engineers India Ltd, a Government of India Undertaking.   Overall quality of
 work is also monitored as a double check at construction sites by NHAI’s Project Implementation Units (PIUs). To
 ensure quality, normally, there are provisions in the contract agreement that in case any work is not found conforming to
 the prescribed technical standards / specifications, the action will be taken by the engineer for rejection / replacement /
 rectification of work / material.  Further, generally there is also a provision of minimum 12 months defect liability period
 after the completion of the period during which it is the responsibility of the contractor to rectify the defects, if any. 
40.       In response to Committee's specific question regarding mandating the third party check for monitoring and
 inspecting the quality of works carried out by the governmental and private agencies, the Department has stated that the
 execution of development works on National Highways are being carried out on agency basis through National
 Highways Authority of India (NHAI), Border Roads Organization (BRO) and State Public Work Departments.
41.       NHAI had appointed Engineers India Ltd., Central Road Research Institute and Gujarat Engineering Research
 Institute as independent auditors for quality audit for the works carried out on the Golden Quadrilateral, North-South and
 East-West Corridor and Port connectivity projects.   Further, they have also appointed M/s TUV SUD South Asia Pvt.
 Ltd. as third party Independent Quality Auditors on 14.12.2007.  The firm is in the process of completing the agreement
 formalities and shall be starting the quality audit work shortly.
42.       Quality audit is being considered for SARDP-NE projects.   The monitoring of quality of works will be got done
 through individual experts to be engaged through India Roads Congress.  Further, reputed institutes such as IITs will be
 involved for conducting tests and materials and works being executed by the contractor.
43.       It has also been decided to appoint third party independent quality auditors for National Highway  works and State
 road works funded from CRF being implemented by State Governments.  The details of appointment and the check list
 etc. are being finalized. BRO is executing the work departmentally in difficult terrain/strategic areas.  There is apparently
 no need for a separate quality audit of works handled by BRO.
 
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
44.       The Committee appreciates the decision of the Department to appoint third party independent quality
 auditors for National Highway works.  The Committee hopes that this measure may help in ensuring qualitative
 execution of National Highway works.
ENCROACHMENT
:
(Recommendation at para 55)
45.       The Committee feels that the encroachment of land under National Highways is a serious issue as it involves huge
 loss of public property, hampers the smooth development of highways and is also an irritant in the timely completion of
 various projects.  The Committee recommends that suitable action should be taken to prevent encroachments.    The
 Committee feels that strict enforcement of Control of National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002 will play a major
 role in removing encroachments upon national highways.  The Committee hopes that the Department will fill up the
 vacancies on priority in National Highways Tribunals to ensure that the law regarding removal of encroachments on
 national highways is implemented in both letter and spirit.
Reply of the Government:
46.       The Department of Road Transport & Highways has taken action to fill up the vacant posts of Presiding Officers
 in the National Highway Tribunals. However, due to non availability of suitable candidates, the posts could not be filled
 up. Appointment of one Presiding Officer is under consideration of this Department. Further, the Department has also
 initiated the process afresh to fill up the vacant posts of Presiding Officers. In this regard, Department has invited
 applications from the Registrar of all High Courts, eligible advocates and the officers from judicial service.  48
 applications have been received in the Department.   These are being scrutinized.   After scrutiny of the applications,
 Registrar General - Supreme Court would be requested to place the matter before the Chief Justice of India for
 nominating a serving judge to head the Selection Committee.   On the basis of the recommendation of the Selection
 Committee and approval of the Government, offer of appointment would be issued to the candidates.   The whole process
 is likely to be completed by July, 2008.

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
47.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires that the process of appointing the Presiding
 Officers need to be expedited to ensure that all the Tribunals get their Presiding Officers at the earliest in any case
 not beyond the date fixed by the Government i.e., July, 2008. The Committee hopes that the appointment of
 Presiding Officers in the National Highways Tribunals will help to enforce the law regarding removal of
 encroachments on National Highways in both letter and spirit.  The respective State Governments may also be
 consulted in the functioning of the Tribunals.
CENTRAL ROAD FUND
:
(Recommendation at Para 59)
48.       The Committee notes that the issue of release of previous fund accruals to the Central Road Funds due to
 additional cess since 1.4.2003 still remains unresolved. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the
 Department should take up the matter immediately with the Ministry of Finance to resolve the impasse in the non-accrual
 of previous fund allocations from the CRF in view of high cost implementation of NHDP and also the inclusion of a large
 number of new roads which are being included in this project. The Committee desires that the Department should
 impress upon the State Governments to spend the allocated amount under this head optimally and periodically monitor
 the projects under taken by State Governments.
 
Reply of the Government:
49.       Secretary (RT&H) took a meeting in September, 2007 with the representatives of the State Governments to review
 the utilization of funds by States under CRF scheme.   It was then observed that utilization of funds under the scheme by
 the States is quite low.  The State Governments/UTs were accordingly requested to fully utilize their accrual of the
 current financial year and submit proposal for release of unspent balance for previous years.  Proposals from only 5
 States for additional funds over and above the allocations of current financial year have been received.   These funds
 would be made available depending on the utilization of funds by other States. All the State Governments/UT
 Administrations have been requested recently to submit their CRF proposals for next year after taking into consideration
 any unspent balance of the previous years and likely allocation of 2008-09 are accorded in time and the unspent amount
 of previous years as well as the allocations 2008-09 are fully utilized. Ministry of Finance will be requested for additional
 funds depending on the utilization by other States.
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
50.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the allocation of additional funds from
 CRF for the States is pursued with the Ministry of Finance so that the fund legitimately due for works of
 development and maintenance of roads are available to the Department. 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION:
(Recommendation at Para 68)
51.       The Committee hopes that the incentives announced by the Government for the participation of private sector in
 road projects of  north-eastern states will invite good response and hopes that North-eastern states will get a better   road
 connectivity as a result thereof.
Reply of the Government:
52.       Upgrading of 603 km (now 588) of various National Highways in North Eastern region to 2 lane standards has
 been included under Phase-A of Special Accelerated Road Development Programme for North East (SARDP-NE)
 through private sector participation.  Earlier, the Government on 22-9-2005 had approved implementation of this 603 km
 on BOT basis.  Thereafter, the NHAI invited bids for the most trafficked corridor from Jorabat to Barapani in the State of
 Meghalaya.  But there was no response from the bidders.  Subsequently, Government approved these projects on BOT
 (annuity) basis on 23-11-2006.  Further, NHDP : III-B includes 4 laning of 1051 km on National Highways in North

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 Eastern region.  Government on 12-4-2007 has approved its implementation.   At present, Detailed Project Report is
 under preparation by National Highway Authority of India.
 
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
53.       The Committee is disappointed to note that the Government initiatives did not yield much result in the
 development of road projects in North-Eastern States.  The Committee recommends that the Department
 undertake a proper scientific study and take the consequent measures to modify the rules and procedures if
 necessary for appropriate participation of the private sector in road projects in North-East. This need to be
 undertaken in a specific time and report may be submitted to the Committee.
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (ORIGINAL) WORKS - NH(O): 
(Recommendation at Para 72)
54.       The Committee feels that non-NHDP works are as important as that of NHDP works.  The Committee desires that
 new works are completed in time for the current year and the funds allocated therefor are utilised fully.
 
Reply of the Government:
55.       The Department of Road Transport and Highways makes all possible efforts for completing the non- NHDP / new
 works as per the programme and try to utilize fully allocated budget.
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
56.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
 
 
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS:
(Recommendation at Para 74)
57.       The Committee notes that the works on the projects have picked up slow momentum   and hopes that all these
 externally funded projects are completed within the stipulated period so that cost overrun do not occur on these projects.
 The Committee also desires the Department to ensure proper monitoring of these projects which carry a huge amount of
 overseas loan.
Reply of the Government:
58.       The recommendations of the Committee are noted for further compliance.  National Highway Authority of India is
 properly monitoring the projects being implemented with external funding so as to ensure that cost overrun do not occur
 on these projects.
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
59.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
ROAD SAFETY
:
(Recommendation at Para 80)
60.       The Committee notes that the number of road accidents in India are quite large in number and human and property
 on account of road accidents is also colossal.  In this context, the Committee is constrained to note that out of the
 allocated amount of Rs 14.80 crore for National Highways Accident Relief Scheme, the Department was able to spend an
 amount of Rs 6.58 crore till 31st March 2007 which is less than 50% of the allocated amount.   The Committee in its
 earlier recommendation had asked the Department to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
 for enhancing the financial assistance for hospital / trauma centres located on the National Highways to upgrade their
 facilities.  The Committee recommends that the Department should coordinate with all the State governments to ensure
 the availability of trauma centres and ambulances within reachable limits on all national highways so that fatality is

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 checked to the extent possible. 
 
Reply of the Government:
61.       The order for procurement of 71 ambulances was placed and an amount of Rs 5.57 crore was also paid.  Till 31st
 March, 2007, an amount of Rs 12.15 crore had been spent under NHARSS.
62.       As regards the financial assistance for hospitals and trauma centres, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is in
 the process of preparing a comprehensive plan for upgradation of trauma care  centres along National highways entailing
 all the relevant elements.  They have already mooted an Expenditure Finance Committee proposal in this regard and the
 comments thereon of this Department have already been communicated to them.
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
63.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  The Committee is however to constrained to note that
 the matter is not receiving the attention of the Government that it merits given the extraordinarily high rate of
 mortality in road accidents.  The Committee recommends that in all future projects allocation for trauma centres
 must be an integral part of the project proposal. 
NATIONAL DATA
  BASE NETWORK:
(Recommendation at Para 83)
64.       The National Data Base Network project aims to bring about uniformity in Driving Licenses and Vehicle
 Registration documents issued by RTOs across the country.  The Committee however expresses its concern over the
 delay in implementation of this project even though there is no cost overrun in this project.  The Committee recommends
 that Department of Road Transport and Highways to persuade the States to implement the project in a time bound
 manner.  The use of smart cards can be useful only if all the DL & RC issuing authorities are covered under National
 Data Base Network. It will also ensure the transparency, responsiveness and e-governance in the transport sector through
 application of information technology.
 
Reply of the Government:
65.       The Department is pursuing the matter through NIC for early completion of the project.   28 States / UTs have
 already implemented pilot projects in Vahan (registration certificate) and Sarathi (driving licence).  Out of these, 26
 States / UTs have started roll-out process.  West Bangal, Jharkhand, Orissa, Maharashtra  and Tripura have started
 issuance of Smart Cards based driving license and registration certificates.   NCT of Delhi has started issuing Smart Card
 based registration certificates.
 
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
 
66.       The Committee is constrained to note that only a few States have started issuing smart card based driving
 license and registration certificates.   The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue with the
 remaining States to implement smart card based DL and RCs.
 
DATA COLLECTION
:
(Recommendation at Para 88)
 
67.       The Committee is constrained to note that the entire amount allocated for data collection has remained unspent
 during 2006-07. The Committee is convinced that “importance of accurate data and well-researched insight to aid
 informed policy-making can not be overstated” accepted by the Department as a mere rhetoric and not supported by
 concrete actions.  The Committee is of the view that the unorganised sector of road transport has remained a neglected
 area particularly due to lack of critical data relating to this Sector.  The Committee recommends that suitable action
 should be taken to evolve a permanent mechanism to ensure collection and analysis of data relating to road transport
 sector which will be useful in research and development activities also.
 
Reply of the Government:
68.       11 consultants were empanelled for entrusting the studies in road transport sector and bids were invited from

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 them.  However, none of the proposals submitted by the empanelled consultants was found suitable in respect of the
 studies identified for road transport sector.
 
69.       During the year 2006-07, three study projects and one R&D project have been awarded to Automotive Research
 Association of India-Pune and national Automotive Testing and R&D Infrastructure Project.   The details of the funds
 released for these projects during the year 2006-07 are as under:
 
 
Name of study Total cost Funds released
Correlation study for world-wide
 harmonized motor cycle emission test
 cycle
Rs 95,40,400/- Rs 28,62,120/-
Study and control of evaporative
 emissions from gasoline
Rs 90,00,000/- Rs 36,00,000/-
Study on vehicle dynamic
 characteristics on wet roads and effect
 of road safety
Rs 1,50,00,000/- Rs 45,00,000/-
Design and development of adaptive
 front lighting system for Indian road
 and driving conditions
Rs 50,00,000/- Rs 15,00,000/-
 
 
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
 
70.       The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Government that there are no suitable consultants to
 carryout study on road transport sector.  If a particular panel of consultants is not competent, the Department
 should go for a wider search to find out suitable consultants.  The Committee recommends that the Department
 should strive for empanelling consultants for the study of road transport sector at the earliest.
 
ROAD SAFETY EQUIPMENT AND POLLUTION TESTING & CONTROL:
(Recommendation at Para 93)
 
71.       The Committee expresses its displeasure over the response of state governments in procuring pollution testing
 equipments.   The Committee feels that perhaps the Department of Road Transport and Highways have failed to
 communicate properly the importance of enforcing the emission norms in the country and that is why the state
 governments are not taking serious actions to tackle the problems of vehicular pollution.   The Committee hopes that the
 Department would sensitize the State Governments on this issue and enforce the emission norms throughout the country
 uniformly.   The Committee desires that the procedures involved in purchase of equipments should not a deterrent in
 implementing emission norms.
 
Reply of the Government:
72.       The Committee’s concern on implementation of the emission norms by the State Governments was conveyed to
 the State Governments on 5-7-2006 and the same has been reiterated on 3-7-2007. Further, this Department is in the
 process of procuring pollution testing equipments through open tender basis for distribution among 18 States / UTs who
 have sent their requirements with a view to assist them for proper enforcement of the Central Motor Vehicle Rules in this
 regard.
 
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
 
73.       The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
 
NATIONAL ROAD TRANSPORT POLICY
:
(Recommendation at Para 96)
           

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
74.       Rapid development is taking place in transport sector. However, the Committee is constrained to note that there is
 no policy to regulate the development of transport sector in the country.  Now the Government is in the process of
 formulating the National Road Transport Policy. The Committee hopes that the new policy would address all the core
 issues related to road transport sector.
 
Reply of the Government:
 
75.       The Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri D. Thangaraj, Principal Secretary (Transport),
 Government of Karnataka submitted a report on 8.9.07 inter-alia recommending a National Road Transport Policy.  The
 National Road Transport Policy recommended by the Committee aims at achieving the following major objectives:
 
·
        To promote modern, energy efficient and environment friendly road transport services
·        To promote road infrastructure support for transportation of passenger and goods to sustain high
 growth rate of GDP
·        To promote public transport and ensure requisite quality of service
·        To promote road safety, traffic management and post-accident trauma care
·        To promote strengthening of data collection and management system
76.       The Policy suggests various measures that need to be pursued to achieve the above objectives.  The National Road
 Transport Policy recommended by the Committee was deliberated in a workshop on 1.12.07 to ascertain the views of
 various stakeholders including the State Government/UTs.   After detailed deliberation it was observed that the policy
 needs to be revisited to incorporate measures for strengthening public transport system and to lay stress on having a
 regulatory mechanism in the road transport sector.  Accordingly, the Committee is in the process of deliberating on these
 issues and a final report from the Committee is awaited.   It is expected that the Committee will submit its report by the
 end of February, 2008.
 
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
 
77.       The Committee notes that the formulation of Road Transport Policy is in its final stages. However, the
 Committee feels that the formulation of the policy should not be an unending process.  The Committee
 recommends that the Road Transport policy may be formulated at the earliest.
 
CREATION OF 
NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY FUND:
(Recommendation at Para 100)
78.       The Committee hopes that the recommendations of the S.Sundar Committee may be implemented on priority
 taking into consideration the issues involved therein. The Committee desires that the setting up of the dedicated national
 road safety fund should not be delayed due to procedural constraints and other administrative issues.   The Committee
 hopes that this fund will have a positive impact on the rising number of accidents on National Highways.
 
Reply of the Government:
79.       The Committee on Road Safety & Traffic Management has submitted its report on 20-2-2007, inter-alia,
 recommending creation of a National Road Safety & Traffic Management Board through an Act of Parliament.  Creation
 of State level Road Safety & Traffic Management Board has also been recommended by the Committee through this
 Act.  The Committee has also suggested creation of a National Road Safety Fund by way of earmarking at least 1% of the
 total proceeds of cess on petrol and diesel.  The report has been circulated among the concerned Ministries / Departments
 and State Governments / UTs for their comments.   A note for Committee of Secretaries has been prepared and is being
 circulated to various Ministries / Departments.   The observation of the Standing Committee has been noted for
 compliance.
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
80.       Further developments in this front may be communicated to the Committee.

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
TOLL TAX ON BRIDGES AND NATIONAL HIGHWAYS:
(Recommendation at Para 104)
81.       The Committee is not convinced with the reasons advanced by the Department of Road Transport and Highways
 for collecting toll on roads and bridges in perpetuity.   The Committee feels that the Government is not justified in
 burdening the common users of highways with the development as well as the maintenance of the roads in the country. 
 The Committee had also commented upon this matter in its 67 th Report on Demands for Grants 2003-04 and
 recommended that once the cost of construction of a road/bridge plus interest is recovered, the collection of toll should be
 stopped. The Committee also feels that there exists a need for the rationalisation of the toll tax being charged on the
 National Highways.  The Committee recommends that persons travelling on smaller stretches of the National Highways
 where toll is being collected should be charged a lower amount than the persons using the entire length of that National
 Highway.   The Committee also recommends that a one time revolving fund should be set up for all the major road
 projects in which share of road projects from CRF should be kept.  The Committee also expresses its concern over the
 multiple-taxation on the vehicle owners by way of tax on the time of purchase of vehicle, cess on purchasing of
 petrol/diesel and collection of toll when he uses tolled highways.  The Committee sees no logic behind such multiple-
taxation on vehicle owners.  The Committee recommends that on BOT Annuity basis contracts, the concessionaire should
 be prevented from collecting toll once he recovers his capital and interest on the project.
Reply of the Government:
82.       Huge amount of resources are required for development and maintenance of National Highways. Considering the
 quantum of available resources, it was decided by the Government to charge user’s fees in perpetuity.  This was a change
 from the previous policy of discontinuation of collection of user’s fees after the cost of the bridge along with interest was
 recovered.  The financing of seven phases of NHDP is based on continuation of user’s fees in perpetuity.
83.       In the open toll system, rationalization of fees is not possible because monitoring the distance travelled by the
 users is difficult.  However, concessions to the local users are also given.
84.       Present levy of cess is tied up for the implementation of NHDPs and Prime Minister’s Gram Sadak Yojana and the
 improvement of sanctioned works of State Road.  Therefore, it may not be possible to create a revolving fund until and
 unless the amount of cess is increased.  However, this is being taken up with Ministry of Finance.
85.       A massive programme for development of National Highways in the country has been launched called the
 National Highway Development Programme (NHDP).   The aim of the programme is to provide world class road
 infrastructure in the country.  Improved road infrastructure will result in considerable savings to the road users by way of
 reduced vehicle maintenance cost, reduced travel time etc.  The implementation of various phases of NHDP requires
 massive investment which cannot be met by public funding alone.  The present rate of cess is Rs 2 per litre of both petrol
 & diesel and are being utilized for development of all categories of roads in the country. Therefore, the fund available
 from cess alone is insufficient to cater the need for development. Therefore, several ways of funding like external
 assistance from the foreign financial institutions, tapping of internal resources, cess on petrol & diesel and users fees
 have been explored.  The financing of the NHDP will be affected if user’s fee is discontinued, unless the level of cess is
 increased.  The tax levied on purchase of motor vehicles is collected by State Government.
86.       Under the BOT annuity basis contracts, the collection of users’ fees is done by the Government.   Annuity
 payments are made to the concessionaire to reimburse his cost of construction.  The amount received by the Government
 as users’ fees are considered in the financing structure of the project.
87.       The private sector participation which is the major sources of financing for NHDP Phase-III to Phase-VII is based
 on the collection of Users' Fees by the private entrepreneurs.  Therefore, the Users' Fees is being collected on perpetuity
 basis as a source of financing for development and maintenance of National Highways.
 
Further recommendations/observations of the Committee
88.       The Committee is not satisfied with the replies of the Government.  The Committee reiterates its earlier
 recommendations and feels that there is no reason to collect users' fee in perpetuity.  Once the capital and interest
 is recovered, the users' fee must be discontinued.  The creation of a revolving fund may be further pursued with
 the Ministry of Finance.
******  
 
 

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
THE TENTH PLAN PROVISIONS AND ANNUAL PLAN 2006-07
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  The Committee feels that though the expenditure level
 of funds stood at 91.47% of the total allocated fund, there is a scope for further improvement to ensure that there
 is uniformity in the expenditure pattern during the 11th Plan period.                              (Para: 11)
THE TENTH PLAN PROVISIONS AND ANNUAL PLAN 2007-08
The Committee notes the reply of the Department                                       (Para:20)
NATIONAL HIGHWAY  DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NHDP)
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the works will be completed as per
 schedule drawn by the Department.    The Committee recommends that the Department should take up with
 appropriate authorities the factors delaying the projects and convince them the need for streamlining various
 procedures in such a way that it should not become an impediment in timely execution of
 projects.                                                                                        (Para:33)
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  The Committee hopes that the Badarpur flyover project
 may be completed by 2010 as per schedule   so that the traffic congestion at Badarpur is eased drastically.   The
 Committee notes that a project needs almost three years to get an approval from the competent authority from
 the date of conception of the project.  The Committee believes that many of the stages of approval can be done

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 away with if a single high powered agency is constituted to give approval of all stages from conception to final
 approval of the project.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take up with the
 Cabinet the need for creating a single high powered agency for approval of such
 project.                                               (Para:34)
 
ROADS OF  INTER-STATE CONNECTIVITY & ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  The Committee, however, is constrained to note that the
 projects which were sanctioned under this head in 2005-06 and 2006-07 are progressing very slowly.  The
 Committee recommends that the Department should monitor these projects as these roads are important for
 providing connectivity to important tourist destinations and also cities of economic
 importance.                                                                       (Para: 37)
QUALITY CONTROL
The Committee appreciates the decision of the Department to appoint third party independent quality
 auditors for National Highway works.  The Committee hopes that this measure may help in ensuring qualitative
 execution of National Highway works.                                                                                                (Para:44)
ENCROACHMENT
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires that the process of appointing the Presiding
 Officers need to be expedited to ensure that all the Tribunals get their Presiding Officers at the earliest in any case
 not beyond the date fixed by the Government i.e., July, 2008. The Committee hopes that the appointment of
 Presiding Officers in the National Highways Tribunals will help to enforce the law regarding removal of
 encroachments on National Highways in both letter and spirit.  The respective State Governments may also be
 consulted in the functioning of the Tribunals.                                                                     (Para:47)
CENTRAL ROAD FUND
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the allocation of additional funds from
 CRF for the States is pursued with the Ministry of Finance so that the fund legitimately due for works of
 development and maintenance of roads are available to the Department.                       (Para: 50)
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION
The Committee is disappointed to note that the Government initiatives did not yield much result in the
 development of road projects in North-Eastern States.  The Committee recommends that the Department
 undertake a proper scientific study and take the consequent measures to modify the rules and procedures if
 necessary for appropriate participation of the private sector in road projects in North-East. This need to be
 undertaken in a specific time and report may be submitted to the
 Committee.                                                                            (Para:53)
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (ORIGINAL) WORKS - NH(O) 
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.                          (Para:56)
 
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department.                        (Para:59)
ROAD SAFETY
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  The Committee is however to constrained to note that
 the matter is not receiving the attention of the Government that it merits given the extraordinarily high rate of
 mortality in road accidents.  The Committee recommends that in all future projects allocation for trauma centres
 must be an integral part of the project proposal.             (Para:63)
NATIONAL DATA
  BASE NETWORK

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 
The Committee is constrained to note that only a few States have started issuing smart card based driving
 license and registration certificates.   The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue with the
 remaining States to implement smart card based DL and RCs.                                     (Para:66)
 
DATA COLLECTION
 
The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Government that there are no suitable consultants to
 carryout study on road transport sector.  If a particular panel of consultants is not competent, the Department
 should go for a wider search to find out suitable consultants.  The Committee recommends that the Department
 should strive for empanelling consultants for the study of road transport sector at the
 earliest.                                                                       (Para:70)
 
ROAD SAFETY EQUIPMENT AND POLLUTION TESTING & CONTROL
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.                          (Para:73)
 
NATIONAL ROAD TRANSPORT POLICY
 
The Committee notes that the formulation of Road Transport Policy is in its final stages. However, the
 Committee feels that the formulation of the policy should not be an unending process.  The Committee
 recommends that the Road Transport policy may be formulated at the earliest.                                   (Para: 77)
 
CREATION OF 
NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY FUND
Further developments in this front may be communicated to the Committee.
                                                                                                                            (Para:80)
TOLL TAX ON BRIDGES AND NATIONAL HIGHWAYS
            The Committee is not satisfied with the replies of the Government.  The Committee reiterates its earlier
 recommendations and feels that there is no reason to collect users' fee in perpetuity.  Once the capital and interest
 is recovered, the users' fee must be discontinued.  The creation of a revolving fund may be further pursued with
 the Ministry of Finance.                                                           (Para:88)    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES
X
TENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 18 th January 2008 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
7. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
9. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Dushyant Singh
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer  
 
2.         *                      *                      *.
3.         Thereafter, the Committee considered the following draft Reports:
 

118th Report of the Department Related Standing Committee on Shipping, Road Transport, Culture and Tourism
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/127threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:24:09]
(i)                  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
 Shipping;
 
(ii)                Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Road
 Transport and Highways; and
 
(iii)               Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture.
 
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the three Reports with minor modifications. The Committee also
 authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the
 ensuing Budget session.
 
3.         *                      *                      *.
 
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m. to meet again on the 31
st January, 2008.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        * Relates to other matters
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            