 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Forty-Second Report on Demands for Grants (2023 
Ministry of 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
December , 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Report on Demands for Grants (2023 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 08 th  December, 2023 ) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 08 th  December, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
362 
REPORT   
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Report on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of 
Road Transport and Highways  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Forty-Second Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  08 th   December, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  08 th   December, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023 / Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-93 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   94-98    
6. ANNEXURES         99-102   
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
99-154
155-157

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy  - Chairman 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji* 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar* 
 
  Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Raj Kamal Singh, Committee Officer  
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f. 26 
th  September, 2023 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Sixty Second Repo rt on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Forty-Second Report on Demands for Grants ( 2023-24) of Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways. 
2. The Three Hundred Forty-Second Report  of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e was presented to the Parliament on 
the 13 th  March, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Forty-Second Report were received fro m the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways on 15 th  September, 2023. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 6 th  
December, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
December 06, 2023                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Agrahayana 15, 1945 (Saka)                             Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iii 
 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
AE  Authority Engineer 
ANPR  Automatic Number Plate Recognition 
ATMS  Advanced Traffic Management System 
BG  Bank Guarantee 
BMP  Bharatmala Pariyojana 
BOT  Build-Operate-Transfer 
CRIF  Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
COD  Commercial Operation Date 
CPPP  Central Public Procurement Portal 
CRIF  Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
DISHA  District Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee 
DPR  Detailed Project Report 
DRSC  District Road Safety Committee 
EAC  Expert Appraisal Committee 
EE  Executive Engineer 
ERP  Enterprise Resource Planning System 
FY  Financial Year 
GAD  General Arrangement Drawing 
GDP  Gross Domestic Product 
GS  Gazette of India 
GSNMP  PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan 
HAM  Hybrid Annuity Model 
HRD  Human Resource Development 
IEBR  Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
IDTR  Institute of Driving Training & Research 
IIT  Indian Institutes of Technology 
IRC  Indian Roads Congress 
IT  Information Technology 
InvIT  Infrastructure Investment Trust 
LVUP  Light Vehicular Under Pass 
MDR  Major District Road 
MLA  Member of Legislative Assembly 
MMV  Medium Motor Vehicle 
MoRTH  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MP  Member of Parliament 
MMLP  Multimodal Logistics Parks 
MV Act  Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1988 
NCLT  National Company Law Tribunal 
NE  North East 
NH  National Highway 
NPG  National Project Group 
NRSB  National Road Safety Board 
NSV  Network Survey Vehicle 
O&M  Operation and Maintenance 
PR  Pavement Rehabilitation 

iv 
 
PSW  Pedestrian Subway 
PUP  Pedestrian Underpass 
RE  Revised Estimates 
RDTC  Regional Driving Training Centres 
RE  Revised Estimate 
RFCTLARR 
Act  
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land 
Acquisition Rehabilitation 
RSA  Road Safety Audit 
RMD  Road Maintenance Division 
ROB  Road Over Bridge 
SH  State Highway 
STQC  Standardisation Testing and Quality Control 
TRW  Transport Research Wing 
UN  United Nations 
USD  United States Dollar 
UT  Union Territory 
VUP  Vehicular Under Pass 
WHO  World Health Organization 
WSAs  Way Side Amenities 
 

1 
 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture deals with the Actio n Taken by the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways on the recommendations/obser vations as contained in its Three 
Hundred Forty Second Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24) of Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways’ which was presented to both  the Houses of Parliament on 13 th  
March, 2023.   
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 15 th  September, 2023 
in respect of all the observations/ recommendations  contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13, 15, 20, 37, 38, 50, 51, 54, 61,  73, 76, 83, 127, 128, 129, 130, 
136, 139, 144, 145, 152, 153, 167, 169, 182, 184, 1 89, 191, 202, 208, 222, 223, 225, 
234, 245, 252, 254, 272, 275, 285. 
Total: 40 
  
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do es not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 14, 25, 53, 58, 59, 63, 65, 70,  97, 98, 99, 100, 107, 108, 122, 
160, 161, 163, 165, 170, 178, 187, 190, 196, 197, 2 03, 204, 205, 206, 209, 212, 214, 
217, 218, 233, 236, 237, 240, 241, 243, 247, 250, 257, 267, 269, 271, 277, 281. 
Total: 49  
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which re plies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 18, 26, 27, 29, 39, 49, 69, 84,  89, 114, 117, 120, 133, 134, 138, 
166, 186, 192, 193, 195, 201, 213, 232, 235, 255, 279,  
Total: 27 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which th e final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil 
Total: 0 
 
3. The Committee desires that final reply in respec t of the recommendation/observation 
which has been categorized as interim reply by the Committee should be furnished at 
the earliest. 
 REPORT

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
Focus Areas of the Ministry for the year 2023-24 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
1. The Committee notes the various focus areas of t he Ministry for the year 2023-24. 
The Ministry has awarded 383 km of Expressway and A ccess-Controlled Corridors in the 
ongoing year. It will award 1667 km in the next 2 m onths and the remaining 1958 km in 
the next financial year. The Committee desires to b e apprised of the slow pace of award in 
the ongoing financial year. The Ministry may inform  how it plans to ensure that the 
remaining length is awarded by the next financial year.  
(Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Ministry has awarded 1,361 km of Expressway and Acc ess-Controlled Corridors in 
FY 2022-23. The Ministry is focusing on early finalization of the DPRs, and efforts are being 
made in consultation with State Governments for spe edy completion of land acquisition 
process to achieve the award target. In current yea r, Ministry has fixed an award target of 
13,290 km including Expressway and Access-Controlle d Corridors against the last year 
award target of 12,000 km.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2. The Committee feels that it is the responsibilit y of the Ministry to enable 
transportation access to the remotest areas of the country. The Ministry should work out a 
balance between the transportation needs of both re mote areas and tourist spots while 
planning projects under the Parvatmala programme. T he Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may lay due focus on enhancing connectivit y through ropeways as last mile 
connectivity to remote areas and hamlets in hilly r egions. This would help the local 
residents to contribute more to the local economy, besides improving their quality of life.   
(Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Considering transportation access to the remote st areas of the country as Ministry’s 
priority, “Parvatmala Pariyojana” was envisioned to  develop ecologically sustainable 
alternative mode of transport in hilly regions, rem ote areas and urban congested areas, which 
will help in improving connectivity and convenience  for commuters, besides promoting 
tourism. 

3 
 
2.2 Ropeway projects have been initiated by Nationa l Highways Logistics Management 
Limited (NHLML) under Parvatmala Pariyojana in part nership with the State/ Union 
Territory (UT) Authority basis the proposals receiv ed from State Govt/UT. Projects have 
been prioritized for feasibility studies and develo pment based on various parameters such as 
Importance of the project, Demand Assessment, Acces sibility, Existing connectivity, Ease of 
implementation etc., which would help in improving tourism, economic activities and provide 
last-mile connectivity in remote areas of the country.  
2.3 Ropeway project at Varanasi has been awarded in  Dec’22 to decongest the streets of 
Varanasi and improve logistics efficiency. 6 projec ts are currently under bidding, viz. 
Kedarnath, Hemkund Sahib Ji, Bijli Mahadev, Shivkho ri, Gwalior and Dhosi Hill. Detailed 
feasibility study has also been initiated for 34 pr ojects and pre- feasibility study for 92 
ropeway projects. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
3. The Committee observes that over the last few ye ars, the Ministry has consistently 
made satisfactory utilisation of the available fund s. This is including the period wherein 
Coronavirus restrictions were in place. The Committ ee hopes that the Ministry may 
continue to make optimal use of the funds available to it in the coming years.  
(Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. The  Ministry is committed to making 
optimal use of the funds available to it. 
 
PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
4. The Committee welcomes the Ministry’s efforts in ex amining 62 NHs/ road 
projects/ Corridors for a total tentative cost of R s. 6,78,505/- crore leveraging the PM Gati 
Shakti National Master Plan (GSNMP) Portal. The Com mittee feels that the GSNMP 
would help tackle long-standing issues in the infra structure sector in India, such as 
disjointed planning and lack of standardisation and  synergy among the various Ministries 
and Departments. The Committee would like to know t he present status of these 62 NHs in 
terms of progress percentage and expected date of completion. The Committee recommends 
that the remaining NHs out of the total 1,510 NHs p rojects may also be considered for 
examining through the PM GSNMP Portal. This will en sure smoother execution of the 
ongoing and upcoming road projects, in coordination  with other Ministries/ Departments/ 
State Governments under the GSNMP.  
(Para 37) 
 

4 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The 64 NH corridors were presented to the Natio nal Project Group (NPG) of the PM 
GatiShakti National Master Plan until the 49th NPG meeting on 8th June 2023 consist of 286 
project packages. Out of these 286 project packages , 42 packages have already been 
completed, 143 packages are currently under constru ction, 40 packages have been awarded 
but not yet appointed, and 61 packages are planned for award.  
4.2 Among the 143 packages that are under construct ion, 23 packages have achieved a 
physical progress greater than 80%, 32 packages hav e achieved a physical progress between 
50 to 80% while 88 packages have physical progress between 0% and 50%.  In regards to the 
expected date of completion, out of the 143 package s under construction, 75 packages are 
expected to be completed in the FY 2023-24, 54 pack ages have a projected completion date 
in the FY 2024-25, while 14 packages have a project ed completion date in the FY 2025-26 
and beyond. 
4.3 Ministry has issued fresh guidelines that all N H projects costing more than Rs. 500 
crore shall be routed through PMG of PM Gati Shakti . In addition, Ministry has also 
mandated that all DPRs shall be prepared using NMP Portal of the PM Gati Shakti. 
4.4 The project monitoring database portals of the Ministry (PMIS/ DataLake) are 
integrated through APIs with the PM GatiShakti NMP Portal.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
5. The Committee observes that the Ministry has not pr esented a clear roadmap 
regarding the completion of the projects it has tak en up under GSNMP. The Committee 
desires to be apprised in this regard. The Committe e may be apprised regarding the 
provisions, if any, under PM GSNMP to ease the proc ess of land acquisition, 
environmental clearances etc.  
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The project monitoring database portals of the Ministry (PMIS/ Data Lake) are 
integrated with the PM GatiShakti NMP Portal. Detai ls of National Highway projects 
including current progress of project and targets f or completion are therefore visible on PM 
Gati Shakti NMP Portal. 
5.2 Project alignments can be created and optimized  on the PM Gatishakti NMP portal 
using the tools and data layers available on the po rtal. Land Records (Cadastral Maps) 
showing Land Parcels along with Survey Numbers are being uploaded in the portal by the 
respective State Governments. Land Records of about  21 States/UTs are partially available 
on the portal. Once the cadastral boundaries data i s uploaded on the PM Gatishakti portal for 
all the states and project alignments mapped sing t he DPR tools, it will facilitate the 
identification of land parcels for land acquisition .  Similarly, records of Geotagged 

5 
 
boundaries of forests / Coastal regulation Zones et c. shall facilitate the identification of 
clearances required for the project.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation     
6. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may s eek feedback from the various 
stakeholders involved in the monetisation process. This will help the Ministry understand 
their concerns so that the same can be adequately a ddressed through suitable regulatory 
modifications. In the long term, this would help bo ost the participation of bidders and the 
increased competition would help the Ministry to realise adequate value from its assets.  
(Para 50) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Ministry has taken the following proactive step s for feedback and active participation 
of all the stake holders for success of Asset Monetization:- 
• Webinars with various stakeholders in road sector v iz. Concessionaires, Bankers, Fund 
Houses. 
• Meeting with prospective investors including Foreig n and Domestic Pension Funds, 
Sovereign Wealth Funds and large Private Equity (PE) Investors.  
• One-to-one meeting with Fund Houses viz. LIC, EPFO etc. 
• Meeting with Bankers viz. State Bank of India, ICIC I Bank, HDFC Bank, Axis, Bank of 
Maharashtra.  
 
6.2 Accordingly, the relevant concerned issues were  addressed in the successive bundles. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
7. The Committee notes that the Ministry has managed t o achieve 41 percent of its 
desired monetisation target for the ongoing FY till  January, 2023. The Ministry has to 
ramp up its efforts in this direction to try and ra ise targeted amounts. The Ministry may 
inform the Committee how it would address the shortfall, if any, that might be caused if the 
monetisation targets for 2022-23 are not met.  
(Para 51) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 During 2022-23, Ministry / NHAI had monetized N Hs amounting to Rs.10,662 Crore 
(remitted to CFI) under TOT (Toll – Operate - Transfer) mode against the budgetary target of 
Rs.10,000 Crore.  In addition, NHAI has also raised  Rs. 2,850 Crore through InvIT 
(Infrastructure Investment Trust) and utilized the realization amount for debt servicing under 
the ring-fenced arrangement approved by the Cabinet . Further, NHAI has also raised Rs. 

6 
 
9824 Crore under Project based Financing. Ministry did not fail in any of its statutory 
obligations due to shortage of funds. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
8. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would bene fit from its experience of BMP 
Phase-I implementation in the planning and executio n of the Phase-II. The Ministry may 
analyse the shortcomings in the estimations made in  the targeted date of completion of 
BMP Phase-I and come up with a realistic timeline f or award & construction of BMP 
Phase-II. The Committee desires to know about the p lanned initiation date for Bharatmala 
Pariyojana Phase-II.  
(Para 54) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Ministry has analyzed the reason of difference in the estimations of Bharatmala 
Pariyojana Phase-I and shall make all necessary eff orts to be closer to realistic estimation in 
any future planning of NH development programs.  
 
Critical Transport Infrastructure Projects for firs t-mile and last-mile connectivity for 
ports, steel, fertilizers, etc.  
Recommendation/ Observation 
9. The timely completion of the 16 road projects re quested by the Ministries of Steel; 
Fertilizers; and Ports, Shipping & Waterways would have a strong multiplier effect on the 
overall economy. The Committee suggests that the Mi nistry may chalk out a detailed 
roadmap for the various stages of completion of these projects. The Ministry should ensure 
that the delays faced at any stage are tackled at t he earliest, in close coordination with the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments.  
(Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Ministry has taken into account the requirement s of different ministry to fill the 
infrastructure gaps through development of NHs for overall improvement in logistic 
efficiency and economy improvement. In this regards , Ministry has completed projects of 
length 84 km at a cost of Rs. 4,115 Cr and awarded projects of 504 km length at a cost of Rs. 
9,633 Cr.  Further, Ministry has also prioritized 15 projects of total length 388 km at a cost of 
Rs. 9,453 Cr for early awards. The Ministry is taking all necessary actions to avoid the delays 
and remove bottlenecks for speedy / timely completi on of these projects considering their 
multiplier effects.  

7 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
Physical and financial performance in the last 5 years 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
10. The Committee notes that NHAI has benefitted from t he trend of increase in the 
budgetary allocation of the Ministry over the last few years. NHAI has consistently 
managed to increase the length of NHs it constructs  each year.  The physical progress in 
the ongoing FY 2022-23 till January, 2023 is laggin g behind when compared to the 
previous years. The Committee recommends that NHAI may put in maximum efforts to 
increase the pace of construction of NHs in the remaining two months of FY 2022-23.  
(Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 During, 2022-23, Ministry has constructed 10,3 31 km length of NHs, out of which 
4,882 km length was constructed by NHAI.  
 
Funding the Increasing Land Acquisition Costs 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
11. The Committee notes that the share of expenditure o n land acquisition has 
gradually come down from 35.3% in 2016-17 to 28.6% in 2020-21. This would partly be 
because certain State Governments have agreed to sh are some percentage of land 
acquisition cost for NH projects. The Committee fee ls that innovative mechanisms such as 
Value Capture Financing are much needed to fund the  increasing land acquisition prices 
in the country. NHAI needs the support of State Governments as well as the Value Capture 
Financing mechanism to ensure an increasing pace of expansion of the NH network in the 
country. The Committee recommends that NHAI may pur sue more innovative ways of 
monetization to offset the increasing input costs. The Ministry may look into the feasibility 
of non-invasive advertising/ sponsoring of signages , way side amenities etc. The Ministry 
may also consider permitting retail investors to in vest through InvITs in road sector 
projects.  
(Para 76) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 A policy circular dated 18.03.2021 on Value Ca pture Finance has been issued for 
developing a mechanism to implement VCF jointly by the States and NHAI, to part finance 
the cost of highway construction. Following are the  options through which State Govt. can 
contribute:- 
1) Project facilitation by States : Expediting land acquisition, preferential mining rights 
for NHAI projects. 
2) Contribution through land : Sharing land acquisition cost, giving land or pro viding 
State/UT Govt land having potential to generate revenue to NHAI. 

8 
 
3) Waiving/refunding of Royalty/taxes etc .: Royalty waiver on sand, earth, 
aggregates/stones, GST refund on construction mater ial like cement, steel, bitumen 
etc. 
4) Sharing of enhanced value of land  in Project Impact Area or 1 km of either side of 
the highway by sharing stamp duty (upto 20%), shari ng (minimum 10%) Change in 
land Use (CLU) fee, development fee, premium on add itional FSI/FAR, charges on 
building rights/land use re-adjustment. 
 
Rising Debt of NHAI 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
12. The Committee appreciates the step taken by the Government to not mandate NHAI 
to raise funds through market borrowings under IEBR  since FY 2022-23. The projected 
debt servicing cost and its share in the projected allocation for NHAI in the coming years 
paint a viable future wherein NHAI would use around  20% of its total allocation for debt 
servicing. The Committee hopes that NHAI will be able to raise higher amounts through its 
asset monetisation programme as part of the Nationa l Monetisation Pipeline. This would 
help NHAI keep a check on its debt servicing costs.  
(Para 83) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 NHAI is working out Asset Monetization program me through TOT/InvIT for 
monetization of its Road assets and thus shall be a ble to raise higher amounts through its 
asset monetisation programme as part of the National Monetisation Pipeline. 
12.2 Further, NHAI is also carrying out securitizat ion in the form of Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPVs) to raise the funds. One SPV for Delh i Mumbai Expressway (DME) is formed 
and debt/loan raised by this SPV to reimburse the expenditure to NHAI against DME project.  
12.3 NHAI has raised debt judiciously as approved i n Union Budget. Since NHAI has not 
been mandated to raise funds through IEBR in FY 202 2-23 & 2023-24, the reduction in debt 
has already started and as per present situation th ere shall be no further increase in the debt 
liability of NHAI at least till 31 
st  March 2024.  
12.4 Year wise details of funds raised so far throu gh monetization of NHs, including 
Project based financing (i.e. SPV), are as under:- 
Year Amount in Rs. Crore 
2018-19 9,682 
2019-20 0 
2020-21 14,742 
2021-22 22,367 
2022-23 23,336 

9 
 
12.5 NHAI has raised debt judiciously as approved i n Union Budget. Since NHAI has not 
been mandated to raise funds through IEBR in FY 202 2-23 & 2023-24, the reduction in debt 
has already started and as per present situation th ere shall be no further increase in the debt 
liability of NHAI at least till 31 st  March 2024. 
 
Maintenance of National Highways 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
13. The Committee notes that the net allocation under t he head 'Maintenance of 
National Highways – financed from CRIF’ has decreas ed from Rs. 2,701.47 crores in BE 
2015-16 to Rs. 2,600 crores in BE 2023-24. The over all budgetary allocation of the 
Ministry has increased from about Rs. 45,750 crores  to Rs. 2.7 lakh crores during this 
period. The Committee acknowledges that the actual expenditure including expenditure 
incurred by NHAI and NHIDCL has increased from Rs. 3,888 crore in 2015-16 to Rs. 
5,158 crore in 2021-22. There is also a clear pattern of under-allocation as compared to the 
Ministry’s projected demand in the last 7 years. However, the Ministry has stated that there 
is no shortage in availability of funds for M&R of NHs.  
(Para 127) 
14. High quality, proactive maintenance of NHs is key t o enhancing the safety of 
passengers, besides reducing travel time. The Minis try invests lakhs of crores into 
developing the NH network across the country. It is  imperative that sufficient budgetary 
allocation is made to ensure that the highways serv e their desired purpose of high speed, 
safe road connectivity. The Ministry must ensure th at the highways permit the vehicles to 
safely travel at the speeds envisaged at the time o f their conceptualization. With low 
allocation for maintenance, the Ministry would be f orced to follow a “worst first” 
approach wherein the worst roads are maintained fir st. This approach cannot ensure that 
the highways are maintained in the best possible sh ape. The Ministry instead needs to 
ensure that a proactive, preventative approach is followed.  
(Para 128) 
15. The Committee finds it likely that delayed road mai ntenance would lead to 
premature need for complete relaying of the road. T he Ministry may look into the 
comparative analysis of the cost of performing road  maintenance at early stages of wear 
and tear versus after deterioration. A study may al so be commissioned regarding the cost 
borne by the road users because of poorly maintaine d NHs, in terms of lost fuel, time, 
productivity and increased safety risk. In the past , NITI Aayog and this Committee have 
also recommended increased allocation for the maint enance of NHs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that MoRTH may request the Mi nistry of Finance to enhance the 
allocation under this head at the R.E. stage and in the coming years.  
(Para 129) 
 

10 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 The Ministry is focusing on both development a nd maintenance of NHs to ensure 
their traffic worthiness. NHs are now in a much bet ter condition except for newly declared 
NHs. Also, there are some maintenance issues on the NH stretches where works are ongoing. 
15.2 Year-wise details of Allocation under budget h ead of Maintenance and Repair (M&R) 
as compared to effective budgetary demand under M&R  and total budgetary support of the 
Ministry as well as actual expenditure incurred by the Ministry on M&R of NHs (including 
actual expenditure incurred by NHAI and NHIDCL) dur ing the last 5 years are given as 
under: - 
(Amount Rs. in crore) 
 
Year Total Budgetary 
Support of Ministry 
at RE Stage 
RE 
Allocation 
under 
M&R 
Demand 
under 
M&R 
Actual Expenditure 
under M&R (including 
NHAI and NHIDCL) 
2018-
19 
78,625 
 2,531  8,500  4,360  
2019-
20 
83,016 
 2,000  6,500  3,446  
2020-
21 
1,01,823 
 2,654  5,000  5,941  
2021-
22  
1,28,149 
 2,778  5,000  5,158  
2022-
23 
2,17,027 
 2,480  2,680  5,600  
 
15.3 Therefore, actual annual expenditure on M&R of  NHs since 2020-21 is in the range of 
Rs. 5,000 – 6,000 Crore, including funds being spent for PR / IRQP works from NH(O) under 
Capital head and actual expenditure being incurred by NHAI and NHIDCL for M&R of NHs, 
and there is no under allocation under M&R head of the Ministry. 
15.4 However appreciating the concerns raised by th e Committee, the Ministry has decided 
that, from 2023-24 onwards, all NHs stretches are t o be invariably covered under ongoing 
works of development or maintenance or Defect Liabi lity Period (DLP), with the 
responsibility of maintenance of such NHs stretches  lying with the concerned Contractor 
/Concessionaire. Therefore, no NH stretch will rema in unattended for want of M&R 
intervention. Also maintenance works on NHs shall b e carried out through Performance 
based Maintenance Contract (PBMC) / Short Term (1 year) Maintenance Contract only.  

11 
 
15.5 Above change in the maintenance policy will ph ase out the need based maintenance 
and will ensure that not a single km of NH remains unattended. The above policy change will 
ensure that All NHs sections remain in traffic worthy condition. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
16. The Committee notes that 10% of the CRIF fund  allocated to the State 
Governments/ UTs for State roads is earmarked for road safety works. The Committee feels 
that ensuring proactive maintenance of roads has a direct positive impact on road safety. 
The Committee recommends that the M/o Finance may c onsider earmarking a certain 
percentage of the CRIF fund for road maintenance as  well. This will ensure that a greater 
focus is laid on road maintenance across the country.  
(Para 130) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 The Central Government is allocating funds for  development of State roads under 
Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) based o n the decision taken by the Committee 
headed by the Finance Minister as per Section 7A & Section 11 of the CRIF Act, 2000. 
Present priority under CRIF is to supplement the development efforts of state government for 
upgradation of their state roads. After development  from CRIF, maintenance of such roads is 
expected to be done by state government out of thei r funds like other state roads. This 
ministry is allocated the funds for development of State Highways (SH) and Major District 
roads (MDR) out of the CRIF.  Out of the funds thus  allocated for SHs and MDRs, 10% of 
the fund are earmarked for road safety works Furthe r the Ministry has started a dedicated 
program  under CRIF scheme to replace existing Rail ways level crossings and Bridges on 
State roads, known as “SETU BANDHAN”  This  also  e nhances  Safety at these vulnerable 
locations. For 2023-24, dedicated fund of Rs. 1,400  Crore has been earmarked for projects 
under SETU BANDHAN. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
17. The Committee feels that the Ministry should al so focus on increasing private 
sector participation in the road maintenance sector . The Committee desires to know 
whether performance-based road maintenance contracts are being utilised in India for NH 
maintenance. The Committee recommends that the Mini stry may come up with guidelines 
as to the performance-based indicators that must be  delivered by the contractors to ensure 
high-quality maintenance of roads. The Ministry may  issue clear quantifiable definitions 
of length of potholes, width of cracks on roads, et c. Stringent empirical checks may be 
enforced to verify the quality of the maintenance w orks. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may ensure sufficient budgetary allocation for this regard.  
(Para 136) 
 

12 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 In order to attract the private participation in maintenance, Ministry is already 
awarding works to concessionaires through Toll Oper ate and Transfer mechanism and also 
through Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InvIT) mechanism.  
17.2 Ministry has issued comprehensive guidelines f or taking up maintenance works under 
PBMC maintenance system. A standard RFP alongwith c ontract document indicating various 
performance parameters have been included. Even pay ment has also been linked to the 
performance standards. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
18. The Committee took cognisance of the issue of r utting, lack of demarcation and 
cleanliness on NH-52 from Ambala to Haryana border.  The Committee recommends that 
necessary action may be taken to ensure that the hi ghway is properly maintained and 
demarcated as per the specifications in place.  
(Para 139) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Stretch from Ambala to Kaithal - This section is under O&M phase w.e.f. 
December 2019 and regular maintenance is being done  by the EPC Contractor. Further, as 
per the recent NSV survey conducted on the project,  there is no Rutting on the project 
highway and riding surface is in good condition. Al so, the signages provided on the NH are 
in place and are being maintained by the EPC Contractor.  
18.2 Stretch from Kaithal to Haryana/ Rajasthan Boarder - In this section,  33.5 km of 
rutting has recently been rectified by means of BC laying (17 km) and micro surfacing (16.5 
km). The rutting is being rectified from time to ti me and demarcation and cleanliness of NH 
is being properly maintained on this stretch. 
 
Special Accelerated Road Development Program for North Eastern Areas 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
19. The Committee notes that allocation made under the head ‘SARDP for North 
Eastern Areas financed’ has increased from Rs. 13,5 05 crores at RE 2022-23 to Rs. 18,591 
crores at BE 2023-24. The Committee hopes that this  boost in budget allocation will aid in 
the completion of the various projects under SARDP for North Eastern Areas.  
(Para 144) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 The boost in budgetary allocation will surely aid in the completion of various projects 
under SARDP-NE. Till July, 2023, out of sanctioned length of 5,829 km, works in 5,352 km 
have been completed and works ongoing in another 47 7 km length. All ongoing works are 

13 
 
targeted to be completed by March, 2024. Total expe nditure of Rs. 51,976 Crore has been 
incurred till July, 2023 under SARDP-NE. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
20. The Committee observes that the Ministry had th e target to complete SARDP-NE 
Phase-A & Arunachal Pradesh Package of SARDP–NE by March, 2014. The Committee 
suggests that the Ministry must ensure that road pr ojects are not awarded to contractors 
with poor track records. The contractors performing  poorly should be promptly replaced to 
avoid further delays. Finally, the Committee recomm ends that the Ministry may ensure the 
completion of SARDP-NE Phase A and Arunachal Prades h within the revised targeted 
timeline of FY 23-24.  
(Para 145) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 Suggestion of Committee is noted. All the ongo ing projects under SARDP Scheme 
are likely to be completed by March, 2024 except 16 9 km of projects yet to be sanctioned / 
awarded. 
 
ROAD TRANSPORT AND SAFETY 
Research, Training, Studies and Other Road Safety Schemes 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
21. The Committee notes that Budget Head ‘Research, Tra ining, Studies and other 
Road Safety Schemes’ include several schemes which are fundamental to improving the 
standards of driver training and road safety in the  country. There has been a clear trend of 
underutilisation of funds under this scheme in the last 5 years. This would be one of the 
reasons for which the allocation under this head ha s remained constant or decreased, 
while the overall allocation has increased manifolds in the recent past.  
(Para 152) 
22. The Ministry has stated that the primary reason for  underutilisation of funds under 
this budget head during the given period were lower  demand from the Transport 
Commissioners and slow down due to Covid -19 induce d epidemic. The Committee does 
not accept this justification. The overall expendit ure of the Ministry over this same period 
has consistently been above 90 percent. Further, th e expenditure under this head has been 
low even before the onset of the pandemic. Even in 2023, after a reduction in allocation at 
RE 2022-23, the Ministry has spent only 23.2% of th e allocation under this head till 
January, 2023. The Committee recommends that the Mi nistry may work on the schemes 
under this head with a renewed zeal to ensure optim al utilisation of allocated funds. The 
Ministry must hold meetings with the State Governme nt Departments concerned to 
understand their lack of interest in full utilisati on of the funds available under this head. 

14 
 
The feedback thus collected may be used to make the  training and road safety schemes 
more effective.  
(Para 153) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 The Ministry’s schemes for road transport sect or under ‘Research, Training, Studies 
and other Road Safety Schemes’ such as setting up o f model Inspection & Certificate (I&C) 
Centres, setting up of model Driving Training Insti tutes, Intelligent Transport System (ITS), 
Nirbhaya Scheme etc. are implemented through Transp ort Department of States/UTs. The 
less demand of funds for the ongoing projects from the States/UTs, Covid-19 pandemic 
during FY 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22, low respons es against GTE (Global Tender 
Enquiry) for equipment for I&C Centres etc. are the  reasons for underutilization of funds. 
Further, teething issues in the revised procedure o f flow of funds, due to Guidelines on CNA 
Model issued vide Dept of Expenditure OM dt 09.03.2 022, have been faced in the Financial 
Year 2022-23. Ministry is making adequate efforts t o ensure optimal utilization of funds 
during FY 2023-24. 
22.2 The Scheme for Central Assistance for strength ening the ITS in public transport 
system in the Country has been revamped. In the yea r 2022-23, two new projects have been 
sanctioned and second installment has been released  in respect of an ongoing project of 
APSRTC. 
22.3 Revised scheme guidelines for Workshop cum Tra ining Programme for development 
of Human Resources in States'/ UTs' Transport Depar tments and Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways have been issued on 19.05.2022. Eight institutes have conducted trainings 
programmes for 4074 Nos. officials from STUs, State  Transport Departments, Traffic Police 
and MoRTH. However, the suggestions of the Committee are noted for compliance.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
23. The Committee notes that the Expenditure Financ e Committee has recommended 
the implementation of the State Support Programme f or Road Safety at a cost of USD 1 
billion, with 50% contribution from Government of I ndia and remaining 50% financed 
equally by the World Bank and the Asian Development  Bank. From the World Bank’s 
latest Implementation Status & Results Report of th is programme, the Committee observes 
that the project targets to reduce 30% annual accid ent deaths in the participating States by 
2028. The Committee feels that the Ministry should target a more ambitious 50% reduction 
till 2030, in tune with the UN resolution on road s afety. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may provide similar support to all the  remaining States with clearly defined 
targets of reduction.  
(Para 167) 
 
 

15 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 Ministry has conceptualized “State Support Pro gramme for strengthening for Road 
Safety” to help realize vision of “Zero Road Fatali ties on Indian Roads”. The objective of the 
programme is to reduce road fatalities across the C ountry. Presently, the scheme is in process 
of approval of Cabinet. 
23.2 In addition, Ministry has formulated a multi-p ronged strategy to address the issue of 
road safety and bring down the number of road accid ents and fatalities based on Education, 
Engineering (both of roads and vehicles), Enforceme nt and Emergency Care. Accordingly, 
various initiatives have been taken by the Ministry as detailed in reply to Para 160 above.  
 
Road Accident Statistics 
Recommendation/ Observation  
24. The Committee notes that 1,481 people lost their li ves in 2021 in accidents on roads 
with potholes. This underscores the urgent need to maintain the roads in the country in a 
better shape. The Ministry may ensure an extensive audit of NH stretches wherein 
accidents have taken place to record the state of m aintenance at the time of the accident. 
Suitable action may be taken against the contractor / organisation responsible for NH 
maintenance in cases of negligence and poor maintenance.  
(Para 169) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 Regular Road Safety Audit is being conducted o n NHs as per IRC:SP:88-2019. 
Guidelines at the stage of DPR/ Construction/ Opera tion & Maintenance stage and safety 
improvements based on audit findings are being made  on an ongoing basis. Around 14,575 
Km of audit has been completed during FY 21-22 and 31,423 Km in FY 22-23.     
24.2 Further, a Road Maintenance Division (RMD) has  been created in NHAI, which 
carries out inspection of stretches.  At present, 1 37 stretches have been inspected and the 
observations including road condition have been sent for compliance to field offices.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
25. The Committee notes that two-wheelers make up f or about 41% of all road accident 
fatalities in the year 2021. The Committee feels th at road safety awareness campaigns 
promoting the usage of helmets would go a long way in saving the lives of two-wheeler 
drivers. The Ministry may consider levying penaltie s for two-wheelers plying on 
expressways using automated systems to improve effe ctive enforcement. The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry must ensure proper signage, safety grills on dividers/ 
boundaries and lighting of highways in coordination  with the departments concerned. The 
Ministry may ensure that high mast lights are insta lled at all junctions on NHs across the 
country.  A robust audit mechanism may be put in pl ace to ensure that these road safety 
provisions are well-maintained across the NH network in the country.  

16 
 
(Para 182) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 To create awareness about road safety among ge neral public, Ministry undertakes 
various publicity measures and awareness campaigns through social media, electronic media 
and print media.  Ministry implements a scheme to p rovide financial assistance to various 
agencies for administering Road Safety Advocacy. Na tional Road Safety Month/Week is 
observed every year for spreading awareness and strengthening road safety. These campaigns 
also include campaigns promoting the usage of helmets.  
25.2 Further, Ministry issued Road Safety Action pl an on13th Jan 2023 to ensure all the 
guidelines related to Road Safety be followed by al l Road Owning Agencies. It is directed to 
all Road Owning Agencies to undertake following interventions on National Highways:  
i. Road safety Audit (RSA) of all National Highways. 
ii. Five stretches (at least 50 km in length) of NH and  having higher no. of accidents/ 
blackspots in the jurisdiction of each ROs shall be  identified and developed as Model 
Safe Roads. 
iii. Five project stretches (at least 10 km in length) u nder construction (preferably with a 
construction progress of 30-75%) shall be identifie d and developed as Model Safe 
Construction Zones. 
iv. An officer, equivalent to AEE/ EE level or above, s hall be designated as Road Safety 
Officer (RSO) under each RO to look after RSA, blac kspot rectification and other 
road safety related works. 
25.3 Regular Road Safety Audit is being conducted o n NHs as per IRC:SP:88-2019. 
Guidelines at the stage of DPR/ Construction/ Opera tion & Maintenance stage and safety 
improvements based on audit findings are being made  on an ongoing basis. Around 14,575 
Km of audit has been completed during FY 21-22 and 31,423 Km in FY 22-23.  
25.4 Lighting/illumination provisions have been mad e at vulnerable locations/intersections 
of NH with SH/MDR/ODR/Village roads for improving r oad safety and avoiding accidents 
during night in addition to locations mentioned in 4/6 laning IRC Manual.   
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
26. The Committee notes that unlike the other count ries listed in the table above, the 
total number of deaths estimated by WHO is signific antly higher than the total deaths 
reported by India. The Committee feels that this could point to a significant underreporting 
of road accident deaths in the country. Accurate st atistics are required to enable decisive 
policy prescriptions for road safety. The Committee  desires that the Ministry may look into 
the methodology used by WHO to arrive on their esti mated figures. Urgent remedial 
actions may be taken to plug the gaps that seem to exist in the collection of accident-related 
statistics.  
(Para 184) 

17 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 Ministry, through Transport Research Wing  (TRW), has been collecting road accident 
data from the Police Department of all the States/UTs and publishes the report Road Accident 
in India annually on the calendar year basis. The s ource of data/ information collection / 
methodology of estimation by WHO is not known to Mi nistry. This issue has been discussed 
by the Supreme Court Committee on Road Safety. As d ecided, TRW has issued a letter dated 
09.02.2023 to WHO for scheduling a meeting under th e chairmanship of Secretary, MoRTH 
with the WHO team and also requested to share the m ethodology before finalizing the 
country role for India in the upcoming Global Status Report on Road Safety.  
 
Other road safety related issues 
Recommendation/ Observation  
27. The Committee desires to know whether the reduced C RIF allocation to MoRTH at 
BE 2023-24 will impact the amount of funds earmarke d for road safety works, as 
compared to FY 2022-23.  
(Para 189) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 Although Ministry has received reduced allocat ion from CRIF, but overall Budgetary 
Outlay has increased from Rs. 2,17,027 Crore in 202 2-23 to Rs. 2,70,435 Crore in 2023-24. 
There would be no impact on safety works of NHs.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
28. The Committee desires to know the reasons why n o dedicated entry and exit lanes 
are provided on most National Highways in India. The Ministry may inform whether it has 
conducted any cost-benefit analysis of mandating en try and exit lanes for NHs across the 
country. The Ministry may also study the positive i mpact of the same in terms of road 
safety.  
(Para 191) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 Dedicated Entry/Exit lanes are provided only o n Expressways and Access-controlled 
National Highways as every access is structurally r egulated. However on other National 
Highways also, all lateral roads junctions are desi gned and constructed as per laid out 
standards with features like minimum radius, accelerating/deaccelerating lane, islands etc.    
 
Recommendation/ Observation        
29. The Committee is of the view that improving dri ver training standards in India will 
have a major role in reducing accidents and fatalit ies on the roads. The Committee 

18 
 
recommends that the Ministry should develop a stand ardised driver training curriculum 
that covers all aspects of safe driving, including lane discipline. This curriculum should be 
updated regularly to reflect changes in road safety regulations and best practices.  
(Para 202) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 A standardised driver training curriculum that  covers all aspects of safe driving is 
provided in Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 vide CHAPTER II: LICENSING OF 
DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES. Further, the suggestions  of the Committee have been 
noted for compliance.  
 
Speed limit on National Highways 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
30. The Committee notes the observation of the Unit ed States Federal Highway 
Administration (FHWA) that variable speed limits re duce up to 34% of crashes on 
freeways. The Committee recommends that the Ministr y/NHAI may analyse the feasibility 
of variable speed limits on NHs in India on a pilot  basis since speed limits should also 
factor in constantly varying factors such as traffic congestion and visibility.  
(Para 208) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 Observation of the Committee is duly noted. 
 
SCHEME ON WOMEN'S SAFETY ON PUBLIC ROAD TRANSPORT 
Recommendation/ Observation  
31. The Committee notes that for the last five years ba rring the year 2020-21, there has 
been a consistent pattern of under-utilisation of funds under the Scheme on Women Safety 
on Public Road Transport.  The Ministry must take c oncrete steps to encourage better 
participation of State Governments under this schem e. The Ministry may invite feedback 
from States which show lack of interest in the scheme, regarding the reasons for the same.  
(Para 222) 
32. The Committee desires to know whether the Ministry has put in place any 
mechanism under the scheme to check the efficacy of the vehicle tracking platform and the 
emergency button. The Committee recommends that the  Ministry may allocate funds for 
creating awareness about the safety provisions in place for women on public transport. The 
Ministry may explore the possible usage of artifici al intelligence to identify instances of 
mishaps on public transport based on route, vehicle speed etc.  
(Para 223) 

19 
 
33. The Committee feels that more needs to be done in o rder to improve the level of 
safety of women on public road transport. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may consult relevant experts, stakeholders  and Departments in order to come up 
with innovative schemes to improve women safety on public transport. This would enable 
the Ministry to make optimal use of the funds available under this head.  
(Para 225) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 The Ministry has been continuously following w ith the States / UTs for 
implementation of projects and timely utilization of funds under the Nirbhaya Framework.  
33.2 Due to continuous engagement with States/ UTs,  this Ministry has succeeded in 
disbursing funds to 32 States / UTs under the Schem e “Development, Customization, 
Deployment and Management of State-wise Vehicle Tra cking Platform for safety and 
enforcement with AIS -140 specification in States/ UTs under Nirbhaya Framework”. Five 
States/ UTs have commissioned their Monitoring Centres under the Scheme in FY 2022-23. 
33.3 A new project regarding women safety in Public  Transport has also been sanctioned 
in the State of Telangana in March 2023. 
33.4 The observations of the Committee have been no ted for compliance. 
Recommendation/ Observation  
34. The Committee feels that ongoing road projects should be given a higher priority 
than award and construction of new projects. Especi ally in case of brownfield projects, 
delays in completion cause discomfort to the public  in terms of traffic jams and pollution. 
Besides, completing the ongoing projects on priorit y will help prevent time and cost 
overruns in future NH projects. In light of this, t he Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may assign high priority to these projects and all-out efforts may be made to avoid 
any further delays.  
(Para 234) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 Ministry is according high priority to the com pletion of ongoing road projects and 
taking necessary steps to avoid delays and expedite  project completion. Adequate measures 
have been taken at the construction sites to avoid traffic jams, pollution & discomfort to the 
public. Moreover, road maintenance and road safety measures, as and when necessitated, on 
road stretches have been provided and monitored timely to avoid any sort of inconvenience to 
the road users.  
 
Preparation of DPR 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
35. The Committee notes that many road projects run  into delays and become accident-
prone as local requirements are not duly factored i n while preparing DPR. The Committee 

20 
 
recommends that the Ministry should mandate consult ation with the local community, 
local Executive Engineers, MP and MLA etc. at the s tage of DPR preparation. The 
approving authorities may consider the feedback rec eived from the local representatives 
and ensure that the suggestions are not dropped with only cost savings in mind. Giving due 
consideration to local factors during preparation o f DPRs will permit smoother execution 
of road projects which would be better suited to meet long-term future needs.  
(Para 245) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 The recommendations of the Committee are duly noted. However, it is submitted that 
in terms of Para-4.1 (ii) (a) of Terms of Reference  of the RFP documents for DPR the scope 
of the work includes “ Pubic consultation, including consultation with com munities located 
along with road, NGOs working it the area, other st ake-holders and relevant Government 
departments at all the different stages of assignme nt (such as inception stage, feasibility 
stage, preliminary design stage and once final designs are concretized) ”.  
 
Provisions for service lanes for all National Highways 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
36. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld explore the possibility of a 
policy to bar construction works on land next to up coming Greenfield National Highways 
till a certain length both sides. This may be done for right of way of service roads in the 
future. The Committee further recommends that the M inistry should have compulsory 
provisions for service roads since it improves safety and reduces slow traffic on NHs.  
(Para 252) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 The Right of Way (ROW) of the greenfield highw ays varies generally 45-100m and 
Ministry has authority within ROW only. Regulation of constructions beyond the ROW is a 
State subject.   
36.2 However, as far as service roads are concerned , they are generally provided at the 
locations wherever inter-mixing of local traffic wi th through traffic is very high resulting in 
congestion. Accordingly, provision of service roads  is made in NHs projects wherever found 
necessary.  
36.3 With reference to greenfield corridors develop ed, development of service roads would 
not stay in line with the concept of access-control led corridors and would diminish the 
benefits of these flagship corridors. However, the Ministry takes up development of 
underpasses along the corridor to ensure un-encumbe red movement of local residents with 
additional provisions made as per site requirements.  
 

21 
 
Provisions for utility ducts and installation of ca meras at construction stage National 
Highways  
Recommendation/ Observation  
37. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should i nstall CCTV cameras at 
frequent distances during the construction of road projects. This will allow NHAI officers, 
engineers, and other stakeholders, including public  representatives, to closely monitor the 
progress of ongoing road projects. By doing this, g round-level monitoring can occur 24x7 
while also keeping a check on encroachments on NH l and. After construction, these 
cameras can be used for the purpose of monitoring traffic and road accidents.  
(Para 254) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1 NHAI has empanelled 10 (ten) drone agencies to  carry out drone videography of 
under-construction and O&M (Operation and Maintenan ce) NHs projects on periodic basis. 
The award of work to these drone agencies are made by Project Directors (PDs) locally. As 
per present policy guidelines, the drone video data  is being collected on NHAI projects on 
monthly basis for under construction projects and b i-annually for operation & maintenance 
projects.  The abridged version of these drone vide os captured by agencies after its 
verification by local field officers are uploaded o n Data Lake portal and is also available for 
public view in citizen charter on NHAI portal.  
37.2 Additionally, the Provision of installation of  CCTV / other cameras on the Highways 
already exists in the recent EPC/BOT/HAM projects i n the clause for ATMS - Highway 
Traffic Management System as per Schedule C and MORTH specifications clause 816.  
 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
38. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibility of 
equipping commercial vehicles with a device that ca n automatically immobilise the vehicle 
if it is carrying weight beyond the specified limit. 
(Para 272) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1 The issue regarding Onboard weighment in comme rcial vehicles was discussed in the 
61st CMVR-TSC (Central Motor Vehicle Rules Technical Standing Committee) held on 17th 
May, 2023. It was proposed to formulate a new stand ard on onboard weighment of gross 
vehicle weight of commercial vehicle. The onboard w eighment will address the issue of over 
loading from user side and will provide a means for  real time check on vehicle load during 
inspections on road by RTAs (Regional Transport Aut hority). Committee noted the 

22 
 
information and it was agreed that a technical pane l under AISC (Automotive Industry 
Standards Committee) may initiate the work on the subject.  
 
Adoption of Electric Vehicles in the country  
Recommendation/ Observation  
39. Electric vehicles have numerous benefits, including  reduced air pollution and 
reduced dependence on imported petroleum products. The Committee acknowledges the 
efforts made by the Ministry of Road Transport & Hi ghways and the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries to promote electric vehicles in India. T he Committee suggests that more steps 
need to be taken to accelerate the shift towards el ectric vehicles. The Committee observes 
that several countries, such as Norway, have reache d high levels of adoption of EVs by 
incentivising vehicle owners to make the shift. The  Ministry should consider exempting 
electric vehicles from road tax and offering discou nts at toll plazas to incentivize their 
adoption. The Ministry may carry out the cost-benefit analysis of providing such incentives 
and proceed accordingly.  
(Para 275) 
39.1 Reply of the Ministry 
• Registration fee and renewal of registration fee ha s been exempted for Electric 
Vehicles vide G.S.R. 525 (E) dated 02.08.2021. 
• Electric Vehicles under Rent a Cab Scheme, 1977 are  exempted from necessity of 
permit. 
• Electric Vehicles are granted All India Tourist Vehicles Permit with zero fee. 
• States are providing concession to Electric Vehicles in road tax. 
• States are also giving subsidy on purchase of Electric Vehicles. 
39.2 At present, user fee is being levied and colle cted on National Highways as per the 
provisions of the National Highways Fee (Determinat ion of Rates and Collection) Rules, 
2008, as amended from time to time, and also as per  the respective Concession Agreement. 
User fee exemption is available to different category of mechanical vehicles as per Rule 11 of 
the National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008, as amended 
from time to time. There is no such provision of ex emption in user fee for electric vehicles at 
fee plazas on National Highways. However, in view o f the directions of the Committee, 
NHAI has been directed to conduct a cost benefit an alysis vis-à-vis the overall 
benefits/advantages to the environment and economy from the use of electric vehicles. 
 
Status of NH-744 from Kadampattukonam-Aryankavu 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
40. The Committee notes the details furnished by th e Ministry pertaining to NH-744. 
The Ministry may inform the Committee regarding the targeted date for revision of DPR of 

23 
 
the package-2 of the NH-744. The Ministry may ensur e that villages are not divided in the 
middle and the villagers are put into inconvenience  due to the difficulty in crossing the 
National Highway to access their agricultural field and other civic amenities. NHAI should 
ensure that adequate number of Vehicular Under Pass es (VUPs), Foot Over-Bridge etc. 
are built alongside the greenfield stretch for the safety of local citizens as well as NH users. 
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that Vilakkupara Town will be 
completely wiped out due to the present alignment o f the Highway and the people there are 
opposing the alignment vehemently. It is also learn ed that the people have given two 
different alignments to save the town and the livel ihood of a large number of people. The 
Committee observes that the Greenfield Highways are  for the people and for their well-
being. It should not lead to large-scale eviction a nd destruction of their economic assets, 
factories and a large number of buildings and shops .  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the alignment of Highway No. NH 744  may be appropriately changed to 
save the thickly populated Vilakkupara Town and its  people. The Ministry may also ensure 
that adequate entry and exit points are provided at  regular intervals to the local population 
through the service roads. The Committee desires th at the Ministry may work out a 
targeted timeline for the completion of the project since it is already under bidding.  
(Para 285) 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1 NH-744, which is Inter Corridor Road (ICR), st arts at Kollam in Kerala and ends at 
Madurai in Tamil Nadu passing through Edamon, Aryan kavu in Kerala.  Alignment of NH-
744 in Kerala is finalised after examining 3 altern ative options suggested by Design 
Consultant and based on consent of Govt of Kerala.  
40.2 The Vilakkupara town is in Ariyanalloor villag e. Alignment of NH-744 passes 
through Ariyanallor village (Vilakkupara Town) in a  length of around 6.3 km.  However, 
sufficient crossing facility in the form of 6 No of  VOP (Vehicular Over Pass), 1 no of LVUP 
(Light Vehicular Under Pass), 2 no. of SVUP (Small Vehicular Under Pass) and 1 no of 
Flyover, 1.852 Km of Service Road etc are provided in the 6.3 km zone of Ariyanalloor 
village (Vilakkupara town) in accordance with IRC C odal provision.  These crossing facility 
are sufficient for safe movement of local population on both side of road.  
40.3 At present, Bid is already invited for Kadamba ttukonam to Edamon section in Kerala 
and Land Acquisition is in progress.  3A notificati on for 6.3 km length in Vilakkupara Town 
is completed.  Bid for Edamon to KL/TN Border secti on will be invited after Forest/Wild 
Life Clearance/Environment Clearance.  
40.4 In view of above, change in alignment is not f easible at this stage.  
 
 
 
 

24 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
1. The Ministry has received more than 90 percent of i ts projected requirement for 
most heads in BE 2023-24. However, several heads cr itical to the good health of the 
National Highways network in the country have recei ved much less than the projected 
demand. These inter alia include 'Road Transport' ( 73%) and 'Maintenance of NHs 
including Swachhta Action Plan' (74%). The Committe e desires to know the reasons for 
the shortfall in allocations under these heads, vis -a-vis demands. The Ministry may inform 
how it plans to tackle the shortfall under these im portant heads. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may devise an effectiv e quarterly plan to ensure that the 
allocated amounts under these heads are optimally u tilized. This would permit the Ministry 
to seek additional funds under these heads in Revis ed Estimates and in the next financial 
year.  
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Details of the  allocations, vis-a-vis demands under Road Transport  and Maintenance 
are as under. Ministry is committed to provide the satisfactory riding quality across all NHs 
in country. We have introduced Performance based co ntracts for better accountability and 
efficiency. Ministry would optimally use the alloca ted funds by innovative methods like 
timely maintenance intervention/monitoring/better t echnology. However Ministry will 
propose any additional requirement under these head s at the time of RE, if required. Ministry 
will also focus on the maximum utilization till finalization of RE and BE of the next financial 
year.  
Amount in Rs. Crore 
 
Head Demand 2023-24  BE Outlay 2023-24 
Road Transport MH-3055 403.00  300.00  
Road Transport MH-5055  50.00  30.00  
Maintenance of NHs including 
Swachhta Action Plan  
3,400.00 
 2500.00  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  

25 
 
2. The Committee observes that the MMLPs offer a si gnificant boost to the regional 
and overall economy through enhanced connectivity and improved efficiency. The Ministry 
has prioritised 15 out of the 35 locations identifi ed for development of MMLPs. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up with a clear targeted timeline for 
awarding the remaining 20 MMLPs.  
(Para 14) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 A network of 35 Multimodal Logistics Parks (MML P) was identified while framing 
the overall Bharatmala Pariyojana Scheme. Out of the 35 MMLPs, 15 MMLPs are prioritized 
for award by FY 2024-25. The list of 15 prioritized  MMLPs along with their current status 
and cost details is placed at Annexure-I. 
2.2 Ministry is in process of the taking up another  20 MMLPs based on the feasibility of 
the MMLP site, consent of the State Governments etc.  
 
Targets and Achievements of the Ministry 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
3. The Committee notes that the Ministry has made 57% progress in the targeted 
length of 12,000 km for both award and construction  till January, 2023. However, the 
Ministry has already spent 87% of its RE 2022-23 al location. It seems likely that given the 
time as well as budgetary constraints, the Ministry  would fall short of its award and 
completion targets. The Committee suggests that the  Ministry may look into possible cost 
overruns in the projects given the physical progress of 57% compared to 87% expenditure.  
(Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 During 2022-23, the Ministry has achieved award  and construction of 12,376 km & 
10,331 km respectively. So far as expenditure is co ncerned, it not only depends upon length 
constructed but there are other factors, like payme nt for land acquisition, utility shifting, 
statutory clearances, bank interests, payment again st arbitration / court cases, advances, 
previous committed liabilities, etc. The expenditur e towards such preconstruction activities 
may lead to the physical progress lagging behind th e expenditure. Similarly, the progress of 
award may also lag behind the progress of expenditu re, as expenditure for civil works starts 
only after projects start physically and Contractor  raises bills. As the progress in 
award/construction need not be commensurate with bu dgeting/expenditure, question of cost 
overrun on account of difference between the two does not arise.  
Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase-I
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
4. Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase-I was initiated with  an ambitious target of 
completion by 2022. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has made record 

26 
 
progress in pace of highway construction in recent years. However, only about 35 percent 
of the BMP Phase-I has been completed till January,  2023. About 27 percent of the Phase-
I is yet to be awarded. The Committee notes that th e Ministry has stated that it would 
award most of the remaining length by FY 23-24. The  Ministry may inform the Committee 
regarding the targeted timeline for physical comple tion of the BMP Phase-I. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may proactiv ely tackle possible hurdles and 
avoid any further delays.  
(Para 53) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Recommendations of the Committee have been duly  noted.  
4.2 Under Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase–I, out of tot al 34,800 Km, about 76% (26,316 
Km) of the total length has been awarded and about 39% (13,575 Km) of total length has 
been completed till April, 2023.  
4.3 It is Ministry’s endeavor to award all projects  on completion of land acquisition and 
obtaining all the requisite clearances and are targ eted for award by FY 2024-25 and 
completion by FY 2027-28. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
5. The Committee is glad to note that the 52% share  of HAM projects in terms of the 
cost of projects awarded under BMP Phase-I is close  to the target of 60%. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may look into the reas ons why the share of BOT (Toll) 
projects is much behind the 10% target. The Ministr y may review the Model Concession 
Agreement for BOT (Toll) Projects and revise the sa me, if needed, after due consultation 
with the stakeholders.  
(Para 58) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Share of HAM projects in terms of the cost of p rojects awarded is 53% under 
Bharatmala Pariyojana (BMP) Phase-I and is close to the target of 60%. 
5.2 In BOT (Toll) mode, maximum risk (construction,  financing and toll revenue risk) is 
borne by the contractor/concessionaire. 73 BOT (Tol l) road projects with length 8,187 km 
were languishing back in 2014.This led to reduced a ppetite for BOT (Toll) mode among the 
Concessionaires.  
5.3 MoRTH has been able to increase the contributio n of private sector through HAM 
mode and create a vibrant Contractor ecosystem as of now.  
5.4 Further, the Ministry has issued amendments to standard tender documents for HAM 
and BOT (Toll) projects, after deliberation with st akeholders and implementing agencies, to 
improve private sector participation.  
 

27 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
6. The Committee notes that the Kerala Government h ad requested for the inclusion 
of the Thrippunithura bypass under the Bharatmala P roject. The Ministry may apprise the 
Committee regarding the present status of the same.  
(Para 59) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 It is submitted that the Thrippunithura Bypass was initially proposed by PWD NH 
Division 30 years back for which land was acquired by State PWD partially and the land 
acquisition process is currently under litigations at various courts. Hence the Thrippunithura 
Bypass is not included in the said alignments.  
 
Connectivity to Tourist Destinations 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
7. Stellar road connectivity can significantly boos t the tourism prospects of any given 
region. The Committee desires to be apprised of the  roadmap for improving highway 
connectivity to the 50 iconic tourist destinations mentioned in the Budget Speech. The 
Ministry may inform regarding the budgetary allocation made in this regard.  
(Para 63) 
8. The Committee notes that the Ministry has not ma de any mention of its plans to 
improve NH connectivity to the 13 tourist destinati ons which are not within 10 km of any 
NHs.  The Committee desires that all the 100 touris t destination may be connected with the 
National Highways. The Ministry may inform regarding its plans in this regard.  
(Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The Ministry is primarily responsible for devel opment and maintenance of National 
Highways (NHs). Although there is no dedicated fund ing for development of tourists 
destinations, the Ministry invariably take up devel opment of NHs connecting to tourist 
destinations due to higher traffic density on these  sections where special focus is also made 
for Way Side Amenities (WSAs), adequate signages an d road side/ median beautifications 
etc., under various schemes of development of NHs.  
8.2 Currently, the Ministry is implementing 97 proj ects of length 3,111 km at a total 
capital cost of Rs. 74,353 Cr. to improve connectiv ity to these prioritized 50 tourist 
destinations identified by Tourism ministry under Phase I.  
8.3 Additionally, the Ministry plans to undertake d evelopment of 98 projects of length 
3,727 km at a total capital cost of Rs. 63,853 Cr. to improve connectivity to remaining 50 
tourist destinations. 
 

28 
 
Increasing Land Acquisition Costs  
Recommendation/ Observation  
9. The Committee feels that tapping the increase in  the value of land adjacent to 
highways can help bear the increasing land acquisit ion costs of NH projects across the 
country. In light of this, the Committee desires to  be apprised of the status of 
implementation of NHAI’s Value Capture Finance policy.  
(Para 70) 
9.1 Reply of the Ministry 
(i) A policy circular dated 24.09.2019 was issued under  which the State Governments 
are requested to fund the land acquisition cost of development of highways. A 
policy circular dated 18.03.2021 on Value Capture F inance (VCF) has been issued 
for developing a mechanism to implement VCF jointly  by the States and NHAI, to 
part finance the cost of highway construction. 
 
(ii) In Sept, 2021, Secretary (RTH) & Chairman, NHAI had  written to all Chief 
Secretaries of State Govt. to convey their preferre d options for Value Capture 
Finance (VCF) so that a MoU (Memorandum of Understa nding) is signed with 
NHAI/MoRTH. 
 
(iii)The draft Umbrella State Support Agreement (SS A) which includes provision of 
Value Capture Finance (VCF) for development of NHs has been approved by the 
Ministry on 01.04.2022. The same has been sent to t he State Government for 
acceptance but response is not encouraging. 
 
Sukhad Yatra app 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
10. The Committee applauds the digital initiative o f NHAI to bring all information 
about NHs for highway users. The Committee is at a loss to understand why only a few 
hundred users are using the App. The Ministry may g ive wider publicity to the App and 
encourage people to use it. Promotional billboards etc. may be put in place at toll plazas to 
make NH users aware of the app and its features. Th e Committee, however, notes that the 
public reception of the application has not been up  to the mark. The application has been 
rated 2.1 star and 2.5 star out of a maximum 5 star , on Google Play Store and Apple App 
Store respectively. This implies that the applicati on is not functioning as per the 
expectations and requirements of the users. The Com mittee recommends that NHAI may 
work on the feedback received from the app users.  
(Para 97) 
11. The Committee notes from the trend of year-wise com plaints that the adoption of 
the Sukhad Yatra app has not picked up the much des ired pace. The app can help NHAI 
gather valuable real-world data about its highways and the maintenance/safety 

29 
 
requirements thereon. The Committee recommends that  a mechanism may be devised to 
ensure that the complaints filed through the Sukhad  Yatra app are actually resolved on 
ground. The App may seek confirmation from the comp lainant before marking the 
complaint as resolved. The Committee further recomm ends that NHAI may make 
budgetary provisions for promoting the App after it s revamped version is launched this 
year.  
(Para 98) 
12. The Committee recommends that NHAI may take immedia te steps to ensure that 
the Sukhad Yatra app is available in Hindi as well as regional languages so as to enable 
more people to utilise its services. Various servic es like emergency services, police 
assistance, roadside assistance, road side amenities, restaurants/ hotels which are available 
along the specific stretch of the National Highway may be provided on the app. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry shou ld give wider publicity to the app 
through media – both print and electronic – advertisements.  
(Para 99) 
13. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensu re that the progress made 
regarding updation of the Sukhad Yatra app and the resolution of complaints received on 
the application may be taken up with the local MPs in the District DISHA meetings.  
(Para 100) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 During FY 2021-22, various initiatives have be en undertaken to improve the user 
experience of Sukhad Yatra App as below:- 
• The usage of Google Map APIs (Application Programmi ng Interface) extended to 
pay-as-you-use basis in a month to allow unhindered usage by users.  
• Updated version of the App available in both iOS an d Android platform with 
improved User Interface (UI). 
• Additional new options under “Report an Issue” sect ion such as Report an accident 
(automatically dials to NH Helpline 1033 on clickin g the Option), Report non-
availability/non-cleaning of Toilets at Toll Plaza,  Others, etc. and Nearby Police 
Station under Nearby Section. 
• Regular update of all NH fee plazas, toll rates etc. 
  
13.2 Now Ministry through NHAI has launched a upgra ded version of Sukhad Yatra App 
namely Rajmarg Yatra which also has additional feat ures of grievance management, 
Emergency, Toll Plaza Information, FASTag recharge and other features. All efforts are 
being made to popularize the App.  
 

30 
 
ROADS AND BRIDGES 
Works under Roads Wing 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
14. The Committee notes that the BE 2023-24 allocation for National Highways 
(Original) has increased by 47% compared to BE 2022-23. The Committee may be apprised 
of the length of construction targeted to be undertaken in 2023-24 as compared to 2022-23. 
The Ministry may furnish the reasons behind the red uction under ‘Tribal Sub-Plan - NH 
works in NE States, Rajasthan, MP, Chhattisgarh, Jh arkhand, etc.’ in RE 2022-23 and 
further in BE 2023-24.  
(Para 107) 
15. The Committee notes that 2,372 km of NH has been co nstructed under NH (O) till 
December, 2022 as against a target of 7,000 km. The  Committee is unable to understand 
why there is such low achievement in NH(O). The Min istry may inform the Committee 
about the reasons behind this slow progress and the way forward.  
(Para 108) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Total target for construction during FY 2022-2 3 was 12,000 km, against which 
achievement was 10,331 km. Out of this, 4,847 km has been constructed under NH(O).  
15.2 Allocation under the Tribal Sub Plan has been enhanced to Rs. 23,095 Crore in 2023-
24 from Rs. 5,957 Crore in 2022-23. This includes a llocations for the ‘Tribal Sub-Plan - NH 
works in NE States, Rajasthan, MP, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, etc.’ 
15.3 Shortfall in achieving construction target und er NH(O) was mainly due to delay in 
land acquisition, protracted monsoon in many States & above average rainfall in some States, 
increase in cost of raw materials (especially steel ) and supply chain disruptions leading to 
shortages, increased prices of construction equipme nt, slow progress by contractor in some 
projects, etc.  
15.4 To ensure expeditious development of highway p rojects and to avoid undue delays, 
various steps have been taken by the Ministry such as:  
(i) Regular review meetings with all stakeholders, incl uding project developers / 
concessionaires/ contractors and State Governments, are held by high level officers in 
the Ministry.  
(ii) Expediting fulfilment of Govt. obligations for condition precedents. 
(iii) One-Time Fund Infusion, premium re-scheduling, securitization of road sector loans. 
(iv) Rationalized exit for equity investors.  
(v) Termination/foreclosure and re-bidding, revamping t he dispute resolution system, 
rationalized compensation for delays attributed to Authority. 

31 
 
(vi) Notification of Guiding Principles for Resolution o f Stuck Projects aiming at 
foreclosure of projects which are stuck on account of the Concessionaire/Contractor 
in NCLT (National Company Law Tribunal) or mutual d efault of both Authority and 
Contractor/Concessionaire 
(vii) To fast track land acquisition and to remove bottle necks causing delay in land 
acquisition, IT based system such as "Bhoomirashi" for land acquisition has been 
developed and its use has been mandated.  
(viii) To capture real time project progress and resolutio n of pending issues causing delay, 
IT based portals such as PMIS and Data Lake have be en developed and widely used 
for efficient project monitoring and decision making.  
(ix) For speedy land acquisition and shifting of utiliti es, regular review meetings of the 
High Power Committee at the State level under Chair manship of Chief 
Secretary/Additional Secretary of the State Governm ent/ concerned department have 
been mandated.  
(x) Further, to expedite clearance of inter-departmenta l issues, important Projects are 
being regularly reviewed by DPIIT and by Secretary (Coordination) in the Cabinet 
Secretariat.  
(xi) To resolve Railways issues, regular coordination me etings with M/o Railways are 
held for obtaining clearance for construction of ROBs/ RUBs.  
(xii) As regards, environment and forest issues, the pend ing matters that could not be 
resolved at officer levels are escalated and resolv ed in the Group of Infrastructure 
(GOI) meeting between the Hon'ble Minister (RT&H) a nd Hon'ble Minister 
(EF&CC).  
(xiii) Similarly, unresolved issues with M/o Railways, M/o  Defence are also taken up with 
the Hon'ble Minister of respective Ministries in the GOI meeting and are resolved. 
(xiv) Providing various COVID-19 relief measures under Atmanirbhar Bharat, etc.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
16. The Indian Roads Congress plays a significant r ole in developing Standards, 
Specifications, Codes of Practices, Guidelines, and  research-based state-of-the-art reports 
related to roads and bridges. However, despite its crucial role in research-led development 
in the road sector in the country, no fund is alloc ated to IRC. The Committee suggests that 
the Ministry may review the budgetary needs of the Indian Roads Congress and take steps 
to meet the same.  
(Para 122) 
16.1 Reply of the Ministry 
• Indian Roads Congress (IRC) is a registered society . IRC generally does not carry out 
any research activity. IRC is basically engaged in bringing out the new IRC Codes 

32 
 
and guidelines, also revamping / upgrading existing codes and guidelines based on the 
recommendations of the expert committee constituted  by IRC. All codes related to 
Highways / Bridges / Tunnels, published by IRC, are  being adopted by all the 
agencies of Central Government and State Government uniformly across the country.  
•  Recently, IRC has set up a Committee for identifyi ng important pilot research 
projects which may be taken up through eminent research organizations and academic 
institutions of repute. The Ministry shall duly con sider recommendations of the 
Committee in taking up new R&D Schemes.    
• The Ministry has been supporting IRC from time to t ime in various ways such as one-
time assistance like construction of IRC building, development of software etc., 
besides providing assistance for organizing seminar s and membership fee on regular 
basis. The Ministry has been providing possible fin ancial supports to IRC from time 
to time. 
 
Road Safety 
 
Steps taken by the Ministry 
Recommendation/ Observation  
17. The Committee appreciates the work that MoRTH/N HAI is doing to make NHs 
across the country better in terms of safety. The C ommittee, however, notes that India 
contributes to about 10% of all road accident deaths worldwide, with just 1% of the world’s 
vehicles. A World Bank Report estimates that Road c rash and serious injury cost to be 
7.5% of India’s GDP. The poor households suffer a h uge socio-economic burden of 
accident deaths due to loss of income. The Committe e is also aware that the 'Right to Safe 
Travel’ has been recognized to be the fundamental r ight of every citizen in a recent Patna 
High Court ruling. In light of this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry needs to 
formulate and execute a multi-pronged road safety s trategy on a war-footing. Allocation 
for maintenance of NHs and road safety is crucial a nd is not increasing commensurately 
with the overall allocation of the Ministry. The bu dgetary allocation and expenditure for 
road maintenance and road safety schemes needs a major boost.  
(Para 160) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Ministry has formulated a multi-pronged strate gy to address the issue of road safety 
based on Education, Engineering (both of roads and vehicles), Enforcement and Emergency 
Care. Accordingly, various initiatives have been taken by the Ministry as detailed below: - 
• Education:  
i.      To create effective public awareness about road safety, Ministry undertakes 
various publicity measures and awareness campaigns through social media, electronic 
media and print media. Further, Ministry has implem ented a scheme to provide 
financial assistance to various agencies for administering Road Safety Advocacy. 

33 
 
ii.     Observance of National Road Safety Month/We ek every year for spreading 
awareness and strengthening road safety. 
iii.      A Certification Course for Road Safety Au ditor has been mandated for 
technical officers of all road owning agencies unde r the Ministry up to the level of 
Superintending Engineer or equivalent. 
iv.      To impart driving training, Ministry has b een implementing a scheme for 
setting up of Institute of Driving Training & Resea rch (IDTRs), Regional Driving 
Training Centres (RDTCs) and Driving Training Centr es (DTCs) at state/district level 
across the Country. 
  
• Engineering (both of Roads and vehicles)  
 Road engineering:  
i.        Road safety has been made an integral par t of road design at planning 
stage. Road Safety Audit (RSA) of all highway proje cts has been made mandatory at 
all stages. 
ii.       RSA of all National Highways (NHs) has be en made mandatory through third 
party auditors/ experts at all stages i.e. design, construction, operation and 
maintenance etc. 
iii.      High priority to identification and rectification of black spots /accident spots on 
NHs. 
iv.     Road Safety Officer (RSO) has been designat ed at each Regional Office of road 
owning agencies under the Ministry to look after RS A, blackspot rectification and 
other road safety related works. 
v.       Five stretches of NH having higher number of accidents/blackspots are being 
developed as Model Safe Roads under each regional o ffice of all road owning 
agencies under the Ministry. 
vi.      Five project stretches under construction are being developed as Model Safe 
Construction Zones under each regional office of al l road owning agencies under the 
Ministry. 
vii.     The electronic Detailed Accident Report (e -DAR) Project has been initiated to 
establish a central repository for reporting, manag ement and analysis of road 
accidents data across the Country. 
viii.    Ministry and IRC has issued various codes and guidelines, time to time, to 
implement various road safety measures so as to min imize accidents on National 
Highways. 
  
 Vehicle engineering:  

34 
 
i.        The Ministry has notified the mandatory p rovision of an airbag for the 
passenger seated on the front seat of a vehicle, next to the driver. 
ii.       This Ministry, vide notification dated 15 th February, 2022 has prescribed 
norms related to safety measures for children below  four years of age, riding or being 
carried on a motor cycle. Further, it specifies use of a safety harness, crash helmet and 
restricts speed to 40kmph. 
iii.      Ministry has notified the mandatory fitme nt of following listed safety 
technologies from 01st July 2019. 
For M1 category vehicles: 
a. Seat Belt Reminder (SBR) for driver and co-driver. 
b. Manual Override for central locking system 
c. Over speed warning system. 
For all M and N category vehicles: 
a. Reverse Parking Alert System 
iv.        The Ministry has mandated Anti-Lock Brak ing System (ABS) for certain 
classes of L [Motor vehicle with less than four wheels and includes a Quadricycle], M 
[Motor vehicles with at least four wheels used for carrying passengers] and N [Motor 
vehicles with at least four wheels used for carryin g goods which may also carry 
persons in addition to goods, subject to conditions  stipulated in BIS standards] 
categories. 
v.         This Ministry has mandated approval of v ehicles for protection of occupants 
in the event of an Offset Frontal Collision, for re quirements for behavior of steering 
mechanism of the vehicle in a Head-on collision, Protection of Occupants in the event 
of Lateral Collision and for approval of vehicles w ith regard to protection of 
pedestrians and other vulnerable road users in the event of a collision with a motor 
vehicle.  
vi.      The Ministry has mandated speed limiting f unction/speed limiting device in all 
transport vehicles, except for two wheelers, three wheelers, quadricycles, fire tenders, 
ambulances and police vehicles. 
vii.   This Ministry has mandated compliance of the  fully built buses (with a seating 
capacity of 22 passengers or above, excluding drive r), manufactured on and after 1st 
April 2019, with the requirements of Fire Detection , Alarm and Suppression system. 
Further, compliance of type III buses of category M3 and school buses with fire alarm 
and protection system in occupant compartment has a lso been mandated, on and after 
26th January 2023. 
viii.    The Ministry has prescribed the format in which vehicle manufacturers issue 
the Road Worthiness Certification for registering motor vehicles. 

35 
 
ix.   Scheme for setting up one model Inspection & Certification Centre in each 
State/UT with Central assistance for testing the fi tness of vehicles through an 
automated system. 
x.       Ministry vide Notifications GSR 652 (E) da ted 23 
rd  September, 2021 published 
the rules for recognition, regulation and control of Automated Testing Stations. 
xi.      Notification vide GSR 272(E) dated 05 th  April. 2022, provides for mandatory 
fitness of vehicles only through an Automated Testi ng Stations.  It mandates the 
fitness check of Heavy Goods Vehicles/Heavy Passeng er Motor Vehicles only 
through automated testing stations with effect from  01st April 2023 onwards, and for 
Medium Goods Vehicles/Medium Passenger Motor Vehicl es and Light Motor 
vehicles (Transport) with effect from 01st June 2024 onwards. 
xii.     Ministry has formulated the Vehicle Scrapp ing Policy based on incentives/dis-
incentives and for creating an ecosystem to phase out older, unfit polluting vehicles. 
          
• Enforcement:  
i.      The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 as stands implemented provides for 
strict penalties for ensuring compliance and enhanc ing deterrence for violation of 
traffic rules and strict enforcement through use of technology. 
ii.     Ministry has issued notification G.S.R. 575 (E) dated 11th August, 2021 for 
Electronic Monitoring and Enforcement of Road Safety. The rules specify the detailed 
provisions for placement of electronic enforcement devices (speed camera, closed-
circuit television camera, speed gun, body wearable  camera, dashboard camera, 
Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR), weigh in  machine (WIM) and any 
such other technology specified by the State Government).                          
  
• Emergency care:  
i.      Ministry has published rules vide GSR 594(E ) dated 29.09.2020 for the 
protection of Good Samaritan, who in good faith, vo luntarily and without expectation 
of any reward or compensation renders emergency med ical or nonmedical care or 
assistance at the scene of an accident to the victi m or transports such victim to the 
hospital.  
ii.     Ministry vide notification dated 25 
th  February, 2022 has enhanced compensation 
of victims of Hit and Run motor accidents (from Rs. 12,500 to Rs.50,000 for grievous 
hurt and from Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 2,00,000 for death). 
iii.    The National Highways Authority of India ha s made provisions for 
ambulances with paramedical staff/Emergency Medical  Technician/Nurse at 
toll plazas on the completed corridor of National Highways. 
 

36 
 
Expenditure on M&R of NHs  
17.2 Actual annual expenditure on M&R of NHs since 2020-21 is in the range of Rs. 5,000 
– 6,000 Crore.  
Expenditure on Road Safety engineering measures / works on NHs  
17.3 Although funds are not allocated dedicatedly f or Road Safety engineering measures / 
works on NHs, Road Safety engineering measures are invariably included in all NH works 
and account for about 33% of the overall NH works o f development. Apart from the above, 
Ministry / NHAI also takes up work of small road sa fety improvement program on case to 
case basis as per the requirement suggested by field units.  
Recommendation/ Observation  
18. The Committee further suggests that the Ministr y may review the progress made 
regarding the implementation of the National Road S afety Policy, 2010. The Ministry may 
make necessary modifications in the same and lay st ress on technological measures that 
can be employed to lower road accidents in the coun try. The Ministry may also look into 
the reasons for the consistent increase in accident severity over the years.  
(Para 161) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 The Union Cabinet on 15th March 2010 approved the National Road Safety Policy. 
The National Road Safety Policy outlines the policy  initiatives to be framed / taken by the 
Government at all levels to improve the road safety  activities in the country.  Key aspects of 
the policy and the initiatives taken by MoRTH to achieve the objectives are given below: 
I. Establish a Road Safety Information Database 
 – Provide assistance to States, UTs & 
local bodies to improve the quality of crash invest igation and of data collection, 
transmission and analysis.  
o The electronic Detailed Accident Report (e-DAR) Pro ject has been initiated to 
establish a central repository for reporting, manag ement and analysis of road 
accidents data across the Country. 
II. Ensure Safer Road Infrastructure  – Take measures to review standards pertaining to 
safety in the design of rural and urban roads and b ring them in consonance with 
international best practices keeping in view Indian  traffic conditions, use Intelligent 
Transport Systems (ITS) to establish a safe and efficient transport system. 
o Road safety has been made an integral part of road design at planning stage. 
Road Safety Audit (RSA) of all highway projects has  been made mandatory at 
all stages. 
o RSA of all National Highways (NHs) has been made ma ndatory through third 
party auditors/ experts at all stages i.e. design, construction, operation and 
maintenance etc. 

37 
 
o High priority to identification and rectification o f black spots /accident spots 
on National Highways. 
o Road Safety Officer (RSO) has been designated at ea ch Regional Office of 
road owning agencies under the Ministry to look aft er RSA, blackspot 
rectification and other road safety related works.  
o Five stretches of NH having higher number of accide nts/blackspots are being 
developed as Model Safe Roads under each regional o ffice of all road owning 
agencies under the Ministry. 
o Five project stretches under construction are being  developed as Model Safe 
Construction Zones under each regional office of al l road owning agencies 
under the Ministry. 
o Ministry and IRC has issued various codes and guide lines, time to time, to 
implement various road safety measures so as to min imize accidents on 
National Highways. 
III. Safer Vehicles  – Take steps to ensure that safety features are bu ilt in at the stage of 
design, manufacture, usage, operation and maintenan ce of both motorized and non-
motorized vehicles in line with international stand ards and practices in order to 
minimize adverse safety and environmental effects of vehicle operation on road users 
o The Ministry has notified regarding mandatory provi sion of an airbag for the 
passenger seated on the front seat of a vehicle, next to the driver. 
o This Ministry, vide notification dated 15th Februar y, 2022 has prescribed 
norms related to safety measures for children below  four years of age, riding 
or being carried on a motor cycle. Further, it spec ifies use of a safety harness, 
crash helmet and restricts speed to 40kmph. 
o Ministry has notified the mandatory fitment of foll owing listed safety 
technologies from 01st July 2019. For M1 category vehicles: 
/square4 Seat Belt Reminder (SBR) for driver and co-driver. 
/square4 Manual Override for central locking system 
/square4 Over speed warning system. 
For all M and N category vehicles: 
/square4 Reverse Parking Alert System 
/square4  The Ministry has mandated Anti-Lock Braking System  (ABS) for certain 
classes of L [Motor vehicle with less than four whe els and includes a 
Quadricycle], M [Motor vehicles with at least four wheels used for carrying 
passengers] and N [Motor vehicles with at least fou r wheels used for carrying 
goods which may also carry persons in addition to goods, subject to conditions 
stipulated in BIS standards] categories.       

38 
 
/square4 This Ministry has mandated approval of vehicles for  protection of occupants 
in the event of an Offset Frontal Collision, for re quirements for behavior of 
steering mechanism of the vehicle in a Head-on coll ision, Protection of 
Occupants in the event of Lateral Collision and for  approval of vehicles with 
regard to protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users in the event 
of a collision with a motor vehicle. 
/square4 The Ministry has mandated speed limiting function/speed limiting device in all 
transport vehicles, except for two wheelers, three wheelers, quadricycles, fire 
tenders, ambulances and police vehicles. 
/square4 This Ministry has mandated compliance of the fully built buses (with a seating 
capacity of 22 passengers or above, excluding drive r), manufactured on and 
after 1st April 2019, with the requirements of Fire  Detection, Alarm and 
Suppression system. Further, compliance of type III  buses of category M3 and 
school buses with fire alarm and protection system in occupant compartment 
has also been mandated, on and after 26th January 2023. 
/square4 The Ministry has prescribed the format in which veh icle manufacturers issue 
the Road Worthiness Certification for registering motor vehicles. 
/square4 Scheme for setting up one model Inspection & Certif ication Centre in each 
State/UT with Central assistance for testing the fi tness of vehicles through an 
automated system. 
/square4 Ministry vide Notifications dated 23rd September, 2 021 and 31st October, 
2022 published the rules for recognition, regulatio n and control of Automated 
Testing Stations. 
/square4 Notification vide GSR 272(E) dated 05th April. 2022 , provides for mandatory 
fitness of vehicles only through an Automated Testi ng Stations.  It mandates 
the fitness check of Heavy Goods Vehicles/Heavy Pas senger Motor Vehicles 
only through automated testing stations with effect  from 01st April 2023 
onwards, and for Medium Goods Vehicles/Medium Passe nger Motor Vehicles 
and Light Motor vehicles (Transport) with effect fr om 01st June 2024 
onwards. 
/square4 Ministry has formulated the Vehicle Scrapping Policy based on incentives/dis-
incentives and for creating an ecosystem to phase o ut older, unfit polluting 
vehicles 
IV. Safer Drivers  – Strengthen the system of driver licensing and tr aining to improve the 
competence and capability of drivers. 
o To impart driving training, Ministry has been imple menting a scheme for 
setting up of Institute of Driving Training & Resea rch (IDTRs), Regional 
Driving Training Centres (RDTCs) and Driving Traini ng Centres (DTCs) at 
state/district level across the Country. 

39 
 
V. Safety of Vulnerable Road Users  – Design and construct all road facilities (rural and 
urban) while taking into account the needs of non-m otorized transport and the 
vulnerable and physically challenged in an appropriate manner. 
o Guidelines have been issued for pedestrian faciliti es on NHs for persons with 
disabilities. 
VI. Road Traffic Safety Education and Training  – Road safety knowledge and awareness 
to be created amongst the population through educat ion, training and publicity 
campaigns. Road safety education will also focus on  school children and college 
going students, while road safety publicity campaig ns will be used to propagate good 
road safety practices among the community. 
o To create effective public awareness about road saf ety, Ministry undertakes 
various publicity measures and awareness campaigns through social media, 
electronic media and print media. Further, Ministry  implements a scheme to 
provide financial assistance to various agencies fo r administering Road Safety 
Advocacy. 
o Observance of National Road Safety Month/ Week ever y year for spreading 
awareness and strengthening road safety. 
VII. Enforcement of Safety Laws  – Take appropriate measures to assist various stat e and 
other governments to strengthen and improve the qua lity of enforcement in order to 
ensure effective and uniform implementation of safety laws. 
o Ministry has issued notification G.S.R. 575(E) date d 11th August, 2021 for 
Electronic Monitoring and Enforcement of Road Safet y by State 
Governments. The rules specify the detailed provisi ons for placement of 
electronic enforcement devices (speed camera, close d-circuit television 
camera, speed gun, body wearable camera, dashboard camera, Automatic 
Number Plate Recognition (ANPR), weigh in machine ( WIM) and any such 
other technology specified by the State Government).                          
VIII. Emergency Medical Services for Road Accidents  – Ensure that all persons involved in 
road accidents benefit from speedy and effective tr auma care and management. The 
essential functions of such a service would include  the provision of rescue operation 
and administration of first aid at the site of an a ccident and the transport of the victim 
from accident site to nearby hospital. 
o Ministry has published rules vide GSR 594(E) dated 29.09.2020 for the 
protection of Good Samaritan, who in good faith, vo luntarily and without 
expectation of any reward or compensation renders e mergency medical or 
nonmedical care or assistance at the scene of an ac cident to the victim or 
transports such victim to the hospital. 
o Ministry vide notification dated 25th February, 202 2 has enhanced 
compensation of victims of Hit and Run motor accide nts (from Rs. 12,500 to 
Rs. 50,000 for grievous hurt and from Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 2,00,000 for death). 

40 
 
o The National Highways Authority of India has made p rovisions for 
ambulances with paramedical staff/Emergency Medical  Technician/Nurse at 
toll plazas on the completed corridor of National Highways. 
IX. HRD & Research for Road Safety 
o Ministry sanctioned a Center of excellence for Road Safety in IIT Madras.  
X. Strengthening Enabling Legal, Institutional and Fin ancial Environment for Road 
Safety  – Take appropriate measures to ensure that the req uired legal, institutional and 
financial environment for road safety is further st rengthened and a mechanism for 
effective coordination of various stakeholders is put in place. 
o The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 as stands implemented provides 
for strict penalties for ensuring compliance and en hancing deterrence for 
violation of traffic rules and strict enforcement through use of technology. 
XI. Implementation Strategy  – Establish a dedicated agency viz. a National Roa d Safety 
Board to oversee the issues related to road safety and evolve effective strategies for 
implementation of the Road Safety Policy. 
o Ministry notified constitution of National Road Saf ety Board (NRSB) along 
with rules vide GSR 615 (E) dated 3 rd  September 2021. NRSB shall be 
responsible for promoting road safety, innovation a nd adoption of new 
technology and for regulating traffic and motor veh icles. The applications for 
the various posts of NRSB have been received and ar e being evaluated by 
Search cum Selection Committee. 
 
UN Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-30 
Recommendation/ Observation  
19. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may also target a quantifiable 
amount of reduction of road accident deaths in the ongoing decade. The Ministry may 
come up with a detailed year-by-year plan with meas urable targets and ensure that the 
plan is scrupulously implemented. The Ministry may request the State Government 
Departments concerned to coordinate and assist in t he matter to reduce road accident 
deaths on all roads in the country. The State Governments may be requested to identify and 
rectify black spots on roads other than National Hi ghways. The Ministry/ NHAI may 
provide assistance to the relevant departments rega rding the strategies to be followed for 
temporary and permanent rectification of such black  spots on State roads. The 
Ministry/NHAI and State Government Departments, whe re concerned, should come up 
with proposals for construction of flyovers for rec tification of black spots. The Ministry 
may also request State Governments to work on the m aintenance and adequate lighting of 
State roads.  
(Para 163) 
  

41 
 
19.1 Reply of the Ministry 
• Ministry has defined Protocol for identification of  Blackspot as per the circular 
no. RW/NH-15017/109/2015-P&M (RSCE) Dated 28.10.201 5. As per this circular, Road 
Accident Black-spot is a stretch of National Highwa y of about 500 m in length in which 
either 5 road accidents (in all   three years put t ogether involving fatalities /grievous 
injuries) took place   during the last 3 calendar y ears or 10 fatalities (in all three years put 
together) took place during the last 3 calendar yea rs. Based on Road accidents data 
collected by police departments of State Government s and compiled by Transport 
Research Wing (TRW) of this Ministry, Blackspots ar e identified for undertaking 
immediate short term measures for mitigation and lo ng term measures for permanent 
rectification. 
 
• Ministry vide letter dated 9 th  September 2021 has written to Chief Secretaries of  all the 
States,  Principal Secretaries/Secretaries/ All eng ineers-In Chief and Chief Engineers of 
(Public Works Department) of all the States, Direct or General (Border Roads), Chairman 
(NHAI), Managing Director (NHIDCL), All CE-ROs/SE-R Os and ELOs of the Ministry 
and all Project Directors of Ministry to take advan ce action for removal of accident spots 
on National highways as per police reports without waiting for converting them into black 
spots after accidents/fatalities. 
 
19.2 The rectification of blackspot site is done on  the basis of outcome of Road safety 
Audits. Road safety Audit is conducted as per IRC S P 88: 2019 “manual on Road safety 
Audit”. Vide Ministry’s circular no RW/NH-29011/08/ 2019-S&R(P&B) dated 26.08.2019 
following corrective remedial measures have been su ggested depending upon the location of 
black spot as under: -  
19.3 Depending upon the site condition/requirement,  the corrective measures may require 
Short Term Measures only, and in some cases Long Te rm Measures including Cautionary 
Measures or Short-Term Measures.  
 
19.4 Short term measures : The suggestive items/measures: (i) Pedestrian fac ilities like 
Zebra crossings (ii) Crash barriers/ railings (iii)  Solar light (iv) Junctions improvement (v) 
Road signs inter-alia speed limits sign, pavement/r oad markings, delineators, studs/ cats eye. 
(vi) Traffic calming measures including rumble stri p (vii) Repairing/maintenance of unsafe 
road/appurtenance including filling of berms/should er on National Highways (viii) 
Restriction of certain types of vehicles, one way streets, reversible lanes, bus lanes, restriction 
on movement of different types of vehicles by time/ by lane etc. specially in urban areas. 
 
19.5 Long term permanent measure : Based on inspection, survey etc. if it is conclud ed 
that the spot requires long term measures, a detail ed estimate may have to be prepared for the 
same. In such situations some of the short term mea sures as mentioned in above para and 
following cautionary measures are consider as rectification measures. 

42 
 
19.6 Some of the long-term suggestive measures depe nding upon the location of black spot 
are as under:- 
Location of Black spot Corrective / remedial measur es 
Obstacles such as trees, poles, 
structure, etc. within the clear zone, 
encroachments etc. 
Shifting/removal of these obstacles 
or providing other safety measures 
including crash barrier etc. further set 
back distance at all locations should 
invariably be achieved 
At grade junction Flyover, underpasses, overpasses 
junction improvement etc. 
Deficient geometry Improvement of horizontal/vertic al 
alignment, curvature or other safety 
measures including crash barrier etc. 
Mix traffic Providing service lane, Footpath, 
crash barrier etc. 
Distressed/narrow Bridge/culvert Reconstruction, re habilitation / 
widening of the bridges 
Crossing of pedestrians/habitant area/ 
school/ hospitals/ educational 
institute etc. 
Foot over bridge etc. 
Animal/ cattle crossing Cattle pass/VUP, fencing et c. 
Hill roads/sharp curves Various safety measures inc luding 
crash barriers 
 
Five Year Vision Plan (2019-24) for Infrastructure Sector 
Recommendation/ Observation  
20. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has  overall made good progress with 
regard to the goals laid out in the Five-Year Visio n Plan (2019-24) for Infrastructure 
Sector. The Committee, however, observes that the M inistry is lagging behind in the 
achievement of targets against some crucial recomme ndations pertaining to road safety. 
The Committee may be apprised regarding the action that the Ministry plans to take to 
make up for the slow progress in the operationaliza tion of ATMS and the development of 
60,000 km of safe and efficient NH network.  
(Para 165) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 There is an in-built provision of installation  of CCTV / other cameras on the 
Highways in the recent EPC/BOT/HAM projects in the clause for ATMS - Highway Traffic 

43 
 
Management System as per Schedule C and MORTH speci fications clause 816. Further, 
measures w.r.t. improvement in road engineering are being taken regularly thereby improving 
safety of users/prevent accidents on NHs. Recently,  the following steps/policies have been 
taken/issued:- 
 (i) Road Safety Audits: 
• Road Safety Audit Policy has been made prescribing Audit to be done in every 
phase of the project issued. 
• Third-Party Audits are being carried out at design / construction / operation & 
maintenance stages of development of highways as pe r IRC guidelines and safety 
improvements based on audit findings are being made  on an ongoing basis. 14,575 
Km completed during FY 21-22 and 31,423 Km completed in FY 22-23. 
• Third party Independent Road Safety Audit at Detail ed Project Report (DPR) stage 
has been made mandatory and Request for Proposal (R FP) for the same has been 
issued on 31.10.2022. NHAI has empaneled 94 teams o f Road Safety Auditors 
(RSA) for carrying out 3 rd  party road safety audit of National Highways. 
• 5 number of stretches (of 15-20 Km) each among comp leted and under construction 
NHs within a Regional Office are being identified f or development as Model Safe 
Roads/Work zones based on NSV/Drone survey reports and the work is in progress 
within all Regional Offices. 
  
(ii) Completion of Safety works for issuance of Pro visional Completion Certificate for NH 
projects has to be strictly followed. 
(iii) NHAI has designated a Road safety officer at each Regional Office. Road Safety officer 
should have mandatorily undergone Road Safety Audit  (RSA) 15-days course prescribed by 
MoRTH from 22.09.2022. In addition, mandatory train ing of 15-days RSA course for all 
NHAI officers upto DGM level is done. Around 240 of ficers has undergone said training 
from institutes such as IAHE, IITs/NITs, NATPAC, CR RI after making it mandatory in 
NHAI upto DGM level officers. 
(iv) Annual Road Safety action plan is being made w .e.f FY 22-23 to undertake remedial 
measures/additional works to make roads safer based  on safety audits/inspections and 
authentic accident data for last 2-3 years. Around 1703 accident spots have been identified 
wherein works are completed on 546 accident spots a nd remaining 1157 accident spots are 
under rectification. 
(v)  Financial powers delegated to Regional Officer s for construction of FoBs have been 
revised including provisioning of Lifts/Ramps up to  Rs. 2.25 Cr. across 4-lane & Rs. 2.75 
Cr. across 6-lane National Highways. 
(vi)  Further, other measures previously taken to i mprove safety of users/prevent accidents 
on NHs with NHAI are as under: 
• NHAI has strengthened its field officers with finan cial powers of up to Rs. 50 crores 
per blackspot to ROs for rectification of MoRTH ide ntified Blackspots through 

44 
 
Long-term measures. Project Directors have been del egated financial powers upto 
Rs. 25 Lakhs per blackspots for rectification of Mo RTH identified Blackspots 
through short-term measures. Short-term measures ta ken at all 4002 MoRTH 
identified Blackspots (2016-18) locations on NHs wi th NHAI and long-term 
measures completed at 2797 locations and works at r emaining 1205 locations is 
under process. 
• Pedestrian Markings marked at median openings and junctions, Footpaths/Walkways 
constructed in Urban/inhabited areas. 
• Lighting/illumination provisions have been made at vulnerable 
locations/intersections of NH with SH/MDR/ODR/Villa ge roads for improving road 
safety and avoiding accidents during night in addit ion to locations mentioned in 4/6 
laning IRC Manual. 
 
20.2 Capacity building on safety measures through t raining of NHAI field offices 
/Concessionaires / Contractors / Consultants engage d in NHAI project works throughout 
India. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
21. As per ‘Road Accidents in India 2021’, a majori ty of road accidents fatalities are 
due to over-speeding, drunken driving and wrong-sid e driving. Such dangerous driving 
behaviour can be curtailed through better training of drivers, awareness campaigns and 
enforcement. The Committee recommends that the Mini stry may strengthen its efforts in 
this direction.  
(Para 170) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 The suggestions of the Committee have been not ed for compliance. Further, it is 
mentioned that the Ministry has taken various initiatives on the matter which includes  
i. The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 as stands implemented provides for 
strict penalties for ensuring compliance and enhanc ing deterrence for violation of 
traffic rules and strict enforcement through use of technology. 
ii. Ministry has issued notification G.S.R. 575(E) dated 11th August, 2021 for Electronic 
Monitoring and Enforcement of Road Safety. The rules specify the detailed provisions 
for placement of electronic enforcement devices (sp eed camera, closed-circuit 
television camera, speed gun, body wearable camera,  dashboard camera, Automatic 
Number Plate Recognition (ANPR), weigh in machine ( WIM) and any such other 
technology specified by the State Government).                          
iii. Ministry has published rules vide GSR 594(E) dated 29.09.2020 for the protection of 
Good Samaritan, who in good faith, voluntarily and without expectation of any 
reward or compensation renders emergency medical or  nonmedical care or assistance 
at the scene of an accident to the victim or transports such victim to the hospital. 

45 
 
iv. To create effective public awareness about road saf ety, Ministry undertakes various 
publicity measures and awareness campaigns through social media, electronic media 
and print media. Further, Ministry implements a sch eme to provide financial 
assistance to various agencies for administering Road Safety Advocacy. 
v. Observance of National Road Safety Month/Week every year for spreading awareness 
and strengthening road safety. 
vi. To impart driving training, Ministry has been implementing a scheme for setting up of 
Institute of Driving Training & Research (IDTRs), Regional Driving Training Centres 
(RDTCs) and Driving Training Centres (DTCs) at stat e/district level across the 
Country. 
vii. The National Highways Authority of India has made p rovisions for ambulances with 
paramedical staff/Emergency Medical Technician/Nurs e at toll plazas on the 
completed corridor of National Highways. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
22. The Committee feels that the Ministry needs to undertake more efforts towards 
improving the prospects of pedestrian safety on Nat ional Highways. The vulnerable points 
may be properly barricaded to prevent the entry of pedestrians. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may ensure that a dequate provisions are made for 
vehicular underpasses/ flyovers/ foot over-bridges etc. to permit pedestrians and villagers 
living on either side of the highways to cross the road in a safe manner. Special focus may 
be laid on ensuring provisions for foot over-bridge s near educational institutions such as 
schools and colleges. Such unsafe crossings pose a safety risk to both the pedestrian as 
well as the drivers and passengers. A detailed surv ey may be carried out to assess the 
requirements for underpasses/ over-bridge especially in the case of greenfield projects.  
(Para 178) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 Following measures have been taken to ensure p edestrian safety:- 
• Adequate provisions for crossing facilities are bei ng taken at the stage of preparation of 
Detailed Project Report (DPR), construction and Ope ration & Maintenance phase of 
NHs as per IRC/MoRTH guidelines issued from time to  time along with consultation 
with stakeholders such as villagers/locals/public representatives/ local authorities/VIPs.  
• Further, Additional crossing facilities are also pr ovided on demand of 
villagers/locals/public representatives/ local auth orities/VIPs during Detailed Project 
Report (DPR), construction and Operation & Maintenance phase of NHs. 
• DPR document specifies that the pedestrian/ animal cross traffic count shall be done on 
all major inhabitation along the highway. 
• Instructions have also been issued to ensure that b oth Pedestrian along/across movement 
traffic count survey be conducted invariably under all ongoing/upcoming DPRs and 

46 
 
based on the pedestrian volume count, required faci lities be mentioned both in the DPRs 
and Technical Schedules.  
• Foot Over Bridges (FoB), Pedestrian underpasses (PUP) and Pedestrian Subways (PSW) 
are constructed to ensure reduction in accidents in volving pedestrians. Around 737 
Pedestrian Underpass (PUP), 14 Pedestrian Subway (P SW), 231 Foot over Bridges 
(FoBs), 1629 Vehicular Underpasses with Footpath an d 3,663 km of Footpath along 
main carriageway/ Service Roads have been constructed by NHAI since Jan-18. 
• Financial powers delegated to Regional Officers of NHAI for construction of FoBs have 
been revised including provisioning of Lifts/Ramps up to Rs. 2.25 Cr. across 4-lane & 
Rs. 2.75 Cr. across 6-lane National Highways. 
• Regular Road Safety Audit is being conducted on NHs  as per IRC:SP:88-2019. 
Guidelines at the stage of DPR/ Construction/ Opera tion & Maintenance  stage and 
safety improvements based on audit findings are bei ng made on an ongoing basis. 
Around 14,575 Km of audit has been completed during  FY 21-22 and 31,423 Km in FY 
22-23. 
• Lighting/illumination provisions have been made at vulnerable locations/intersections of 
NH with SH/MDR/ODR/Village roads for improving road safety and avoiding accidents 
during the night in addition to locations mentioned in 4/6 laning IRC Manual.  
• Pedestrian Markings marked at median openings and j unctions, Footpaths/Walkways 
constructed in Urban/inhabited areas, and Street lighting in inhabited section of NHs.  
Physical Traffic Calming measures are being underta ken by state police at 
vulnerable/critical locations (including NHs) through barricading.   
 
Role of State Governments 
Recommendation/ Observation  
23. The Committee notes that about 64 percent of ro ad accident fatalities take place on 
roads other than National Highways. This highlights the need for the Ministry to guide the 
State Government Departments concerned with improvi ng the safety prospects of State 
Highways and other local roads.  
(Para 187) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 The Ministry is primarily responsible for deve lopment and maintenance of National 
Highways (NHs). Apart from this, the Ministry is al so allocating funds for development of 
State roads under Central Road and Infrastructure F und (CRIF) based on the decision taken 
by the Committee headed by the Finance Minister as per Section 7A & Section 11 of the 
CRIF Act, 2000. Broad criteria for such allocation of funds includes that “Out of the fund 
thus allocated to the State Governments/ UTs, 10% o f the fund shall be earmarked for road 
safety works”. However, many of the works taken up under CRIF Scheme also enhances 
Road Safety aspects and the Ministry is committed to continue the same. 

47 
 
23.2 Effective from the financial year 2022-23, the  Ministry has started allocating separate 
funds for State Govts./ UTs for construction of ROB s/ RUBs, in replacement of existing 
Railways level crossings, and Bridges on State roads under “SETU BANDHAN” Programme 
under CRIF Scheme. This is intended at enhancing Ro ad Safety aspects at these vulnerable 
locations where many accidents take place. The SETU  BANDHAN Programme shall include 
the construction of ROBs/ RUBs and bridges on State  roads under CRIF Scheme, except on 
Village Roads / Roads considered under PMGSY Scheme and those which are not considered 
for funding by M/o Railways or M/o Rural Developmen t in any of their programmes. For 
2023-24, dedicated fund of Rs. 1,400 Crore has been  earmarked for projects under SETU 
BANDHAN.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
24. The Committee feels that the existing traffic o ffence penalties are not enough of a 
deterrent for people who drive/ ride in premium lux ury vehicles. To curb incidents of 
overspeeding and other violations in such cases, th e Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should implement a vehicle-cost/income bas ed traffic penalty system. Such a 
system is already in place in countries such as Fin land. The fines should be a factor of the 
vehicle cost or the income of the vehicle owner. Re peat offences should also be charged in 
a similar manner. The present penalty charges may be kept as minimum charges.  
(Para 190) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 Hefty penalty has been prescribed for violatio n of Speed Limit under the Motor 
Vehicles (Amendment, 2019) Act, 1988, detailed hereunder: - 
i. Section 112 of MV Act,1988 mandates that no person shall drive a Motor Vehicle at a 
speed exceeding the maximum speed as prescribed by the Central Government under 
this Act. 
ii. Section 183 prescribes the penalties for driving at excessive speed as under:-  
• For LMV- shall not be less than Rs. 1000/- but may extend to Rs. 2000/- 
• For MMV/HMV - shall not be less than Rs. 2000/- but  may extend to Rs. 
4000/-.  
• For second or any subsequent offences - Driving Lic ense shall be impounded 
and forwarded to the licensing authority for disqua lification or revocation 
proceeding. 
iii. Section 184 - Prescribes the penalties for driving at a speed which causes a sense of 
alarm or distress:-  
• Shall not be less than Rs. 1000/-but may extend to Rs. 5000/- 
• Imprisonment for the first offence which may extend  to one year but shall not 
be less than six months or both 

48 
 
• For second or any subsequent offences - If committe d within 3 years of 
commission of previous similar offence, with impris onment for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine of Rs. 10,000/, or with both. 
24.2 Section 210A of MV Act, 1988 states that - sub ject to conditions made by the Central 
Government, a State Government, shall, by notificat ion in the Official Gazette, specify a 
multiplier, not less than one and not greater than ten, to be applied to each fine under this Act 
and such modified fine, shall be in force in such S tate and different multipliers may be 
applied to different classes of motor vehicles as m ay be classified by the State Government 
for the purpose of this section. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
25. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld ensure that regional officers, 
especially road safety officers and State Public Wo rks Department (PWD) representatives, 
participate in district DISHA meetings. The DISHA m eetings should cover the status of 
rectification of black spots and construction & mai ntenance of NHs in the district. This 
would enable coordination among the executive and t he elected representatives to work in 
tandem toward improving the regional NH network.  
(Para 196) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 Ministry is already giving very high importanc e of the rectification of the black spots. 
Field officers of executive agencies attend distric t DISHA meeting as and when required and 
also District Road Safety Committee (DRSC) since RO s of this Ministry and PDs of NHAI 
are its Member. Further Road Safety systems on NHs are being reviewed at the highest levels 
in the Ministry. Ministry also invariably consultan ts the respective state governments on 
various issues of DPR while finalising NH development plans.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
26. The Committee notes that Indian Roads Congress develops Standards, 
Specifications, Codes of Practices, Guidelines, and  research-based state-of-the-art reports 
related to roads and bridges. Such guidelines play a vital role in deciding the quality of 
road safety provisions being implemented on Indian highways from an engineering 
standpoint. The Committee therefore recommends that  the Ministry may ensure that 
sufficient  budgetary allocation is made to IRC in order to ensure that the guidelines 
are developed after thorough research.  
(Para 197) 
 
 
 

49 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 Indian Roads Congress (IRC) is a registered so ciety. IRC generally does not carry out 
any research activity. IRC is basically engaged in bringing out the new IRC Codes and 
guidelines, also revamping / upgrading existing cod es and guidelines based on the 
recommendations of the expert committee constituted  by IRC. All codes related to Highways 
/ Bridges / Tunnels, published by IRC, are being ad opted by all the agencies of Central 
Government and State Government uniformly across the country.  
26.2 Recently, IRC has set up a Committee for ident ifying important pilot research projects 
which may be taken up through eminent research orga nizations and academic institutions of 
repute. The Ministry shall duly consider recommendations of the Committee in taking up new 
R&D Schemes.    
26.3 The Ministry has been supporting IRC from time  to time in various ways such as one-
time assistance like construction of IRC building, development of software etc., besides 
providing assistance for organizing seminars and me mbership fee on regular basis. The 
Ministry has been providing possible financial supports to IRC from time to time.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
27. The Ministry may also assess the length of driv er training programs in terms of 
adequacy to prepare drivers for the challenges they  will face on the road. The length of 
these programs may be increased to ensure that drivers receive comprehensive training. 
The Ministry may put in strict checks to ensure tha t all driving training centres meet the 
specified standards before they are allowed to oper ate. This can include requirements for 
the qualifications of driving instructors and the q uality of training facilities. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may mandate all drivers to undergo a 
comprehensive driver training program and pass a standardised driving test before they are 
allowed to obtain a driver's licence.  
(Para 203) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 A standardized driver training curriculum is a pplicable for training institutes and 
covers all aspects of safe driving as provided in C entral Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 vide 
CHAPTER II: LICENSING OF DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES.  
• As per the Rule 11 of CMV Rules, 1989 – within 7 da ys of submitting an application 
under Rule 10, every applicant for a learner’s lice nse shall complete a tutorial on safe 
driving electronically on a portal. Ministry has is sued an advisory dated 
20th February, 2023  to all the states that the app licant has to undertake an online 
tutorial of 2 hours duration under Rule 11 of Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. The 
tutorials on safe driving contains the followings:  
• The traffic signs, traffic signals and the rules of  the road regulations made 
under section 118 of the Act; 

50 
 
• The duties of a driver when his vehicle is involved  in an accident resulting in 
the death or bodily injury to a person or damage to  property of a third party; 
• The precautions to be taken while passing an unmanned railway crossing; 
• The documents he should carry with him while driving a motor vehicle and 
• Knowledge and understanding of fuel efficient driving technique 
• Rule 21 of CMVR, 1989 envisages that no person shal l establish or maintain any 
driving school or establishment for hire or reward in driving motor vehicles without a 
licence in Form 11 granted by the licensing authority.  
• Rule 31 of CMVR,1989 contains the syllabus as well as duration of training for 
imparting  instructions in driving of motor vehicles. 
• Rule 31B of CMVR, 1989 has the provisions of Accred ited Driver Training Centers 
which states that no person shall establish or main tain an accredited driving training 
centers for imparting instructions for driving moto r vehicles without an accreditation 
in Form 11A granted by the State Transport authorit y or any authorized agency 
notified by the Central Government on recommendatio ns of any testing agency 
referred in Rule 126 of CMVR, 1989.   
• The syllabus for imparting instructions in driving of motor vehicles as well as the 
duration of training by the accredited driving training centers is prescribed in Rule 31J 
of CMVR, 1989. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
28. The Committee notes that the Government is plan ning to pilot a program to offer 
ratings for drivers, similar to credit ratings, whe rein safe driving would be rewarded by a 
high score. The ratings can be used by insurers to offer lower premiums and by logistics 
companies while hiring drivers for commercial vehicles as well. The Committee appreciates 
this innovative program and recommends that the Min istry may introduce comprehensive 
driving training programmes wherein those who compl ete it get a high default rating. The 
incentive of lower insurance premium, increased job  opportunities etc. could act as an 
impetus for drivers to get well-trained. Those with  lower scores should be offered refresher 
courses.  
(Para 204) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 Ministry in January 2023 issued advisory to al l State/UTs regarding Enforcement of 
Lane Driving regulations in which it is inter-alia mentioned to States/UTs Government that:- 
“Technology may be leveraged to detect driving beha viour a pattern, and converting 
the same into measurable scores for the drivers. Al  (Artificial Intelligence) based 
algorithm, on-board units, mobile cameras etc.  can  also be used to alert the drivers 
for over speeding, drowsiness, fatigue etc. on a re al time basis. As a first step, all 

51 
 
Commercial Vehicle Fleet owners may be advised to m aintain and monitor their 
drivers' scores using such applications. The high-s coring drivers should be given due 
recognition/rewards, incentives and their scores ma y be highlighted at appropriate 
forums.”’ 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
29. The Committee further recommends that the Minis try may consider sponsoring the 
stay arrangements of underprivileged drivers, who m ust travel long distances from their 
homes to get trained at a driving training centre.  
(Para 205) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 The Ministry’s scheme for setting up of Instit ute of Driving Training & Research 
(IDTRs) includes hostels with canteen facilities for the drivers during training programme.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
30. The Committee desires to know about the reasons why  the Regional Driving 
Training Centers at Vidarbha and Amravati have not been operationalised despite 
completion. The Ministry may take urgent action to ensure their operationalisation at the 
earliest.  
(Para 206) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 As per CMVR, responsibility to grant license t o the Driving Training Center rests 
with the State. Department of Transport, Govt. of M aharashtra sought certain clarifications 
from the Ministry regarding the fee structures etc.  for training courses at RDTCs. 
Clarification on the same has been provided by the Ministry. Department of Transport, Govt. 
of Maharashtra has also been requested to send clos ure report of these two projects and take 
necessary action to ensure optimal utilization of the RDTCs.   
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
31. The Committee notes that overspeeding accounts for a large number of deaths in 
road accidents. The Committee recommends that the M inistry may look into the size and 
specifications of speed limit signages. It is somet imes seen that the speed limit signs are 
easy to miss, or are partially covered by foliage a nd hoardings. It should be ensured that 
drivers do not have to actively look for speed limi t signs in order to keep a track of the 
permitted speed limit. The Ministry may analyse the  possible benefits of overhead signages 
for speed limits since this would offer better visibility to NH users in all lanes.  
(Para 209) 

52 
 
31.1 Reply of the Ministry 
• A Committee was setup by Ministry to review the pro vision of signages as per 
relevant IRC Codes and guidelines, existing practic es prescribes in various 
international codes, information and functionality perspective to ensure better 
compliance of traffic regulations. 
• Accordingly, the Ministry has issued road signage g uidelines vide Circular dated 
20.07.2023 in conformity with international standards.  
• In the first stage it will be implemented on all ne w incoming NHs and Expressways 
and Greenfield Corridors along with highways having PCU>20,000. 
 
Improvement in Signages 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
32. The Committee is of the view that proper installati on/ maintenance of signages is a 
low-cost exercise that can pay huge dividends in te rms of enhancing road safety. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may introduc e mandatory provisions to conduct 
regular inspections of signages on highways to iden tify any damage or maintenance needs. 
These inspections should be done by trained profess ionals who can assess the condition of 
the signages and recommend repairs or replacements.  High-quality materials should be 
used for signages on highways to ensure their durab ility and longevity. The materials used 
should be able to withstand weather conditions such  as wind, rain, and extreme 
temperatures.  NHAI may provide an option in its Su khad Yatra app to permit NH users to 
report a damaged or missing sign.  
(Para 212) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1 Regular Road Safety Audit is being conducted o n NHs as per IRC:SP:88-2019. 
Guidelines at the stage of DPR/ Construction/ Opera tion & Maintenance stage and safety 
improvements based on audit findings are being made  on an ongoing basis. Around 14,575 
Km of audit has been completed during FY 21-22 and 31,423 Km in FY 22-23.     
32.2 NHAI has empaneled 94 teams of Road Safety Aud itors (RSA) for carrying out 3 
rd  
party road safety audit of NHs. 
32.3 The material of signage are used as per Sectio n 800 of MoRTH specifications for 
Road and Bridge works in line with guidelines speci fied in IRC:67-2012. Repairs and 
rehabilitations of signage, boards, road paints are  carried out regularly by maintenance 
agencies.  
32.4 Sukhad Yatra App: 
(A) During FY 2021-22, various initiatives have bee n undertaken to improve the user 
experience of Sukhad Yatra App as below:- 
• The usage of Google Map APIs extended to pay-as-you -use basis in a month to 
allow unhindered usage by users.  

53 
 
• Updated version of the App available in both iOS an d Android platform with 
improved User Interface (UI). 
• Additional new options under “Report an Issue” sect ion such as Report an accident 
(automatically dials to NH Helpline 1033 on clickin g the Option), Report non-
availability/non-cleaning of Toilets at Toll Plaza,  Others, etc. and Nearby Police 
Station under Nearby Section. 
• Regular update of all NH fee plazas, toll rates etc. 
(B) Further, NHAI has recently launched an upgraded  version of Sukhad Yatra App and 
named this as Rajmarg Yatra App.  This App also inc ludes reporting of  grievance and their 
management, FASTag recharge, Hindi version and other features.  
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
33. NHAI should launch public awareness campaigns t o educate road users on the 
importance and interpretation of road signages. Thi s will help improve compliance and 
reduce accidents due to improper usage of road sign ages. NHAI could explore the 
possibility of using large displays at toll plazas to educate users about the meaning of 
various signages. The Ministry may approach the Min istry of Education to make basic 
knowledge of road signs a part of school curriculum.  
(Para 214) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 Road Safety Week is observed every calendar ye ar for spreading awareness about 
safer behaviour of road users on National Highways. 
33.2 During year 2022-2023, Road Safety Week was ob served from 11 
th -17 th  Jan 2023 
wherein the following major activities have been ca rried out for creating awareness and 
enhancement of Safety of Road users:- 
• Conducting of Walkathon, Exhibition on Road safety alongwith Essay writing/Poster 
making competition/Nukkad natak and Mass awareness events. 
• Distribution of pamphlets etc. to road users at Tol l plazas, wayside amenities, food stall 
points during the Safety Week.  
• Awareness drives for Road Safety through Flex banners, Workshop, and Discussion. 
• Check rear-side for Red light or Retro reflective s heeting to avoid rear–end collision and 
get installed reflectors/retro-reflective tapes on truck, tractor-trolley, animal cart, etc. at 
toll plazas. 
• Motivation and road side safety awareness programme  for school /college students 
through Quiz competitions, drawing competitions, Es say writing and speech 
competitions, etc.  
• Special drives to stop overloading along with check ing of over-speeding, unauthorized 
parking, drunken driving, etc. with the help of police dept.  

54 
 
• Health cum Eye Check-up Camp and the distribution o f eye glasses are conducted for 
truck/bus drivers operating on NHs.  
• Distribution of pamphlets, and the display of safety banners. 
• Checking fatigue of truck drivers and educating them about road safety. 
 
33.3 Also, Road safety awareness messages on social  media, such as Twitter, Instagram 
and Facebook are being spread on regular basis. 
33.4 Ministry has requested Ministry of Education, which is formulating and 
implementing New Education Policy (NEP), 2020 to incorporate the aspects of road safety in 
the curriculum for students of both primary and secondary standards. 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS & INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION LIMITED (NHIDCL) 
Recommendation/ Observation  
34. The Committee appreciates that NHIDCL has shown a c onsistent increase in its 
expenditure since the last three years. The Committ ee notes that the share of funds being 
spent on land acquisition has decreased since 2020.  The Ministry may inform the 
Committee regarding the factors that have permitted  NHIDCL to bring down land 
acquisition costs in 2021 and 2022.  
(Para 217) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 Land Acquisition (LA) for the projects under t he jurisdiction of NHIDCL is done as 
per the provisions of NH Act ,1956 and RFCTLARR Act , 2013 except in the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, where LA is being d one under Jhum Act, 1947.  NHIDCL 
has taken steps to initiate implementation of the p rojects almost immediately after land 
acquisition, which reduced the interest burden. Als o the share of expenditure is dependent on 
quantum of land acquired and expenditure incurred o n civil works in a particular year.  
Hence, the year-wise variation in LA compensation m ay differ as per requirements of the 
projects and planning of the same.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
35. The Committee further desires to know whether NHIDC L makes use of NHAI’s 
technological solutions and pilot projects, in its road projects. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may ensure that NHIDCL also makes use of NHAI’s Data Lake platform, 
Vendor Performance Evaluation System, Sukhad Yatra app etc. to enhance its output. The 
Committee further recommends that NHIDCL may also c ome up with rating of NH 
stretches under its purview. The ratings may be use d to identify contractors with poor 
performance history.  
(Para 218) 
 

55 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 Both NHAI and NHIDCL are executing agencies of  MoRTH, mandated with 
development and maintenance of National Highways in  the Country. While the projects of 
NHIDCL are confined to the States sharing internati onal boundaries with neighboring 
countries in the Northeast, Uttarakhand and UTs of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh having 
predominantly hilly and mountainous terrain, the projects of NHAI are mostly confined to the 
interior of the country. Also, both these organizat ions follow the same IRC codes/manuals as 
prescribed in the contract/concession agreement for  executions of NH projects, in addition to 
guidelines/directives issued by Ministry from time to time. However, certain 
procedures/policy guidelines being followed by NHAI  and proven to be beneficial and 
efficient in successful execution of Highways proje cts will be considered for adoption by 
NHIDCL with necessary modifications to suit its req uirements. Regarding the use of NHAI’s 
Data Lake platform, NHIDCL has its own platform, na mely, eDMS Portal which facilitates 
efficient monitoring and documentation of road proj ects right from Contractor to HQ Office 
with complete transparency. NHIDCL is also using eD ISHA scheme of Ministry for ERP 
solutions for HR, Inventory, Payments, etc. and PMI S Platform for project monitoring. 
However, Ministry has initiated the process of unif ied technological solution for all agencies 
for the project monitoring in line with NHAI’s Data  Lake system. Accordingly, NHIDCL has 
initiated necessary action for adoption of NHAI’s D ata Lake platform with certain 
modifications as per functional requirements of NHI DCL. Vendor Performance Evaluation 
System is in advanced stage of finalization and wil l be implemented soon. Regarding the use 
of Sukhad Yatra, Ministry / NHAI has recently launc hed a new unified mobile application, 
namely, Rajmarg Yatra App on 30 
th  May, 2023 in place of Sukhad Yatra App. NHIDCL is 
taking necessary action for adoption of this new ap p. Regarding the rating of contractors, 
NHIDCL has already initiated a system for rating of  contractors based on various parameters 
in lines with MoRTH and NHAI.  Regarding the rating  of NH stretches, the same has been 
noted for compliance.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
36. The Committee desires to be apprised of the rea sons for which Chhattisgarh 
accounts for about half the number of projects dela yed more than 5 years. The Ministry 
may highlight the specific remedial measures being taken to avoid such delays in 
Chhattisgarh in the coming years.  
(Para 233) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 5 no. of ongoing works in 298 km length at a t otal sanction cost of Rs. 2,619 Crore 
are ongoing since more than 5 years from their comm encement date due to issue related to 
Land acquisition, utility shifting, poor progress o f main contractors being in NCLT/poor 
mobilization of resources etc. All these works are likely to be completed in a phased manner 
by March, 2024. 
36.2 Following steps have been taken to expedite th e completion of works:  

56 
 
• Streamlining of land acquisition 
• Disputes Resolution mechanism revamped  
• Award of projects after adequate preparation in ter ms of land acquisition, clearances 
etc.  Process of obtaining clearances from differen t Ministries/Deptt. would 
commence as soon as the alignment is finalized and final feasibility report is 
submitted. 
• Correctly worked out utility estimates are to be ob tained at the earliest from utility 
owning agencies after the alignment finalization an d shall form part of appraisal 
proposal. 
• The process of project appraisal should commence at  the earliest on receipt of the 
Final Detailed Project Report (DPR) and Technical schedules. 
• ROBs: The procedure for GAD approved by Railways fo r ROBs simplified and 
made online.  Maintenance charges which were hamper ing the progress of many 
projects stand waived by railways.  Standard design put on website. 
• Close coordination with other Ministries and State Governments 
• One time fund infusion scheme 
• Completion of major portion of land acquisition prior to initiation of bid. 
• Regular review at various levels. 
• Rationalised exit for Equity Investors 
• Securitization of road sector loans 
• Rationalized compensation for delays attributed to Authority. 
 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
37. The Ministry may also analyse whether the prese ntly posted strength of officials 
under its various departments/ organisations is suf ficient. It may be studied if the 
vacancies existing in the Ministry and its organisa tions are also contributing to delays in 
the completion of road projects.  
(Para 236) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1 Ministry has reviewed the strength of its offi cers and staff and accordingly initiated 
the process of cadre review for enhancing the techn ical manpower. With optimum use of 
technology, standardization of processes, Ministry and its implementing agencies are 
monitoring the project closely and there is no dela y in completion of project due to shortage 
of staff. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
38. The Committee highlighted delays in various NH projects in the country. These 
include Bangalore to Amravati access-controlled Hig hway; Belagavi to Goa road; Panjim 
to Goa border road; Pulgaon to Jalna NH-753; Talegaon to Pulgaon NH-347; NH projects 

57 
 
in Rayachoti-Vempalli and Vempelli-Porumamilla; pro posed Bhatinda-Ajmer Economic 
Corridor; upgradation of NH-52 from Haryana border to Salasar. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take urgent action  to complete such delayed projects 
across the country.  
(Para 237) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1 Following steps have been taken by NHAI/Govern ment to speed up the pace of 
construction:  
• Streamlining of land acquisition 
• Disputes Resolution mechanism revamped  
• Award of projects after adequate preparation in ter ms of land acquisition, clearances 
etc.  Process of obtaining clearances from differen t Ministries/Deptt. would 
commence as soon as the alignment is finalized and final feasibility report is 
submitted. 
• Correctly worked out utility estimates are to be ob tained at the earliest from utility 
owning agencies after the alignment finalization an d shall form part of appraisal 
proposal. 
• The process of project appraisal should commence at  the earliest on receipt of the 
Final Detailed Project Report (DPR) and Technical schedules. 
• ROBs: The procedure for GAD approved by Railways fo r ROBs simplified and 
made online.  Maintenance charges which were hamper ing the progress of many 
projects stand waived by railways.  Standard design put on website. 
• Close coordination with other Ministries and State Governments 
• One time fund infusion scheme 
• Completion of major portion of land acquisition prior to initiation of bid. 
• Regular review at various levels. 
• Rationalised exit for Equity Investors 
• Securitization of road sector loans 
• Rationalized compensation for delays attributed to Authority. 
 
38.2 The status of the projects mentioned in the ab ove Para is as follows:  
i) Bangalore to Amravati access-controlled Highway : The project ‘Bangalore – 
Kadapa – Vijayawada Economic Corridor section of NH -544G’ was taken up by NHAI.  The 
DPR for the project commenced w.e.f.22.07.2021. For  expeditious implementation of the 
project, the project has been divided into 14 const ruction packages (Design length of 
342.50kms) on HAM connecting Sri Satya Sai (75km), YSR Kadapa (123.5km), SPS Nellore 
(16km), Prakasam (110.5 km) and Bapatla (17.5km) in  the State of Andhra Pradesh.  All 14 
packages have been awarded in January to March 2023  and for 10 packages (272 Km) 
Concession Agreements have been signed between NHAI  & Concessionaire in April / March 
2023.  

58 
 
(ii) The EAC on 12/01/2023 recommended for Environm ental Clearance.  The proposal for 
Wildlife Clearances have been submitted and Forest Clearance proposal is being submitted 
on Parivesh Portal. 
(iii) Land Acquisition is in advanced stage for all  the 14 packages and works will likely be 
started after obtaining Forest & Wild Life Clearanc es.  There is no delay in implementation 
of the above project. 
ii) Belagavi to Goa road  
The widening works of NH-748 ((Old NH-4A) from Belg aum to Goa/KNT Border is divided 
in two packages i.e., (1) 4-laning of Belgaum to Kh anapur (30 km) and (2) 2-laning 
with/without Paved Shoulders of Khanapur to Goa/ KNT Border (52.30 Km). 
Package-I: 
 Out of 30 Km, 20.76 km has been completed. Balance  work could not be 
completed due to Court stay (9.02km) and Stoppage o f work by villagers against shifting of 
Religions Structure (0.22km). 
Package-II: 
 Two Lane with/without paved shoulder work commence d from 05.11.2018 and 
after completing 70% of work, Hon’ble High Court of  Karnataka issued stay order on 
construction work from 28.11.2019 in the case WP-33 50/2019 filed by Shri Suresh Heblikar 
and others. Due to delay in disposal of court case,  Contractor demobilized the resources and 
requested to foreclose the contract, which was acce pted by NHAI. Further, the case was 
disposed off on 03.03.2022 with clear direction tha t NHAI is not in fault as mentioned in the 
petition. Balance of works were retendered and pres ently work in progress w.e.f 21.11.2022. 
Scheduled completion date is 21.05.2024. 
iii) Panjim to Goa border road -  
The stretch pertains to NH-66. 
In Goa, NH-66 starts at Maharashtra / Goa border, p asses through Panjim and ends at 
Goa / Karnataka border. The design length of NH-66 in Goa is around 124 Km. Maharashtra 
border to Panjim is 41 km which has been completed to 4-lane except for a 5 km stretch 
which has also been sanctioned recently. Panjim to Karnataka border is 83 km, out of which 
35 km has been completed to 4-lane while in the bal ance 48 Km, land acquisition is in 
advance stage and this stretch will be taken up for  4-laning in phases subject to sanction 
ceiling inter-se priority. The delay in 4-laning of  NH-66 is mainly on account of Land 
Acquisition. 
The status of 4-laning of NH-66 in Goa is as under: 
Sr. 
No.  Chainage  Length 
(Km)  Current Status  
1. 475.00 – 500.500 (Patradevi - 
Karaswada) 25.50 PCOD issued 
2. 500.500 - 512.930 (Karaswada – 12.44 PCOD issued 

59 
 
Sr. 
No.  Chainage  Length 
(Km)  Current Status  
Porvorim) 
3. 514.830 - 517.880 (Mandovi 
bridge) 3.050 Completed 
4. 517.833 - 522.840 (Panjim - 
Bambolim) 5.00 PCOD issued 
5. 522.790 - 536.620 (Zuari bridge) 12.99 
Pkg-I: PCOD issued; Pkg III: 
Completed 
Pkg–II (1.08 km): (likely by Aug 
23) 
6. 536.850 – 542.781 5.93 Yet to be sanctioned 
7. 542.781 – 554.245 (Margao 
bypass) 11.62 
8.87 Km completed 
2.75 Km under construction, 
separate work   
8. 554.245 – 561.960 (Navelim - 
Cuncolim) 7.71 Yet to be sanctioned 
9. 561.960 – 570.00 (Cuncolim – 
Bali bypass) 8.04 Yet to be sanctioned 
10. 
570.000 – 578.500 & 582.300 – 
585.865 (Bendordem – Canacona 
bypass) 
12.06 Yet to be sanctioned 
11. 578.500 – 582.300 (Karmal Ghat 
section) 3.80 Yet to be sanctioned 
12. 585.865 – 602.900 (Cancona 
bypass) 7.74 Completed 
13. 602.900 - 610.900 (Canacona - 
KNT border) 8.00 Yet to be sanctioned 
  Total  123.88    
76 Km completed / sanctioned, 48 Km balance for sanction for 4-laning 

60 
 
 
iv) Pulgaon to Jalna NH-753 & Talegaon to Pulgaon N H-347 
The Samurddhi Mrg from Nagpur-Shirdi is developed b y MSRDC and is opened to traffic by 
Hon’ble Prime Minister on 11.12.2022 and the length  of NH-753C, which is parallel and 
alignment of this section is located within a dista nce of 8 Km. from Samruddhi Marg. 
Further, entry/exit points Samruddhi Marg at Km. 10 5 (Dhamangaon Railway), Km. 138.400 
(Yavatma-Amravati), Km. 182.400 (Karanja Lad), Km. 210.600 (Seloo Bazar), Km. 238.850 
(Malegaon-Jahangir), Km. 284 (Mehkar), Km. 316.697 (Dusarbid) and Km. 339.814 
(Sindhkhed Raja) on NH-753C have been provided on S amurddhi Marg. As such, these 
stretches need not be developed as a four-lane corridor.  
v) Rayachoti-Vempalli:- 
Name of 
Project  
Length 
(in km)  
TPC  
(Rs. in 
Cr.)  
Work 
Status  
Current 
Status  Main reason for delay  
Widening to 
2L+PS of 
Rayachoty 
to Vempalli 
Section 
from 
Chainage 
Km 0+00 to 
Km 50+000 
of NH 440 
53.59 439.82 
Work 
Awarded on 
08-03-2022. 
 
Appointed 
date issued 
on 02-05-
2022 
Present 
Physical 
Progress of 
work is 
21.62% 
 
 
Work at present is 
running delayed behind 
Schedule due to Financial 
Condition of EPC 
Contractor 
 
vi) Vempelli-Porumamilla:-  
Vempalli to Porumamilla Stretch is covered by 3 NHs, i.e.  
a. Vempalli to Proddatur is NH-440 
b. Proddatur to Mydukur is NH-67 
c. Mydukur to Porumamilla is NH-167B 
Status of above-mentioned Stretches is as given below:- 
a. Vempalli to Proddatur is NH-440 – This is part of Recently sanctioned work Vempalli 
to Chagalamarri Via Yerraguntla and Proddatur. Work yet to be awarded. Vempalli to 
Proddatur is 52 Km 
 
b. Proddatur to Mydukur is NH-67 – This stretch of 21 Km has already been developed 
to 4 Lane Standard. 
 

61 
 
c. Mydukur to Porumamilla is NH-167B: Mydukur to Porum amilla is 42 Km. NH-167B 
is being developed under 5 Packages. 1 st  2 packages are: 
i. Rehabilitation and Upgradation from Km 0+00 to 22/3 00 of Mydukur to 
Mudireddypalli section of NH-167B to 2L+PS – Yet to  be Sanctioned. To be 
Included under Annual Plan 2023-24 
ii. Rehabilitation and Upgradation from km 22/300 to 58 /635 of Mudireddypalli to 
Kadapa/Nellore Border (via) Porumamilla section of NH-167B Two lane with 
paved shoulder – Work Sanctioned and Awarded. Appoi nted date Yet to be 
Given. It may be noted that Porumamilla Falls under this stretch and Porumamilla 
Realignment is proposed in this package. 
Alternate Vempalli-Porumamilla Route: - 
Alternately, NHAI is developing Bangalore Vijayawad a Kadapa Expressway, with 
provision of Interchanges at Km 127+210 (near Yerra guntla) and at Km 189+270 (near 
Porumamilla). So, to reach Porumamilla from Vempall i, Vemapalii to Yerraguntla, NH-440 
(part of PKG-2 of NH-440) and Yerraguntla to Poruma milla (Bangalore Vijayawada Kadapa 
Expressway) will be Much Faster option. 
Status of this Route: 
 
a. Vempalli to Yerraguntla is NH-440 – This is part of  Recently sanctioned work 
Vempalli to Chagalamarri Via Yerraguntla and Prodda tur. Work yet to be 
awarded. Vempalli to Proddatur is 38 Km 
b. Yerraguntla to Porumamilla is Bangalore Vijayawada Kadapa Expressway – 
Length is 62.1 Km. This section is being developed under folliwng 4 packages 
by NHAI. 
Sr. 
No.  Project Length 
(Km) 
TPC (Rs. 
Cr.) 
Awarded 
on  
Agreement 
signed on  
1 
Development of 6-Lane Access Controlled 
Greenfield Highway from Nallacheruvu palli 
(Ch.96.300) to Yerragudipadu (Ch 129.000) of 
NH-544G Bengaluru Vijayawada Economic 
Corridor on HAM under Bharatmala Pariyojana 
Phase-I in Andhra Pradesh ( Pkg-5)  
32.70 1253.24 28-02-2023  01-05-2023  
2 
Development of 6-Lane Access Controlled 
Greenfield Highway from Yerragudipadu 
(Ch.129.000) to Audireddipalle (Ch.160.000) of 
NH-544G Bengaluru Vijayawada Economic 
Corridor on HAM under Bharatmala Pariyojana 
Phase-I in Andhra Pradesh (Pkg-6)  
31.00 1200.42 28-02-2023  01-05-2023  

62 
 
Sr. 
No.  Project Length 
(Km) 
TPC (Rs. 
Cr.) 
Awarded 
on  
Agreement 
signed on  
3 
Development of 6-Lane Access Controlled GFH 
from Audireddipalle (Ch160.000) to Mallapalle 
(Ch176.000) of NH-544G Bengaluru Vijayawada 
Economic Corridor on HAM under Bharatmala 
Pariyojana Phase-I in Andhra Pradesh (Pkg-7)  
16.00 956.14 31-03-2023  07-06-2023  
4 
Development of 6-Lane Access Controlled GFH 
from Mallapalle (Ch176.000) to Kavulakuntla 
(Ch196.000) of NH-544G Bengaluru Vijayawada 
Economic Corridor on HAM under Bharatmala 
Pariyojana Phase-I in Andhra Pradesh (Pkg-8)  
20.00 909.02 29-03-2023  04-05-2023  
 
All 4 Packages has been awarded and Agreement has been signed. Appointed Date to be issued 
vii) Bhatinda-Ajmer Economic Corridor:- The Technical Consultant M/s. 
Intercontinental Consultants & Technocrats Pvt. Ltd . in Joint Venture with M/s. Consulting 
Engineers Group Ltd. prepared the final feasibility  of Greenfield alignment from Bhatinda to 
Ajmer and during a review meeting on 07.06.2018 und er the Chairmanship of Secretary 
RT&H regarding optimization of corridors including review of progress of Greenfield 
corridors, following was decided: 
(a) Given that the Trans-Rajasthan Corridor and the Del hi-Vadodara Corridors are being 
developed, it was decided that the development of L udhiana – Ajmer Economic 
Corridor may be taken up in Bharatmala Phase-II bas ed on traffic assessment post-
completion of Trans-Rajasthan and Delhi-Vadodara Corridors. 
(b) Further, it was also decided that alignment of the proposed Greenfield corridor should 
start from Sangrur instead of Bhatinda as the State  Government has already agreed to 
provide land for development of a Logistics park in Sangrur. 
 
Further, during the Review Meeting held on 30.06.20 18 in NHAI-HQ under the 
Chairmanship of Member (A), NHAI, wherein Competent  Authority has decided that the 
ongoing feasibility/DPR study of Jhalandhar-Moga-Ba thinda-Kishangarh-Ajmer may be 
closed at feasibility stage. Minutes of said meetin g dated 30.06.2018 was issued vide NHAI 
HQ letter no. 1099 dated 18.07.2018 which is enclosed as Annexure-III . 
 
viii) Upgradation of NH-52 from Haryana border to S alasar:-  
Name of Project Length 
(in 
km) 
TPC  
(Rs. in 
2- Lane 
COD 
issued 
Current 
Status 
Main reason for 
delay 

63 
 
Cr.) 
Rajasthan Border-
Fatehpur-Salasar 
Section of NH-52 & 
58 
154.14 
1  
530.07 23.09.20 
22 
 
2-Lane Project 
completed & 2 
Lane to 4- 
Laning work is 
in progress as 
per in built 
contractual 
provisions & 
Contract 
provisioned 
completion 
date by 
06.02.2024 
 
2-laning project 
was delayed due to 
Financial crunch 
of Concessionaire 
and legal disputes 
related to Land.  
Now, 2-lane has 
been completed 
and COD issued 
on 23.09.2022. 
 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Accountability of Contractors/ Concessionaires, Consultants, Engineers etc. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
39. The Committee observes that the Ministry has not fu rnished any information 
regarding provisions for the punitive action for po or quality of work, delays etc. in road 
projects carried out through HAM or BOT mode. The M inistry has also not made any 
mention of the punitive measures in place, if any, for approving authorities, in cases of 
gross negligence or mala fide. The Ministry may apprise the Committee in this regard.  
(Para 240) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1 Ministry vide circular No.RW/NH-33044/76/2021- S&R(P&B) dated 06.10.2021 has 
issued a Standard Operating Procedure to debar/pena lize/declare as Non-Performer the 
Contractor/Concessionaire in National Highways and other centrally sponsored road projects 
and NHAI has issued Policy Circular no. 16.11/2021 dated 16.11.2021 (Annexure-IV ) in the 
same line. The amendments in the Model RFP document s of EPC, HAM and BOT (Toll) 
regarding the same have also been made vide said circular.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
40. The Committee also desires to know whether the DPR consultants are liable for 
punitive action till the physical completion of the  respective NH project. The Committee 
recommends that the DPR consultant should be made a ccountable for the road project till 
the completion of the same.  

64 
 
(Para 241) 
Reply of the Ministry 
40.1 In terms of RFP for DPR vide Para-7.2 of Gener al Conditions of Contract the 
retention money (10% of contract value) will be rel eased after the completion of civil 
contract works or after 3 years of completion of consultancy services whichever is earlier. 
40.2 The penalty provisions for deficiencies of DPR  Consultants have been specified under 
Para-7.3 of General Conditions of Contract in the R FP documents for preparation of DPR as 
issued by Ministry (Annexure-V). 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
41. The Committee may be apprised regarding how the ven dor rating being generated 
by the Vendor Performance Evaluation System. The Co mmittee recommends that NHAI 
may make user satisfaction one of the parameters fo r assessing the performance of the 
vendors. NH users may be asked to submit their feed back to enable the assessment of user 
satisfaction. The Committee feels that a robust Ven dor Performance Evaluation System 
can help the Ministry identify under-performers and  habitual litigants. NHAI may give 
some weightage to these vendor ratings while awardi ng road projects instead of awarding 
the projects purely based on lowest bid amount. Thi s would give further incentive to road 
contractors for high-quality, time-bound execution of NH projects. The Committee also 
suggests that the Ministry may roll out the Vendor Performance Evaluation System for 
vendors working on NH projects other than those of NHAI.  
(Para 243) 
41.1 Reply of the Ministry 
(a)  NHAI had developed Vendor Performance Evaluati on System so that implementation of 
projects can be improved by regularly monitoring th e performance of Vendors 
(Contractors/Concessionaires/Consultants). It was b eing implemented through Data Lake 
Portal in which vendors are required to conduct sel f-assessment and upload the documents 
related to the project activities being executed by  them for further assessment by NHAI. The 
ongoing and completed projects pertaining to EPC, H AM, BOT-Toll, BOT – Annuity, 
Authority Engineer(AE) & Independent Engineer(IE) were covered under this.  
(b) The self-assessment made by the Consultants (AE s & IEs) was reviewed (from March 
2021 to May 2021) by a Committee of NHAI comprising  of CGM/GM at HQ, RO & PD. 
 After assessment by the aforesaid committee, the s cores of all the projects of one specific 
Vendor were reviewed by a Committee of NHAI Members . The committee was to give its 
single overall score for each vendor covering all i ts projects. In case of evaluation of 
performance of consultants, 60% weightage was to be  given to analysis done by the 
Committee of CGM/GM at HQ, RO & PD and balance 40% weightage to analysis done by 
the committee of NHAI Members. The mechanism for ev aluation of performance of 
contractors/concessionaires was under finalization.  

65 
 
(c)   Further, a Committee was constituted to study  and suggest a mechanism to capture the 
information project wise on Data Lake including the  procedure to be adopted to debar/ 
penalise/ declare as non-performer Contractor & Con sultant in reference to Policy Guideline 
No. 16.11/2021 dt. 16.11.2021 (Contractor) and 25.0 1.2022 (Consultant). Subsequently, in 
a   meeting held on 27.07.2022, the aforesaid commi ttee presented the suggestions and 
Chairperson NHAI wherein it was directed to start w ith trial simulation of the circular 
provisions based on information available in data l ake. The study/ mechanism is under 
process.   
 
Bid Secrecy 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
42. The Committee recommends that given the seriousness  of the issue, an extensive 
third-party audit of the procurement platform may b e conducted. The Committee further 
suggests that robust technical solutions may be emp loyed to ensure bid secrecy and prevent 
bid-rigging. The procurement platform should not have any possibility of premature access 
to bid data even to the system/ database administrators.  
(Para 247) 
Reply of the Ministry 
42.1 National Informatics Centre (NIC), Ministry of  Electronics & Information 
Technology, in close association with the Procureme nt Policy Division, Ministry of Finance, 
has developed, hosted and implemented the Central P ublic Procurement Portal customized to 
cater to the electronic procurement/ tendering requ irements of the Central Government 
Departments and other organizations. 
42.2 The primary objective of the portal is to prov ide a single point access to the 
information on procurements made across various Ministries and the line Departments. 
42.3 Ministry / NHAI is also utilising the services  of the CPPP for hosting tender 
enquiries. 
42.4 The portal is audited by a third party Cert-in  empanelled vendor under the aegis of 
NIC to ensure that it meets all the cyber security guidelines. The last audit was conducted by 
STQC in Dec 2020 and a certificate to that effect h as been issued on 21 Dec 2020 which is 
valid for three years i.e till 20 Dec 2023.  
 
Bogus Bank Guarantees 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
43. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may request the banks to review the 
present mechanism for e-verification of Bank Guaran tees. The Ministry may take strict 
legal action against the culprits and guilty conces sionaires may be debarred from future 
projects. The Committee further recommends that NHAI and NHIDCL may also get all the 

66 
 
Bank Guarantees of its projects re-verified to dete ct any more such cases. Any ongoing 
contracts with the guilty concessionaires should be  cancelled/ terminated so as to deter 
such frauds in the future.  
(Para 250) 
Reply of the Ministry 
43.1 Ministry is now accepting the Bid Security and  Performance Security in the form of e-
BGs so as to mitigate the risk of fake BGs.  In add ition, the proposal for acceptance of 
Insurance Surety Bonds in place of BGs is under consideration of Ministry.  
43.2 Further, NHIDCL had initiated the process of r e-verifying all the Bank Guarantees of 
the ongoing projects in December, 2022. Response ha s been received from 4 Banks, namely 
PNB (157 nos. of BGs), Canara Bank (22 nos. of BGs) , YES Bank (59 nos. of BGs) and 
IndusInd Bank (29 nos. of BGs). NHIDCL shall be fol lowing up the issue with the other 
banks also. 
43.3 NHIDCL has also initiated action against guilt y Contractors /Concessionaires as 
below:- 
(i) NHIDCL has terminated the Contract Agreement of  4 Contractors engaged in 7 
projects in March, 2023. As per Clause 2.1.14 of RF P for EPC Contracts relating to 
General Terms of Bidding, a bidder who is a non-per former as on the date of bids 
submission is not eligible for participating in Bid s. Contractors whose services are 
terminated by Ministry or its implementing agencies  are to be considered as non-
performers provided that such termination leads to debarment of the bidder. 
(ii) For one project (Kohima-Mao), the EPC Contract or was issued notice for Intention to 
Terminate on 16.03.2023. However, Hon’ble Gauhati H igh Court in April, 2023 stayed 
from going ahead with Termination proceedings till 30.05.2023. The Contractor filed an 
SLP in Supreme Court based on which the Supreme Cou rt vide order dated 12.05.2023 
stayed the High Court Order dated 13.03.2023 and th e matter is listed in Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in September, 2023. 
 
Road Asset Management System 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
44. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld ensure the timely completion 
of the RFP evaluation process for the collection of  Road Inventory and Pavement 
condition data of all National Highways. This data would be crucial in helping the 
Ministry assess and prioritise the road maintenance  requirements across the entire NH 
network. The Committee feels that this would lead t o better maintenance of India’s NH 
network.  
(Para 257) 
 

67 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
44.1 The bid has been annulled on administrative gr ound by the Executive Committee of 
NHAI. However, Ministry will continue to carry out the NSV (Network Survey Vehicle) & 
Failing Weight Deflectometer (FWD) test on NHs thro ugh the existing IE (Independent 
Engineer) /AE (Authority Engineer) or already empanelled agencies.  
 
Greening of Highway Corridors 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
45. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has  planted 91% of its targeted 
number of plants in 2022-23, till January, 2023. Th e Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may put in place a suitable monitoring mec hanism to ensure that the plants are 
duly watered and maintained. Visibility of signages  may be ensured from time to time to 
ensure that plants do not grow to the extent of cov ering the signages. NHAI can involve 
local communities and NGOs to ensure better impleme ntation of the plantation program. 
The plantation activities must focus on planting lo cal best performing plant species in that 
agro-climatic zone. The Committee feels that local communities can be trained and 
employed to maintain the plantations, which will pr ovide them with additional income 
opportunities. The Green Highways Policy is a great  initiative by NHAI, and the program 
can be further strengthened by implementing these r ecommendations. The plantation 
program not only enhances the beauty of highways bu t also contributes to environmental 
sustainability and provides numerous benefits to local communities.  
(Para 267) 
Sustainability Initiatives  
46. The Committee notes the sustainability initiati ves undertaken by NHAI. The 
Committee recommends that it may continue to focus on sustainable development and 
environment protection in its road infrastructure p rojects. NHAI's involvement of Self 
Help Groups (SHGs), Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs), and women in 
undertaking various sustainable development initiat ives is a positive step. The Committee 
recommends that NHAI may ensure that sustainable pr actices form a core part of the 
NHAI’s entire process, instead of just being a comp liance formality. Enhanced focus may 
be laid on sustainable principles for projects that  are located in or around protected areas. 
The Committee suggests that NHAI may work on furthe r increasing the involvement of 
various stakeholders such as SHGs, NGOs, private se ctor, Forest Department etc. for 
sustainable development and expansion of NH network.  
(Para 269) 
Reply of the Ministry 
46.1 Steps taken by the Government to ensure enviro nment sustainability while 
constructing the National Highways (NHs) as under:- 

68 
 
(i) Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) c onducted a study through The 
Energy and Resources Institute to estimate carbon e missions from NHs sector and to suggest 
interventions for making climate resilient highway infrastructure. NHAI has also published 
the first Sustainability Report as per Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) norms, which captures 
the initiatives of NHAI for protecting and conserving the environment. 
(ii) MoRTH vide Circular No. RH/NH-33044/18/2020-S& R (P&B) dated 14.12.2020 has 
issued the guidelines on use of new / alternate mat erials and technology in construction of 
National Highways. NHAI has also issued policy circ ular dated 02.06.2022, mandating the 
use of New / Alternative Material and technology in construction of Highways. 
(iii) Promotion of use of Green Technologies such as : 
• Steel slag in base & sub-base layer  
• Cement treated sub base 
• Reclaimed asphalt 
• Inert material for landfill  
• Industrial Waste (Phosphor-gypsum) 
• Construction & Demolition waste 
• Alternate material like stones, gravels and municipal waste 
• Waste Plastic 
(iv) MoRTH vide Circular No. RW/NH-33044/01/2019-S& R (P&B) RSCE – Pt.1 dated 
18.04.2022 has issued guidelines to use fly ash in road/flyover embankment construction on 
National Highways. 
(v) Green Highways (Plantation, Transplantation, Be autification and Maintenance) Policy, 
2015 was launched in September, 2015. 
(vi) Plantation and Transplantation initiatives: 
• Total 373.20 lakh plants planted since 2016 on available RoW.  
• Total 64,466 mature trees transplanted so far.  
(vii) Use of renewable energy for operation of Toll  Plaza and some locations of Highways by 
way of installing the solar plate on the roof of th e toll plaza and vacant place of Highways 
respectively.   
(viii) As per MoEF&CC Study “An Assessment of Avoid ed CO2 Emissions During 
Construction, Maintenance and Operation of National  Highways”, the saving of natural 
resources and carbon sequestration from 20 stretches/corridors is as under:  
• Overall consumption of fuel due to the operation of  all these stretches over a 20-year 
period is expected to be 19% lower with respect to the BAU situation (a situation 
when the NH were either not present or were narrower than the present)  

69 
 
• Over the same period,  CO2 emissions on these stret ches is expected to be 25.19 
million tonnes lower. 
• Avenue plantation and compensatory afforestation do ne post construction of the 
highways can sequester 584.27 thousand tonne of CO2 in 20 years 
(ix) Amrit Sarovars: 
• Total 433 ‘Amrit Sarovars’ have been constructed al ong National Highways for 
augmenting the ground water regime of the area including micro climate of the area.  
   (x)  Wildlife Mitigation structure /Passage 
• Construction of wildlife friendly specified structu res for the conservation of wildlife 
habitat for the stretches passing through any prote cted area under WPA 1972 or any 
Eco Sensitive Zone/Eco Fragile areas. 
 
Need for strict measures to deter overloading 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
47. The Committee desires to be apprised as to how the Ministry plans to penalise 
overloaded vehicles at the toll plazas with MSWIM i nfrastructure. The Ministry may 
examine the feasibility of charging toll/penalty according to the tonnage of the vehicle. The 
Committee feels that this would help deter overload ing besides generating revenue. This 
would also help in keeping the NHs in a better cond ition as overloaded vehicles cause a lot 
of damage.  
(Para 271) 
Reply of the Ministry 
47.1 There are two types of projects i.e. public fu nded projects with tolling risks with 
NHAI and private investment projects with tolling risks with Concessionaires. As on Apr- 23, 
there are 848 fee plazas with NHAI, out of which 56 6 plazas are public funded and 282 are 
Concessionaire fee plazas. The user fee is decided based upon applicable National Highways 
Fee Rules.  
47.2 As per the BOT Concession Agreements, the pena lty for overloaded vehicles is being 
charged by the Concessionaire as provided in their respective Concession Agreements. 
Mostly, for any overloaded vehicle, the user fee is  charged equally to the user fee prescribed 
for the next higher category of vehicle.  
47.3 As per Rule 10 of National Highways Fee Rules,  2008, a mechanical vehicle which is 
loaded in excess of permissible maximum gross vehic le weight in respect of such vehicles, 
shall not be permitted to use the National Highway or crossing the fee plaza until the excess 
load has been removed from such mechanical vehicle.  Further Fee Rules 2008 provides for 
penalty from overloaded vehicles in order to curb o verloading at NH.  These rules have 
amendments from time to time as under:- 

70 
 
(i)         Rule 10 of NH Fee Rules 2008 prescribes  rate of fee for overloading whereby 
overloaded vehicle are liable to pay applicable fees of next higher category of vehicle. 
(ii)       The fee for overload has been amended by  Ministry vide Gazette GSR 778(E) 
dated 16.12.2013 whereby the ‘rate of fee for overl oading’ was enhanced to 10 times the 
applicable fee.  
(iii)      The above rule was again amended by Mini stry vide GSR 920(E) dated 
25.09.2018 having provision for a provision of grad ed penalty for overloaded vehicles as 
under:-   
Percentage of 
excess load over 
Maximum 
permissible gross 
vehicular weight 
Multiplying factor to 
base rate of fees 
Fees 
(1) (2) (3) 
0% to 20% Two [(Fees applicable for such category 
of mechanical vehicle under sub-
rule (2) of rule 4) x (multiplying 
factor)] 
>20% to 40% Four 
>40% to 60% Six 
>60% to 80% Eight 
>80% and above Ten 
  
47.4 As on date, for public funded fee plazas, the overload fee is collected as per above 
table prescribed under GSR 920(E) dated 25.09.2018. 
Tendering of Road Projects 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
48. The Committee notes that NHAI has issued direct ions for regular quality inspection 
of projects awarded to substantially lower bids. Th e Committee recommends that NHAI 
may analyse the shortcomings in its project cost es timation methodology in cases where 
projects awarded to substantially lower bids are completed with high quality standards. The 
Committee further desires that the Ministry may for mulate guidelines for more frequent 
quality checks in cases where a contractor sublets the project. The Ministry may inform 
about the mechanism in place, if any, to ensure tha t projects are not sublet except as per 
the rules and guidelines in this regard.  
(Para 277) 
 
 
 

71 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
48.1 To address the issue of projects being awarded  at substantially lower costs compared 
to estimates of the Ministry or its implementing Ag encies, following initiatives have been 
taken:- 
i. MoRTH vide letters dated 18.05.2022 and 26.08.2022 has issued amended 
provision in Standard RFP (Request for Proposal) fo r EPC (Engineering, 
Procurement and Construction) projects for identifi cation of abnormally low 
bids, which stipulates that in case bid price offer ed by bidder is less than 20% 
of the estimated project cost (as mentioned in RFP) , then the bidder shall 
furnish an irrevocable and unconditional guarantee from a Bank towards an 
Additional Performance Security. 
ii. NHAI vide policy circular no 15.10/2021 dated 02.07 .2021 has issued 
directions that quality inspection teams constitute d by NHAI would visit 
projects awarded at substantially lower costs regul arly and submit report for 
taking required action against defaults, if any. Su ch projects would also be 
identified separately on Data Lake and details uplo aded regularly to enable 
effective monitoring of progress of work. 
As far as sub-contracting is concerned, permissible  extent of sub-contracting along 
with guidelines on the same are already laid down in the Contract Document. 
 
Way Side Amenities 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
49. The Committee is pleased to note the planned develo pment of state-of-the-art Way 
Side Amenities along National Highways. This would permit NH users to be well-rested 
and should lead to safer driving. The Committee rec ommends that the Ministry should 
establish a strong mechanism to ensure that Way Sid e Amenities are well-maintained for 
years to come.  
(Para 281) 
Reply of the Ministry 
49.1 NHAI in its Contract document has provided var ious clauses for ensuring proper 
maintenance of the Way Side Amenities facility.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) and PAST P ERFORMANCE OF 
THE MINISTRY 
Analysis of Demands for Grants (2023-24) 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
1. The Committee notes that about 99 percent of the pr ojected demand of the Ministry 
has been met in BE 2023-24. Enhanced focus on trans portation infrastructure, as evinced 
by the increase in the allocation to the Ministry, will have a multiplier effect on the 
economy. The Ministry should chalk out a detailed month-by-month plan to ensure optimal 
utilisation of the allocated funds. It may make eff orts to identify and bridge gaps in 
connectivity to hinterland regions as well as economic and tourist hubs. 
(Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Budgetary Outlay of the Ministry for 2023-24 is  Rs. 2,70,435 Crore. Ministry has 
chalked out a very challenging monthly expenditure plan, targeting 90% expenditure of its 
capital allocation by December 2023 considering the  expected constraints to emerge during 
this particular year. Although expenditure of Rs. 1 ,06,769 Crore till July 2023 is lower than 
the planned target yet it is about 50% more than la st year corresponding expenditure. 
Ministry in its Annual Plan of 2023-24, has emphasi zed the development of Bridges & 
Structures, missing links and stretches less than 2  lane, removal of black spots for safety and 
better connectivity with the hinterland. 
1.2 Monthly Expenditure Plan of the Ministry along with actual expenditure achieved till 
July-23 are as under :-  
Amount in Rs. Crore 
 
Sl. No. Month 
Cum. 
Expenditure 
Target 
Actual 
Expenditure 
percentage 
1 Apr-23 54,125  41,968  77.5  
2 May-23 60,034  59,682  99.4  
3 Jun-23 1,05,643  99,914  94.6  
4 Jul-23 1,18,758  1,06,769  89.9  
5 Aug-23 1,22,873  -  - 

73 
 
Amount in Rs. Crore  
Sl. No. Month 
Cum. 
Expenditure 
Target 
Actual 
Expenditure 
percentage 
6 Sep-23 1,70,189  -  - 
7 Oct-23 1,87,570  -  - 
8 Nov-23 1,97,260  -  - 
9 Dec-23 2,45,508  -  - 
10 Jan-23 2,57,811  -  - 
11 Feb-23 2,62,764  -  - 
12 Mar-23 2,70,435  -  - 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
1.3 The Committee notes that the actual expenditure  is still less than the monthly 
expenditure targeted by the Ministry. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the 
expenditure planning should be such that 100% fund utilization is made in the 
remaining months.  
 
Expenditure under various heads in the ongoing Financial Year 2022-23 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
2. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has spent 87 per cent of its 
overall RE 2022-23 allocation. The Ministry received an increase of 9 per cent in RE 2022-
23, compared to BE 2022-23. This reflects good over all fund utilisation throughout the 
ongoing financial year. The Committee, however, not es that the utilisation rate for several 
important heads is slow. These heads are ‘R&D and T raining’, ‘Capital Outlay for 
development of road connectivity in LWE affected ar eas and other tribal areas’, 
‘Bharatmala Pariyojana – work under State PWDs/ NHI DCL/ BRO etc’, ‘Maintenance of 
NHs’ and ‘Road Transport’. Since only two months re main in the ongoing financial year, 
it is likely that there will be savings under these  heads. The Committee desires to know the 
reasons behind underutilisation under these heads. The Ministry may also highlight its 
plans to tackle the reasons behind this underutilisation in FY 2023-24.  
(Para 18) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Expenditure position under the above heads vis- à-vis budgetary outlay during 2022-
23 is as under:- 

74 
 
Sl. 
No.  Name of the scheme RE 2022-
23 
Expenditure 
as on 
31.03.2023  
Expenditure 
% 
1 Highway Research  78.98  58.51  74.08  
2 Special Programme for Development of 
Road Connectivity (NH and State Roads) in 
Left Wing Extremist Affected Areas 
372.00 
 362.07  97.33  
3 Bharatmala Priyojana - Work under Road 
Wing/PWDs/NHIDCL  2,782.96  2,703.24  97.13  
4 Maintenance and Repair 2,480.00  2,473.86  99.75  
5 Road Transport  MH -3055 213.00  175.28  82.29  
 
2.2 Therefore, it can be seen that Ministry has ach ieved satisfactory utililisation of funds 
under the above heads, however there is some shortfall under Research and Development. 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
2.3 The Committee notes that the expenditure under Highway Research head is 
extremely low. The Ministry should ramp up all its resources to invest in the Research 
and Development sector for overall development of Highways sector. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
3. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may m ake sincere efforts to reach as 
close as possible to its targets for 2022-23. The M inistry should also factor in rainfall 
forecasts while setting monthly/ quarterly targets for 2023-24. The Ministry may also 
analyse the reasons behind the slow awarding of roa d projects till January 2023, since 
awarding of projects is not impeded by monsoon.  
(Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Ministry typically awards ~30%-40% of the total  annual target in the first half of 
fiscal year. During FY 2022-23, Ministry had awarde d 4,092 km during first 6 months. 
Generally, pace of construction speeds up during se cond half of the financial year and during 
FY 2022- 23, MoRTH has awarded 12,376 km. The Minis try mainly awards those projects 
which were sanctioned/approved during previous fina ncial years and current year. Projects 
are awarded only when sufficient land as per mode o f execution is available and statutory 
clearances are obtained. This may typically result in slow progress in award during the first 
half of the financial year.  

75 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
3.2 The Committee notes that the land acquisition i s the main factor that comes on 
the way of timely completion of the projects. The C ommittee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry should set-up a single window cle arance/portal that includes all 
stakeholders involved in the process of land acquis ition in the interest of making the 
process hassle-free and time-bound.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
4. The Committee would like to know the reasons for th e decrease in targeted and 
actual construction of roads since FY 2018-19. Furt her, the Committee notes that the 
Ministry has not set any quantifiable target for reduction of road accident deaths under the 
Output Outcome Monitoring Framework for 2023-24. Th e Ministry may furnish specific 
reasons for this omission of quantifiable targets pertaining to road safety.  
(Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Development and maintenance of NHs is a continu ous process. Accordingly, works 
on NHs are approved and awarded in stretches based upon traffic, inter-se priority, and 
requirements of connectivity and availability of re sources. Ministry sets target for 
construction every year based on realistic assessme nt of balance length of projects, which 
could be completed during any financial year, consi dering various impeding factors. 
Following is the lane wise achievement in last five  years. It may be seen that there has been 
steady increase in the construction of 4/6/8 lane w ith decreasing trend in the 
reconstruction/construction of 2-lane with paved sh oulders. Hence if the construction is 
counted on lane length basis, total lane km constru cted in 22-23 is about 33,955 lane km 
against 32335 km in 21-22. 
Length in Km  
Year Strengthening  2 
Lane 4 Lane 6/8 
Lane  Total 
Total  
Provisional 
Lane 
length 
2018-19 1,719 6,033 2,517 587 10,855 29,681 
2019-20 862 6,031 2,728 616 10,237 29,010 
2020-21 4,907 4,408 2,913 1,099 13,327 37,975 
2021-22 2,790 3,704 2,798 1,165 10,457 32,335 
2022-23 2,152 3,544 3,294 1,341 10,331 33,955 

76 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
4.2 The Committee notes that the construction of 2- lane roads is consistently 
declining year by year. The Committee, in this rega rd, recommends that the 
construction of 2-lane roads should not be neglecte d since 2-lanes roads play a vital role 
in the road connectivity and as such major parts of  the country are connected through 
2-lanes roads only. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
5. The Committee takes note of the progress made ti ll Q3, 2022-23 under the Output 
Outcome Monitoring Framework. The Ministry has perf ormed well under the major 
indicators such as development of NH road network i n all schemes. However, progress 
under various crucial output and outcome indicators  leaves much to desire. These 
indicators include length of roads having Incident Management System (providing 
Ambulances, Cranes, etc.), constructed length of co astal and port connectivity roads, 
number of NGO partnerships to create road safety aw areness, etc. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may analyse the hurdle s impeding the progress under these 
indicators. Further, the Ministry should implement suitable remedial measures to ensure 
achievement of targets under these indicators in the next financial year.  
(Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Measures taken under Road Safety Awareness, Inc ident Management System (IMS) 
and Port Connectivity roads are as follows:- 
A. Road Safety Awareness: Road Safety Week is observed every calendar year fo r 
spreading awareness about safe behaviour of road users on National Highways. 
During 2023, Road Safety Week was observed from 11 
th -17 th  Jan 2023 wherein the 
following major activities have been carried out for creating awareness and 
enhancement of Safety of Road users:- 
• Conducting of Walkathon, Exhibition on Road safety alongwith Essay writing/Poster 
making competition/Nukkad natak and Mass awareness events. 
• Distribution of pamphlets etc. to road users at Tol l plazas, wayside amenities, food 
stall points during the Safety Week.  
• Awareness drives for Road Safety through Flex banners, Workshop, and Discussion. 
• Check rear-side for Red light or Retro reflective s heeting to avoid rear–end collision 
and get installed reflectors/retro-reflective tapes  on truck, tractor-trolley, animal cart, 
etc. at toll plazas. 
• Motivation and road side safety awareness programme  for school /college students 
through Quiz competitions, drawing competitions, Es say writing and speech 
competitions, etc.  
• Special drives to stop overloading along with check ing of over-speeding, 
unauthorized parking, drunken driving, etc. with the help of police dept.  

77 
 
• Health cum Eye Check-up Camp and the distribution o f eye glasses are conducted for 
truck/bus drivers operating on NHs. 
• Distribution of pamphlets, and the display of safety banners. 
• Checking fatigue of truck drivers and educating them about road safety. 
  
Also, Road safety awareness messages on social media, such as Twitter, Instagram and 
Facebook are being spread on regular basis. 
B. Incident Management:  NHAI has started central deployment of Ambulances t o 
improve the coverage of IMS. Further, NHAI is also planning to deploy crane and 
patrolling vehicles on OPEX basis through central procurement.     
C. Port Connectivity: Ministry and its implementing agencies have planned  
development of 56 Port Connectivity Road Projects o f length ~2,600 km to improve 
last-mile connectivity to Operational and Under Imp lementation Ports in the country. 
Out of these 56 projects:- 
• 8 projects of length ~300 km have been completed till FY 2022-23.  
• 27 projects of length ~1,800 km have been awarded t ill FY 2022-23. The projects are 
under various stages of implementation.  
• 5 projects of length ~100 km are in bidding stage. 
• 16 projects of length ~400 km are in DPR stage. 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
5.2 The Committee notes that out of 56 projects for  port connectivity road projects, 
only 08 projects have been completed till FY 2022-2 3, which is only 14 per cent. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should expedite the completion of 
the remaining projects on a priority basis. Further , the Ministry should formulate a 
timeline for completion of the said projects.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
6. The Committee notes that the Ministry is plannin g to develop 35 MMLPs on PPP 
mode, under the GSNMP. Out of these 35 MMLPs, 15 MMLPs are prioritised for award by 
F.Y. 2024-25.  The Committee desires to know the details regarding  the MMLPs identified, 
road length and project cost involved. The Committe e opines that the DPRs for these 
MMLPs should be formulated in consultation with all  other participating Ministries 
including Railways and Ports, Shipping & Waterways and suitable amendments may be 
carried out in the proposals based on the feedback.  The Committee further recommends 
that a robust monitoring framework may be put in pl ace to ensure the timely completion of 
the development of MMLPs.  
(Para 39) 
 

78 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 A network of 35 Multimodal Logistics Parks (MML P) was identified while 
framing the overall Bharatmala Pariyojana Scheme. O ut of the 35 MMLPs, 15 MMLPs are 
prioritized for award by FY 2024-25. The list of 15  prioritized MMLPs along with their 
current status and cost details is placed at Annexure-I. 
6.2 MMLPs are being developed in line with the prin ciples of PM Gati Shakti. Multiple 
Central Government Ministries (Ministry of Railways  and Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways) and State Government bodies are collabor ating for the development of the 
MMLPs across India. Furthermore, MMLPs have been up loaded onto the PM Gati Shakti 
National Masterplan Portal for better coordination between multiple Ministries. 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
6.3 The Committee recommends that pending bidding, award allocation process of 
remaining 20 MMLPs should also be taken into consid eration. The Ministry must 
ensure that the development of logistic parks shoul d be evenly distributed across the 
country, facilitating connectivity to the country’s remotest locations.  
 
National Monetisation Pipeline (NMP) 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
7. The Committee opines that the National Monetisat ion Pipeline will play a pivotal 
role in fulfilling India's infrastructural aspirati ons in the near future. The Committee 
agrees with the various key benefits listed by the Ministry. The monetization of existing NH 
assets is crucial to fund the desired pace of impro vement of the road network in the 
country. In this light, the Committee desires to kn ow the year-wise targets of the Ministry 
under the NMP for FY 22-25.  
(Para 49) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The year-wise target of Ministry under National  Monetisation Pipeline (NMP) for 
FY22-25 is as under:  
Amount in Rs. Crore 
 
Year Target Achieved 
2021-22 30,000  22,367  
2022-23 32,855  23,336  
2023-24 43,979  - 
2024-25 53,366  - 

79 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
7.2 The Committee notes that there is a persistent shortfall in achieving the targets 
fixed by the Ministry in a financial year. The Comm ittee recommends that the Ministry 
should fix achievable targets and then strive hard and marshall all its resources to 
achieve the said target.  
 
Assessment of Quality of NH works 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
8. The Committee desires to be apprised of the outc ome of the pilot project of 
engaging the services of Mobile Quality Control Van s for conducting quality checks on a 
regular basis. The Committee would also like to kno w from the Ministry regarding the 
existing mechanism for conducting quality checks on NH projects.  
(Para 69) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The Mobile Quality Control Vans (MQCVs) have be en engaged in 4 States, namely, 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Odisha and Karnataka on a pilot  basis. The MQCVs have been 
commissioned and under operation in these 4 States.  
8.2 MQCVs have been conducting Non-Destructive Test ing (NDT) in 2000 Km of NHs 
length per quarter (about 670 Km per month). The ND T test results from MQCVs are shared 
with the concerned Executing Agencies for further i nvestigation and taking up necessary 
follow-up corrective actions.  
8.3 The existing mechanism to monitor and check the  construction quality of National 
Highways (NHs) involves appointment of Consultants as Authority’s Engineer (AE) / 
Independent Engineer (IE) for day-to-day supervisio n of implementation of quality 
assurance/control as specified in contract/ concess ion agreement to ensure that all NHs are 
constructed as per quality standards specified in t he Ministry and Indian Roads Congress 
(IRC) specifications and codes. Officials of Nation al Highways Authority of India (NHAI), 
National Highways & Infrastructure Development Corp oration Limited (NHIDCL), Border 
Roads Organization (BRO), Public Works Departments / Road Construction Departments/ 
Corporations of State Governments/ Union Territorie s and Independent Quality Auditors 
undertake inspections from time to time. Retired Ch ief Engineers from Central and State 
Governments have been empanelled by NHAI and NHIDCL  for conducting Third Party 
Quality Inspections of NH works in NHAI and NHIDCL respectively. The existing panels of 
NHAI & NHIDCL are also being utilized for conductin g Third party quality inspections of 
projects under Roads Wing and BRO.  
 

80 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
8.4 The Committee notes that the MQCVs have been op erational only in 04 states in 
the country. The Committee recommends that the Mini stry should expand the coverage 
of this project to all the States/UTs in the countr y. This will give boost to the road 
infrastructure, quality assessment and inspection mechanism.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
9. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may undertake effective 
measures to ensure that its stuck projects are comp leted at the earliest without further 
delays. This would permit NHAI to free up a part of  its capital for new road projects and 
also to monetise the completed assets for further revenue generation.  
(Para 84) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Delayed / Stuck Projects are being monitored re gularly for expediting their 
completion.  
9.2 The Government has taken several initiatives fo r completing the delayed projects, 
such as streamlining Land Acquisition (LA), expedit ing fulfilment of Govt. obligations for 
condition precedents, One-Time Fund Infusion, premium re-scheduling, securitization of road 
sector loans, rationalized exit for equity investor s, termination/foreclosure and re-bidding, 
revamping the dispute resolution system, rationaliz ed compensation for delays attributed to 
Authority, regular meetings and reviews at various levels with all stakeholders including the 
State Governments, project developers, Contractors/ Concessionaires, notification of Guiding 
Principles for Resolution of Stuck Projects aiming at foreclosure of projects which are stuck 
on account of the Concessionaire/Contractor in NCLT  (National Company Law Tribunal) or 
mutual default of both Authority and Contractor/Con cessionaire, providing various COVID-
19 relief measures under Atmanirbhar Bharat, etc.    
Further recommendation/observation 
9.3 The Committee notes that the delayed projects s eldom accrue desired benefits. 
The Ministry must make concerted efforts to complet e the projects timely. Further, 
land acquisition must be streamlined as it is the m ain reason for delay in most of the 
cases. The Committee, therefore, recommends that th e Ministry should set-up a single 
window clearance/portal that includes all stakehold ers involved in the process of land 
acquisition so that it becomes hassle-free. 
 
Vacancies in NHAI 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
10. NHAI shoulders a heavy responsibility of develo ping and maintaining the NH 
network of the country. The increasing allocation m ade to NHAI each year reflects the 

81 
 
importance of its mandate. The Committee recommends  that NHAI may ensure that it is 
adequately staffed at all times to ensure optimal utilisation of its budgetary allocation.  
(Para 89) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 At present, against the total sanctioned stren gth of 1,892 posts, 1,189 posts have been 
filled-up and 703 posts are vacant. The updated sta tus and remedial measures undertaken in 
filling up the vacant posts in NHAI is submitted as under: -  
• Out of the vacant posts, recruitment action for fil ling up of 131 posts is already 
underway. 
• All the vacant posts in NHAI are identified and the  recruitments are being undertaken 
by drawing detailed time-lines for filling-up each post. 
• To overcome shortage of technical manpower and to m eet the temporary requirement 
of manpower due to increased workload on account of  Bharatmala projects, 447 
Technical personnel in the category of Site Enginee rs have been engaged through 
outsourcing agencies. 
• Further, to meet the temporary requirement of techn ical manpower, action for 
engaging State PWD Officers at the level of AE/AEE to work in NHAI projects has 
been initiated and the process is already underway. 
• Further, after studying the impediments in non-fill ing up of the vacancies, 
comprehensive review of the Recruitment Rules (RRs)  has been undertaken and the 
RRs are at advanced stage of finalisation. 
With the above status and measures undertaken, it i s expected to meet the manpower 
requirement for efficient usage of the enhanced budgetary allocation. 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
10.2 The Committee notes that around 37 per cent of  posts are lying vacant. Shortage 
of manpower is adversely affecting the efficiency o f the organisation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a time line may be fixed  to fill the vacant posts at the 
earliest for better performance as also optimum utilisation of resources.  
 
Schemes of States and UTs financed from CRIF 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
11. The Committee notes that the Ministry has spent  about 72 percent of the RE 2022-
23 allocation of Rs. 7,974 crores under CRIF for St ate Roads for States and UTs. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may proactiv ely reach out to the State/UT 
Departments concerned to ensure that the available budgetary allocations are optimally 
utilised.  

82 
 
(Para 114) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Fund amounting to Rs. 7,551.98 Crore has been released under CRIF (State Roads) 
Scheme during 2022-23, which accounts for 94.7% of corresponding budgetary outlay of Rs. 
7,974.31 Crore. 
  
Further recommendation/observation 
11.2 The Committee reiterates that the Ministry may  proactively reach out to the 
State/UT Departments concerned to ensure that the a vailable budgetary allocations are 
optimally utilised.  
 
Development, Planning, Quality Assurance, Research and Training – Financed from 
CRIF   
Recommendation/ Observation  
12. The Committee notes a consistent pattern of und erutilisation of funds allocated for 
Research and Development. High quality research and  development in the road 
infrastructure sector will go a long way in improving the efficacy and health of India’s NH 
network. The Committee desires to be apprised of th e reasons behind this underutilisation. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may awar d more R&D schemes and work 
towards making optimal utilisation of funds under this head in FY 2023-24.  
(Para 117) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Currently, about 48 nos. of Research Projects sponsored by MoRTH / NHAI 
(including research projects being undertaken throu gh MoRTH Chair Professor) are ongoing 
for an amount of about Rs. 105 Crore . 
12.2 Ministry has an established framework to ident ify the applied & need based research 
projects in consultation with all the stakeholders.  Subsequently, the projects are evaluated 
with due consideration for practical use of its out comes in road 
design/construction/maintenance and the qualified p rojects are being sanctioned for rational 
utilization of allocated funds. Efforts are being made to award more R&D projects. 
Further recommendation/observation 
12.3 The Committee notes that the resource allocati on to Research and Development 
is meagre compared to the budget allocated to the M inistry. It is recommended that the 
budgetary allocation to R&D should be increased and  the Ministry should award 
scholarships and fellowships to attract research sc holars to work in this field. The 
Ministry can also collaborate with private sector t o realize the potential of Public 
Private Partnership in this sector.  
 

83 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
13. The Committee takes cognizance of the Joshimath  land subsidence. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may undertake detailed  research into the environmental 
impact of the highway projects in the Himalayan reg ion. Improving connectivity to the 
Himalayan region is crucial from a strategic as well as tourism point of view. However, the 
Ministry needs to ensure that the same is done with out causing any damage to the 
ecologically fragile region.  
(Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Satellite based ground movement analysis is be ing done through dedicated agency for 
projects encompassing such locations and work shall start shortly to study the behavior of hill 
slopes and anticipating the vulnerability caused due to untimely & unprecedented movements 
of Hill slopes. With this technology, it can be exp ected to have advance alerts before such 
happenings besides the close monitoring of hill terrains on weekly / monthly / quarterly basis. 
In addition to this study, M/s THDC India Ltd. has already been engaged to study the 
identified landslide vulnerable locations and sugge st mitigation measures to be adopted there 
especially on landslide prone areas located at Ramb an-Banihal section, which will definitely 
help in improving connectivity to the Himalayan reg ion. Ministry would improve its 
standards and specification based on such and other  studies also being carried out by state 
governments.  
 
Further recommendation/observation 
13.2 The Committee is of the view that there is an urgent need to factor in technology 
that minimize the disaster vulnerabilities in devel opment of roads in hilly regions, 
especially after witnessing the damage caused due t o natural disasters in Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand. The Ministry should conduc t a survey to identify the 
vulnerable areas in hilly regions. An action plan m ust be put in place to take stock of 
the situation in case of such calamities and measur es must include immediate actions to 
control the situation.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
14. The Committee notes that an amount of around Rs . 4,490 crore is being spent for 
the maintenance of about 25,000 km of NHs i.e. abou t 17 percent of India’s present NH 
network. The Committee feels that the amount is ina dequate considering the vast length of 
NH network covered under it. The actual expenditure  has exceeded the allocation every 
year since 2017-18. The Committee recommends that t he MoRTH may communicate with 
the Ministry of Finance to know the reasons behind the consistent under-allocation under 
this head.  
(Para 133) 

84 
 
15. The Committee may also be apprised of the mecha nism in place to assess the 
requirement of maintenance on this 25,000 km of Nat ional Highways which is neither 
under the contractor’s liability, nor under PR/IRQP . The Ministry may also inform about 
the present procedure to ensure maintenance of othe r important aspects besides road 
quality, such as adequate lighting, signage, barriers, lane demarcation etc.  
(Para 134) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Actual annual expenditure on M&R of NHs since 2020-21 is in the range of Rs. 5,000 
– 6,000 Crore. 
15.2 The Ministry has decided that, from 2023-24 on wards, all maintenance works on NHs 
shall be carried out through Performance based Main tenance Contract (PBMC) / Short Term 
(1 year) Maintenance Contract only. Further, all NH s stretches are to be invariably covered 
under ongoing works of development or maintenance o r Defect Liability Period (DLP), with 
the responsibility of maintenance of such NHs stret ches lying with the concerned Contractor 
/Concessionaire. Therefore, no NH stretch will rema in unattended for want of M&R 
intervention.  
15.3 To reduce the additional of burden of expendit ure under M&R from revenue head, 
Ministry is allocating funds for PR&IRQP works of M&R under Capital head. 
15.4 New system of PBMC maintenance will ensure the  maintenance of other important 
aspects besides road quality, such as adequate ligh ting, signage, barriers, lane demarcation 
etc. 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
15.5 The Committee reiterates that the MoRTH may co mmunicate with the Ministry 
of Finance to know the reasons behind the consisten t under-allocation of fund under 
this head. The Committee also suggests that the Min istry should persuade the Ministry 
of Finance to increase the budgetary allocation under M&R of NHs.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
16. The Committee notes that even though NSV survey  has been mandated to capture 
road conditions every 6 months, NSV data has only b een received for 48,000 km length of 
NHs so far. The Committee desires to know why the M inistry is not carrying out the 
mandated periodical NSV surveying across the entire  NH network in the country. The 
Ministry may inform about the bottlenecks being faced in this regard and how the Ministry 
plans to address the same. The Committee would also  like to know the targeted timeline by 
which the Ministry would ensure that the periodicit y of the NSV data is being maintained 
for the entire NH network.  
(Para 138) 

85 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 At present, NSV surveys are being done biannua lly on completed works and before 
starting the work. Hence NSV surveys are getting re peated on same stretches. Now Ministry 
has mandated that while contractor is undertaking t he maintenance work on PBMC, 
Contractor has to the do the NSV or similar surveys within one month of start of work. 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
16.2 The Committee notes that the pace of NSV surve y is slow and the frequency of 
such surveys must be increased for better maintenan ce and operation of roads. The 
Committee also recommends that the results of such surveys must be placed in public 
domain so that the concerned private organisations/NGOs can deduce information from 
it.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
17. The Committee notes that the Ministry has devel oped 38,787 km of ‘safe and 
efficient’ NH network in the country as against the  2019-24 target of 60,000 km. The 
Ministry may inform the Committee regarding the ave rage number of accidents and road 
deaths happening on these safer NHs, as compared to the rest of the NH network.  
(Para 166) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Ministry does not have information/ data on ro ad accidents and deaths due to road 
accidents on the NH of said 38,787 km of ‘safe and efficient’ NH network in the country. 
However, the information on road accidents and deat hs on all the National Highways 
(including Expressways) are given below:-  
Year 
National Highways (including Expressways) 
Road Accidents Persons Killed 
2019 137,191 53,872 
2020 116,496 47,984 
2021 128,825 56,007 
Further recommendation/observation 
17.2 The Committee notes with concern a consistent rise in the number of road 
accidents on NHs and in the number of persons kille d. The Ministry should identify the 
black spots and act immediately to minimize the acc idents at these spots. Further, the 
Ministry should mandatorily provide medical and fir st-aid facilities at a distance of 
every 4-5 kms.  
 

86 
 
Role of citizens 
Recommendation/ Observation  
18. The Committee feels that road safety awareness is a  key component to reducing 
road accident deaths in India. The Ministry should launch extensive public awareness 
campaigns to educate the public about the importanc e of safe driving and road safety 
regulations. This will help create a culture of saf e driving in India. NH users may also be 
made aware of the various available options to subm it feedback regarding safety 
provisions, or lack thereof, on National Highways. Crowd sourcing of data regarding road 
safety lapses will help the Ministry to proactively prevent road accidents.  
(Para 186) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 To create effective public awareness about roa d safety, Ministry undertakes various 
publicity measures and awareness campaigns through social media, electronic media and 
print media.  Ministry implements a scheme to provi de financial assistance to various 
agencies for administering Road Safety Advocacy. Na tional Road Safety Month/Week is 
observed every year for spreading awareness and strengthening road safety. 
18.2 NHAI has newly launched Rajmarg Yatra, a mobil e application (App), which enables 
public to give feed on any issue on NH.  
 
Further recommendation/observation 
18.3 The Committee appreciates the features of Rajm arg Yatra app launched by the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. However, i t is observed that the common 
masses are hardly aware of such apps. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should work upon the promotion of this app so that a two way interface can be 
created between the Ministry and road users.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
19. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work in coordination with 
concerned local authorities to tackle the problem o f stray animals trespassing National 
Highways, to mitigate accident risk. Authorities sh ould erect barriers in stretches where 
this problem is faced frequently to prevent stray cattle and other animals from coming onto 
NHs. The Ministry should also explore other possibl e solutions to minimise such incidents 
across the entire NH network in the country. The Mi nistry may also tie up with local 
veterinary hospitals and animal rescue centers ever y hundred kilometers or so, to treat 
injured animals and to minimise the incidents of ac cidents involve stray animals and 
cattles.  
(Para 192) 
 

87 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 NHAI has issued directions to field officers t o make use of Patrolling vehicles to 
check stray cattle movement/trespassing on NHs, including access-controlled expressways (if 
found any despite having barriers on either side of the carriageway). 
19.2 Further, NHAI has also directed field offices to ensure that suitable remedial 
measures are taken to minimize such incidents, in close cooperation with local authorities.  
 
Further recommendation/observation 
19.3 The Committee feels that more should be done t o mitigate the accidents caused 
due to movement/trespassing of stray animals on NHs . The Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways should co-ordinate with the Ministry of Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
to formulate a plan to prevent stray cattle and oth er animals from coming onto NHs. 
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should also focus that the Cattle 
underpasses are built near the villages. Further, a  helpline number may be displayed so 
that the common people can inform the authorities about any cattle movement.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
20. The Committee took up the issue of frequent acc idents at a flyover on NH-58 on the 
Gogasar bypass connecting Sujangarh city. The Commi ttee recommends that suitable 
rectification measures may be taken to prevent accidents on the stretch in the future.  
(Para 193) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 It is submitted that the mentioned location Go gasar bypass is not located at NH-58 
stretch. Gogasar bypass is situated on the Ratangar h-Sujangarh Mega Highway, which is 
under jurisdiction of State Government, Rajasthan.  
 
Further recommendation/observation 
20.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry sho uld inform the concerned 
State Government to take necessary action in the matter.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
21. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the areas in which 
India lags behind the highway networks of developed  countries. The Committee suggests 
that the Ministry may conduct a detailed study rega rding the lessons that can be learned 
from the road construction techniques and safety pr ovisions implemented in the safest 
highway networks in the world.   
(Para 195) 

88 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 A comparison of NH network density and High Sp eed Corridor density per 1000 
sq.km with developed countries at present is as under:- 
Item India USA China Best-in-class (G20) 
National Highways per 1,000 
sq.km. 44 36 39 210 (UK) 
High Speed Corridor per 1,000 
sq.km 0.95 10 17 24 (Japan) 
21.2 Although Indian Road Congress publishes codes and guidelines for road construction 
which is at par with International standards, howev er Ministry through IRC, IABSE etc. 
conducts from time to time international seminars o n latest road construction techniques and 
safety provisions implemented in other countries.  
 
Further recommendation/observation 
21.3 The Committee notes that the network density a nd High Speed Corridor density 
per 1000 sq.km is far less than the global benchmar k. The Committee feels that the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should ramp  up all its resources to increase 
the NH network density, particularly in respect of High Speed Corridor per 1,000 
sq.km.  
 
Driving Training Centres 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
22. The Committee desires to know the number of dis tricts that have driver training 
facilities, be it DTCs, RDTCs or IDTRs. The Ministr y may also furnish the number of 
districts in the country where no such facility is presently available. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may target opening driving training centres in all districts of 
the country since this basic facility must be acces sible to all in order to improve their 
driving standards. The Ministry should come up with  a timeline for this purpose and 
inform this Committee regarding the same.  
(Para 201) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 The Ministry started scheme to create model Dr iving Training facilities namely (i) 
Institute of Driving Training & Research (IDTR), (i i) Regional Driving Training Centres 
(RDTCs) and (iii) Driving Training Centres (DTCs) i n the States/UTs.  Till date, 31 IDTRs, 
12 RDTCs and 14 DTCs have been sanctioned under the  scheme (details placed at 
Annexure-II ). The scheme is continued during the 15 
th  Finance Commission period and 

89 
 
more centres will be set up under the scheme. Besid es, Ministry has also notified rules for 
accredited driving Training Centres in 2021 and als o issued guidelines for guidance of the 
States to make their driving training systematic, s cientific and to make accredited driving 
training centers a commercially viable business pro position since it is the responsibility of 
state government. 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
22.2 The Committee notes that the model Driving Tra ining facilities have not been set 
up in States like Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that all States should be covered under this projec t and at least three centres should be 
developed in big states.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
23. The current practice of carrying out third-part y road safety audits at the 
construction, operation, and maintenance stages is a positive step. The Committee 
recommends that NHAI should ensure that these audit s are conducted periodically on all 
NHs and due focus is given to the inspection of roa d signages and other road safety 
provisions. Faded signages may be replaced at the e arliest. The Committee desires to know 
what length of the NH network is inspected using a retro-reflectometer twice a year.  
(Para 213) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 Regular Road Safety Audit is being conducted o n NHs as per IRC:SP:88-2019. 
Guidelines at the stage of DPR/ Construction/ Opera tion & Maintenance stage and safety 
improvements based on audit findings are being made  on an ongoing basis. Around 14,575 
Km of audit has been completed during FY 21-22 and 31,423 Km in FY 22-23.     
23.2 Authority’s Engineer conducts road survey usin g Network Survey Vehicle (NSV), 
Mobile Bridge Inspection unit (MBIU) etc., includin g retro-reflectometer twice a year, as per 
provisions of Consultancy Agreement.  
23.3 Maintenance of road signs is ensured to retain  both the legibility and the visibility of 
the signs in accordance with “IRC-67: CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ROAD SIGNS”.  
 
Further recommendation/observation 
23.4 The Committee recommends that the results of s uch surveys must be placed in 
public domain so that the concerned private organis ations/NGOs can deduce required 
information from it.  
 

90 
 
DELAYS IN ROAD PROJECTS 
Recommendation/ Observation  
24. The Committee understands that road infrastruct ure development is a complex 
process that involves various stages and requires the coordination of multiple stakeholders. 
The Committee notes that land acquisition is one of  the bottlenecks that has been a 
primary cause of delays in road infrastructure proj ects. The Committee notes that the 
Ministry has taken several initiatives to streamlin e land acquisition. Still, land acquisition 
is repeatedly at the forefront of the issues causin g delays in road projects. The Committee 
suggests that the Ministry may highlight the exact stages of the present land acquisition 
process wherein delays take place. The Committee al so desires to be apprised of the 
amount of cost overrun that the Ministry has incurr ed on account of delayed projects in 
the last 5 years.  
(Para 232)  
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 Generally after finalization of the alignment plan of NHs, notification process of 3(a), 
3(A) and 3(D) are done which has been streamlined s ince introduction of the BhoomiRashi 
Portal. However delays take places in award prepara tion, compensation distribution and also 
resistance from the affected people demanding highe r compensation and forcing to stop the 
works. 
24.2 642 projects are reported to have been delayed  during the last 5 years, of which 270 
delayed projects have upward revision in cost from Rs. 1,24,677 Crore (original project cost) 
to Rs. 1,53,080 Crore (revised project cost) on agg regated basis. The upward revision in 
project cost, in most of the cases, are attributabl e to factors such as increase in land 
acquisition cost, utility shifting cost, cost of fo rest & environment clearances, change in law, 
additional scope of work, change in specification, etc., which are not exactly in the nature of 
cost overrun because they either involve value addi tion to the project through augmentation 
or modification of project components (additional s cope of work, change in specification) or 
arise on account of actual statutory/governmental v aluation of cost over estimated values (3G 
award by CALA, Costing by Utility Agencies, FC charges, etc.).  
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
25. The Committee notes that land acquisition is on e of the most consistent reasons 
behind delays in road infrastructure projects in the country. The Ministry may examine the 
effectiveness of the existing legislative framework  and propose amendments to the same, if 
needed. The Ministry may establish a dedicated cell  to track and tackle delays in land 
acquisition in all NH projects. This dedicated cell may take up delays in land acquisition at 
the highest level with the concerned authorities an d coordinate with all stakeholders in the 
process. The Committee suggests that the Ministry m ay prescribe strict timelines for those 
stages of the land acquisition process were doing so is feasible.  
(Para 235) 

91 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 Ministry is already having a dedicated Land Ac quisition (LA) division. This division 
from time to time reviews the processes involved in  LA and time taken and accordingly 
incorporates technological solutions like amendment s in BhoomiRashi Portal to track such 
delays.  
25.2 Officers at various levels including the topmo st officers review the LA status of 
projects and accordingly fix timelines for completing the same.  
 
Further recommendation/observation 
25.3 The Committee is of the view that the delayed projects should be taken up on 
priority for completion. Further, the issue of land  acquisition must be streamlined as it 
is the main reason of delay in most of the cases. T he Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry should set up a hassle-free singl e window clearance/portal that 
includes all stakeholders involved in the process of land acquisition.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
26. The Ministry may explore the feasibility of cre ation of utility ducts at the 
construction stage itself. The utility ducts can th en be utilised not just for OFC 
infrastructure but installation of CCTV cameras on highways, gas pipes, electric cables etc. 
This would enable the safe and efficient delivery o f essential services to customers with 
ease of maintenance and repair. The Ministry may mo netise the utility ducts over time to 
recover the infrastructure cost associated with the same.  
(Para 255) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 Ministry has conducted a study to explore the potential options for the development of 
utility corridors along the Highways. As per the st udy, Ministry is developing Optical Fiber 
Cable Infrastructure in the utility corridors along  the Highways. Works have already been 
initiated for two pilot projects along Delhi-Mumbai  Expressway and Hyderabad-Bangalore. 
Based on the success of the pilot projects, nation-wide roll-out shall be taken up. 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
26.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry sho uld expedite the creation of 
utility ducts at all the National Highways. Further , it is reiterated that the utility ducts 
may be developed at the construction stage in the expressways to be built in the future.  
 
 

92 
 
Vehicle Fitness Certificate  
Recommendation/ Observation  
27. The Committee desires to be apprised of the pre sent procedure for issuance of a 
vehicle fitness certificate. The Committee recommen ds that the Ministry may work upon 
the ease of obtaining vehicle fitness certificate. The Ministry may permit issuance of 
vehicle fitness certificates at the town level as w ell, besides district headquarters.  The 
requirement, if any, for the vehicle to be in the h ome district/State may be done away with. 
   
(Para 279) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 The provisions regarding vehicle fitness certi ficate are provided in the Central Motor 
Vehicles Rules (CMVRs), 1989. The responsibility to  enforce the rules rests with the 
States/UTs.  
27.2 Further, to promote automated fitness check of  vehicles and to reduce the human 
interventions in the fitness check of vehicles, Min istry implements a scheme of setting up of 
one model vehicle Inspection & Certificate centre i n each State/UT. Till date, 27 States/UTs 
have been covered under the scheme. Besides, Minist ry also notified rules for recognition, 
regulation and control of automated testing station  to set up Automated Testing Stations 
(ATS) in private sector in the States/UTs.  
27.3 Attention of the Committee is invited to Para 5(9) of GSR Notification 797 (E) dt 
31.10.2022, which states that: 
“..Notwithstanding anything in the fourth proviso to  sub-rule (1) of rule 62, the 
automated testing station may accept and test the v ehicle registered in any of the States or 
Union territories. ” 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
27.4 The Committee notes that the models Vehicle In spection & Certificate Centres 
have been established only in 27 States/UTs. The Co mmittee recommends that such 
Centres may be opened up in all States/UTs. Further , the number of Centres in each 
State/UT may also be increased. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

93 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

94 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE  
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) and PAST P ERFORMANCE OF 
THE MINISTRY 
Analysis of Demands for Grants (2023-24) 
 
The Committee notes that the actual expenditure is still less than the monthly 
expenditure targeted by the Ministry. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the 
expenditure planning should be such that 100% fund utilization is made in the 
remaining months.  
(Para 1.3) 
Expenditure under various heads in the ongoing Financial Year 2022-23  
The Committee notes that the expenditure under High way Research head is extremely 
low. The Ministry should ramp up all its resources to invest in the Research and 
Development sector for overall development of Highways sector. 
(Para 2.3) 
The Committee notes that the land acquisition is th e main factor that comes on the way 
of timely completion of the projects. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should set-up a single window clearance/po rtal that includes all stakeholders 
involved in the process of land acquisition in the interest of making the process hassle-
free and time-bound.  
(Para 3.2) 
The Committee notes that the construction of 2-lane  roads is consistently declining year 
by year. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that the construction of 2-lane 
roads should not be neglected since 2-lanes roads p lay a vital role in the road 
connectivity and as such major parts of the country  are connected through 2-lanes 
roads only. 
(Para 4.2) 
The Committee notes that out of 56 projects for por t connectivity road projects, only 08 
projects have been completed till FY 2022-23, which is only 14 per cent. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should expe dite the completion of the 
remaining projects on a priority basis. Further, th e Ministry should formulate a 
timeline for completion of the said projects.  

95 
 
(Para 5.2) 
 
The Committee recommends that pending bidding, awar d allocation process of 
remaining 20 MMLPs should also be taken into consid eration. The Ministry must 
ensure that the development of logistic parks shoul d be evenly distributed across the 
country, facilitating connectivity to the country’s remotest locations.  
(Para 6.3) 
National Monetisation Pipeline (NMP) 
 
The Committee notes that there is a persistent shor tfall in achieving the targets fixed by 
the Ministry in a financial year. The Committee rec ommends that the Ministry should 
fix achievable targets and then strive hard and mar shall all its resources to achieve the 
said target.  
(Para 7.2) 
Assessment of Quality of NH works  
The Committee notes that the MQCVs have been operat ional only in 04 states in the 
country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry  should expand the coverage of 
this project to all the States/UTs in the country. This will give boost to the road 
infrastructure, quality assessment and inspection mechanism.  
(Para 8.4) 
The Committee notes that the delayed projects seldo m accrue desired benefits. The 
Ministry must make concerted efforts to complete th e projects timely. Further, land 
acquisition must be streamlined as it is the main r eason for delay in most of the cases. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should set-up a single window 
clearance/portal that includes all stakeholders inv olved in the process of land 
acquisition so that it becomes hassle-free. 
(Para 9.3) 
Vacancies in NHAI  
The Committee notes that around 37 per cent of post s are lying vacant. Shortage of 
manpower is adversely affecting the efficiency of t he organisation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a time line may be fixed  to fill the vacant posts at the 
earliest for better performance as also optimum utilisation of resources.  
(Para 10.2) 
Schemes of States and UTs financed from CRIF  
The Committee reiterates that the Ministry may proa ctively reach out to the State/UT 
Departments concerned to ensure that the available budgetary allocations are optimally 
utilised.  

96 
 
(Para 11.2) 
 
Development, Planning, Quality Assurance, Research and Training – Financed from 
CRIF   
The Committee notes that the resource allocation to  Research and Development is 
meagre compared to the budget allocated to the Mini stry. It is recommended that the 
budgetary allocation to R&D should be increased and  the Ministry should award 
scholarships and fellowships to attract research sc holars to work in this field. The 
Ministry can also collaborate with private sector t o realize the potential of Public 
Private Partnership in this sector.  
(Para 12.3) 
The Committee is of the view that there is an urgen t need to factor in technology that 
minimize the disaster vulnerabilities in developmen t of roads in hilly regions, especially 
after witnessing the damage caused due to natural d isasters in Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand. The Ministry should conduct a survey t o identify the vulnerable areas in 
hilly regions. An action plan must be put in place to take stock of the situation in case of 
such calamities and measures must include immediate actions to control the situation.  
(Para 13.2) 
The Committee reiterates that the MoRTH may communi cate with the Ministry of 
Finance to know the reasons behind the consistent u nder-allocation of fund under this 
head. The Committee also suggests that the Ministry  should persuade the Ministry of 
Finance to increase the budgetary allocation under M&R of NHs.  
(Para 15.5) 
The Committee notes that the pace of NSV survey is slow and the frequency of such 
surveys must be increased for better maintenance an d operation of roads. The 
Committee also recommends that the results of such surveys must be placed in public 
domain so that the concerned private organisations/NGOs can deduce information from 
it.  
(Para 16.2) 
The Committee notes with concern a consistent rise in the number of road accidents on 
NHs and in the number of persons killed. The Minist ry should identify the black spots 
and act immediately to minimize the accidents at th ese spots. Further, the Ministry 
should mandatorily provide medical and first-aid fa cilities at a distance of every 4-5 
kms.  
(Para 17.2) 
Role of Citizen  
The Committee appreciates the features of Rajmarg Y atra app launched by the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. However, i t is observed that the common 

97 
 
masses are hardly aware of such apps. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should work upon the promotion of this app so that a two way interface can be 
created between the Ministry and road users.  
(Para 18.3) 
The Committee feels that more should be done to mit igate the accidents caused due to 
movement/trespassing of stray animals on NHs. The M inistry of Road Transport and 
Highways should co-ordinate with the Ministry of An imal Husbandry and Dairying to 
formulate a plan to prevent stray cattle and other animals from coming onto NHs. The 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should also  focus that the Cattle 
underpasses are built near the villages. Further, a  helpline number may be displayed so 
that the common people can inform the authorities about any cattle movement.  
(Para 19.3) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should i nform the concerned State 
Government to take necessary action in the matter.  
(Para 20.2) 
The Committee notes that the network density and Hi gh Speed Corridor density per 
1000 sq.km is far less than the global benchmark. T he Committee feels that the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should ramp  up all its resources to increase 
the NH network density, particularly in respect of High Speed Corridor per 1,000 
sq.km.  
(Para 21.3) 
Driving Training Centres  
The Committee notes that the model Driving Training  facilities have not been set up in 
States like Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, etc. The Commit tee, therefore, recommends that 
all States should be covered under this project and  at least three centres should be 
developed in big states.  
(Para 22.2) 
The Committee recommends that the results of such s urveys must be placed in public 
domain so that the concerned private organisations/ NGOs can deduce required 
information from it.  

98 
 
(Para 23.4) 
DELAYS IN ROAD PROJECTS 
The Committee is of the view that the delayed proje cts should be taken up on priority 
for completion. Further, the issue of land acquisit ion must be streamlined as it is the 
main reason of delay in most of the cases. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should set up a hassle-free single win dow clearance/portal that includes all 
stakeholders involved in the process of land acquisition.  
(Para 25.3) 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should e xpedite the creation of utility 
ducts at all the National Highways. Further, it is reiterated that the utility ducts may be 
developed at the construction stage in the expressways to be built in the future.  
(Para 26.2) 
Vehicle Fitness Certificate 
 
The Committee notes that the models Vehicle Inspect ion & Certificate Centres have 
been established only in 27 States/UTs. The Committ ee recommends that such Centres 
may be opened up in all States. 
(Para 27.4) 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

99 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

100 
 
 
Annexure-I 
 
Status of 15 prioritized MMLPs 
 
S.No.  MMLP  Cost (INR Cr)  Status  
1 Chennai  1423.5  Awarded for development  
2 Bangalore  1770  Awarded for development  
5 Indore  1110  Awarded for development  
4 Nagpur  919.5  Bids to be invited (2 nd Call)  
5 Guwahati  - Under implementation by NHIDCL  
6 Mumbai  - DPR in progress  
7 Pune  - DPR in progress  
8 Vishakhapatnam  - DPR in progress  
9 Anantapur  - DPR in progress  
10  Hyderabad  - DPR in progress  
11  Jammu  - DPR in progress  
12  Coimbatore  - DPR in progress  
13  Delhi  - DPR to be awarded  
14  Patna  - DPR to be awarded  
15  Nashik  - DPR to be awarded  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

101 
 
 
Annexure-II 
Details of IDTRs, RDTCs and DTCs sanctioned under the Driver Training scheme 
S.No  State  Location  Center  
1 Andhra Pradesh  Vijayawada  IDTR  
2 Andhra Pradesh  Dasri  IDTR  
3 Andhra Pradesh  Kurnul  IDTR  
4 Assam  Dispur  IDTR  
5 Bihar  Aurangabad  IDTR  
6 Chhattisgarh  Naya Raipur  IDTR  
7 Haryana  Rhotak  IDTR  
8 Haryana  Bhiwadi  IDTR  
9 Himachal Pradesh  Mandi  IDTR  
10  Himachal Pradesh  Sarkaghat  IDTR  
11  J&K  Jammu  IDTR  
12  Jharkhand  Jamshedpur  IDTR  
13  Karnataka  Bellary  IDTR  
14  Kerala  Eddapal  IDTR  
15  Madhya Pradesh  Indore  IDTR  
16  Madhya Pradesh  Chhindwara  IDTR  
17  Maharashtra  Pune  IDTR  
18  Maharashtra  Latur  IDTR  
19  Maharashtra  Nagpur  IDTR  
20  Manipur  Imphal  IDTR  
21  Nagaland  Dimapur  IDTR  
22  Odisha  Jajpur  IDTR  
23  Rajasthan  Rajsamand  IDTR  
24  Sikkim  Pakyong  IDTR  
25  Telangana  Karimnagar  IDTR  
26  Tripura  Agartala  IDTR  
27  Uttar Pradesh  Kanpur  IDTR  
28  Uttar Pradesh  Rai Bareilly  IDTR  
29  Uttarakhand  Dehradun  IDTR  

102 
 
30  West Bengal  Kolkata  IDTR  
31  Delhi  Sarai Kale Khan  IDTR  
32  Maharashtra  Vardha  RDTC  
33  Maharashtra  Nanded  RDTC  
34  Maharashtra  Sangli  RDTC  
35  Maharashtra  Nagpur  RDTC  
36  Maharashtra  Yavamattal  RDTC  
7 Madhya Pradesh  Chhatarpur  RDTC  
38  Madhya Pradesh  Bhopal  RDTC  
39  Madhya Pradesh  Battul  RDTC  
40  Rajasthan  Ajmer  RDTC  
41  Rajasthan  Hanumangarh  RDTC  
42  Rajasthan  Jaipur  RDTC  
43  West Bengal  Kolkata  RDTC  
44  Nagaland  Kohima  RDTC  
45  Assam  Silchar  DTC  
46  Madhya Pradesh  Singrauli  DTC  
47  Madhya Pradesh  Dhar  DTC  
48  Madhya Pradesh  Raisen  DTC  
49  Madhya Pradesh  Siddi  DTC  
50  Madhya Pradesh  Satna  DTC  
51  Odisha  Mayurbhanj  DTC  
52  Karnataka  Koppal  DTC  
53  Uttar Pradesh  Bulandshahar  DTC  
54  Uttar Pradesh  Kushi Nagar  DTC  
55  Uttar Pradesh  Prayagraj  DTC  
56  Uttar Pradesh  Gazipur  DTC  
57  Rajasthan  Bharatpur  DTC  
58  Telangana  Rangareddy  DTC  
 

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

 
114

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
416
115

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
417
116

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
418
117

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
419
118

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
420
119

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
421
120

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
422
121

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
423
122

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
424
123

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
425
124

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
426
125

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
427
126

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
428
127

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
429
128

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
430
129

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
431
130

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
432
131

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
433
132

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
434
133

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
435
134

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
436
135

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
437
136

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
438
137

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
439
138

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
440
139

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
441
140

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
442
141

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
443
142

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
444
143

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
445
144

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
446
145

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
447
146

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
448
147

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
449
148

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
450
149

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
451
150

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
452
151

683460/2023/GM (CMD) Office
453
152

153

154
*******

155 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

156 
 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th December, 2023 in Committee 
Room-D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil  
5. Shri A. A. Rahim 
6. Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu  
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri D. S. Prasanna Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Deputy Secretary 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee  
and informed that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the  following Reports of 
the Committee:- 

157 
 
(i) ***1 
(ii) *** 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee contained in its Three Hundred Forty Second Report on Demands for Grants 
(2023-24) of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; and  
(iv) *** 
 
2.        The Committee took up fo r consideration the draft Reports, one by one. After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four draft Reports and authorized the Chairman 
to carry out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting, if needed in 
all the Reports. 
3.       The Committee authorized Shri Zala Kesridevsinhji, M.P., and in his absence, Shrimati 
Rajani Ashokrao Patil, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 8 th December, 
2023. The Committee also authorized Shri K. Muraleed haran, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Tirath Singh Rawat, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
4 ***   
5.       The Meeting adjourned at 10:50 A.M. 
                                                                                                                                       
New Delhi,                                                                                                    Monica Baa 
6th December, 2023                                                                                              Director  
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                             
  
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 