PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 143
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY FOURTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE DEPARTMENT 
OF SHIPPING
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV A TIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY FOURTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—24
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 25—28
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 29—32

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
3. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Shanta Kumar
6. Shrimati Hema Malini
*7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
10. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shrimati Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Prahlad Joshi
21. Shri P. Karunakaran
22. Dr. P.P. Koya
23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Rakesh Singh
31. Shri Suraj Singh
* Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.  26.11.2008.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Forty-third Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendation/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Thirty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Department of Shipping”.
2. The One Hundred and Thirty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the
17th April, 2008.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained on its
One Hundred and Thirty-fourth Report were received from the Department of Shipping on the 23rd
October, 2008.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the
18th December, 2008.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 18, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 27, 1930  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred Thirty-fourth Report on Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Shipping, which was presented to the Parliament on
17th April, 2008.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 23rd October, 2008 in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been
categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 10, 11, 28, 48, 55, 63, 64, 70, 81, 82 and 97 Total: 11
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of the Government replies:
Para Nos. 39 and 101 Total: 2
(iii) R ecommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 100 Total :1
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited:
Para Nos. 16, 20, 23, 24, 31, 35, 40, 51, 58, 69, 75, 93 and 94 Total :13
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which
have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Department of Shipping. The
recommendations of the Committee contained in the One Hundred Thirty-fourth Report, action
taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each
item of action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL PLAN 2008-09
(Recommendation at Para 10 and 11))
5. The Committee observes that the Department has projected a requirement of Rs.68971.48
crore for the entire Eleventh Plan. Against this requirement, the Planning Commission approved an
allocation of Rs. 67173.40 crore to the Department for carrying out major activities i.e.
development of Major Ports, Inland Water Transport, procurement of Dredgers and connected
activities for the Dredging Corporation of India, constructions of landing facility in Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, post Tsunami rehabilitation works, Ship Buidling, Rail connectivity for the ports
and Sethusamudram Ship Channel Project etc.
6. The Committee strongly deplores the tendency of Planning Commission and the Ministry of
Finance for imposing cuts on the amount demanded by the Department as per their pressing needs.

2
The Committee feels that if the Department of Shipping has to attain the national growth of 9%
in the Eleventh Plan period, it will require huge and well planned funding. Thus, the Government
spending for the Department of Shipping will have to be significantly stepped up from the present
level to meet the growth targets. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the
Department should be provided with Rs.68971.48 crore by the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance for the Eleventh Plan period as their original proposal and ensure that no
projects/scheme proposed by the Department would languish for want of funds. The Committee
also recommends the Department to take appropriate caution and remedial action to absorb in time
the allocation made to them.
Reply of the Government
7. The recommendations of the Committee have been brought to the notice of Planning
Commission as well as Ministry of Finance for compliance.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
8. The Committee notes that as per the recommendations of the Committee, the
Department of Shipping has requested the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for
providing Rs.68971.48 crore as per original proposal for the entire Eleventh  Plan. The
Committee feels that if the Department has to achieve the growth targets then the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance should consider to allocate the projected outlay.
PORT SECTOR
(Recommendation at Paras 16 and 20)
9. The Committee is perturbed to note that the Department of Shipping has projected higher
plan outlays of Rs.4271.27 crore during the year 2007-08 which was drastically reduced to
Rs.3075.34 crore at RE stage and ultimately, the Department failed to utilize the reduced amount
too. The Department utilized Rs.2517.00 crore during 2007-08 against the budget estimates of
Rs.4271.27 crore and surrendered an amount of Rs.1754.27 crore as compared to the BE for the
year. The Committee observes that the saving affects almost all the major activities of Department
of Shipping be it Inland Water Transport, Shipping, Ports, Lighthouses and Lightships, Shipbuilding
etc. and the actual expenditure incurred has always been abysmally low compared to the estimated
amount. The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons furnished by the Department for non-
utilization of the allocations for their being either vague or of routine in nature. The Committee does
not approve the practice being followed by the Department which has been asking for higher
allocations year after year, but the implementation of projects and schemes were poor as ground
realities were not taken into account while formulating and implementing the projects. The
Committee is pained to note that although they have repeatedly recommended for formulation of
realistic plans and schemes but no action have been taken by the Government on those
recommendations. The Committee expects that intensified monitoring mechanism which is being put
in place by the Department, would ensure that budgeted amounts earmarked at the BE stage are
fully utilized during 2008-09. At the same time, The Committee recommends that a meaningful and
relevant programmes and policies be formulated for regular infusion of funds in various projects
and schemes in all quarters of the financial year for total utilization of plan outlays and if required,
the Government should review all the on-going schemes periodically for re-allocation of the
budgeted amount. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government
in this regard.
10. The Committee is distressed to note that there has been under-utilization of plan allocation
in the port sector and finds that in BE 2007-08, an outlay of Rs.2109.76 crore consisting of GBS

3
of Rs.498.49 crore and IEBR of Rs.1611.27 crore was provided to the port sector as against this
allocation, the anticipated expenditure is Rs.1694.71 crore comprising of Rs.359.62 crore GBS and
Rs.1335.09 crore IEBR. In the Annual Plan 2008-09, again higher budgetary allocations to
Rs.3650.97 crore has been made in anticipation of modernization of port sector though the actual
expenditure has always remain low as compared to budget estimates. The Committee feels that
since ports have a crucial role to play in facilitating the India’s total EXIM trade, the Department
should devise the concrete and concerted efforts for achieving the desired targets. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that projections of required fund should be made more realistic so that
resources are not unnecessarily kept unutilized and are allocated more judiciously and projects are
monitored scrupulously to achieve the envisaged targets. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the achievement of the physical and financial targets in the port sector during the
current financial year.
Reply of the Government
11. The above recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to all the Major Ports
and other concerned Organizations for compliance.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
12. The Committee notes the reply and desires to have the expenditure pattern of the
Department of Shipping for the year 2007-08 and 2008-09 up to December, 2008 to ascertain
the progress of fiscal management, utilization of budgetary allocation and the details of the
physical and financial target set for achieving the progress. The Committee recommends
that for better physical and financial monitoring of the projects, the Department should
strengthen its own monitoring mechanism in a well coordinated manner at apex level to
achieve optimum utilization of funds.
(Recommendation at Para 23 and 24)
13. The Committee notes that the Department has delegated the financial powers to the port
trusts under the instructions issued by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for
timely execution, formulation, appraisal and approval of the projects to be funded through the
public investment and also for public private partnership projects. The respective jurisdiction with
respect to Standing Finance Committee (SFC), Departmental Expenditure Finance Committee
(Departmental EFC), Main Expenditure Finance Committee (Main EFC), Committee of Secretaries
(CoS), Public Investment Board (PIB) or Public Private Partnership Appraisal Committee (PPPAC)
is determined on the basis of the total cost of the project/schemes for the entire plan period. The
Committee notes with dismay that the spreparation and clearance of SFC/EFC/CCEA/PPPAC
proposals require undue long time and in some cases it takes precious long time of about 2-3
years. The Committee see no justification in such a situation wherein many schemes/plans/projects
of the Department has an outlay for a period of 5 years mentioned on paper only but actually
cannot be utilized till the approval of the SFC/EFC/CCEA/PPPAC remains pending. The Committee
urges the Department as well as the concerned Appraisal Agencies to seriously introspect over
the delays which are so detrimental for the progressive functioning of the Shipping and Port
Sectors.
14. The Committee also desires that steps should be taken well in time by the Department/
Planning Commission/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) to avoid any such
recurrences for the future and a limited stipulated time frame should be fixed for clearance from
the Planning Commission and SFC/EFC/CCEA/PPPAC approval.

4
Reply to the Government
15. The recommendations of the Committee have been brought to the notice of Planning
Commission as well as Ministry of Finance for compliance.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
16. The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has taken up the matter with
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for removal of procedural hurdles in the
preparation and clearance of project proposals. The Committee does not see any difficulty in
the Government establishing a single high powered agency for quick clearance of projects
proposals for the Shipping and Port Sectors with a view to address the procedural hurdles and
administrative delays. The Committee therefore, recommends the Department to pursue the
matter with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for setting up of the single
high powered Committee for the progressive functioning of the Shipping and Port Sector.
CAPACITY UPGRADATION IN MAJOR PORTS
(Recommendation at Para 28)
17. The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Department of Shipping in
implementing schemes for augmenting the cargo handling capacity and productivity of all major
ports under National Maritime Development Programme (NMDP) to meet India’s EXIM trade
requirements. The Committee also notes that during 2007-08, the aggregate capacity of major ports
was 504.75 mt pa which was a little over the total traffic of 469.37 mt. up to February, 2008.
The Committee feels that the projected increase in the traffic also requires increase in capacity in
ports. During Eleventh Plan period, the ports require a projected capacity addition of 1016.55 mt pa
to meet the overall projected traffic of 1008.95 mt. of which the share of major ports will be
708.09 mt. The Committee also observes that the bulk of capacity augmentation projects at major
ports will be undertaken through Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) and captive users. The
Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to devise plans for holistic and integrated
development of major ports and make efforts to encourage the private sector investments including
FDI for creation and maintenance of port infrastructure including cargo handling capacity at major
ports. The Committee also recommends the Department to provide enabling policies, regulatory
framework and institutional monitoring mechanism support to raise port efficiency, productivity,
equipment and performance level in order to face global challenges of merchandize trade.
Reply of the Government
18. Noted for compliance.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
19. The Committee notes that as per its recommendation the Department has taken
steps for augmenting capacity building schemes at major Ports for the Eleventh Plan. The
Committee recommends the Department to remove the bottlenecks and provide facilitative
and legislative support to encourage the private sector investments for major capacity
upgradation infrastructure projects at all major Ports.
CONTAINERIZATION IN MAJOR PORTS
(Recommendation at Para 31)
20. The Committee notes that containerization of traffic is growing steadily and significantly

5
with dedicated capacity for handling containerized cargo in major ports. The Committee, however,
is constrained to note that the major ports did not significantly contribute to merchandise global
trade making thereby India’s export costlier and imports less competitive. The Committee observes
that a high powered committee has been constituted by the Government to report on the matter
of creation of infrastructure facilities for handling containers at major ports, identification of
problems of congestion and explore areas of improvement in logistics chain and to suggest
measures to increase India’s share in world maritime trade as in India only two regional hub ports
are operational at Jawaharlal Nehru and Chennai Ports for maximizing direct to destination cargo.
The report of high powered committee is awaited. The Committee recommends the Department of
Shipping to ensure that there is no laxity in its efforts pending report of the high powered
Committee for development of more hub ports in the country for transshipment of containerized
cargo for growth of overseas maritime merchandise trade.
Reply of the Government
21. Noted. The Department of Shipping is planning to construct a number of container
terminals on BOT basis through Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode at various Major Ports.
Some of the container terminals which are expected to be awarded in the next two years are as
shown below:
(i) Container Terminal at Ennore — Estimated cost Rs.1300 crore.
(ii) Mega Container Terminal at Chennai — Estimated cost Rs.3105 crore.
(iii) Container Terminal at Tuticorin — Estimated cost Rs.150 crore
(iv) Container T erminal at Kolkata — Estimated cost Rs.1233 crore
(v) Development of Container Terminal north of NSICT, Jawaharlal Nehru Port–Estimated
cost Rs. 600 crore
(vi) Fourth C ontainer Terminal at Jawaharlal Nehru Port–Estimated cost Rs.4100 crore.
22. In addition License Agreements have been signed for (i) International Container
Transshipment Terminal at Cochin Port which is expected to be operational by November, 2009
(ii) Development of 2nd Container Terminal at Chennai Port which is expected to be operational
by 2009-10 and (iii) Construction of two offshore container terminals at Mumbai Port which is
expected to be operational by 2010-11.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
23. The Committee notes the reply.
PORT CONNECTIVITY
(Recommendation at Para 35)
24. The Committee is perturbed to note that port efficiency is still continuing to be impeded
mainly because of slow evacuation of cargo from ports. It also notes with dismay that various rail-
road connectivity projects in the ports of Haldia, Paradip,Chennai, Ennore, Tuticorin, Cochin, New
Mangalore, Mormugaon, Jawaharlal Nehru Ports are either lagging behind schedule or not
sanctioned for implementation. The Committee feels that the slow progress of projects not only
undermines the competitiveness of Indian Ports but also vitiates the environment of investment in
the country. The Committee recommends the Department to augment the rail-road connectivity of

6
major ports with the hinterland for smooth flow of present as well as future traffic. The Committee
also recommends the Department to fix some realistic and achievable targets and put in place
institutional monitoring and review mechanism so that projects could be completed in a time bound
manner and in case of delay, the responsibility must be fixed.
Reply of the Government
25. The status of Port Connectivity Projects is given below:
A. ONGOING/SANCTIONED RAILWAY PROJECTS
Sl. Name of Scope of work Scheduled Present Status
No. Port to be Completion
connected date
1. Haldia Doubling of March, Completed and commissioned.
Panskura-Haldia 2006
Section
2. New Aresikere-Hassan- December, Complete section has been commissioned
Mangalore Mangalore rail link 2005 for goods traffic.
3. Kandla Gandhdham- March, Completed and commissioned.
Palanpur Gauge 2007
Conversion
4. JN Port Doubling of March, Project completed and commissioned.
Panvel-Jasai 2006
Section
5. Paradip Haridaspur-Paradip December, FLS completed. SHA signed on 11.10.2006
link with mines 2008 and SPV incorporated. Private land of
and steel plants 345.86 ha in 50 villages has been taken
possession out of total requirement of
668 ha started on Luna Bridge and
Mahanadi Bridge. Works in progress.
6. Tuticorin Doubling of December, Ambaturai-Koddaikanal Rd. doubling
Madurai-Dindigul 2008 has been merged with this work.
Section Detailed estimate sanctioned. Tenders
for earthwork between Kodaikanal-
Dindigul also awarded.
7. Kandla Bhildi-Samdari June, Earthwork and bridgeworks on
Port Gauge Conversion 2008 Samdari-Bhimnmal (122 km Section) is
being executed by NWR. FLS
completed for full section.
8. Paradip Second bridge over June, W ork in progress. Planned for
Mahanadi 2008 completion in 2007-08.

7
B. RAILWAY PROJECTS TO BE SANCTIONED
Sl. Name of Scope of work Scheduled Present Status
No. Port to be Completion
connected date
12 3 4 5
1. Kolkata Railway December, Survey completed in January, 2007.
connectivity to 2005 This is a deposit survey for KoPT and
proposed jetties report has been submitted to KoPT.
at Diamond The length of the line is 2 kms and
Harbour will cost Rs.22 crores.
2. Mormugao Doubling of March, Report received from RVNL is under
Londa- 2006 appraisal. This is for the entire route
Dharwar from Londa to Vasco which is 342
Section RKM and will cost Rs.1840 crores.
Project can be preferably taken up on
cost sharing basis and on SPV mode.
3. Haldia Doubling of November, RVNL will be executing the work
Panskura- 2005 between Rajgoda-Durgachak. The
Haldia Section proposal has been approved by RVNL
(Phase-I) Board of Directors and is now being
processed for consideration of Ministry
of Railways and thereafter for approval
of MOF.
4. Mumbai Dedicated March, Feasibility study has already been
freight line 2006 completed. Proposal of CR and Mumbai
between Port Trust to take up the work as  Deposit
Wadala and work has been given ‘in-principle,
Kurla approval by Rly. Board. Other issues
have been revolved in a meeting taken
by Secretary (Shipping). Work to start
after Port Trust deposits the money.
Letter has been issued on 20.3.2007.
5. Ennore The new March, Project Report for the new Chord line
Chord Line. 2006 is under appraisal. The traffic projections
(Puttur-Attipattu) are under review. Project will  required
cost sharing and SPV mode can be
explored.
6. Cochin Vallarpadam- (i) Note was put up by M/o  Shipping
Idapally-New for CCEA (meeting held on 22.3.2007)
line. for approval of this project.
(ii) Railway Board has authorized
RVNL for implementation of the project.
(iii) The complete funding of the
project will be made by D/o Shipping
and will be provided to M/o Railways
as per the progress of the work.

8
12 3 4 5
(iv) The operation and maintenance
will be done by M/o Railways.
(v) Land acquisition is in progress.
(vi) Contract has been awarded.
STATUS OF NEW PORT CONNECTIVITY PROJECTS
Sl. Name of Scope of work Length Present status
No. Port (Km)
1. Kolkata Kona Junction 14 Transfer of Defence land for the Link is pending.
on NH-6 to NHAI Board in the meeting held on 11.06.08
Netaji Subash decided to close this project and request
Dock DoR T&H to entrust Kona Expressway to
Government of WB.
2. Paradip Panikholi- 263 PPPAC cleared the Project in  November, 2007
(BOT) Keonjhar- and RFQ Applications received on 4.2.08 and
Rimluli (166.2 evaluation is in progress. RFP is likely to be
kms.) and Rimuli- invited in Aug., 08
Roxy-Rajuamunda
(96.5 km)
4. Tuticorin Four laning of 128 W ork awarded in Feb.,06. Agreement signed
(BOT) Tuticorin-Madurai in July, 06. Financial Close achieved in
Road (NH-45B) Jan., 07 and Scheduled completion by 2010.
4. Cochin Connectivity to 17.2 The work commenced in Aug., 07 with
ICTT, scheduled completion in Feb., 2010 Cumulative
Vallarpadam progress: 8% upto 20th August, 2008.
Reasons for delay:
1. Reclamation by CoPT is delayed (Scheduled
Completion: Nov., 07 and Likely Completion:
Sept, 08)
2. Land Acquisition was completed by State
Government in July, 08. F ACT land was handed
over on 30.1.2008. Subsequently, shifting of
NAPHTHA Pipelines by IOCL and BPCL in FACT
land delayed the work.
3. Bridge No. BR 12 to be extended to cross over
Railway line at Vallarpadam.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
26. The Committee is perturbed to note the slow progress of most of the various
ongoing/sanctioned railway-road connectivity projects at the major Ports. It also constrained
to note that the connectivity projects in the Ports of Paradip, Tuticorin, Kandla, Kolkata,
Mormugao, Haldia, Mumbai, Ennore and Cochin are either lagging behind schedule or the
work was not awarded for implementation. The Committee recommends the Department to

9
pursue the matter with the Ministry of Railways and the Department of Road Transport and
Highways for timely completion of the various projects.
ESTABLISHMENT OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY
(Recommendation at Para 39)
27. The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is in the process of formulating a
Maritime Policy for the maritime sector which seeks to ensure a coordinated development of Ports,
Shipping, Inland Water Transport, Ship Building and Ship repairing with the objective to upgrade and
modernize the port infrastructure in India to benchmark its performance against global standards. The
Committee also gathered from the replies that the regulatory authority will be setup at an appropriate
time. The Committee observes that since much of the activities in the port sector are taking place
with private participation, there is need to establish regulatory authority well in time and that too
before coming across any problem for better control, co-ordination and monitoring for achieving
excellence in the port and shipping sector besides addressing serious security implications. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to take steps for setting up of a
regulatory authority on the pattern of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) and Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) for creating a level playing field
and foster healthy competition and to encourage investments for the shipping and port sector besides
monitoring performance standards and adjudication of disputes and disposal of appeal thereof.
Reply of the Government
28. Noted. In so far as the Major Ports are concerned, there is an autonomous body, namely,
Tariff Authority for Major Ports (TAMP) to regulate tariffs for various services at the Major Ports.
TAMP fixes the Scale of Rates (SoR) for various services rendered by the Major Ports. The
Department of Shipping has recently issued guidelines to TAMP for upfront fixation of tariffs for
projects which are to be taken up through private sector participation through the Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode. Thus, the TAMP is regulating the various activities at the Major Ports
through tariff fixation.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
29. The Committee notes that the Tariff Authority for Major Ports (TAMP) is regulating
the various activities at the Major Ports only. The Committee however has recommended
to set a regulatory authority to regulate the shipping and port sector and not for major
ports only and wish to have the opinion of the Government in this regard.
(Recommendation at Para 40)
30. The Committee also recommends the Department to formulate maritime policy for the private
sector participation for improving quality, efficiency and increasing competition for coordinated
development of Ports, Shipping, Inland Water Transport, Ship building and Ship repairing.
Reply of the Government
31. Noted. The Department of Shipping is in the process of formulating the Maritime Policy in
consultation with the concerned Ministries and Planning Commission. The changes/modifications
suggested by various Ministries/Departments have been incorporated and action is being taken to
finalize the policy.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
32. The Committee notes the reply.

10
CALCUTTA DOCK LABOUR BOARD
(Recommendation at Para 48)
33. The Committee strongly criticize the lackadaisical approach of the Government in releasing the
one time grant of Rs.738.71 crore for financial assistance on account of payment of (arrears of
pension and pensionary dues of Calcutta Dock Labour Board (CDLB) and setting up of a corpus fund
for discharging pension and pensionary liabilities of the employees. The Committee notes with anguish
that even after repeated recommendations of the Committee, the Government has not approved any
specific proposal to mitigate the sufferings of these poor pensioners. The Committee observes that
a scheme for merger of CDLB with Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) and financial restructuring of KoPT
is under consideration of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS). The Committee unanimously opines
that unless the Government is actually willing and come forward to support the employees and
pensioners of CDLB, they will continue to die in harness under the resource crunch. The Committee,
therefore, strongly urges the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance to consider favourably the
legitimate and long-felt needs of the pensioners and provide much needed one time grants immediately
in order to settle the arrears of pension and pensionary dues of the employees of Calcutta Dock
Labour Board, who have rendered their services to the nation.
Reply of the Government
34. Department of Shipping worked out the following scheme for payment of unpaid arrears to
pensioners, workers and employees of Calcutta Dock Labour Board in the following manner:
(i) The total annual liability of CDLB, including payment of salary, pension etc. is estimated at
Rs.51.44 crores approximately per year. It is proposed that, on an average Rs.31.01 crores approx.
(after tax) can be met by way of 10% levy on the cargo handled by KoPT, permission for which
will be granted by the Government. The remaining Rs.19.43 crores will be sought as annual
budgetary support (non plan) from the Government of India.
(ii) Arrears amounting to Rs.183.97 crores as on 30.9.07 (inclusive of interest) is due for
payment by the CDLB towards its employees, workers and Rs.19.43 crores will be sought as
annual budgetary support (non plan) from the Government of India.
(iii) Arrears amounting to Rs.183.97 crores as on 30.9.07 (inclusive of interest) is due for
payment by the CDLB towards its employees, workers and pensioners. It is proposed that KoPT
will move an application before the Hon’ble Court to allow them to liquidate the amount over a
period of ten years in installments. A plea will also be made to the Hon’ble Court for waiving
interest accrued till date and also the interest likely to accrue in future on the outstanding amounts.
It is proposed to arrange an intercorporate long terms loan at nominal interest by way of
contributions from eleven Major Port @ Rs.10 crores per port, which will be converted into a
corpus to be managed by KoPT.
(iv) The residual liability, if any, will be met by Kolkata Port Trust.
(v) Once all workers and employees of CDLB are retired, Kolkata Port Trust will meet the
pensionary liabilities through levy. Government support of Rs.19.43 crores and the amount available
in the corpus. Thus, in effect, CDLB will be merged with KoPT, once the financial assistance as
stated above is received and implemented.
35. Above proposal was considered by the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in its meeting held
on 8.2.08 and agreed with the scheme formulated by Department of Shipping with the modification
that the proposed annual financial assistance to KoPT by Government of India would be in the
form of loan and not grant. Matter has been examined and it is felt that providing of financial
assistance to KoPT in the form of loan to tide over the problem of CDLB will not solve the
problem, the assistance should be in the form of grant. Accordingly, it is proposed to take up the

11
matter again with CoS to review its decision and allow financial assistance to KoPT in the form
of grant instead of loan.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
36. The Committee notes that the Department has formulated a scheme for clearing the
unpaid arrears to pensioners, workers and employees of Calcutta Dock Labour Board on the
recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries. However, the Committee recommends
the Department to release payments of pension and pensionary dues to the employees of
the CDLB at the earliest. The Committee of Secretaries should also be pursued to review
its decision and allow financial assistance to KoPT in the form of grants instead of loans.
TONNAGE TAX REGIME
(Recommendation Para 51)
37. The Committee is not satisfied with the repeated replies of the Department. The Committee
feels that worthwhile action should have been taken by the Government on the specific
recommendation of the Committee for inclusion of vessels registered under the Indian Vessels Act,
1917 and the Coastal Vessels Act, 1838 for getting tonnage tax benefits for the development of the
Inland Water Transport and Coastal; Vessel Transport in the country. The Committee apprehends that
the Government does not desire to rationalize the fiscal regime for Indian Shipping Industry for
facilitating the growth of the Indian tonnage. The Committee Disapproves the contention of the
Department that introduction of tonnage tax to these vessels would unnecessarily burden the CIWTC.
The Committee desires the Department to conduct a feasibility study to know the profit-loss benefits
with the introduction of tonnage tax regime to these vessels and submit a report to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
38. IWAI has been asked to get a feasibility study conducted in this regard and the report would
be submitted to the Committee once its findings are in place.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
39. The Committee notes the reply.
CRUISE SHIPPING
(Recommendation at Para 55)
40. The Committee is concerned that despite its recommendations in the earlier reports on
Demands for Grants urging the Government to bring out a Comprehensive Cruise Shipping Policy,
the Government neither complied with its recommendations nor formulated the cruise shipping
policy till date although it has been informed by the Department on 09-01-2008 that the
comprehensive cruise shipping policy will be formulated within a period of two months. The
Committee feels that in the absence of a comprehensive cruise shipping policy the Department will
not be able to popularize the cruise shipping and address all the aspect of facilitating creation of
infrastructure, encourage investments from the private sector and create a congenial and hospitable
environment for growth of cruise shipping in the country. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
earlier recommendation urging the Government to bring out a comprehensive policy on cruise
shipping without further delay.
Reply of the Government
41. The Cruise Shipping Policy with certain deletions/amendments relating to fiscal regime has
been approved by the Cabinet on 26.6.2008.

12
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
42. The Committee notes that as per its recommendation the Cabinet approved the
Cruise Shipping Policy for the growth of Cruise Shipping in the country. The Committee
hopes that with the implementation of the Policy, a sustained and structured growth for the
sector could be achieved.
MULTIPLICITY OF TAXES
(Recommendation at Para 58)
43. The Committee has been drawing attention of the Government to the problem of multiplicity
of taxes having adverse impact on shipping sector. The Government, however, till date has not
come out with a proposal for rationalization and as of now there are twelve different taxes ailing
the country’s shipping sector particularly the EXIM trade. The Committee feels that Indian shipping
will remain uncompetitive unless Government provides the level playing field as available to other
maritime nations in the world. Since the shipping is truly international business with no commercial
barrier, the Committee recommends that the Government must provide a level playing field by
attempting to rationalize the tax structure and eliminate the disparity in tax treatment which
counters the growth of the shipping sector and ultimately tonnage is losing out. The Committee
also recommends the Department to continue to make all out efforts at the highest level till the
matter is favourably resolved.
Reply of the Government
44. A Group under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Shipping) with the Members from
Indian National Shipowners’ Association (INSA), Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) and Director
General of Shipping was constituted in October, 2005 with the approval of Hon’ble Minister of
SRT&H to review the tax regime of Shipping Industry. The Group considered the problem of
multiplicity taxes being faced by the Shipping Industry. After detailed deliberation the Group
finalized its report. Based on the recommendation of the Group, the matter has been taken up more
than once with the Ministry of Finance about extension of fiscal incentives to Indian Shipping
Industry but none of the incentive asked for by this Department has found a place in the Union
Budget 2008-09. The Department will continue to make all out efforts at the highest level.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
45. The Committee notes that a group was constituted to go into the problems of
multiplicity of taxes being faced by the shipping industry and its report has been submitted
to the Government. The Committee also notes that based upon the recommendation of the
report, the Department is consistently making efforts for extension of fiscal incentives to
Indian Shipping Industry which are adversely impacting the growth of the shipping sector
with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee recommends the Department to vigorously
follow up the matter for rationalization of taxes ailing the shipping sector with the Ministry
of Finance at the apex level.
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
(Recommendation Para 63)
46. The Committee notes that India has positioned itself as a major human resources supply
nation to the Maritime Industry with 130 maritime training institutes at her credit for imparting
training in various disciplines. The Committee is, however, concerned about the continuing shortage
of about 1015 Indian officers during 2007-08 which is likely to increase further. The Committee is

13
of the view that the problem of trained manpower in the country may further aggravate if the
Government does not come forward with concrete plan/policy to arrest these rising trend. The
Committee notes that Government is actively considering proposals for recruitment of foreign officers
on Indian flagships and increasing training facilities including capacity building of private sector. The
Committee is of the view that the shortage of Indian officers can be better addressed by augmenting
existing training facilities in the country besides opening more such training institutes in the private
hands. The Committee, however, urges the Department to provide institutional and integrated curricula
for creation of maritime human resources in order to standardize the quality of maritime education
and training imparted by the private maritime institutes in the country and the Department may
continue to act as a nodal agency for co-coordinating, monitoring and controlling maritime training
in India pending the decision of setting up of Indian Maritime University in the country.
Reply of the Government
47. The proposals for enhancement in intake and new courses from the existing institutes are
processed on priority. To ensure quality of maritime education and training, applications from
existing institutes for enhancement in intake and new courses are considered only from the existing
institutes which have highest grading, a satisfactory placement record and are running the maritime
related courses satisfactorily. As per the guidelines, only institutes which are promoted with the
non-profit making objective by leading and reputed shipping companies, ship and management
related companies, Government institutes and ship building companies, are eligible to set up new
private institutes in this field.
48. In order to standardize the quality of maritime education and training imparted by approved
maritime training institutes the following measures have been taken:—
(i) A standardized system of examination for General Purpose (GP) Ratings and Certificate
Course in Maritime Catering (CCMC) Ratings introduced across the country for all the Maritime
Training institutes from the year 2006 through Board of Examination for Seafarers Trust (BEST).
(ii) Degree/Diploma courses in Nautical and Engineering Stream is standardized by way of
prescribed syllabi as per META Manual and STCW Mandates administered by Directorate General
of Shipping.
(iii) For the Diploma in Nautical Science (IGNOU) course, a Common Entrance Test (CET) was
introduced for the non sponsored candidates since the inception of the course in August, 2004. In
order to standardize the admission process for sponsored as well as non sponsored candidates,
CET has been made mandatory for all categories w.e.f. August, 2008.
(iv) The detailed procedure has been devised for enforcing shipboard training for trainees of all
approved maritime training institutes conducting pre-sea courses.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
49. The Committee notes that the Department is actively considering proposals for
enhancement in intake and augmenting existing training  facilities to ensure quality in
Maritime Education and Training. The Committee recommends the  Department to make
endeavour to address the continuing shortage of maritime human resources by setting up
new institutes in this field.
(Recommendation at Para 64)
50. The Committee also impresses upon the Department to take into confidence the major trade
unions before inducting foreign officers on Indian board but in the process the future prospects
of Indian officers should not be jeopardized.

14
Reply of the Government
51. The Department of Shipping has already had discussions with the Trade Unions and
apprised them that it is considering the possibility of employment of foreign officers and not ratings
on Indian Ships.
52. Presently, the proposal is for allowing employment of foreign nationals of a few select
countries on Indian foreign going ships. Out of the total of 877 Indian ships, only 277 ships are
issued with license to trade in foreign waters. The Indian officers are much in demand and since
majority of them prefer to work for foreign flag ships rather than Indian ships on account of the
discrimination in the income tax assessment, this proposal will not in any way jeopardize the future
prospects of Indian officers. There is world wide acute shortage of officers in the merchant navy
and the Department of Shipping is considering inducting of foreign officers on Indian board only
to enable the Indian shipowners to man the ships.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
53. The Committee notes the reply.
HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LTD.
(Recommendation at Para 69)
54. The matter of Rehabilitation cum Financial Restructuring of Hindustan Shipyard Limited has
been engaging attention of the Committee for a long time and the Committee highlighted the
problem in its various Reports. The Government has, however, not cleared the Rehabilitation-cum-
Financial Restructuring proposal and the same is still under the consideration of the Government.
The Committee fails to understand the Government policy which one hand intends to “capitalized
and strengthens the infrastructure of the shipyard by the financial restructuring” but on the other
hand it speaks that “it has been decided by the GoM to handover the yard to the MoD and set
up another shipyard in public sector”. This reflects indecisiveness and ambiguity in Government
approach toward Hindustan Shipyard Limited.
Reply of the Government
55. The Department of Shipping had submitted a Note for Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) for Rehabilitation-cum-Financial Restructuring of Hindustan Shipyard Limited,
Visakhapatnam. The CCEA decided that the matter may in the first instance, be considered by a
Group of Ministers (GoM). The GoM has considered the proposal of this Department and has
made its recommendations. Based on the recommendations of the GoM, a draft Cabinet Note has
been prepared which is under circulation to various appraising Ministries/Departments/Agencies.
After receipt of the comments of all the appraising agencies, the final Cabinet Note shall be placed
before the Cabinet for approval.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
56. The Committee notes that a draft Cabinet Note for Rehabilitation-cum-Financial
Restructuring of Hindustan Shipyard Limited, Visakhapatnam has been circulated to various
appraising Ministries/Departments/Agencies. The Committee recommends the Department
to pursue the matter with all the apprising agencies for obtaining their comments at the
earliest for placing before the Cabinet for a final decision.
(Recommendation at Para 70)
57. The Committee, however, may not object the transfer the Hindustan Shipyard Limited to the
Ministry of Defence. However, the Committee fails to understand as to what will happen to the

15
projects under execution or promised to be executed by the Hindustan Shipyard Limited. Another
thing the Committee, will like the Government to ensure that while transferring the Hindustan
Shipyard Limited to Ministry of Defence, all the employees of Hindustan Shipyard Limited may also
be taken over by the Ministry of Defence without affecting the terms and conditions of service
of those employees. The Committee recommends that pension liabilities and pending dues of the
retired employees may also be taken care by the Government.
Reply of the Government
58. The concerns expressed by the Hon’ble Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding the
projects under execution by Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL), the interest of the employees of HSL
and the pending dues of the retired employees have been taken note of in the draft Cabinet Note.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
59. The Committee notes the reply of the Department that while transferring Hindustan
Shipyard Limited to the Ministry of Defence the interest of the employees of HSL and the
pending dues of the retired employees will be taken care of.
HOOGHLY DOCK AND PORT ENGINEERS LIMITED
(Recommendation at Para 75)
60. The Committee notes that a final cabinet note for Rehabilitation-cum-Restructuring Package
is being finalized for according approval of CCEA. The Committee also notes that a token provision
of Rs.0.50 crore has been kept for revival package during 2008-09. The Committee wishes the
Government to grant an early approval for revival of HDPEL and write-off the Government loan
and interest liability for improving the financial health of the company. The Committee hopes that
with the approval and implementation package, the company would achieve a turn around and earn
sustainable profits.
Reply of the Government
61. The Department of Shipping has sent the final cabinet note for  Rehabilitation-cum-
Restructuring package of Hooghly Dock and Port Engineers Limited for consideration and approval
of Cabinet Committee on Economic: Affairs (CCEA). The CCEA has considered the proposal in its
meeting held on 5th June, 2008.
“The Committee considered the note dated 15th May, 2008 from the Ministry of Shipping,
Road transport and Highways, Department of Shipping and decided that in the first instance, a
committee of Secretaries look into the question of reviving the company through a joint venture
with the private sector.”
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
62. The Committee notes that a final Cabinet Note for granting Rehabilitation-cum-
Restructuring package of Hooghly Dock and Port Engineers Limited has been sent for
consideration and approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).  The
Committee recommends the Department to follow-up the matter for grant of Rehabilitation-
cum-Restructuring Package to HDPEL so that the financial health of the Company could be
sustained.
INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
(Recommendation at Para 81)
63. The Committee has consistently expressed its concern over the slow pace of utilization of

16
plan outlays and development of Inland Water Transport sector in the country. The Committee
notes with anguish that an outlay of Rs.158.00 crore was allocated in BE 2007-08 for  the IWT
sector but it was reduced to Rs.138.60 crore at RE stage and an expenditure of Rs.56.53 cr was
made only upto Feb. 2008. The Committee is disappointed to note the continuous under utilization
of funds by the Department of Shipping for  development of IWT sector. The Committee expects
that the Department would make every endeavor to ensure that the measures adopted for  the
growth of IWT sector in the country is monitored scrupulously to achieve the envisaged physical
and financial targets.
Reply of the Government
64. The observation/recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted for compliance. During
2007-08 many projects of Inland Water Transport (IWT) sector got delayed due to procedural
delays in approval of projects, delay in execution of some of the projects by CPWD- being a new
area for trem delay in construction of vessels by HDPE and inadequate response to many tenders
of Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) for acquisition of vessels, capital dredging etc
leading to re-tendering. Because of these reasons a substantial part of targeted expenditure during
the year could not be made due to which expenditure of IWAI during 2007-08 was only Rs.79.63
crore (provisional). Most of these reasons were beyond the control of IWAI/Department of
Shipping (DoS). However, as on date, most of such projects have been either sanctioned or are in
the advanced stage of sanction and many of the tenders have also been re-invited and, therefore, it
is felt that a good part of the expenditure targeted for 2007-08 would spill over to the next financial
year which would result in substantial improved utilization of funds during 2008-09 by IWAI.
65. Review and monitoring of implementation of programmes/activities of IWAI is done on a
regular basis and co-ordination is ensured through continuous interaction by the DoS with IWAI.
A taskforce has been functioning in the DoS to review the progress of IWT projects on quarterly
basis. Also, Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor and Joint Secretary (Shipping) are on the
Board of IWAI. This arrangement further hel ps in such interaction/monitoring of projects.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
66. The Committee notes the measure adopted by the Department for the growth of IWT
sector in the country. It also notes that a taskforce has been functioning in the Department
to review the progress of IWT projects on quarterly basis. The Committee recommends the
Department to remove the procedural bottlenecks which causes the delay in approval and
execution of the projects so that the physical and financial targets could be achieved in a
big way.
(Recommendation at Para 82)
67. The Committee notes that potential of the Inland Water Transport remains largely
unexplored due to the indifferent attitude of the Central and State Governments. The Committee
observes that although the Department of Shipping is committed to increase the share of Inland
Water Transport in the country’s total EXIM trade, still the waterways are not being utilized to
their potential and remain largely neglected and underdeveloped for want of required infrastructure
namely fairways, terminals and navigable aids, as a result, it has not reached at a threshold level
to become commercially viable. The Committee is of the view that with adequate investments,
policy framework and focused approach, the Inland Water Transport in the country can be
developed into a viable transport mode complementary to the rail and road modes. The Committee
is of the opinion that to develop the Inland Water Transport sector with fast pace to its full
potential in the country, the Government should endeavor to provide institutional framework and
minimize the procedural bottlenecks besides providing adequate investments both from Public and

17
private partnership primarily public investment in Inland Water Transport and to develop it to a level
where private sector feels confident to invest in this sector particularly in ownership and operation
of cargo and passenger vessels to Inland Water Transport mode. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Government to provide institutional framework and basic infrastructural facility for
accelerated development of Inland Water Transport sector in the country under National Maritime
Development Programme.
Reply of the Government
68. The DoS is committed to developing IWT sector as a complementary mode of transport
to rail and road and necessary steps in this direction are being taken by the Department.
69. Realising that since the IWT sector remained neglected for a very long time and rather a
small investment has been made for development of this sector compared to rail and road, the
IWAI has prepared an Action Plan to make the existing three National Waterways fully functional
by providing a threshold level of required infrastructure namely fairway, terminals and navigational
aids. Most of the projects of this Action Plan have been sanctioned by the respective Competent
Authorities and these are at various stages of implementation. Efforts are being made to complete
all the projects of this Action Plan by March, 2010. To demonstrate the efficacy of this
infrastructure and commercial viability of IWT operations for transportation of cargo on the
National Waterways the Action Plan also envisages procurement of a few cargo vessels and their
demonstration runs for 3-4 years after the implementation of the Action Plan. The DoS is hopeful
that after these demonstration runs, the private sector will get adequate encouragement to run more
cargo vessels on the National Waterways and consequently the effective utilization of these
waterways for transportation of cargo would substantially increase.
70. As regards institutional frame work for accelerated development of IWT sector it is
essential to enhance capacity of IWAI. Therefore, an organization re-structuring/expansion study in
respect of IWAI has already been got done through National Productivity Council.
71. As regards, National Maritime Development Programme (NMDP), 15 projects of IWT
sector are integrated with the Programme.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
72. The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has prepared an Action Plan
to make the existing three National Waterways fully functional by providing a threshold
level of required infrastructure namely fairway, terminals and navigational aid and these
are at various stages of implementation. The Committee, however, once again recommends
the Department to provide institutional framework and basic infrastructural facility for
accelerated development of Inland Water Transport sector in the country.
(Recommendation at Para 93)
73. The Committee notes with dismay over the discontinuance of the Centrally sponsored
scheme for IWT development in the country by the Planning Commission. The Committee is of
the view that the decision of the Planning Commission to convert the Centrally Sponsored Scheme
(CSS) for IWT development into Central sector scheme will adversely affect the pace of
development of Inland Water Transport in the country. The Committee recommends the Department
of Shipping to impress upon the Planning Commission for the revival of the central sponsored
scheme for overall development of the IWT Sector during the annual plan itself.
Reply of the Government
74. The DoS agrees with the observation of the Hon’ble Committee that dis-continuation of

18
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for IWT development for the entire country and its conversion
into a Central Sector Scheme for North Eastern Region only by the Planning Commission will
adversely affect the pace of overall development of IWT in the country. The DoS is already
impressing upon the Planning Commission for revival of CSS and in this direction formal letters
have already been written by the Minister of Shipping to Dy. Chairman, Planning Commission as
well as to the Hon’ble Prime Minister. In addition, this issue is raised in various meetings with the
Planning Commission from time to time.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
75. The Committee notes the reply.
(Recommendation at Para 94)
76. The Committee is constrained to note that cargo transportation by Inland Water Transport
mode has not shown significant improvement on the three National Waterways. The Committee also
expresses its displeasure over the fact that no comparative cost output evaluation for transportation
of cargo through this inland water transport has been carried out by the Department. The Committee
is of the view that such evaluation would further establish the support of Inland Water Transport over
other mode of transports. Therefore, the Committee recommends that a detailed study should be
carried out by the Department in this regard. The Committee also urges the Department to fix realistic
physical target for cargo transportation by IWT mode year-wise for entire Eleventh Plan period and
put in place institutional monitoring mechanism for achieving the desired growth.
Reply of the Government
77. As regards cargo transportation by IWT mode on three National Waterways, it is reiterated
that after completion of the implementation of Action Plan to make these waterways fully functional
and demonstration vessel runs the utilization of the National Waterways for transportation of cargo
is expected to increase significantly.
78. As regards comparative cost evaluation of transportation of cargo through IWT, the
transportation by this mode is recognized all over the world as fuel efficient and cost effective
compared to both rail and road modes. However, since the development of this sector remained
grossly neglected over many decades in India, the infrastructure required to make the total
transport cost competitive from origin to destination using IWT mode is yet to be developed
(namely fairway for safe and unhindered navigation, terminals with mechanical loading/unloading
and aids for 24 hrs navigation). Actually, the IWT requires is multi modal approach by nature since
most of the origin/destination of cargo are not located on the water front. While the water borne
leg of a particular O-D pair will be definitely cost effective, it is not necessary that the total cost
from origin to the water front at originating station, transshipment from road/rail to the inland
vessels, transportation of cargo on waterway by inland vessels, again transshipment from inland
vessels to the road/rail at the destination station and transportation by road or rail to the final
destination may not necessarily be cheaper. Therefore a generalized comparison of cost advantage
of IWT over rail or road may not be very meaningful for IWT sector in general. Such a
comparison may be true mostly for a particular O-D pair only. Nevertheless to get some idea a
study has been awarded by IWAI to National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) in
the context of IVBSS, where inter alia , their terms of reference also include comparison of the
cost of inland waterways transportation with the alternative modes (railway and roads) and benefits
of inland waterways over the other alternatives.
79. As regards fixing realistic target for cargo transportation by IWT mode under the Action
Plan mentioned earlier the following targets for cargo transportation on three existing National
Waterways have already been envisaged:

19
Year NW-l NW-2 NW-3 Total
in MnT in btkm in MnT in btkm in MnT in btkm in MnT in btkm
2011-12 4.18 2.00 1.61 1.23 5.09 0.40 10.88 3.63
2016-17 7.26 3.40 2.40 2.37 5.61 0.44 15.27 6.21
2021-22 14.50 6.69 4.43 4.73 6.50 0.51 25.43 1 1.93
2024-25 18.20 8.69 5.65 4.87 7.17 0.563 31.02 14.12
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
80. The Committee notes with dismay that the infrastructure required to make the total
transport cost competitive from origin to destination using IWT mode is yet to be developed
namely fairway for safe and unhindered navigation, terminals with mechanical loading/
unloading and aids for 24 hrs navigation. It however, notes that the utilization of the
National Waterways for transportation of cargo is expected to increase significantly after
completion of the implementation of Action Plan and demonstration vessel runs. The targets
for cargo transportation on three existing National Waterways have already been envisaged
in the action plan. The Committee further notes that a study has been awarded to National
Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) for comparison of the cost and benefits of
inland waterways transportation with the alternative modes. The Committee recommends
the Department to provide adequate investment, policy framework and focused approached
for development of these existing national waterways for making them commercially viable.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of study report.
(Recommendation at Para 97)
81. The Committee notes with anguish that no security personnel are being provided for safe
transportation of men and material in Sunderbans /Protocol routes in West Bengal. The Committee
is of the opinion that security is a prime concern and should be looked into seriously by making
commensurate security arrangement in Sunderbans/Protocol routes. The Committee recommends
the Department of Shipping to take up the matter of beefing up of security arrangement in the
Sunderbans /Protocol routes with the Union Home Ministry so that inadequacy of police deployment
could be addressed in a big way.
Reply of the Government
82. The DoS or IWAI has not experienced any problem in respect of security arrangements in
Sunderbans/Protocol routes.
83. Under the IWT Trade and Transit Protocol between the Government of Bangladesh and the
Government of India, IWAI is the nodal agency in India for issuing necessary permission for inland
barges of Bangladesh and India for their movement across the country and undertaking loading/
unloading operation at designated Ports of Call. Checking of un-authorized/illegal transportation of
men and materials (cargo) falls under the purview of Customs Department (for material) and
Immigration Department (for men) and IWAI do not play any role in the same. The above two
authorities, at their respective check points, check and verify if the cargo carried by them and the
men present on board the ship are as per the declared manifesto (certified by BIWTA, the nodal
agency on Trade and Transit Protocol on behalf of Bangladesh Government). At all other border
points the Border Security Force keeps vigil on illegal immigrants/illegal movement of goods.
Bangladeshi vessels never demanded from IWAI, security arrangement in their vessels nor have the
State Government of West Bengal/Assam ever requested for security arrangement in Bangladeshi
vessels.

20
84. Nevertheless, the matter had been taken up with the Ministry of Home Affairs who have
replied that the area around the International Border (IB) is dominated properly by BSF with the
help of floating BOP and other water crafts stationed at Bharikhal. No case either of dacoity or
theft, within the jurisdiction of BSF, in this area has been reported. The depth areas, however, are
not under the BSF area of operations. For these area security needs to be ensured by State police,
Coast Guard and Custom officials. Letter have been sent to these agencies.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
85. The Committee notes the reply that the Department has not experienced any
problem in respect of security arrangement in the Sunderbans/protocol routes. However, the
Committee recommends the Department to take up the matter for strengthening the
security arrangements at depth areas which are not under the BSF operations, with the
State police, coast guard and custom officials in the Sunderban/protocol routes, for safe
transportation of men and material.
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION
(Recommendation at Para 100)
86. The Committee is pained to note that the Government has decided neither to consider
revival of CIWTC nor to amalgamate this Corporation with various Organizations, such as Inland
Waterways Authority of India (IWAI), Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) or Shipping Corporation of India
(SCI) that too, without getting conducted any scientific study by an expert agency. The Committee
is of the view that the matter of revival and amalgamation of CIWTC should be got examined by
some high powered expert committee. The Committee once again reiterates its earlier
recommendation contained in 117th Report on Demands for Grants 2007-08 of Department of
Shipping, which is reproduced below:
“The Committee is constrained to note that in spite of its recommendation in the past, the
Government has not come out a complete blueprint for making full use of the existing
assets of River Service Division (RSD). The Committee is of the opinion that CIWTC with
its infrastructure and expertise can play an integral part for development and promotion of
inland water transport through NW-1 and NW-2. The Committee recommends that
possibility may also be explored to physically amalgamate the remaining CIWTC with Inland
Waterway Authority of India (IWAI) or Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) or Shipping Corporation
of India (SCI), so that the infrastructure and expertise of CIWTC can be utilized for
development of waterways transport.”
Reply of the Government
87. It is submitted that the Cabinet has decided in favour of disinvestment of CIWTC minus
RBD. Action has already been initiated in compliance of the said decision. The Corporation has been
making losses continuously since operation in the longer stretches of national waterways as of now
are not commercially viable compelling the Government to go for its disinvestment. The
disinvestment of CIWTC is not likely to affect the role/activities of CIWTC. It will only result in
charge of share holding pattern and in the nomenclature of the Corporation. The Inland Water
Transport activities too are not likely to be affected by the disinvestment of the Corporation.
Further, since Cabinet has already decided in favour of disinvestment of CIWTC (minus RBD), no
feasibility study for merger of CIWTC with other organizations was conducted. The issue of
physical amalgamation of CIWTC (minus RBD) with various organizations such as IWAI, KoPT or
SCI was raised in various communications received from Hon’ble Members of Parliament and other
dignitaries and was examined in the Ministry and not found feasible.

21
88. The corporation has about 100 IWT vessels out of which 40 are operational. While some
of the non-operational vessels are awaiting repair some are beyond economic repair. CIWTC
operated 47 voyages in NW-1 between 2004 and 2006 at the behest of IWAI. The route is,
however, non-economical.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
89. T he Committee is perturbed to note that despite being recommended by the
Committee a number of times the Government has not taken setps to improve the financial
health of the CIWTC. The Committee does not agree with the Government that with the
disinvestment of CIWTC, the role and activities of CIWTC will not be affected. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department to conduct a feasibility study
for merger of CIWTC with other organizations such as IWAI, KoPT or SCI for the holistic
development of inland water transport.
DEVELOPMENT OF WATER TRANSPORT IN ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR AND
LAKSHADWEEP ISLANDS
(Recommendation at Para 101)
90. The Shipping Corporation of India with its two owned passenger-cum-cargo vessels and 27
managed vessels operates domestic passenger-cum-transportation services between mainland and
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep group of islands on behalf of the Government of
India. Presently, Andaman and Nicobar Islands administration has 22 vessels comprising of 18
passenger vessels and 4 passenger-cum-cargo vessels, Union Territory of Lakshadweep has 5
vessels comprising 1 passenger-cum-cargo vessel, 3 passenger vessels and one bunker barge. The
Committee observes that water transport is the life-line of these groups of islands for their
interconnection with the mainland and within islands. The Committee notes that this sector has
been neglected for so many years without any fund infusion for modernization of the vessels and
purchase of additional vessels. Due to this, the populations of these islands are suffering to a great
extent. The Committee further notes that in the Demand for Grants for the year 2008-09 no
financial allocation has been made for improving the interconnectivity and water transport in
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep islands. The Committee, therefore, recommends
to the Government of India to take immediate steps for improving inter-islands connectivity of the
islands of Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep for mitigating the problems of connectivity
between these islands. The Committee also recommends that sufficient Budgetary Allocation may
be provided for augmenting the water transport connectivity in these islands.
Reply of the Government
91. (A) ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS
(1) Purchase of additional/new vessels:—
In order to mitigate the problems of connectivity between the mainland and the islands, Ship
Acquisition Committee in its meeting held under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Shipping) on
08.08.2007 has recommended acquisition of 25 vessels during Eleventh Five Year Plan period as
under:—
(a) Mainland-Island Sector: 2 x 1200 pax vessels during 2007-08 for replacement and
2 x 1200 pax new vessels during remaining years of Eleventh Five Year Plan;
(b) Inter-Island Sector: 2 x 400 pax vessels during 2007-08 and 2 x 400 Pax Vessels during
remaining years of Eleventh Five Year Plan (1 towards replacement and 3 new vessels for capacity
augmentation);

22
(c) Foreshore Sector: 2 x 200 pax vessels and 1 x 250 Pax Vessel during 2007-08 for
augmentation of capacity; and
(d) Harbour Ferry Sector: 4 x 100 Pax Vehicle Ferries, 6 x 200 Pax V essels and 4 x 50 Pax
Motor Launches during 2007-08 ( 5 for capacity augmentation and 9 for replacement).
The A&N Administration has been asked to submit EFC proposals for seeking final approval of
Government of India for acquisition. A&N Administration has informed that they are processing the
proposal in consultation with SCI for finalization of the tendering process.
(2) Vessels delivered/under construction :—
2 x 65 Pax-cum-Ferries (Landing Crafts) built at M/s Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers,
Kolkata and 1 x 100 Pax Vessel built at M/s Shalimar Works Limited, Kolkata have been delivered.
8 vessels are at various stages of construction at different shipyards out of which 6 - 7 vessels
are expected to be delivered in this year and as regard the vessel (1 x 400 Pax-cum-50 Ton Cargo
Vessel under construction at M/s AAGL, this Department, A&N Administration/SCI are pursuing
with the shipyard to complete the construction at the earliest. The present status of the vessels
of A&N Administration is given below:
Sl. Type of V essel Present Status
No.
12 3
1. 1 x 400 Pax-cum 50 In the last meeting held in this Ministry on 07.08.2008 to review
Ton Cargo Vessel at the progress of vessels, it was decided that a Committee headed
M/s Alcock Ashdown by Shri U.C. Grover, Director, SCI with Members from HSL and
(Gujarat) Limited, DG (Shipping) should make an inspection of the yard and submit
Bhavnagar a written report to the Ministry. The inspection report was
handed over by Shri J.V.S. Rao of SCI in the meeting. SCI in
(Inter-Island Sector its report has indicated that the completion of the vessels will
– take considerable time. The Shipyard has not yet started even the
structural modification work in line with DGS approved
M.V . Mayabunder) emergency escape route plan and accommodation plans. Unless
the yard takes drastic measures without further delay, the project
may take longer time than projected by the yard. The
representative of the yard indicated that they have increased the
manpower and critical drawings have already been approved.
However, they face a cash crunch due to escalation in the cost.
It was indicated in the meeting that the owner is not responsible
for escalation in the cost of the vessel and the shipyard may bear
the cost of escalation as per the contract. It was also advised
that since the yard is a State PSU, they should approach the
State Government for additional funds. The yard was directed to
take all necessary steps to expedite the pace of construction of
the vessels.
2. 1 x 500 Pax Vessel As desired by Joint Secretary (Shipping) in the last review
at M/s ABG meeting held on 7.8.2008, SCI also submitted a report on the
Shipyard, Mumbai progress of the vessel at ABG shipyard. In the last meeting, the
representative of the yard, Shri Tejinder Singh had indicated that
the yard would deliver the vessel by 30.11.2008. SCI in its

23
12 3
(Inter-Island Sector report has indicated that considering the quantum of work
– involved to complete the project, the delivery of the vessel in
M.V. Campbell Bay) November, 2008 may not be feasible. However, the yard is
putting in their best report to complete the project at the earliest.
The representative of the shipyard impressed upon the Committee
that the yard is trying its level best to adhere to the deadline of
completing the vessel by November, 2008.
3. 2 x 100 Pax Vessel Representative of the yard indicated that the doors have reached
at M/s Shalimar in package which are yet to be tested and they require one
Works Limited, month’s time for testing and calibrating the engine. He also
Kolkata informed that as against Rs.8.5 crores received from the A&N
Administration, they have already incurred an expenditure of
(Foreshore Sector – Rs.10 cr. on the vessel. He requested the A&N Administration
not to deduct LD and also make payment towards sales tax and
M.V. Rani Lakshmi other expenses like foreign exchange variation. He indicated that
and bills for Rs.190 lakhs is pending from A&N Administration.
M.V. Rani Changa) Secretary, A&N Administration informed that they shall be
forming a small Committee to go into the payment details and
they shall opt a member from the shipyard to resolve the issue
of outstanding payment and whatever amount due shall be paid
by A&N Administration.
4. 2 x 150 Pax Vessel CMD, HSL indicated that the ships are ready and due to non-
at M/s Hindustan payment of the outstanding dues, they are not in a position to
Shipyard Limited, deliver the vessels to the Administration. He indicated that there
Vizag is an outstanding amount of Rs.4.20 crores against the
Administration in addition to Rs.50 lakhs approx. towards
(M.V. Bambooka berthing charges etc. Secretary , A&N Administration indicated
that interest on advances given to HSL amounting to
M.V. North Passage) Rs.1.90 crores has to be deducted. He pointed out that they
could pay Rs.3 cr. to HSL and the other outstanding payments
could be looked into separately and to be settled at a later date.
CMD, HSL agreed to the proposal of the A&N Administration.
5. 2 x 100 Pax-cum- Earlier the shipyard informed that the ship shall be ready for
Ferries (RORO) at delivery in September, 2008. Now it has been informed by GRSE
M/s Garden Reach that during trial, one stern thruster steering drive failed at the last
Shipbuilders and moment. The supplier of the equipment, a Singapore based
Engineers, Kolkata company has been asked by the shipyard to repair the equipment.
The shipyard expects to deliver the ship sometime in November/
December, 2008 as soon as the equipment is repaired by the supplier.
92. (B) UNION TERRITORY OF LAKSHADWEEP
(1) Purchase of additional/new vessels :—
In order to mitigate the problems of connectivity between mainland and islands, a
Perspective Plan for the period 2000-2015 for shipping requirements in Lakshadweep was
considered by Expert Committee and approved a total 18 vessels of different sizes.

24
Out of these 18 vessels, 15 vessels have been acquired by the UTL Administration. As
regard the remaining three vessels i.e. One 150 M.T. Oil Barge, One LPG Cylinder Ship and One
400 Passenger Ship, tender for one 150 M.T. Oil Barge and one LPG Cylinder Ship have been
floated and the technical offers received are under scrutiny by SCI. As regard the 400 Passenger
Ship, the proposal is under consideration for acquisition by A&N Administration and this
Department.
(2) Vessels ordered/under construction :—
10 vessels have been delivered by various shipyards to the UTL Administration in the last two years
period. The present status of the vessels of UTL Administration is given below:
Vessel under construction
No. Type of V essel Present Status
1. 2 x 250 Pax-cum-l00 M.T. As per the shipbuilding contract, first and second vessels
Cargo Ship at M/s Colombo are to be delivered by December, 2009 and June, 2010
Dockyard Limited, Sri Lanka respectively.
The first instalment for two vessels amounting to USD
9150000 on Contract becoming effective and 2nd
instalment for first vessel amount to USD 2745000 on
Keel Laying of the vessel have been released.
2. 6 x 200 Pax Landing Barge As per the shipbuilding contract, delivery dates of barges
at M/s Vipul Shipyard are – 1st barge 16.10.2008, 2nd barge 16.11.2008, 3rd
barge 16.05.2009, 4th barge 16.06.2009, 5th barge
16.11.2009 and 6th barge 16.12.2009.
First instalment for 1st Barge has been released to the
builder amount to Rs.l,26,60,000/-.
3. 2 x 200 Pax Landing Barge GOI has approved the proposal for acquisition of 2 Nos.
at M/s Vipul Shipyard Landing Barges in SFC meeting held on 15.11.2007. Order
has been placed with M/s Vipul Shipyard.
Further recommendation/observation of the Committee
93. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the process of
procurement of additional/new vessels initiated by the A&N and Lakshadweep
Administrations will be completed well in time. The Committee recommends the
Department to prepare perspective plan for acquisition of vessels for mitigating the
problems of connectivity between the mainland and islands.

25
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
ANALYSIS OF ANNU AL PLAN 2008-09
The Committee notes that as per the recommendations of the Committee, the
Department of Shipping has requested the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
for providing Rs.68971.48 crore as per original proposal for the entire Eleventh Plan. The
Committee feels that if the Department has to achieve the growth targets then the
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance should consider to allocate the projected
outlay. (Para 8)
PORT SECTOR
The Committee notes the reply and desires to have the expenditure pattern of the
Department of Shipping for the year 2007-08 and 2008-09 upto December, 2008 to
ascertain the progress of fiscal management, utilization of budgetary allocation and the
details of the physical and financial target set for achieving the progress. The Committee
recommends that for better physical and financial monitoring of the projects, the
Department should strengthen its own monitoring mechanism in a well coordinated
manner at apex level to achieve optimum utilization of funds. (Para 12)
The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has taken up the matter
with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for removal of procedural hurdles
in the preparation and clearance of project proposals. The Committee does not see any
difficulty in the Government establishing a single high powered agency for quick clearance
of projects proposals for the Shipping and Port Sectors with a view to address the
procedural hurdles and administrative delays. The Committee therefore, recommends the
Department to pursue the matter with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
for setting up of the single high powered Committee for the progressive functioning of
the Shipping and Port Sector. (Para 16)
CAPACITY UPGRADATION IN MAJOR PORTS
The Committee notes that as per its recommendation the Department has taken
steps for augmenting capacity building schemes at major Ports for the Eleventh Plan. The
Committee recommends the Department to remove the bottlenecks and provide facilitative
and legislative support to encourage the private sector investments for major capacity
upgradation infrastructure projects at all major Ports. (Para 19)
The Committee notes the reply.
(Para 23)
PORT CONNECTIVITY
The Committee is perturbed to note the slow progress of most of the various
ongoing/sanctioned railway-road connectivity projects at the major Ports. It also
constrained to note that the connectivity projects in the Ports of Paradip, Tuticorin,
Kandla, Kolkata, Mormugao, Haldia, Mumbai, Ennore and Cochin are either lagging
25

26
behind schedule or the work was not awarded for implementation. The Committee
recommends the Department to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Railways and the
Department of Road Transport and Highways for timely completion of the various projects.
(Para 26)
ESTABLISHMENT OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY
The Committee notes that the Tariff Authority for Major Ports (TAMP) is
regulating the various activities at the Major Ports only. The Committee however has
recommended to set a regulatory authority to regulate the shipping and port sector and
not for major ports only and wish to have the opinion of the Government in this regard.
(Para 29)
The Committee notes the reply.
(Para 32)
CALCUTTA DOCK LABOUR BOARD
The Committee notes that the Department has formulated a scheme for clearing
the unpaid arrears to pensioners, workers and employees of Calcutta Dock Labour Board
on the recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries. However, the Committee
recommends the Department to release payments of pension and pensionary dues to the
employees of the CDLB at the earliest. The Committee of Secretaries should also be
pursued to review its decision and allow financial assistance to KoPT in the form of grants
instead of loans. (Para 36)
TONNAGE TAX REGIME
The Committee notes the reply.
(Para 39)
CRUISE SHIPPING
The Committee notes that as per its recommendation the Cabinet approved the
Cruise Shipping Policy for tile growth of cruise shipping in the country. The Committee
hopes that with the implementation of the Policy, a sustained and structured growth for
the sector could be achieved. (Para 42)
MULTIPLICITY OF TAXES
The Committee notes that a group was constituted to go into the problems of
multiplicity of taxes being faced by the shipping industry and its report has been
submitted to the Government. The Committee also notes that based upon the
recommendation of the report, the Department is consistently making efforts for
extension of fiscal incentives to Indian Shipping Industry which are adversely impacting
the growth of the shipping sector with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee
recommends the Department to vigorously follow up the matter for rationalization of
taxes ailing the shipping sector with the Ministry of Finance at the apex level.
(Para 45)
HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes that the Department is actively considering proposals for

27
enhancement in intake and augmenting existing training facilities to ensure quality in
Maritime Education and Training. The Committee recommends the Department to make
endeavour to address the continuing shortage of maritime human resources by setting up
new institutes in this field. (Para 49)
The Committee notes the reply.
(Para 53)
HINDUSTAN SHIPYARD LTD.
The Committee notes that a draft Cabinet Note for Rehabilitation-cum-Financial
Restructuring of Hindustan Shipyard Limited, Visakhapatnam has been circulated to
various appraising Ministries/Departments/Agencies. The Committee recommends the
Department to pursue the matter with all the apprising agencies for obtaining their
comments at the earliest for placing before the Cabinet for a final decision. (Para 56)
The Committee notes the reply of the Department that while transferring
Hindustan Shipyard Limited to the Ministry of Defence the interest of the employees of
HSL and the pending dues of the retired employees will be taken care of. (Para 59)
HOOGHLY DOCK AND PORT ENGINEERS LIMITED
The Committee notes that a final cabinet note for granting Rehabilitation-cum-
Restructuring package of Hooghly Dock and Port Engineers Limited has been sent for
consideration and approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). The
Committee recommends the Department to follow-up the matter for grant of
Rehabilitation-cum-Restructuring Package to HDPEL so that the financial health of the
Company could be sustained. (Para 62)
INLAND WATER TRANSPORT
The Committee notes the measure adopted by the Department for the growth of
IWT sector in the country. It also notes that a taskforce has been functioning in the
Department to review the progress of IWT projects on quarterly basis. The Committee
recommends the Department to remove the procedural bottlenecks which causes the delay
in approval and execution of the projects so that the physical and financial targets could
be achieved in a big way. (Para 66)
The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping has prepared an Action Plan
to make the existing three National Waterways fully functional by providing a threshhold
level of required infrastructure namely fairway, terminals and navigational aid and these
are at various stages of implementation. The Committee, however, once again
recommends the Department to provide institutional framework and basic infrastructural
facility for accelerated development of Inland Water Transport sector in the country.
(Para 72)
The Committee notes the reply.
(Para 75)
The Committee notes with dismay that the infrastructure required to make the
total transport cost competitive from origin to destination using IWT mode is yet to be
developed namely fairway for safe arid unhindered navigation, terminals with mechanical
loading/unloading and aids for 24 hrs. navigation. It however, notes that the utilization of
the National Waterways for transportation of cargo is expected to increase significantly

28
after completion of the implementation of Action Plan and demonstration vessel runs. The
targets for cargo transportation on three existing National Waterways have already been
envisaged in the action plan. The Committee further notes that a study has been awarded
to National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) for comparison of the cost
and benefits of inland waterways transportation with the alternative modes. The
Committee recommends the Department to provide adequate investment, policy framework
and focused approached for development of these existing national waterways for making
them commercially viable. The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of
study report. (Para 80)
The Committee notes the reply that the Department has not experienced any
problem in respect of security arrangement in the Sunderbans/protocol routes. However,
the Committee recommends the Department to take up the matter for strengthening the
security arrangements at depth areas which are not under the BSF operations, with the
State police, coast guard and custom officials in the Sunderban/protocol routes, for safe
transportation of men and material. (Para 85)
CENTRAL INLAND WATER TRANSPORT CORPORATION
The Committee is perturbed to note that despite being recommended by the
Committee a number of times the Government has not taken steps to improve the
financial health of the CIWTC. The Committee does not agree with the Government that
with the disinvestment of CIWTC, the role and activities of CIWTC will not be affected.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department to conduct a feasibility
study for merger of CIWTC with other organizations such as IWAI, KoPT or SCI for the
holistic development of inland water transport. (Para 89)
DEVELOPMENT OF WATER TRANSPORT IN ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR AND
LAKSHADWEEP ISLANDS
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the process of
procurement of additional/new vessels initiated by the A&N and Lakshadweep
Administrations will be completed well in time. The Committee recommends the
Department to prepare perspective plan for acquisition of vessels for mitigating the
problems of connectivity between the mainland and islands. (Para 93)

29
MINUTES

30

31
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday the 18th December, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsu1
5. Shri Joachim Baxla
6. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Shrimati Priya Dutt
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the draft 143rd, 144th, 145th, 146th and 147th Reports on the
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its (i) One Hundred and Thirty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of
the Department of Shipping; (ii) One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of the Department of Road Transport and Highways; (iii) One Hundred and Thirty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Tourism; (iv) One Hundred and
Thirty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Culture; and (v) One
Hundred and Thirty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation respectively. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the reports without any
modifications.
31

32
3. Thereafter, the Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Birendra Prasad
Baishya to present the reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Adhir Chowdhury and Shrimati Priya
Dutt to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2008.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.