 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
280 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTIETH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Seventieth Report on 'Development of Tourism in Jammu 
and Kashmir' 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February , 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTIETH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Seventieth Report on 'Development of Tourism in Jammu and 
Kashmir' 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February , 2021) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS               (iv)-(v) 
4. REPORT         1-27 
CHAPTER-I-     RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
CHAPTER-II-  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY  
CHAPTER-III- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN  RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
CHAPTER-IV- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
                               
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   28-32  
    6. *MINUTES          
7. ANNEXURES        33-44  
        
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________________________  
*To be appended at printing stage. 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. *Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. *Shri K.C.Venugopal  
9. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
12.  Shri Anto Antony 
13.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
14.  Shri Tapir Gao  
15.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
17.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
18.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
19.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
20.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
21.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
22.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
23.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
24.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
26.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
29.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
_________________________________________________________  
*Nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020 
 
 
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present 
on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred and Eightieth Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the recommendations /observations of the Committee contained in its  
Two Hundred and Seventieth Report on Development of Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir. 
2.  The Two Hundred and Seventieth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  21st December, 
2018  to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Seventieth Report was received from the Ministry of Tourism on 17th July, 
2019. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  17th 
August, 2020.   
 
 
 (T.G. VENKATESH) 
NEW DELHI;                                                      Chairman, 
August 17, 2020                                           Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
26 Sravana, 1942 (Saka)                               Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
   AAI        :    Airports Authority of India  
 
ASSOCHAM : Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
 
BE : Budget Estimates 
 
BOCA : Building Operation Construction Authority 
 
BOV : Battery Operated Vehicles 
 
CII : Confederation of Indian Industry 
 
FICCI : Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry  
 
GoI : Government of India 
   
   GST : Goods and Services Tax 
  
IHM : Institutes of Hotel Management 
 
IISM : International Institute of Sports Management 
 
IITF : Incredible India Tourist Facilitator 
 
IITTM : Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management 
 
IMCCTS : Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector  
 
ITI : Industrial training institute 
 
IWAI : Inland Waterways Authority of India 
 
LWDA : Lakes and Waterways Development Authority 
 
MoCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
MoRTH : Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
 
MoT : Ministry of Tourism 
 
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding 
 
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force 
NOC : No Objection Certificate 
 
 
(iv) 

OM : Office Memorandum 
 
PFMS : Public Financial Management System 
 
PIL : Public Interest Litigation 
 
PMDP : Prime Minister's Development Package 
 
PMRP : Prime Minister’s Reconstruction Package 
 
   PPP : Public Private Partnership 
 
PRASHAD : Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation 
   
RBD : Reservation Booking Designator 
 
RCS-UDAN : Regional Connectivity Scheme- Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
 
RE : Revised Estimates 
 
SDS : Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
SKICC : Sher-i-Kashmir International Conference Centre 
 
STP : Sewerage Treatment Plant 
 
SUPW : Socially Useful Productive Work 
 
TFC : Tourist Facilitation Centre 
 
TSM : Transportation System Management 
 
UNESCO : United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
   
UT : Union Territory 
 
WMDA : Wular-Manasbal Development Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
             REPORT  
 
The Report of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred and Seventieth Report on 
‘Development of Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir’ presented to both the Houses of Parliament 
on 21st  December,  2018. 
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry of Tourism on 17th July, 2019 
in respect of the observations/recommendations contained in the 270th Report.   The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  36, 42, 43, 44, 45, 49, 50, 52 
Total: 08 
 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 16, 17, 46, 56, 57, 58, 59  
Total: 08 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:  7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 
32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 47, 48, 51,  53, 54, 55, 60, 61, 62  
Total: 38 
 
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.:  Nil  
Total:   Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee recommends that the State Government, Ministry of Tourism and the 
various other stakeholders must endeavor to remove the negative publicity in the press by finding 
innovative means to engage with the world at large via the social media. In this age of You Tube 
and social platforms  like Instagram and Snapchat, social media influencers may be engaged 
to promote a more positive image of the State. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the 
State Government must engage with ASSOCHAM, CII and FICCI to invite and encourage 
companies to host meetings and visits in the region. The Committee fe els that websites of the 
Ministry of Tourism and its various arms should be made interactive and user -friendly. Mobile 
applications and social networking sites like Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat, Instagram, etc. should 
be harnessed as a quick and cost effective medium for tourism marketing. 
(Para 36) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1.  The Ministry of Tourism launched the new Incredible India website on 14 th June 
2018.  The website showcases India as a holistic destination, revolving around major 
experiences, such as, spirituality, heritage, adventure, culture, yoga, wellness and more. The 
website follows the trends and technologies of international standards  with an aim to project 
India as a “must-visit” destination, among its overseas travelers. 
 
1.2. The Ministry of Tourism proactively leverages the potential of Social Media in marketing 
and promotion of India, both in the domestic as well as in the oversea s markets.  The Ministry, 
currently maintains accounts in leading social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, 
Instagram, LinkenIn, YouTube, Vimeo and Periscope.  Since, May 2016, a professional social 
media agency has been appointed to manage the soc ial media activities on Ministry’s social 
media handles.  A large number of posts/tweets/messages are regularly posted/tweeted on 
various facets of India including Jammu & Kashmir with a view to provide wide publicity about 
various destinations in India.   
 
1.3. The Ministry of Tourism has  guidelines for extending Financial Support to Commerce, 
Trade and Industry Organizations for organizing Tourism and Tourism Related Events.   
These organizations include ASSOCHAM, CII, FICCI, etc. The Tourism related events include 
Seminars, Symposia, Conferences, Conventions, Lectures, Competitions focusing on Tourism or 
Tourism related subjects and any other event which has the potential of promoting tourism 
within the country. 
1.4. The Ministry of Tourism, through i ts Hospitality Scheme invites Key Influencers 
including leading international Bloggers/ Instagrammers to visit India to promote India including 
Jammu & Kashmir among their followers.  The Ministry also undertakes campaigns on social 
media channels to furth er enhance visibility of tourist destinations and products in India, 
including J&K in the overseas markets. 
 

3 
 
SAFETY OF TOURISTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. Safe and secure travel is always the top priority for travelers. The Committee feels 
that security of tourists must be given top priority. The Committee was informed by the Tour and 
travel operators and Hoteliers that the travel bans imposed by various Governments, both 
international and domestic , on travel to the State create an air of negativ ity in the region. The 
Committee, during its visit to Srinagar, observed that the situation was more peaceful than  what 
was reported in the news and media. The Committee feels that this is a matter which must be 
broached with caution as it involves issues of national security.                    (Para 42) 
 
3. The popularity of the region as a 'dham' pilgrimage site is offset by large crowds 
travelling on foot. Often, the elderly, women and children have to be carried on indigenous 
palanquins which are neith er sturdy nor reliable. The result is a chaotic situation of unregulated 
crowds which cause regular stampedes which leave many injured and prove fatal for  others.                                             
(Para 43) 
 
4. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that the State Government must work on 
crowd management in coordination with the concerned temple authorities, to formulate a plan to 
regulate the crowds in the area. Furthermore, the State Government of J&K must work to ensure 
the provision of regulated assistance, in order to prevent overcrowding by vendors.                             
(Para 44) 
 
5. The Committee recommends that the State Government must endeavour to establish 
an evacuation plan and procedure, with signage and instructions at re gular intervals, to help and 
evacuate the tourists in the event of a stampede or a natural  calamity.                                                                                            
(Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1.  Various measures have been taken to ensure safety and security of tourists in the 
country including the State of J&K.  MoT takes up the issue of Safety & Security time to time 
with the concerned authorities to minimize the air of negativity created by vari ous media reports 
and news.  
  
5.2. MoT has taken up the issue with the State Govt of J&K in order to formulate a plan 
to regulate the crowd in the area and to ensure the provision of regulated assistance in order to 
prevent overcrowding by vendors. 
 
 
ECOLOGICAL SUSTAINABILITY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6.  The Committee was informed by the stakeholders that J&K has been declared a 
fragile Eco Zone. The Committee notes that pollution and waste management are problems being 
faced by the J & K Government.                    (Para 49) 
 
7. The Committee recommends that the State Government of Jammu & Kashmir must 

4 
 
envisage a Solid Waste treatment plant in Srinagar and other prominent tourist destinations. The 
State must work to clean up the Dal Lake, Nigeen Lake and develop the Wular Lake.  Solar 
Energy must be encouraged in the region and green initiatives must be undertaken. The 
Committee recommends that the State should draw up an action plan on how to maintain 
cleanliness and develop and maintain an ecolo gically–friendly and ecologically –viable form of 
tourism in the region.                                                                                      (Para 50) 
 
 
Reply by the Ministry 
7.1.  As per input received from the Govt. of J&K Solid Waste Man agement Plants have 
been/are being installed at various tourist destinations in the region to overcome the problem of 
Solid Waste Management created due to influx of tourists.  For the purpose of implementation of 
Pollution Control Board norms have been ma de mandatory for Hoteliers/Guest House 
Owners/Houseboats Owners for establishment of Sewerage Treatment Plant (STP) with capacity 
of 19 rooms and above.  Bio -digesters are being installed on each House Boat through Housing 
& Urban Development Departments  as per the recommendations of Committee of Experts 
(CoE) constituted by the Hon’ble High Court, J&K in the PIL 159/2002.  Besides, 
Polythene/plastic items have been banned in the region.  Furthermore, the tourist destinations 
have been pedestrized to promote Eco-Tourism in the region. 
 
    7.2.  In order to regulate the construction of Hotels/Guest Houses all the construction 
have been brought under the mandate/rules/regulations of BOCA (Building Operation 
Construction Authority). A Government Order No. 193-TSM of 2018 dated 19-06-2018 has been 
issued in respect of Ladakh region to ensure that no haphazard construction takes place. 
 
7.3.  Furthermore, the Department of Tourism does not create any such infrastructure 
which creates environmental problem at tourist destination in Tourism sector and due care is 
being taken to provide Eco -friendly infrastructure at various Tourist Resorts in private sector as 
well. 
 
 7.4. The measures taken by the Directorate of Tourism, Kashmir are: 
 
1.   Bio-digester toilets have been installed at Charchinari Dal Lake. 
2.  Battery Operated Vehicles (BOV) have been/are being procured for operation at 
Tourist Resorts for facilitation of tourists. 
3.  Tourism Department registers and renews the licenses of Hotels/Guest Houses, 
subject to NOC from the Pollution Control Board.  The pollution control board is 
mandated with taking punitive action against the delinquents and periodical 
instructions are being conducted to Hotels by the prescribed authority to check the 
violation of garbage dumping (if any) and in case any stake holder is found guilty, 
the matter is brought to the notice of concerned Departme nt besides, withholding 
of renewal of Registration certificate of the unit. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee feels that special efforts should be taken to highlight famous lakes of 
the State in order to promote them as important tourist destinations as a part of eco-tourism in the 

5 
 
State. Steps should be taken to preserve and enhance their beauty by undertaking development in 
an integrated manner. Moreover, Lakes and Waterways Development Authority (LWDA) must 
ensure that wastes generated by houseboats are not dumped into the lakes. Furthermore, 
emphasis should be placed on the introduction of an effe ctive Waste Management Treatment 
System.                                                                                                             (Para 52) 
 
Reply by the Ministry 
8.1.  The Govt. of J&K  has informed that t he water bodies especially Dal  Lake/Nigeen 
Lake are being taken care of/ maintained by the separate Department i.e. lakes and Waterways 
Development authority (LAWDA).  As per the directions  of Hon’ble High Court J&K, the 
Tourism Department is also undertaking various measures for cons ervation of famous Dal 
Lake/Nigeen lake. Besides, the Government has created a separate development authority viz. 
Wullar Manasbal Development Authority (WMDA) to protect and conserve the ecology of these 
lakes and its surroundings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Tourism about the various policies 
which have been introduced to provide funding towards the development of Swadesh Darshan 
for integrated development of tourism based theme circuits and PRASHAD in Jammu & 
Kashmir. It was stated that there have been limited allocation of funds under the Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme. However, given its status, the State has been allocated special funds under 
Prime Minister Development Plan (2016). 
(Para 10) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1.  There is no separate allocation of funds under the Prime Minister Development Plan 
2015.  The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure at the time of announcement of 
package, vide letter dated 11.7.2016 had conveyed that different components of Recon struction 
Plan are allocated to respective line Ministries and are to be implemented by them out of their 
own Budget. The component of Reconstruction Plan of Ministry of Tourism (MOT) may be 
implemented through MoT’s Budget. If necessary, MoT may seek suit able augmentation of 
Budget at supplementary stage. Accordingly, the projects under PMDP are taken up for 
implementation under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme. In 2016 -17, the MoF at RE stage made 
provision of additional Rs. 200 Crores under SD scheme to meet the requirements for PMDP and 
PMs Bihar package. After that no additional funds were allocated by the MoF for the PMDP to 
the Ministry of Tourism. The Ministry has taken up the matter of additional funds with the MoF.  
 
SEASONALITY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee understands that the seasonality of the region along with the other 
variables may contribute to delay in completion of Project in the region.  The Committee is of 
the view that the time table followed by the Ministry of Finance towards funding various 
activities in the region may not be conductive to peculiarities of the region.  The Committee 
therefore recommended that the Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
and other stakeholders may impress upon the Ministry o f Finance to chalk out a plan to ensure a 
more sustainable and efficient way of releasing funds to J&K and other similar affected States. 
(Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. Release of funds for projects approved under the Schemes of Ministry of Tourism is 
as per the provisions of the respective Scheme Guidelines.  The Scheme Guidelines have 
adequate provisions for timely release of funds for smooth implementation of the proje cts for 
Scheme undertaken by the Ministry of Tourism and there is hardly any occasion when projects 
are held up due to the pattern of release of funds.  
 

7 
 
CONNECTIVITY 
(i) Air  
3. The Committee is pleased to note that the airports at Leh  and Srinagar have been 
upgraded and made functional. The Association of Tour, Travel and Hotel operators of the State 
informed the Committee that the exorbitant price of air tickets is a major dampener. Escalating 
airfares of ‘low cost’ carriers during th e peak season are a major deterrent to increasing footfall 
in the region. The airfares are equivalent to that of the nearby foreign destinations and given the 
sensitivity of the region, tourists would prefer to visit nearby foreign destinations at the same  
airfare rather than visit J&K. 
(Para 17) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1.  Ministry of Tourism has taken up the matter with Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(MoCA) on the said observation earlier and M/o Civil Aviation had informed that, at present, 
airfares are not controlled by the Government. Airlines offer fares on various levels which are 
driven by demand and market forces and as the demand goes up the seats on lower fare levels get 
filled. This is a global practice in the aviation industry. Pricing forms the strategic framework, 
day-to-day tactical changes  in pricing  respond to demand/supply and market dynamics  works 
through the Inventory Management process.   
 
3.2.  Airlines are free to fix the reasonable tariff under the provision under the provision 
of Aircraft rules 1937 having regard to all relevant factors, and the generally prevailing tariff. Air 
fares are not fixed by the Government as they are determined by th e interplay of market forces. 
Airlines remain compliant to the regulatory provisions of Sub -Rule 2 of rule 135 as long as the 
fare charged by them does exceed the fare established and displayed on their website.  
 
3.3.  The domestic airline pricing runs in multiple levels (bucket or RBD) which is in line 
with the practice followed globally. The lower fare in the fare bucket is available for advance 
booking much earlier. As time lapses and date of journey approaches closer, the fare in higher 
side of fare bu cket is made available as per the respective airline policy. In order to identify the 
fare and conditions of travel on passenger tickets, airlines world over follow IATA Resolution 
728  which contains information on various booking classes referred to as R eservation Booking 
Designator(RBD). The RBD is the code used in reservation transactions to identify the booking 
class.  
 
    SAFETY OF TOURISTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee is pleased to note that the State Government has implemented 
Tourism Police in the State. The Committee recommends that the Tourism Police must be 
trained regularly and must undergo sensitization training to deal with the large number of tourists 
arriving from different countries, cultures and languages. The Committ ee desires that the Tourist 
Police may also be encouraged to learn foreign languages in order to better serve foreign tourists 
in the region. 
(Para 46) 

8 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. It is to be mentioned that Ministry of Home Affairs had forwarded a concept paper 
on Tourist Police as discussed during the DsGP and IsGP Conference held in 2015. Further, as 
desired by Ministry of Home Affairs,  a list of 25 tourist sites which may be taken as pilot project 
for formation of a separate police unit in the States/UTs and training module, as given by IITTM 
for imparting training vide OM TT/84/2018 dated 12.12.2018, has been forwarded to them. Now, 
Ministry of Home Affairs has circulated a lett er to all the Chief Secretaries of all state 
Governments/UT Administrations asking for the training to be imparted. It may now be seen that 
necessary action with respect to formation of Tourist Police and imparting training to them has 
already been taken u p by Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Tourism. The follow up 
action is to be taken by the State Governments. 
 
 
NEED FOR GREATER CENTRE- STATE COORDINATION 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5.  The development of J&K has been integral to the overall devel opment policy for the 
nation. In this regard, the Committee was informed that the Prime Minister’s Reconstruction 
Package (PMRP) was instituted as early as 2004 and a great deal of money was sanctioned under 
different kind of projects which included a proj ect for rural tourism, tourism authorities and one 
for the Circuits amongst others. The Committee was further informed that the package also 
included compensation for businesses destroyed/damaged by the floods in 2014. 
 
(Para 56) 
6. The Committee was also informed that under the Product/Infrastructure 
Development of Destinations and Circuits, the Ministry of Tourism extended Central Financial 
Assistance to the State Governments/Union Territory administrations for tourism projects 
identified in consultation with them for the improvement of existing tourism products and also 
for developing new ones. Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Product/Infrastructure 
Development for Destinations and Circuits, 100% Central assistance is given  for development of 
Destinations/Circuits, including mega projects, to world standard and also for Rural Tourism 
infrastructure development. The Ministry of Tourism provides financial assistance up to Rs. 5.00 
crore for the development of destinations and R s.8.00 crore for circuits. The upper limit of 
financial assistance has been increased to Rs.25 crore and Rs.50 crore for development of 
identified mega destinations and circuits respectively, under the schemes to promote rural 
tourism in the country. The t hrust is for development of tourism infrastructure at the identified 
rural tourism sites so that socio -economic benefits percolate down to the rural community. A 
maximum of Rs.50.00 lakhs is sanctioned for each project under this scheme for development of  
tourism related infrastructure. The Committee was informed that the scheme had been 
restructured under the PRASHAD and Swadesh Darshan.  
(Para 57) 
7. Upon scrutiny of the subject, the Committee is of the opinion that there is a major 
lacuna in coordination and policy implementation between the Centre and State Government. 
Only a small portion of the amount sanctioned has been released via Phase I and Phase II. Given  
 
 

9 
 
the importance of the State and its strategic position, the Committee emphasizes on greater 
coordination between the Centre and the State Government. 
(Para 58) 
 
8. The Committee notes that a large number of projects which have been funded under 
the Central Government Schemes are yet to be completed. The Committee has observed that 
there seems to be a lacuna in communication with regards to funding of these projects. The 
Committee feels that this is due to a lack of coordination between the State and Central 
Governments and the implementing agencies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Tourism should take greater initiative and facilitate communication between the 
various Central Government agencies and the State Governm ent (including the Department of  
Tourism) in order to ensure smooth and timely implementation of the projects. The Committee 
further recommends that a ‘Coordination Committee’ must be constituted, spearheaded by the 
Ministry of Tourism, which would include  the State Government agencies and the Central 
Government agencies who are stakeholders in the projects. This would go a long way to ensure 
that there is a common platform to facilitate and coordinate various projects, while also serving 
to act as a monitoring Committee, to monitor the implementation and progress of the projects. 
(Para 59) 
 
Reply by the Ministry   
8.1.  The Ministry has sanctioned 6 projects for Rs. 569.19 crore under Swadesh Darshan 
to the Jammu & Kashmir and released the funds to the tune of Rs. 302.59 Crores Under Swadesh 
Darshan. The release of funds under the infrastructure development schemes of the Ministry is 
dependent upon execution of projects and submission of Utilisation Certificates by the State 
Government and physical review of the progress of work on-site by the Ministry.  
 
8.2.  The Ministry regularly coordinates with the State Government on the projects from 
the stage of concept submission to its sanctioning, implementation and Opera tion and 
Maintenance of the assets created.  At present most of the projects are at implementation stage. 
The implementation of projects sanctioned under the Swadesh Darshan scheme is monitored 
rigorously by the Ministry of Tourism. The Central Sanctioning  and Monitoring Committee 
chaired by Secretary (Tourism) and Mission Directorate chaired by the Joint Secretary (Tourism) 
reviews the progress of the projects implementation on periodic basis. The Ministry also holds 
regional workshops, Video Conference an d review meetings with the States and UTs to review 
the progress of the projects. At working level Swadesh Darshan Division along with Programme 
Management Consultants and Domestic offices of Ministry monitors the projects for Cost, 
Quality and Schedule. T he Ministry has also developed an on -line monitoring portal to monitor 
the real time physical and financial progress of the projects. 
 
 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
STATE TOURISM POLICY 
Recommendation/Observation 
1.  State Tourism Policy is essential to ensure the planned development of tourism in 
the region. The Committee was informed by the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism that States have 
been encouraged to formulate a State Policy for tourism to give direction to the growth of 
tourism in the State and to ensure its sustainability in the years to come. The Committee was 
informed by the representatives of the State Government of Jammu & Kashmir in July, 201 8 that 
the State had formulated a State Tourism Policy which was being finalised. 
 
(Para 7) 
 
2. The Committee feels that the formulation of State Tourism Policy is integral to the 
growth, promotions and sustenance of tourism and related activities in the r egion. The Tourism 
Policy should give equal opportunities to all the stakeholders involved in tourism related 
activities like the local people, private sector and NGOs. It should include provisions to promote 
effective communication and greater intra -State coordination within J&K, i.e., Jammu, Kashmir 
and Ladakh. As tourism is mainly a private sector driven industry, it is important for J&K 
Government to act as a facilitator with respect to tourism. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India should pursue with the State 
Government to finalise the State Tourism Policy at the earliest. The Committee further 
recommends that the State Tourism Policy, upon release, must be placed in public domain. 
(Para 8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. The State of Jammu & Kashmir has formulated and notified Adventure 
Policy/Guidelines & Tourism Incentive policy vide their letter No. Tsm/Estt./117/2014, dated 
14.06.2019. 
 
Further Recommendation 
2.2.      The committee feels that the objective of the tourism policy is to integrate the 
people of rural parts of Jammu and Kashmir and create opportunities to exploit its 
potential to generate more employment in the Union Territory. Public Private 
Partnership’s p rogrammes should be launched giving representation to each and every 
section of the society. Active engagement with and involvement of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions through capacity building programmes can go a long way in ensuring such 
integration. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 

11 
 
3.  The Committee may be informed of the details of 
historical monuments and heritage sites in J&K and the maintenance of the UNESCO Heritage 
Sites in the State. The Committee may also be apprised of the present condition of the  Pari 
Mahal. The Committee recommends that the same may be included in the Action Taken Replies.  
(Para 9) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1.  The details of historical monuments and heritage sites in J&K are enclosed at 
Annexure- A. 
Further Recommendation 
3.2.  The reply is not complete as neither the details of UNESCO heritage sites nor 
the present condition of the Pari Mahal have been furnished by the Ministry.  The 
Committee desires that those details may be furnished by the Ministry at the earliest. 
 
DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. It has been brought to the attention of the Committee that the State Government of 
J&K has not submitted any proposals for funds during 2017 -2018 and 2018 -2019 for the 
development of tourism in Ladakh region under the PRASHAD/Swadesh Darshan. Furthermore, 
the Committee was informed that there have been no proposals for projects under Buddhist 
Circuit in Ladakh. 
 
(Para 11) 
 
5.  The Committee expressed its displeasure that the State Government has not 
submitted any proposals for the development of tourism in Ladakh region continuously for two 
years. The Committee reiterates its view that development of tourism is integral to the holistic 
development of the State. J & K deserves to be prosperous and econom ically able, to ensure a 
better life for its residents. The Committee urges upon the State of J&K to submit proposals for 
the development of tourism in Ladakh region, at the earliest. Furthermore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must coordinate with the State Government to ensure 
that sufficient funds and due publicity are given for the promotion of tourism in Ladakh region. 
(Para 12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1.  The projects under Swadesh Darshan  scheme are identified for development in 
consultation with the State Governments/UT Administrations and are sanctioned subject to 
availability of funds, submission of suitable detailed project reports, adherence to scheme 
guidelines and utilization of fun ds released earlier. Based on above the Ministry has sanctioned 
following projects under Swadesh Darshan Scheme in Ladakh region: 
 
Rs. In lakhs 
Sl. No. Project / sanction year Amount sanctioned  
for Ladakh Region  
1 Integrated Development of Tourism Infrastructure projects in the State of 
Jammu & Kashmir under Himalayan Circuit of Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme 2016-17 
1343.00 

12 
 
2 Integrated Development of Gulmarg-Baramulla-Kupwara-Leh under 
Himalayan Circuit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
2016-17 
4523.54 
 
5.2.  The Ministry of Tourism promotes India including Jammu and Kashmir as a holistic 
destination as part of its on -going activities. It releases print, electronic, online and outdoor 
media campaigns in the domestic and international markets, under the Incredib le India brand -
line, to promote tourism products and destinations of the country including pilgrimage sites.   
MoT also promotes the tourism destinations and products through its websites and publicity and 
promotional material produced by it from time to time. 
Further Recommendation 
5.3.  The reply of the Ministry does not cover the period of two years i.e., 2017-18 
and 2018-19, for which the State has not continuously sought any funds  for development of 
Ladakh region.  The Committee desires to be furnished with specific replies in this regard. 
 
5.4.  The Committee also desires that the Ministry should provide the details of all 
the existing and potential  tourist sites in Ladakh region , along with the budgetary 
support given to rejuvenate them so as to attract both domestic and international 
tourists in the region. 
 
5.5.   The Committee may also be apprised of the status of fund utilized and the 
implementation of Integr ated D evelopment of Tourism Infrastructure project in J&K 
and Integrated Development of Gulmarg -Baramulla-Kupwara-Leh under Himalayan 
Circuit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme that were sanctioned in the year 2016-17 in Ladakh 
region. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. As Ladakh region offers multiple tourism options which cater to the taste of a vast 
array of tourists from varied age groups, the Committee recommends that an elaborate tourism 
development plan should be conceived for Ladakh which accounts for focused promotion of  
rural, theme based and adventure tourism, besides opening of new destinations for the tourists. 
(Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1.  The Ministry acknowledges the diverse tourism potential of the Ladakh  region.  
However, the Ministry conceives the idea of development and promotion of tourism on a 
country-wide scale.  
 
6.2.  Augmenting the efforts of Government of J & K, Ministry has sanctioned 6 projects 
under Swadesh Darshan scheme for Rs. 569.19 crore to the State. The projects cover a range of 
components including niche areas of rural, adventure, heritage sites, lesser known destinations, 
etc. expecting them to prove concomitant in boosting tourism in the region. 
 
Further Recommendation 
6.3.  The Committee is aware of the proposal of development and promotion on an 
country-wide scale. But, keeping in view the fact that the Ladakh region is a niche tourist 

13 
 
destination in the country, special attention needs to be given f or all-round development of 
the region and promotion of rural, theme based and adventure tourism  may be given 
priority.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.  In this regard, the Committee recommends that necessary measures must be taken to 
keep the air fares for J &  K during the peak tourist season, under reasonable limit.  The 
Committee also recommends that the number of flights from Srinagar to Leh and from Srinagar 
to Kargil may be increased. 
(Para 18) 
 
8. Given the mountainous terrain and the frequency of landslides in the region, the 
Committee recommends that Pawan Hans Services may be further augmented by pressing 
additional helicopters into service, for tourist facilitation, to lesser known destinations like 
Gurez, Bangus, Kishtwar and Kargil. UDAN scheme should also be devised in such a manner as 
to connect Srinagar with other major cities especially in the peak tourist season. 
(Para 19) 
 
9. The Committee could understand that the Sheikh ul Alam  Airport (International 
airport) at Srinagar is not functional. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism 
must initiate talks with the Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Airports 
Authority of India, to facilitate the o peration of international  flights from Srinagar. The 
Committee recommends that the infrastructure provided at Srinagar Airport must be improved. 
(Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. Ministry of Tourism has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
AAI. 
Further Recommendation 
9.2. The Committee feels that J&K being a major tourist attraction, there is an 
urgent need to keep the airfares for J&K during the peak season, under reasonable limit.  
The Committee also observes that air travel in our country is subject to multiple levies 
which undermine the competitiveness of Indian destinations.  Additionally, there is lack of 
transparency in collection of these levies and they vary across the airlines  operating in the 
country.  The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry , in close coordination with 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Ministry of Finance , to address the issue of multiple 
taxes on air travel in India   so that the incidence of tax on  air travel is lowered and the air 
fares are kept under reasonable limits. 
 
CONNECTIVITY 
 
(i) Railways 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. Railways are an economical way of exploring the country. Rail journeys are 
affordable and increase the connectivity of the region with other parts of India. Domestic tourists 
are primarily train -friendly and prefer to travel by trains due to better connectivity and  

14 
 
affordability. 
(Para 21) 
 
11. The Committee was informed that the Ministry of Tourism provided financial 
assistance to the tune of 12 crores @ Rs 4 crore per coach to the Ministry of Railways for the 
manufacture of three glass top coaches, for developing rail tourism in the country. Th e ‘Glass 
Top Coach’ have been designated for the route between Budgam to Banihal and Baramulla to 
Srinagar.The Vistadome Coach boasts of a glass roof which has electrically controlled 
opalescence, i.e., it can be made transparent or opaque at the turn of a  switch – 360 degree 
rotatable, pushback chairs and automatic shading compartment doors. 
(Para 22) 
 
12. The Committee recommends that Tourist Trains may be introduced to J&K from 
various metros of the country. The Committee further recommends that the Mini stry of Tourism 
must coordinate with the Ministry of Railways for better railway connectivity with the valley, 
besides operating additional tourist trains from all Metro Cities to J & K. Furthermore, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism mu st coordinate with the Ministry of 
Railways to facilitate the speedy completion of the Vistadome Coaches. These Coaches, with the 
glass tops, would be a wonderful addition to the railway services in the region, by giving its 
passengers a 360 degree view of the surrounding regions. 
(Para 23) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. MoT has written a letter to the Ministry of Railways for introduction of tourist trains 
to J& K from various metros of the country along with speedy  rolling out of  Vista Dome 
Coaches, fully funded by MoT.  
Further Recommendation 
 
12.2. The Committee exhorts the Ministry to pursue with renewed vigour  the matter 
with the Ministry of Railways for introduction of tourist trains to Jammu and Kashmir 
from various metros of the country and speedy rolling out of Vista Dome Coaches , so as to 
give a fillip to tourism in J&K region. 
 
12.3. The Committee feels that during p eak seasons when tourists visit  the region of 
J&K and Ladakh in large number, destination focused trains and special trains with 
reasonable fares should be introduced in order to accommodate more and more passengers 
comfortably. 
 
(ii) Road 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. Jammu & Kashmir is a place of religious prominence and a popular pilgrimage 
destination. However, the conditions of the roads in the region leave much to be desired. The 
Committee understands that the mountainous terrain  of t he region makes building of capital 
infrastructure a herculean task. Roads, thus, serve to become the cheapest and most reliable 
mode of transportation. 

15 
 
(Para 24) 
 
14. The Committee, in this regard, notes that the region is prone to frequent landslides, 
road caving, etc.   Many of the tourists are forced to travel by foot, while carrying the old and 
disabled on hand held palanquins. Moreover, the Committee noticed that the roads lack proper 
signages and safety markers at bends or around the thinner mountainside roads. 
(Para 25) 
 
15. The Committee strongly feels that the National Highways should take initiatives to 
improve the roads in Jammu &  Kashmir. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Tourism may impress upon the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to 
expedite the upgradation of Jammu -Srinagar highway which is long pending. Furthermore, the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, through its agencies in the region, may also coordinate 
with the concerned State departments in order to ensure that the roads including the National 
Highways are properly maintained; signages are put in place and to ensure that fluorescent safety 
markers are installed along the roads to reduce the incidence of accidents in the region. 
(Para 26) 
 
16.  The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Tourism to impress upon the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and the Government of J&K to  
improve road infrastructure in pilgrim and border towns and backward areas of the State where 
the road network is poor and the existing roads are unable to cater to the ever increasing 
vehicular movement.  
(Para 27) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1. MoT has tak en up the matter with MoRTH regarding upgradation of Jammu -
Srinagar highway including putting up of proper signages and to ensure that fluorescent safety 
markers are installed along the roads to reduce the incidence of accidents in the region. 
 
16.2. Besides above, MoT is implementing its flagship scheme of Swadesh Darshan for 
development of theme based tourist circuits and PRASAD Scheme for development of tourist 
Pilgrim sites.   Under these schemes,  MoT has also taken up the issue of better road connectivity 
in various tourist destinations in the circuits and pilgrim sites.  MoT has also set up specific 
timelines for completion of projects sanctioned to various states including Jammu & Kashmir 
and utilization of funds in a time-bound manner. 
Further Recommendation 
16.3. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to identify tourist destinations of 
J&K region, particularly backward and border pilgrim towns for improvement of road 
network, installation of night vision safety markers and signages in close coordination with 
Ministry of  RTH and concerned State agencies. 
 
16.4. The Committee recommends that in order to provide safety against accidents to 
the tourist vehicles especially after sunset till sunrise, mobile ambulances should be made 
available with a facility to provide immediate first aid to injured tourists on the spot and 
carry them later to the nearest hospital for further treatment. A toll -free helpline number 

16 
 
can also be launched in the State to call such ambulances at the s pot of accident within few 
minutes. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee observes that for all the above mentioned works related to 
connectivity, no timelines or follow up mechanisms are in place. Delays in completion of 
projects increase the cost s and woes of people. The Committee recommends that an effective 
mechanism may be set up to ensure that the respective Ministries take these recommendations  
seriously and come up with specific and concrete timelines to follow up on the progress made 
and funds utilized. 
(Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1. The matter is taken up periodically by MoT with different Ministries through forum 
of Inter Ministerial Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee for Tourism Sector (IMCCTS). 
Further Recommendation 
17.2. While making the recommendation in Para 28 of its 270 th Report, the 
Committee had expected the Ministry to set up a robust monitoring mechanism to ensure 
close monitoring of physical performance of the projects  undertaken by the Ministry and 
the expenditur e being incurred thereon so that the timelines set for their execution are 
adhered to and funds do not get accumulated and locked up but are utilized in a more 
productive manner.  The Committee regrets to note that instead of taking effective steps to 
address the recurring problem of delays and cost overruns in implementation of road 
network projects in pilgrimage destinations and border towns in J&K, the Ministry has 
been taking up  the matter with different Ministries as a routine work , more as a ritual .  
The Committee, therefore, reiterates that an effective monitoring mechanism should be set 
up at the earliest by the Ministry.   
 
17.3. The Committee also recommends that a web -based monitoring system be 
developed to review the physical progress of the road  projects in pilgrimage destinations 
and border towns of the Union Territory of J&K. 
    
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18.  The presence of trained and skilled workforce is necessary for the success of a 
destination as a tourist destination. The Committee was informed of the dearth of trained 
individuals in the tourism sector in the State. The Committee is pleased to note the c onstruction 
of the Institute of Hotel Management (IHM) in  
Srinagar. However, there is a lack of qualified and trained professionals in tourism    
management. 
(Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1. In addition to IHM Srinagar, the J&K State is having two more Food Craft Institutes, 
one at Leh and another at Jammu.   Both these FCIs were created on the Central Financial 
Assistance from Govt. of India and are imparting training skills in the field of hospitality as 
required by the State.  

17 
 
 
18.2. Moreover, following universities are running Tourism Programmes for the 
manpower development in Tourism in the region. 
a.  Central University Kashmir  
b.  University of Kashmir Srinagar  
c.  Baba Gulam Shah Badshah University Rajouri 
d.  Central University Jammu 
e.  Jammu University Jammu  
f.  Extension Center of Central University of Kashmir at Ladhak 
 
18.3. There are Polytechnic, ITI and 50 selected Higher Secondary Institutions running 
Tourism as  Vocational course in Jammu and Kashmir.  
 
18.4. Institute of  Skiing and Mountaineering, Gulmarg and Jawahar Institute of 
Mountaineering Pehalgon are also running short term programmes related to Adventure Tourism 
courses. 
Further Recommendation 
18.5. The Committee notes the reply.  However, the Committee underlines the need  
for trained and skilled workforce to help, g uide and assist the J&K bound tourists and for 
this, consistent efforts should be made to augment the workforce to meet the existing and 
future demands. The tourist guides in the J&K region sh ould be incentivized as much as 
possible to sustain and give a fillip to tourism in the region. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must collaborate with the 
State Government in order to introduce contemporary courses by the Indian Institute of Tourism 
and Travel Management (IITTM) in the region. The students must be given due exposure in 
other States. The Committee recommends that training must not be restricted to theoretical 
knowledge, but must include internships and regular interactions with industry pioneers, in order 
to gauge the present requirement of the sector. Local Universities and professional colleges 
should be encouraged to introduce courses on Tourism studies and foreign language cour ses, in 
collaboration with national and international institutes of Tourism studies. 
(Para 30) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1. IITTM has signed MOU with Central University of Jammu, under which the key 
areas cooperation in joint degree programme , Joint research programme, supervising Phd 
programme jointly, Joint holding of conference, seminar, workshop, training, symposium, 
faculty exchange programme, student exchange programme, research scholar exchange 
programme and exchange of knowledge/infras tructural Resource are organized with close 
coordination with each other.  
 
19.2. IITTM has signed an MOU with Central University of Kashmir, Srinagar also for 
student exchange programme, faculty exchange, collaborative research, seminar, symposium, 
conference, workshop, exchange of knowledge Resource for the benefit of Tourism academia in 
the region. 

18 
 
 
19.3. An International Conference was organized in Leh under the banner of Central 
University of Kashmir with the funds of Rs. 10 Lakhs sanctioned by Ministr y of Tourism, GOI, 
IITTM had played an important role for the success of the Conference during 2017. 
 
19.4. IITTM Academic experts frequently visit the Universities in Jammu & Kashmir for 
delivering potential lectures. The Vice Chancellors and Senior Profe ssor from Central 
Universities in Jammu & Kashmir also visit IITTM regularly for the academic purposes. 
 
19.5. Tourist sensitization programme, Tourist stakeholders meeting, Student awareness 
programmes were organized in Jammu & Kashmir by IITTM during the year 2018. 
 
19.6. With financial assistance from Ministry of Tourism IITTM in collaboration with 
IISM is starting short term training on Adventure Tourism program for local youths. 
 
19.7. As desired by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, IITTM is now again writing to 
the local Universities in Jammu & Kashmir for organizing the collaborative short term courses in 
Tourism and Foreign Languages.  
 
19.8. The main advice is on starting courses in the State by IITTM.  It is pertinen t to 
mention here that during Principals' Conclave held in August 2018, it was decided to put stress 
on introducing awareness program for tourism and heritage sites of the local areas for IHM 
students, so that the pass -outs have basic knowledge about the p laces of tourist interest and in 
turn they may guide any tourist whenever they boarded in a hotel/guesthouse where such pass -
out is employed.  In addition to that, soft skill on languages is also imparted to the IHM students 
to make them comfortable to und erstand languages of other countries and to communicate with 
the tourists.  
Further Recommendation 
19.9. The Committee welcomes the steps taken by the Ministry.  The Committee is of 
the view that sincere efforts should be made to encourage schools, college s and universities 
in the region to introduce courses on tourism and foreign languages to ensure the much 
needed impetus for the development of tourism. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee recommends that the State Government may devise programs to 
introduce skill/craft as a subject under Socially Useful Productive Work (SUPW) in the 
curriculum, in order to educate children of the rich traditional handicrafts of the State, develop 
skills in the State and promote such activity. This will go a long way in ensuring a livelihood in 
the State, whilst ensuring the longevity of these prized handicraft skills. 
(Para 31) 
Reply of the Ministry  
    20.1. The matter has been taken up with the State Government of J&K. 
Further Recommendation 
20.2. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would further 
pursue the matter with the Government of J&K.  

19 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
21.  The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must work with 
the Ministry of Finance to  provide some exemption to handicrafts under implementation of GST 
in order to ensure a market for the handcrafted products which are presently being cornered by 
the cheaper Chinese products.  
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1. This matter has already b een taken over with the GST Cell of Ministry of Finance. 
The copy of the letter is enclosed for information of the Committee. (Annexure – B) 
Further Recommendation 
21.2. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the final outcome in the matter.   
The Committee further recommends that funding for purchase of cheap raw material and 
machines to craftsmen and artisans should be provided under the Government schemes 
like Technology Upgradation Fund and Integrated Handloom Development Scheme. 
 
MEDIA AND PROMOTION 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22.  The Committee was informed by the various stakeholders of tourism in the region 
that a major hindrance to increasing the footfall in the region is the constant negative publicity 
received by the State as a trouble d State. This perception overshadows the true narrative of the 
region, as not all parts of the State are in conflict or affected by it. 
(Para 33) 
 
23. The Committee was also informed that the travel advisories issued by various 
countries acted as an impediment in attracting foreign tourists. The Committee feels that many a 
times, the advisories are based on ill -informed facts and unnecessary assessment o f local 
conditions. The Committee feels that the print and electronic media, both domestic and 
international, have an important role in projecting the favorable situations existing in J&K. 
(Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1. The Ministry of Tourism undertakes various activities for the promotion of Jammu & 
Kashmir as a tourist destination.  These activities include (i) release of television campaigns 
promoting tourism in the State on Doordarshan and private channels in the country (ii) 
production of publicity material, creatives and television commercials/promotional films on the 
State (iii) Ministry of Tourism, under its Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality 
Scheme provides financial assistance to State Governments/UT Administrations  including 
Jammu & Kashmir for organising fairs and festivals which have the potential for promoting 
tourism (iv) regular promotion of the tourist destinations and products of the State is undertaken 
on the social media handles and website of the Ministry. 
Further Recommendation 
23.2.  The Committee appreciates the various efforts of the Ministry to promote 

20 
 
tourism in J&K.  The Committee, however, opines that the Ministry should play a 
proactive role in effectively addressing  the negative publicity attached to the Union 
Territory of Jammu & Kashmir as a troubled region from time to time throu gh publicity 
material, creative and visual media, to ensure promoting the State as a major and peaceful 
tourist attraction. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should organize 
their own publicity campaign in order to remove the negative impression which is based on 
incorrect facts. The Ministry should also involve the Ministry of  Information and Broadcasting 
and the Ministry of External Affairs for the removal of advisories imposed by various countries 
against travel to Jammu& Kashmir. 
(Para 35) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1.  The Ministry of Tourism regularly releases television campaigns on Doordarshan 
and private channels in the country to promote tourism in the State of Jammu & Kashmir.  
Promotions on Jammu & Kashmir are also undertaken on the social media handles of the 
Ministry. 
 
24.2.  In connection with the issues related to removal of advisories imposed by various 
countries against travel to Jammu & Kashmir it is mentioned that the Ministry of Tourism 
through its India Tourism Offices overseas, takes up matters related t o removal of travel 
advisories with the Indian Missions in their region.  
Further Recommendation 
24.3. The Committee would like the Ministry to prevail upon the countries to remove 
their advisories against the Union Territory of J&K  as a supplement ary effort while 
addressing the negative publicity. 
 
BUDDHIST CIRCUIT 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
25.  The Committee could understand that the Ladakh region of the State is 
predominantly Buddhist. However, it was informed that the Leh and Ladakh  region of the State 
have not been included in the purview of the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee feels that the 
Buddhist Circuit is integral to the promotion of the soft power of India via its culture. The scenic 
landscape and terrain are a perfect backdr op for the Buddhist Festivals in the region which are a 
major tourist attraction and are very popular the world over. 
(Para 37) 
 
26. The Committee recommends that the State Government must take efforts to co -
ordinate with the Ministry of Tourism, in order to include Ladakh & Leh under the Buddhist 
Circuit in the country and develop the tourist destinations in the region. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 

21 
 
26.1. Ministry has identified Buddhist Circuit as one of the fifteen thematic circuits for 
development under Swadesh Darshan Scheme. All sites associated with Buddhist heritage in the 
country are covered under this Circuit.  
 
26.2. The projects under Swadesh Darshan scheme are identified for development in 
consultation with the State Governments/UT Administrations and are sanctioned subject to 
availability of funds, submission of suitable detailed project reports, adherence to scheme  
guidelines and utilization of funds released earlier.  The Ministry has not received any proposal 
under the Buddhist Circuit theme from the Government of J&K.  
Further Recommendation 
26.3. The Committee observes that the tourist circuits help provide the geographical 
and cultural cohesion that facilitate s unique tourist experience  and ensures promotion of 
local arts, cultural traits, handicrafts, etc. which in turn generate s livelihood in the 
identified regions.  It is in this context that inclusion o f Leh and Ladakh under the 
Buddhist Circuit is of paramount importance. The Committee would, therefore, like the 
Ministry to pursue inclusion of Leh and Ladakh regions under the Buddhist Circuit under 
the newly created UT of Ladakh keeping  in view the predominance of Buddhist culture in 
the region and the popularity of Buddhist festivals held therein .   The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the specific efforts made and results achieved in this regard. 
 
TOURIST FACILITIES 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee observed during its visit to Jammu and Kashmir that the State 
requires further input in terms of improving upon tourist facilities in the region. The tourist 
destinations must be equipped with safe drinking water stations, clean and hygieni c washrooms, 
rest stop, car stops etc. The Committee recommends that tourist facilities proposed under the 
Swadesh Darshan scheme must be completed at the earliest. Furthermore, the Committee 
recommends that the State Government must put in place a system to ensure that these tourist 
amenities, once operational, are well maintained and at par with global standards. The creation of 
adequate and suitable infrastructure in terms of accommodation, transport, communication links 
etc. and other essential amenities are the foundation for the success of tourism in the State. 
(Para 39) 
 
28.  The Committee recommends that in order to improve the maintenance of existing 
tourist destinations, adoption/management/sponsorship programs should be promoted so as to 
create a sense of ownership in the minds of locals and corporate alike, for monuments, religious 
sites and tourist destinations. 
(Para 40) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1. The Ministry lays special emphasis on timely execution/completion of work and 
simultaneous establishment of O&M (Operation & Maintenance) mechanism for the projects 
sanctioned under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme. The Ministry regularly holds review meeting 
with the State Government to monitor the timely implementation of projects sanctioned in the 

22 
 
State. The State in the meeting held on 25 th February 2019 had assured to bring the projects to 
timely completion and to plan for O & M of assets created.  
 
28.2. For proper O&M of the assets created under the scheme the Ministry has revised the 
guidelines of the Swadesh Darshan Scheme and now 5% of the project cost will be paid to the 
implementing agency after successful O&M of Toilet, TFC, Cafeteria facilities for  one year as 
certified by an independent agency. 
Further Recommendation 
28.3. The Committee suggests that in addition to provision of  Toilets, TFCs, 
Cafeteria, etc., under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, the Ministry should ensure sufficient 
number of drinking water stations, rest stops, car stops, refreshment centres in the tourist 
destinations of the State in tandem with tourist footfall in the State. The Committee also 
suggests that in order to provide such facilities at faster pace, the works may be outsourced 
on need basis for adoption/sponsorship  of the tourist sites  by agencies for better  
maintenance. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. During the visit of the Committee to Srinagar, it was informed that there was an 
urgent need to introduce a Laser Show on the Dal Lake and restart the Sound and Light Show at 
Shalimar Gardens. The Committee may be apprised of the status of implementation o f the Sound 
and Light Show at Dal Lake. The Committee feels that these facilities may definitely attract 
more tourists while serving to narrate the story of Kashmir. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry of Tourism should extend financial support to t he Government of J & K to restart the 
above mentioned projects. 
(Para 41) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1. The Ministry under the project Integrated Development of Tourism Infrastructure 
projects in the State of Jammu & Kashmir under Himalayan Circuit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
sanctioned in June 2016 has developed Sound and Light Show with water fountains at Sher-i-
Kashmir International Conference Centre (SKICC) Ghats. Work on this component is complete. 
Further Recommendation 
29.2. The reply of the Ministry does not address the recommendation.  The 
Committee seeks a categorical reply on introduction of a Laser Show on Dal Lake and 
resumption of Sound and Light Show in Shalimar Gardens in the State. 
 
SAFETY ALERTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
30.  The Committee notes that the region is prone to natural calamities and feels that the 
State must be better equipped to handle situations in the event of calamities, both natural and 
man–made. 
(Para 47) 
31. In this regard, the Committee strongly feels that the State Government must work 

23 
 
towards ensuring the safety of tourists in the region. The Committee recommends that the State 
Government must work to ensure that its volunteers, Tourist Police and State Police are regularly 
trained by the National Disaster Relief Force (NDRF) in the evacuation and rescue of civilians. 
The Committee further recommends that the State Government must work to coordinate regular 
joint exercises with the volunteers, Army and the NDRF in preparation for any eventualities. 
(Para 48) 
Reply by the Ministry 
31.1. The matter has been taken up with the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir in 
order to ensure that its volunteers, Tourist Police and State Police are regularly trained by the  
National Disaster Relief Force (NDRF) in the evacuation and rescue of civilians.  
Further Recommendation 
31.2.  The Committee recommends that units of disaster management teams should 
be deployed at appropriate places in order to safeguard the to urists from natural 
calamities. 
 
ECOLOGICAL SUSTAINABILITY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32.  The Committee feels that the State Government needs to regulate the houseboat 
operations on the Dal Lake keeping in mind its carrying capacity and introduce special incentives 
to start houseboat operations in areas other than Dal and Nageen Lakes. 
(Para 51) 
Reply by the Ministry 
32.1. The Govt. of J&K has informed that they have constituted a Committee of Experts 
(CoE) to monitor and recommend various measures of conservation of Dal Lake.  The 
Committee of Experts has recommended that the Department of Tourism shall find out the 
optimum carrying capacity of Lake in terms of House Boats and till such time  the 
issuance/renewal of licenses in favour of House Boat owners be put on hold.  The Department 
has accordingly requested Kashmir University for report in the matter.  Preliminary concept note 
has been received from Director, Centre of Research & Developm ent (CoRD), Kashmir 
University and the research work has been initiated. 
 
32.2. The State Government is of the view that in case the incentive scheme is revalidated 
and subsequently extended to the areas other than Dal & Nigeen Lake, it will definitely boost the 
Tourism Sector. 
Further Recommendation 
32.3.   The Committee desires to be apprised of the findings of Kashmir University on 
the optimum carrying capacity of Dal Lake in terms of House Boats  and the action taken 
thereon.  The Committee also reiterates that an early action on regulation of house boats in 
the Dal Lake and introduction of house boats in areas other than Dal and Nageen Lakes 
may be taken on a priority basis. 
 
GOODS AND SERVICES TAX 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

24 
 
33. The sensitive nature of Jammu & Kashmir must be taken into consideration during 
the development of tourism in the region. The implementation of GST on tourism in the region 
would have manifold effects, mostly negative on the economy of the region. The Comm ittee was 
informed by the stakeholders that sourcing of products and materials is an issue. Unlike other 
States, the residents of Jammu & Kashmir and its business owners spend huge amounts of money 
on procuring essentials, most of which have to be flown in , which increases their capital 
expenditure. Most wholesale traders insist on payment in cash which is a major issue, as the 
support from the Government must be processed via the Public Financial Management System 
(PFMS) payment system which insists on digital transactions. 
(Para 53) 
34. Furthermore, the Committee was informed that small business owners for small scale 
hotels, bed and breakfasts and home stays cannot list their properties on various travel 
intermediary websites as there is a levy of an 18 percent of GST, which cuts across the little 
profit that they might make, making their venture unsustainable. 
(Para 54) 
 
35. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the implementation of GST on 
tourism related activities in the State must be reconsid ered. It must be done in a cautious and 
phased manner in order to ensure that the delicate state of tourism in the region is not adversely 
affected. Furthermore, the Committee suggests that the Ministry of Tourism must initiate 
dialogues with the Ministry of Finance in order to formulate a policy  wherein tourism in the 
region can be supported and developed over a period by giving tax sops for a given time period 
and to be leaned off slowly, in order to ensure the sustained development of the region. 
(Para 55) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1. This issue has been taken up with Ministry of Finance for further taking up with GST 
Council (Annexure -C). 
Further Recommendation 
35.2. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would continue to 
follow up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
 
SUBMISSION OF UTILISATION CERTIFICATES 
Recommendation/Observation 
36. The Committee is dismayed to note the disappointingly low percentage of 
submission of utilization certificates by the State Government. The submission of utilization 
certificates is essential to facilitate the release of funds for the proceeding phase of the respective 
projects. The Committee was informed that the State Government has been lackadaisical in its 
submission of utilization certifi cates for projects under implementation, while at the same time, 
requesting for the release of funds for the proceeding stage. 
(Para 60) 
 
37. The Committee acknowledges that the timely submission of ut ilization certificates is 
critical. Not only does it ac t as a monitor for progress of a project, but also essential, since funds 
are released in stages. The Committee strongly feels that tardiness in submission of these 
utilization certificates is indicative of a lack of accountability on the part of the State  

25 
 
Government. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, in coordination with the 
Ministry of Finance, must impress upon the State Government of J&K to ensure the timely 
submission of utilization certificates, as it is vital to the implementatio n of projects. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must include the status of 
submission of utilization certificates vis a vis projects under implementation in the State and 
reasons for the low percentage of submission of utilization certificates and remedial measures 
required for their speedy liquidation, in their Action Taken Reply. 
(Para 61) 
 
Reply by the Ministry 
37.1. The status of Utilization Certificate received against the funds released is as 
following:  
(Amt in Rs. crore) 
S.No. Circuit Name of Project/  
Year of Sanction 
Amount 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
(Till March 
2019) 
Amount 
Utilised 
1.   
 
 
 
 
 
Himalayan 
Jammu-Srinagar- 
Pehalgam- Anantnag- 
Salamabad-Uri- Kargil- 
Leh 
82.97 41.48 
 
34.78 
2.  Jammu-Rajouri- 
Shopian-Pulwama 
96.38 48.19 
 
29.80 
3.  Anantnag- Kishtwar- 
Pahalgam – Daksum–
Ranjit Sagar 
96.39 48.19 
 
36.18 
4.  Gulmarg- Baramulla- 
Kupwara- Leh 
96.93 45.51 16.04 
5.  Mantalai- Sudhmahadev- 
Patnitop 
97.82 44.52 15.17 
6.  Construction 
of Assets in lieu  
of those  
Destroyed in  
Floods 
98.67 74.70 
 
45.09 
          Total 569.19 276.46 177.06 
Further Recommendation 
37.2. The Committee is concerned to note that as against Rs.276.46 crore released, the 
amount involved in pending Utilization C ertificates (UCs) is to the tune of Rs.99.4 crore s 
(i.e., 35% of the amount released)  which is substantial.  The Committee desires to be 
informed of the reasons given by the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir for non -
submission of UCs.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry in coordination 
with the UT of J&K, should evolve a multi-pronged strategy for liquidation of pending UCs 
within a designated time-frame so that the execution of projects is not hamstrung by lack of 
flow of funds. 
 

26 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
38. The completion of projects is essential, as an employment generator and a catalyst, to 
boost the economy of the State, for which tourism is its primary source of income. The 
Committee is yet to receive any information on the status of completion of project s under the 
Swadesh Darshan scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism 
must impress upon the State Government and its Departments, the importance of development 
of the projects under its purview. The progress made on the same  may be furnished in the Action 
Taken Reply. 
(Para 62) 
Reply by the Ministry 
38.1. The Status of projects sanctioned under SD Scheme is at Annexure - D.  
Further Recommendation 
38.2. The Committee notes that in 4  out of 6 Himalayan Circuits, less than 50% of 
physical progress has been reported.  The Committee fails to understand the reasons for 
such slow pace  and desired to be apprised whether the six Himalayan Circuits under 
implementation in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir have witnessed any time overrun and 
cost escalation as a result thereof. 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
- N i l - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
STATE TOURISM POLICY 
  The committee feels that the objective of the tourism policy is to integrate the people 
of rural parts of Jammu and Kashmir and create opportunities to exploit its potential to 
generate more employment in the Union Territory. Public Private Partnership’s 
programmes should be launched giving representation to each and every section of the 
society. Active engagement with and involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions through 
capacity building programmes can go a long way in ensuring such integration.        
                           (Para: 2.2)     
The reply is not complete as neither the details of UNESCO heritage sites nor the 
present condition of the Pari Mahal  have been furnished by the Ministry.  The 
Committee desires that those details may be furnished by the Ministry at the earliest. 
                          (Para: 3.2) 
 
DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS 
 The reply of the Ministry does not cover the period of two years  i.e., 2017-18 and 
2018-19, for which the State has not continuously sought any funds for development of 
Ladakh region.  The Committee desires to be furnished with specific replies in this 
regard.                     (Para: 5.3) 
 
 The Committee also desires that the Ministry should provide the details of all the 
existing and potential tourist sites in Ladakh region, along with the budgetary support 
given to rejuvenate them so as to attract both domestic and international tourists in  the 
region.                     (Para: 5.4) 
 
 The Committee may also be apprised of the status of fund utilized and the 
implementation of Integrated Development of Tourism Infrastructure project in J&K 
and Integrated Development of Gulmarg -Baramulla-Kupwara-Leh under Himalayan 
Circuit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme that were sanctioned in the year 2016 -17 in Ladakh 
region.                              (Para: 5.5) 
 
 The Committee is aware of the proposal of development and promotion on an 
country-wide scale. But , keeping in view the fact that the Ladakh region is a niche 
tourist destination in the country, special attention needs to be given for all -round 
development of the region and promotion of rural, theme based and adventure tourism 
may be given priority.                              (Para: 6.3)  

29 
 
The Committee feels that J&K being a major tourist attraction, there is an urgent 
need to keep the airfares for J&K during the peak season, under reasonable limit.  The 
Committee also observes that air travel in our country is subject to multiple levies which 
undermine the competitiveness of Indian destinations.  Additionally, there is lack of 
transparency in collection of these levies and they vary across the airlines operating in 
the country.  The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry, in close coordination 
with Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Ministry of Finance, to address the issue of 
multiple taxes on air travel in India  so that the incidence of tax on air travel is lowered 
and the air fares are kept under reasonable limits.              
                    (Para: 9.2)  
CONNECTIVITY 
 
(i) Railways 
 
 The Committee exhorts the Ministry to pursue with renewed vigour  the matter with 
the Ministry of Railways for introduction of tourist trains to Jammu and Kashmir from 
various metros of the country and speedy rolling out of Vista Dome Coaches, so as to 
give a fillip to tourism in J&K region.                        
                     (Para: 12.2)  
 
 
The Committee feels that during peak seasons when tourists visit the region of J&K 
and Ladakh in large number, destination focused trains and special trains with 
reasonable fares should be introduced in order to accommodate more and more 
passengers comfortably.             (Para: 12.3)  
 
 
(ii) Road 
The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to identify tourist destinations of J& K 
region, particularly backward and border pilgrim towns for improvement of road 
network, installation of night vision safety markers and signages in close coordination 
with Ministry of  RTH and concerned State agencies.            
                 (Para: 16.3)  
The Committee recommends that in order to  provide safety against accidents to the 
tourist vehicles especially after sunset till sunrise, mobile ambulances should be made 
available with a facility to provide immediate first aid to injured tourists on  the spot and 
carry them later to the nearest hospital for further treatment. A toll -free helpline 
number can also be launched in the State to call such ambulances at the spot of accident 
within few minutes.            (Para: 16.4)  
 
While making the recom mendation in Para 28 of its 270 th Report, the Committee 
had expected the Ministry to set up a robust monitoring mechanism to ensure close 

30 
 
monitoring of physical performance of the projects undertaken by the Ministry and the 
expenditure being incurred thereon so that the timelines set for their execution are 
adhered to and funds do not get accumulated and locked up but are utilized in a more 
productive manner.  The Committee regrets to note that instead of taking effective steps 
to address the recurring problem of delays and cost overruns in implementation of road 
network projects in pilgrimage destinations and border towns in J&K, the Ministr y has 
been taking up the matter with different Ministries as a routine work, more as a ritual.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterates that an effective monitoring mechanism should be 
set up at the earliest by the Ministry.            
                (Para: 17.2) 
 
The Committee also recommends that a web -based monitoring system be developed 
to review the physical progress of the road projects in pilgrimage destinations and 
border towns of the Union Territory of J&K.             
                 (Para: 
17.3)  
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
The Committee notes the reply.  However, the Committee underlines the need for 
trained and skilled workforce to help, guide and assist the J&K bound tourists and for 
this, consistent efforts should be made to augment the workforce to meet the existing and 
future demands. The tourist guides in the J&K region should be incentivized as much as 
possible to sustain and give a fillip to tourism in the region.          
                (Para: 18.5) 
 
The Committee welcomes the steps taken by the Ministry.  The Committee is of the 
view that sincere efforts should be made to encourage schools, colleges and universities 
in the region to introduce courses on tourism and foreign languages to ensure the much 
needed impetus for the development of tourism.            
               (Para: 19.9)  
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would further pursue 
the matter with the Government of J&K.            (Para: 20.2)  
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the final outcome in the matter.   The 
Committee further recommends that funding for purchase of cheap raw material and 
machines to craftsmen and artisans should be provided under the Government schemes 
like Technology Upgradation Fund and Integrated Handloom Development Scheme. 
(Para: 21.2) 
MEDIA AND PROMOTION 
 

31 
 
The Committee appreciates the various efforts of the Ministry to promote tourism 
in J&K.  The Committee, however, opines that the Ministry should play a proactive role 
in effectively addressing the negative publicity attached to the Union Territory of 
Jammu & Kashmir as a troubled region from time to time through publicity material, 
creative and visual media, to ensure promoting the State as a major and peaceful tourist 
attraction.                (Para: 23.2) 
 The Committee would like the Ministry to prevail upon the countries to remove 
their advisories against the Union Territory of J&K as a supplementary effort while 
addressing the negative publicity.            (Para: 24.3)  
BUDDHIST CIRCUIT 
 The Committee observes that the tourist circuits help provide the geographical and 
cultural cohesion that facilitates unique tourist experience and ensures promotion of 
local arts, cultural traits, handicrafts, etc. which in turn generates livelihood in the 
identified regions.  It is in this context that inclusion of Leh and Ladakh under the 
Buddhist Circuit is of paramount importance. The Committee would, therefore, like the 
Ministry to pursue inclusion of Leh and L adakh regions under the Buddhist Circuit 
under the newly created UT of Ladakh keeping in view the predominance of Buddhist 
culture in the region and the popularity of Buddhist festivals held therein.   The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the specifi c efforts made and results achieved in 
this regard.              (Para: 26.3)  
 
TOURIST FACILITIES 
 
The Committee suggests that in addition to provision of Toilets, TFCs, Cafeteria, 
etc., under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, the Ministry should ensure suffici ent number 
of drinking water stations, rest stops, car stops, refreshment centres in the tourist 
destinations of the State in tandem with tourist footfall in the State. The Committee also 
suggests that in order to provide such facilities at faster pace, th e works may be 
outsourced on need basis for adoption/sponsorship of the tourist sites by agencies for 
better maintenance.              (Para: 28.3)  
The reply of the Ministry does not address the recommendation.  The Committee 
seeks a categorical reply on introduction of a Laser Show on Dal Lake and resumption 
of Sound and Light Show in Shalimar Gardens in the State.          
               (Para: 29.2)  
 
SAFETY ALERTS 
 The Committee recommends that units of disaster management teams should be 
deployed at appropriate places in order to safeguard the tourists from natural 
calamities.                
                (Para: 31.2) 
  
ECOLOGICAL SUSTAINABILITY 

32 
 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the findings of Kashmir University on the 
optimum carrying capacity of Dal Lake in terms of House Boats  and the action taken 
thereon.  The Committee also reiterates that an early action on regulation of house boats 
in the Dal Lake and introduction of house boats in areas other than Dal and Nageen 
Lakes may be taken on a priority basis.             
                (Para: 32.3)  
GOODS AND SERVICES TAX 
 The Co mmittee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would continue to 
follow up the matter with the Ministry of Finance.          (Para: 35.2)  
 
SUBMISSION OF UTILISATION CERTIFICATES 
 
 The Committee is concerned to note that as against Rs.276.46 crore  released, the 
amount involved in pending Utilization Certificates (UCs) is to the tune of Rs.99.4 crores 
(i.e., 35% of the amount released) which is substantial.  The Committee desires to be 
informed of the reasons given by the Union Territory of Jammu an d Kashmir for non -
submission of UCs.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry in coordination 
with the UT of J&K, should evolve a multi -pronged strategy for liquidation of pending 
UCs within a designated time -frame so that the execution of projects  is not hamstrung 
by lack of flow of funds.                
                (Para: 37.2)  
The Committee notes that in 4 out of 6 Himalayan Circuits, less than 50% of 
physical progress has been reported.  The Committee fails to understand the reasons for 
such slow pace and desired to be apprised whether the six Himalayan Circuits under 
implementation in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir have witnessed any time overrun and 
cost escalation as a result thereof.           (Para: 38.2)  
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
 
Annexure-A  
LIST OF HERITAGE SITES UNDER J&K HERITAGE CONSERVATION AND 
PRESERVATION ACT 2010 
S. No. Name of Heritage Site Division Declared vide SRO 
1 Cheshma-Shahi Spring and Garden, Cheshma 
Shahi, Srinagar 
Kashmir SRO-275 
Dated:7th July 2017 
2 Shalimar Mughal Garden, Shalimar, Srinagar Kashmir SRO-277 
Dated:7th July 2017 
3 Nishat Garden Kashmir SRO-276 
Dated:7th July 2017 
4 Mughal Garden Sahibabad, Jogigund, Achabal, 
Anantnagar 
Kashmir SRO-274 
Dated:7th July 2017 
5 Silk Factory, Solina, Srinagar Kashmir SRO-117 
Dated: 14th Feb 2019 
6 Stone Building Old Sectt, Srinagar and Shergari 
complex 
Kashmir SRO-270 
Dated: 6th July 2017 
7 Zainakadal Bridge, Srinagar Kashmir SRO-315 
Dated:28th July 2017 
8 Gole Mahal, Hazuri Bagh Talab-Talo Jammu Jammu SRO-263 
Dated:20th May 2018 
 
LIST OF STATE PROTECTED MONUMENT OF KASHMIR, DIVISION 
S. No. Name of Monument SRO under which declared 
as protected  
1 Ancient Temple at Narastan Tral SRO-383 dated 10.07.1983 
2 Ruins of Ancient Temple and Spring at Katheir 
Anantnagar 
SRO-383 dated 10.07.1983 
3 Masque 7 Tomb of Madian Sahib, Hawai Sgr SRO-383 dated 10.07.1983 
4 Mamleshwar temple at Mamal Phalgam SRO-383 dated 10.07.1983 
5 Ruins of Temple at Durng Tang Marg SRO-383 dated 10.07.1983 
6 Hari- Parbat Fort, Srinagar SRO-383 dated 10.07.1983 
7 Ancient Buddhist Site situated in compartment no.30 
at Hoinar, Phalgam 
SRO-10 dated 07.01.1980 
8 Ancient Temple at village Patarmula, Mansbal, 
Sonawari 
SRO-155 dated 07.04.1985 
9 Ruins of Mughal Hamam at Achabal, Anantnag SRO-67dated 21.10.1986 
10 Chatur Mukha Linga at Sheeri, Baramulla SRO-675 dated 21.10.1986 
11 Ancient Temple at Parihaspora, Diver, Baram SRO-337 dated 31.08.1989 
12 Ancient site at Hatmurra, Anantnaga SRO___dated_____ 
13 Ancient site at Asharatnar, yarikhah, Gurwait, 
Budgam 
SRO-313 dated 12.09.2000 

34 
 
14 Old Ceremanial of Old  Sectt, Srinagar SRO-77dated 23.03.2005 
15 Sheikh Mohammad Ibrahim Alias (Thagbab Sahib) SRO-226 dated 03.08.2009 
16 Historical Tomb at Soura SRO-290dated 14.09.2009 
17 Hari Parbat Wall (Qalie) Sgr SRO-265dated 06.07.2010 
18 Mughal Hamam Shalimarg, Sgr SRO-237dated 24.07.2013 
19 Rock Carving at Satbaran Kawari, District Kupwara SRO-243 dated 13.05.2013 
20 Ancient site at Parihaspora Known at Goverdhana 
Distt. Baramulla 
SRO-408 dated 19.09.2013 
21 Sadder Court, Srinagar SRO-178 dated 3rd June 2016 
22 Old SPS Museum Building Lalmandi, Srinagar SRO-06 dated 4th January 
2019 
23 Temple/Spring near sukhnag SRO-517 dated 29.08.2019 
24 Aali Masjid Iddgah, Srinagar SRO-17th dated 16.01.2018 
25 Gufkral Tral SRO-14 dated 9th January, 
2020 
 
LIST OF STATE PROTECTED MONUMENT OF JAMMU, DIVISION 
S. No. Name of Monument SRO under which declared as 
protected 
01 Ancient Temple at Saju Maidan, Poonch SRO- 441dated 17-07-1986 
02 Shahi Mughal Masjid, Nowshera, Rajouri SRO-441 dated 17-07-1986 
03 Chairans Devta Temple Salal Udhampur  SRO-441 dated 17-07-1986 
04 Temple Samadhi Charai, Udhampur SRO-441 dated 17-07-1986 
05 Budhist site at Ghora Gali Gool, Gulabgarh  SRO-281 dated 26-09-1986 
06 Jalandara Devi Temple Laddankotli, Udhamp SRO-281 dated 26-09-1986 
07 Chingus Sarai, Rajouri SRO-281 dated 26-09-1986 
 
08 Assar Temple at Assar Doda SRO-281 dated 26-09-1986 
 
09 Bahu Fort, Jammu AMA 50 SRO-281 dated 26-09-1986 
 
10 Pirmitha Tomb at Pirmitha, Jammu SRO-281 dated 26-09-1986 
 
11 Mast Garh Shahi Masjid at Jammu SRO-281 dated 26-09-1986 
 
12 Bhimgarh Fort Reasi, Udhampur SRO-33 dated 31-08-1989 
13 Salal Fort, Batal Bale, Udhampur SRO-33 dated 31-08-1989 
14 Fort complex at Jasrota SRO-32 dated 15-12-1995 
15 Mubarak Mandi Complex, Jammu SRO-121 dated 26-04-2005 
16 Ladden Fort, Chennai SRO- 323 dated 19-10-2009 
17 Manar Haveli Fort, Udhampur SRO- 323 dated 19-10-2009 
18 Jaganoo Fort, Udhampur SRO- 323 dated 19-10-2009 
19 Royal Bowli  Nandni SRO-151 dated 01-04-2010 
20 Historical Fort, Rajouri SRO-220 dated 25-05-2020 

35 
 
21 Jaffer Chak Masjid, Jammu SRO-270 dated 11-06-2010 
22 Mohar Garh Fort, Samba SRO-72 dated 07-03-2011 
23 Dehar Garh Fort, Samba SRO-72 dated 07-03-2011 
24 Bupnare Garh Fort, Samba SRO-72 dated 07-03-2011 
25 Poonch Fort in Distt. Poonch SRO-17 dated 09-01-2012 
26 Ancient Ragu Nath Temple Chani Parat Tehsil 
Sunderbani, Rajouri 
SRO-371 dated 09-11-2012 
27 Ancient Temple at Panj Nara The Kalakote, 
Rajouri 
SRO-371 dated 09-11-2012 
28 Historical Fort at Samba SRO281 dated 21-09-2011 
29 General Zorawar Singh Palace Vijayur Distt. 
Reasi 
SRO-43 dated 06-02-2013 
30 Bagh Deodi Poonch SRO-34 dated 28-07-2017 
 
LIST OF STATE PROTECTED MONUMENT OF LEH, LADAKH, DIVISION 
S. No. Name of Monument SRO under which declared 
as protected 
1 Chamba Statue, Sanku, Kargil SRO-261 dated 16-03-2012 
2 Rock Sculpture of Matria Budha Situated at Apati, 
Kargil 
SRO-44 dated 06-02-2013 
 

36 
 
Annexure – B
 
  


37 
 
 
  
Annexure - C 

38 
 
ANNEXURE - D 
S.No. State / UT Name of 
Circuit 
Name of the project Sanctioned 
Amt. 
(in cr) 
Percentage 
of Physical 
progress 
(Approx) 
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
North-East   
Circuit 
Development of Mega Circuit at 
Bhalukpong- Bomdila and Tawang in 
Arunachal Pradesh. 
49.77 85% 
2 Andhra Pradesh Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Kakinada Hope Island 
Konaseema as World Class Coastal & 
Eco Tourism Circuit in Andhra 
Pradesh 
67.84 100% 
3 Manipur North-East 
Circuit 
Development of Tourist Circuit in 
Manipur: Imphal- Khongjom 
72.23 100% 
4 Sikkim North-East  
Circuit 
Development of Tourist Circuit linking 
Rangpo (entry) – Rorathang- Aritar- 
Phadamchen- Nathang - Sherathang- 
Tsongmo – Gangtok – Phodong - 
Langan-Lachung – Yumthang - 
Lachen- Thangu-Gurudongmer - 
Mangan – Gangtok - TuminLingee - 
Singtam (exit) in Sikkim. 
98.05 95% 
5 Uttarakhand Eco Circuit Integrated Development of Eco-
Tourism, Adventure Sports, 
Associated Tourism related 
Infrastructure for Development of 
Tehri Lake & Surroundings as New 
Destination-District Tehri, 
Uttarakhand. 
70.92 95% 
6 Rajasthan Desert 
Circuit 
Development of Sambhar Lake Town 
and Other Destinations in Rajasthan 
under Desert Circuit. 
63.96 95% 
7 Nagaland Tribal 
Circuit 
Development of Tribal Circuit Peren- 
Kohima- Wokha, Nagaland 
97.36 80% 
8 Madhya Pradesh Wildlife 
Circuit 
Development of Wildlife Circuit at 
Panna- Mukundpur- Sanjay- Dubri-
Bandhavgarh- Kanha- Mukki- Pench 
in Madhya Pradesh. 
92.22 85% 
9 Andhra Pradesh Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Coastal Tourism 
Circuit in Sri PottiSriramalu Nellore 
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme in 
Andhra Pradesh.  
59.7 80% 

39 
 
10 Telangana Eco Circuit Integrated Development of Eco 
Tourism Circuit in Mahaboobnagar 
district, Telangana. 
91.62 70% 
11 Kerala Eco Circuit Development of Pathanamthitta- Gavi- 
Vagamon- Thekkady as Eco Tourism 
Circuit in Idduki and Pathanamthitta 
Districts in Kerala. 
76.55 80% 
12 Mizoram North East   
Circuit 
Integrated Development of New Eco 
Tourism under Swadesh Darshan-
North East Circuit at Thenzawl& 
South Zote, District Serchhip and 
Reiek, Mizoram.   
94.91 65% 
13 Assam Wildlife 
Circuit 
Development of Manas– Probitora– 
Nameri– Kaziranga– Dibru– Saikhowa 
as Wildlife Circuit in Assam.  
95.67 50% 
14 Puducherry Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Union Territory of 
Puducherry as Tourist Circuit under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme (Coastal 
Circuit) 
85.28 50% 
15 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
North East   
Circuit 
Integrated Development of New 
Adventure Tourism in Arunachal 
Pradesh 
97.14 75% 
16 Tripura North East   
Circuit 
Development of North East Circuit : 
Agartala - Sipahijala - Melaghar - 
Udaipur - Amarpur- Tirthamukh- 
Mandirghat– Dumboor- NarikelKunja- 
Gandachara– Ambassa in Tripura 
99.59 60% 
17 West Bengal Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Beach Circuit: 
Udaipur- Digha- Shankarpur- Tajpur- 
Mandarmani- Fraserganj-Bakkhlai- 
Henry Island in West Bengal 
85.39 60% 
18 Chhattisgarh Tribal 
Circuit 
Development of Tribal Tourism 
Circuit in Jashpur- Kunkuri- Mainpat- 
Ambikapur- Maheshpur -Ratanpur- 
Kurdar-Sarodadadar- Gangrel- 
Kondagaon– NathiyaNawagaon- 
Jagdalpur- Chitrakoot- Tirthgarh in 
Chhattisgarh.                                                                                     
99.21 60% 
19 Maharashtra Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Sindhudurg Coastal 
Circuit in Maharashtra under Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme. 
82.17 20% 
20 Goa Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Coastal Circuit 
(Sinquerim-Baga, Anjuna-Vagator, 
Morjim-Keri, Aguada Fort and Aguada 
Jail) in Goa.   
99.99 60% 

40 
 
21 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourism 
Infrastructure Projects in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir.  
82.97 50% 
22 Telangana Tribal 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Mulugu-
Laknavaram- Medavaram- Tadvai- 
Damaravi- Mallur- Bogatha Waterfalls 
as Tribal Circuit in Telangana.                                                                                        
83.88 45% 
23 Meghalaya North East 
Circuit 
Development of Umium (Lake View), 
U LumSohpetbneng-Mawdiangdiang – 
Orchid Lake Resort, Meghalaya.  
99.13 80% 
24 Madhya Pradesh Buddhist 
Circuit 
Development of Buddhist Circuit in 
Sanchi-Satna-Rewa-Mandsaur-Dhar in 
Madhya Pradesh. 
74.94 50% 
25 Kerala Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Sabarimala - Erumeli-
Pampa-Sannidhanam as a Spiritual 
Circuit in      District Pathanamthitta, 
Kerala. 
99.99 0% 
26 Manipur Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Spiritual Circuit – 
Shri Govindajee Temple, Shri 
BijoyGovindajee Temple – Shri 
Gopinath Temple – Shri Bungshibodon 
Temple – Shri Kaina Temple, 
Manipur. 
53.8 60% 
27 Gujarat Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Heritage Circuit in 
Ahmedabad- Rajkot- Porbandar –
Bardoli- Dandi in Gujarat. 
85.01 45% 
28 Haryana Krishna 
Circuit 
Development of Tourism 
Infrastructures at places related to 
Mahabharata in Kurukshetra, Haryana. 
97.35 45% 
29 Rajasthan Krishna 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Govind 
Dev ji temple (Jaipur), KhatuShyam Ji 
(Sikar) and Nathdwara (Rajsamand) in 
Rajasthan. 
91.45 30% 
30 Sikkim North East   
circuit 
Development of Tourist Circuit 
Linking Singtam– Maka- Temi-
BermoikTokel- Phongia- Namchi –
Jorthang- Okharey- Sombaria-
Daramdin- Jorethang- Melli (Exit) in 
Sikkim. 
95.32 65% 
31 Madhya Pradesh Heritage 
circuit 
Development of Heritage Circuit 
(Gwalior – Orchha – Khajuraho – 
Chanderi – Bhimbetka – Mandu) 
Madhya Pradesh 
92.97 55% 
32 Kerala Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of 
SreePadmanabhaArnamula- 
92.22 70% 

41 
 
Sabrimala-as a Spiritual Circuit in 
Kerala 
33 Bihar Tirthankar 
circuit  
Development of Tirthankar Circuit: 
Vaishali- Arrah- Masad- Patna- Rajgir- 
Pawapuri- Champapuri in Bihar. 
52.39 30% 
34 Bihar Spiritual 
circuit  
Integrated Development of Kanwaria 
Route: Sultanganj – Dharmshala- 
Deoghar under Spiritual circuit in 
Bihar. 
52.35 50% 
35 Odisha Coastal 
circuit  
Development of Gopalpur, Barkul, 
Satapada and Tampara as Coastal 
circuit in Odisha.  
76.49 20% 
36 Nagaland Tribal 
circuit  
Development of Tribal circuit 
(Mokokchung–Tuensang-Mon) in 
Nagaland 
99.67 30% 
37 Uttarakhand Heritage 
circuit 
Integrated Development of Heritage 
Circuit in Kumaon Region – Katarmal 
–Jogeshwar-Baijnath-Devidhura in 
Uttarakhand. 
79.13 35% 
38 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourist 
Facilities at Jammu-Rajouri-Shopian-
Pulwama  under Himalayan Circuit 
theme in J&K. 
96.38 40% 
39 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourist 
Facilities under the Construction of 
Assets in lieu of those Destroyed in 
Floods in 2014 
98.7 75% 
40 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourist 
facilities at Mantalai- Sudhmahadev- 
Patnitop under Himalayan Circuit 
Theme in J&K. 
97.82 35% 
41 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourist 
Facilities at Anantnag- Kishtwar- 
Pahalgam – Daksum – RanjitSagar 
Dam under Himalayan Circuit Theme 
in J&K. 
96.39 30% 
42 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourist 
Facilities at Gulmarg-Baramulla-
Kupwara-Leh Circuit under Himalayan 
Circuit Theme in J&K. 
96.93 15% 
43 Uttar Pradesh Buddhist 
Circuit 
Development of Buddhist Circuit – 
Srawasti, Kushinagar, &Kapilvastu in 
Uttar Pradesh. 
99.97 10% 
44 Uttar Pradesh Ramayana 
Circuit 
Development of Chitrakoot and 
Shringverpur as Ramayana Circuit in 
Uttar Pradesh  
69.45 30% 

42 
 
45 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Coastal Circuit (Long 
Island-Ross Smith Island- Neil Island- 
Havelock Island- Baratang Island-Port 
Blair) in Andaman & Nicobar under 
Coastal thematic circuit of Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme. 
42.19 15% 
46 Tamil Nadu Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Coastal Circuit 
(Chennai- Mamamallapuram – 
Rameshwaram – Manpadu – 
Kanyakumari) in Tamil Nadu under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
99.92 50% 
47 Uttar Pradesh Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Spiritual Circuit 
(Shahjahanpur-Basti- Ahar-Aligharh-
Kasgunj-Sarosi-Pratapgarh-Unnao-
Kaushambi- Mirzapur-Gorakpur- 
Kairana- Doamriyagunj- Bagpat-
Barabanki- Azamgarh) 
68.39 50% 
48 Uttar Pradesh Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Spiritual Circuit –II 
(Bijnor- Meerut- Kanpur- Kanpur 
Dehat- Banda- Ghazipur- Salempur- 
Ghosi- Balia- Ambedkar Nagar- 
Aligarh- Fatehpur- Deoria- Mahoba- 
Sonbhadra- Chandauli- Mishrikh- 
Bhadohi) in Uttar Pradesh under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
63.77 75% 
49 Uttar Pradesh Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Heritage 
Circuit(Kalinjar Fort (Banda)- 
MarharDham (SantKabir Nagar)- 
ChauriChaura, Shaheed Sthal 
(Fatehpur)-  MavaharSthal (Ghosi)- 
Shaheed Smarak (Meerut) in Uttar 
Pradesh under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme 
34.82 45% 
50 Bihar Buddhist 
Circuit 
Development of Buddhist circuit- 
Construction of Cultural Centre at 
Bodhgaya, Bihar 
98.73 2% 
51 Assam Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Tezpur – Majuli – 
Sibsagar as Heritage Circuit in Assam 
under Swadesh Darshan scheme 
98.35 15% 
52 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Himalayan 
Circuit in Himachal Pradesh under 
Swadesh Darshan scheme 
99.76 10% 

43 
 
53 Mizoram Eco Circuit Development of Eco-Adventure 
Circuit Aizawl -Rawpuichhip – 
Khawhphawp – Lengpui – Durtlang – 
Chatlang- Sakawrhmuituaitlang -  
Muthee – Beratlawng  -Tuirial Airfield 
– Hmuifang under Eco circuit theme of 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
99.07 30% 
54 Rajasthan Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Spiritual Circuit– 
Churu (SalasarBalaji)– Jaipur (Shri 
SamodeBalaji, Ghat keBalaji, 
BandhekeBalaji)- Alwar 
(PandupoleHanumanji, Bharathari)- 
Viratnagar (Bijak, Jainnasiya, Ambika 
Temple)- Bharatpur (Kaman Region)- 
Dholpur (Muchkund) – 
MehandipurBalaji- Chittorgarh 
(Sanwaliyaji) in Rajasthan under 
Swadesh Darshan scheme 
93.9 25% 
55 Gujarat Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Heritage circuit: 
Vadnagar- Modhera and Patan in 
Gujarat under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme 
98.61 70% 
56 Bihar Rural 
Circuit 
Development of Gandhi Circuit: 
Bhitiharwa -Chandrahia - Turkaulia in 
Bihar under Rural Circuit theme of 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
44.65 15% 
57 Goa Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Coastal Circuit II: 
Rua De Orum Creek - Don Paula -
Colva - Benaulim in Goa under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
99.35 10% 
58 Gujarat Buddhist 
circuit 
Development of Buddhist circuit: 
Junagadh- GirSomnath- Bharuch-
Kutch- Bhavnagar- Rajkot- Mehsana 
in Gujarat under Swadesh Darshan 
scheme 
35.99 15% 
59 Puducherry Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Heritage Circuit in 
Puducherry under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme. 
66.35 15% 
60 Puducherry Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Spiritual Circuit in 
Puducherry under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme 
40.68 15% 

44 
 
61 Rajasthan Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Heritage Circuit 
(Rajsamand (Kumbhalgarh Fort)- 
 Jaipur (Nahargarh Fort)- Alwar 
(BalaQuila)– SawaiMadhopur 
(Ranthambore Fort and  Khandar 
Fort)– Jhalawar (Gagron Fort)– 
Chittorgarh (Chittorgarh Fort) 
Jaisalmer (JaisalmerFort) 
Hanumangarh  (Kalibangan,  Bhatner 
Fort and Gogamedi)-  Jalore (Jalore 
Fort)- Udaipur (Pratap Gaurav 
Kendra)- Dholpur (Bagh-i-Nilofar and 
 PuraniChawni)– Nagaur(Meera Bai 
Temple) in Rajasthan under Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme. 
99.6 30% 
62 Telangana Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Heritage Circuit: 
QutubShahi Heritage Park- Paigah 
Tombs- Hayat Bakshi Mosque- 
Raymond's Tomb in Telangana under 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
99.42 15% 
63 Bihar Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Mandar Hill &Ang 
Pradesh under Spiritual Circuit theme 
of Swadesh Darshan Scheme. 
53.49 5% 
64 Madhya Pradesh Eco Circuit Development of Gandhisagar Dam- 
Mandleshwar Dam- Omkareshwar 
Dam- Indira Sagar Dam- Tawa Dam- 
Bargi Dam- Bheda Ghat- Bansagar 
Dam- Ken River under Eco circuit 
theme of Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
99.62 45% 
65 Uttar  
Pradesh 
Ramayana 
Circuit 
Development of Ayodhya under 
Ramayana Circuit theme of Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme 
133.31 30% 
66 Andhra Pradesh Buddhist 
Circuit 
Development of Buddhist Circuit: 
Shalihundam-Thotlakonda- 
Bavikonda- Bojjanakonda- Amravati- 
Anupu in Andhra Pradesh under the 
theme of Buddhist Circuit of Swadesh 
Darshan Scheme 
52.34 10% 
 