89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
EIGHTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING  (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON     27.07.2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON   27.07.2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
JULY, 2005/SARAVANA, 1927 (SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C O N T E N T S
                        1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               
                        2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                       
                        3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                               
                        4.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE  
                        5.ANNEXURE                                                                                               
                        6.MINUTES                                                                                                                                       
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
 PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2004-2005)
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
* 2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
3.
      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
5.
      Shrimati Hema Malini
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
9.      Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
10.  Shrimati Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Ramdas Athawale
12.  Shri Raj Babbar
13.  Shri Anil Basu
14.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
15.  Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
16.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju 
17.  Shri Dip Gogoi
18.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
19.  Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
20.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
21.  Shri Samik Lahiri
22.  Shri Sudam Marandi
23.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
24.  Shri Ravindra Naik
25.  Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
26.  Shri Manabendra Shah
27.  Shri Dushyant Singh
28.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
29.  Shri Sartaj Singh
30.  Shri Chengara Surendran
31.  Shri Umakant Yadav
      SECRETARIAT
Shri Naresh Chandra Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary         
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
 * Nominated w.e.f. 14.04.2005 vice Shri Dara Singh Chauhan.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Eighty-ninth Report
 of the Committee on the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill 2004*.
 
2.                     The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 23 rd December 2004.  In pursuance of rules relating to
 the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with
 the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred** the Bill to the Committee on 31 st December 2004 for examination and
 report.
 
3.                     The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Shipping at
 its meetings held on the 17
th January and 23rd February 2005.
 
4.                     The Committee heard the views of Shri Raman Puri, Vice Admiral, Ministry of Defence and Shri M. P.
 Pinto, formerly Secretary, Department of Shipping on the provisions of the Bill at its meeting held on 14
th February
 2005.  The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of Indian National Port and Dock Workers'
 Federation and All India Port & Dock Workers Federation at its meetings held on the 15
th February and 23rd February
 2005 respectively.
 
5.                     The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill during its meeting held on the 6 th June
 2005.  The Committee also considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same with minor modifications
 on 6
th June 2005 itself.
 
6.                     The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the Department of
 Shipping for the assistance provided during deliberations on the provisions of the Bill. The Committee also


89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 acknowledges the contribution of Vice Admiral Raman Puri, Shri M. P. Pinto and the representatives of employees
 unions of major ports, who submitted their valuable suggestions on the provisions of the Bill.
 
NEW DELHI
June 6,
 2005 
Jyaistha 16, 1927 (Saka)                   
NILOTPAL BASU
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
_____________________________________________________
*   Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 23.12.2004.
**   Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.41890 dated 31.12.2004.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
R E P O R T
 
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004 seeks to address the issue of security pertaining to the
 Merchant Shipping in India and to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and Indian Ports Act, 1908 so as to
 incorporate therein provisions relating to security measures to be adopted by ships and port, port facilities, ship
 identification number, port facility assessment, international ship security certificate, ship security alert system, control
 measures and compliance.
 
2.                     The statement of objects and reasons of the Bill states that India has ratified the International Convention
 on Safety of Life at Sea 1974 (SOLAS 1974) on 16
th June 1976, which came into force on 25 th May 1980.  This
 Convention in its successive forms is generally regarded as the most important of all international treaties concerning
 the safety of merchant ships.  The main objective of the SOLAS 1974 is to specify minimum standards for the
 construction, equipment and operation of ships, compatible with their safety.  There are 11 codes or similar instruments
 that are made mandatory under SOLAS 1974.  Of these, the last Code is the 'International Code for the Security of
 Ships and Port Facility' (ISPS Code).  This Code was adopted as an amendment to SOLAS 1974 by the conference of
 contracting States on 12
th December 2002, by passing 11 resolutions.  Out of those 11 Resolutions, Resolution No. 6
 inter-alia prescribes 1st July 2004 as the application dates for the code.  If the ISPS Code is not implemented it will be
 difficult for the Indian Ships to secure entry in the Ports of other contracting States an also for the foreign ships to visit
 Indian Ports.
 
3.
                                         The statement of objects and reasons of the Bill further states that with a view to implement the
 provisions of the ISPS Code, it is proposed to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  India being a major seafarer-
supplying nation, it is essential to ensure that our seafarers' employment prospects and movements to other countries are
 not hampered for want of Seafarers' identity document.  Accordingly, it is proposed to incorporate necessary provisions
 in the Bill.
4.
                                         The statement of objects and reasons of the Bill also states that since the implementation of ISPS Code
 also involves ports, it is proposed to consequentially amend the Indian Ports Act, 1908 so as to facilitate a port facility
 in complying with the requirements of the maritime security proposed to be included under the new Part IX B of the

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 Merchant Shipping act, 1958.
 
5.                                         In their background note furnished to the Committee giving the reasons for the introduction of the Bill,
 the Department of Shipping have brought out in the succeeding paragraphs:-
 
NEED FOR ISPS CODE
5.1                   Part IX of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 relates to 'Safety' of ships.  The provisions of this part
 achieves implementation of International Convention on Safety of Life at sea, 1974 (SOLAS 1974), which came into
 force internationally on 25
th May 1980. India having ratified this on 16 th June 1976 the convention came into force in
 India on 25 th May 1980.  The main objective of the SOLAS Convention is to specify minimum standards for the
 construction, equipment and operation of ships, compatible with their safety.  The Convention has been updated and
 amended on numerous occasions hence is referred to as SOLAS 1974, as amended.  There are 11 Codes or similar
 instruments that are made mandatory under SOLAS 1974.  Of these the last Code is 'International Code for the Security
 of Ships and of port Facility' (ISPS Code).  Following the tragic events of 11 th September 2001, the 22nd session of the
 Assembly of the IMO in November 2001 had unanimously agreed to the development of new measures relating to the
 security of ships and of port facilities for adoption by a Conference of Contracting Governments to the SOLAS 1974. 
 This Code was adopted as an amendment to SOLAS by the conference of Contracting Governments (SOLAS 1974) on
 12th December 2002.  To address the issue of 'Security' in the legislation pertaining to merchant shipping in India, it has
 been proposed to introduce/insert a new part IXB in the Merchant Shipping Act along with minor changes in the long
 title of the Act, new definition of security in Section 3 in part I, amendment of section 31 in Part V.  To complement the
 provisions of new part IXB it was also felt necessary to make corresponding amendments in Indian Ports Act, 1908 by
 providing new Section 68 D.
 
OBJECTIVES OF ISPS CODE
5.2                   The objectives of the ISPS Code are to establish an international framework-involving co-operation
 between contracting States, Government agencies, local administrations and the shipping and port industries to detect
 or assess security threats and take preventive measures against security incidents affecting ships or port facilities used
 in international trade; to establish the respective roles and responsibilities of all concerned at the national and
 international level for ensuring maritime security; to ensure the early and efficient colletion and  exchange of security
 related information; to provide a methodology for security assessments so as to have in place plans and procedures to
 react to changing security levels and; to ensure adequate and proportionate maritime security measures.  If the ISPS
 Code is not implemented, it will be difficult for the Indian ships to secure entry in the ports of other contracting states
 and also for the foreign ships to visit Indian ports. Therefore, it was felt necessary to provide legislative support to
 Indian ships in respect of security and to provide corresponding measures at Indian ports for foreign flag ships.

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 
5.3                   Similarly, 'Seafarers Identity Document Convention (Revised), 2003', (Convention 185) was adopted by
 International Labour Conference, Geneva, on 19th June 2003.  According to this, access to ships/ports will be restricted
 to only those seafarers who are in possession of Seafarers Identity Document.  Therefore, to bring the Indian seafarers
 at par with international standards, it was felt necessary to introduce corresponding changes in the Merchant Shipping
 Act by insertion of new section 99A in Part VII.  Since India is a major seafarer-supplying nation to international
 shipping, it is imperative that the Indian seafarers are issued the identification documents giving his biometrics and
 personal information, which can be scrutinized, from any port of world for its genuineness.  These provisions would
 ensure that employment opportunity of Indian Seafarers is not compromised.  Similar checks have been employed for
 foreign seafarers at Indian ports at the facilities to meet the requirements of this convention and ensure security of our
 ports and country at large. 
 
SCOPE OF ISPS CODE
6.                                         The scope of ISPS Code is limited to ship and port facilities and the measures included in the Code are
 essentially preventive measures so as to reduce the chances of easy entry for unlawful elements such as and they have
 to be implemented by the port security personnel and the trained ship-staff.  Further, in case of any security incident,
 there would be a better coordination with the agencies in-charge of security and the law and other in the area.  There
 would also be a better awareness towards ensuring safety of ships from acts of sabotage etc.  The measures will also
 ensure that the ships and ports would not be a soft target of the terrorists besides introducing some security measures
 which would assist the port and ship staff in preventing unauthorized entry in ports and on board ships, there are other
 measures to ensure that weapons and unauthorized people are not permitted to enter the port or ships through
 cargo/stores or otherwise.  This necessitates that the port facilities where the ship port interface takes place are
 sanitized.
 
FEATURES OF ISPS CODE
7.                                         The salient features of the ISPS code are as under:-
Ž         To establish an international framework involving co-operation between contracting Governments,
 Government agencies, local administrations and the shipping and port industries to detect and assess
 security threats and take preventive measures against security incidents affecting ships or port facilities
 used in international trade.
Ž          To establish the respective roles and responsibilities of the Contracting Governments, Government
 agencies, local administration and the shipping and port industries, at the national and international level,
 for ensuring maritime security.
Ž         To ensure the early and efficient collection and exchange of security-related information.
Ž         To provide a methodology for security assessments so as to have in place plans and procedures to react to
 changing security levels and

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
Ž         To ensure confidence that adequate and proportionate maritime security measures are in place.
 
FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS OF ISPS CODE
8.                     In order to achieve its objectives, this code embodies a number of functional requirements.  These
 include, but are not limited to:-
Ž                Gathering and assessing information with respect to security threats and exchanging such information
 with appropriate contracting Governments;
Ž                Requiring the maintenance of communication protocols for ships and port facilities;
Ž                Preventing unauthorized access to ships, port facilities and their restricted areas;
Ž                Preventing the introduction of unauthorized weapons, incendiary devices or explosives to ships or port
 facilities;
Ž                Providing means for raising the alarm in reaction to security threats or security incidents;
Ž                Requiring ship and port facility security plans based upon security assessments; and
Ž                Requiring training, drills and exercises to ensure familiarity with security plans and procedures.
APPLICATION OF ISPS CODE
9.                     The ISPS Code shall apply to the following type of ships on International
Voyages and Port Facilities serving such ships:-
Ž                Passengers ships irrespective of size,
Ž                Cargo ships of 500 Gross Tonnage and above not on International voyage.
Ž                All ships of 300 Gross Tonnage on International voyages
Ž                 Port facility serving ships on International voyages.
Ž                Mobile of shore Drilling Units.
 
10.                   The Committee in its meeting held on 17 th January and 23rd February 2005 respectively heard the views
 of Secretary and other officers of the Department of Shipping on the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004. 
 
11.
                The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of the National Security Council and the employees
 unions of Indian National Ports & Docks Workers Federation and All India Port & Dock Workers Federation at its
 sitting held on 14th, 15th  & 23rd February 2005 respectively.  The representatives of National Security Council and of
 the two workers federation while supporting the Bill from maritime security point of view have expressed their
 reservations before the Committee about the implementation of ISPS Code.
 
REASONS FOR ADOPTION OF ISPS CODE AND PROTECTION OF NATIONAL INTEREST
12.
                                     As regards the compulsions for adoption of ISPS Code and protection of National interest, the
 Department of Shipping vide their O.M. No.SR. 20013/2/2003-AG dated 17.02.2005 informed the Committee that in

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 order to ensure continuity of EXIM trade, the Government has entered into this agreement.  In case ISPS Code is not
 implemented by ships then Indian flagships will not be allowed to carry Cargo to the ports of other countries and
 therefore EXIM trade would suffer.  All the ships involved in international trade are also mandatorily required to keep
 data for last 10 ports of call, all of which must be ISPS compliant.  Therefore, it is necessary for ports also to be ISPS
 compliant; otherwise no foreign ships would call at Indian ports.  Moreover, the measures included in the ISPS Code
 have been arrived at after lengthy deliberations at International Maritime Organization in which India has participated
 actively and they do take into account the views of contracting parties to Safety of Life at Sea Convention.  In ISPS
 Code, there is no such element, which would compromise the national interest.
13.
                                     During the course of evidence tendered on 17.01.2005, the Secretary of Department of Shipping
 deposed before the Committee that;
" Sir, as everybody is aware, after the 11 th September, 2001 incident, there was such an urgency
 to increase security, both in shipping and in ports, in short, in the maritime sector, that the International
 Maritime Organisation called for a diplomatic conference where all the member state Governments were
 present in December, 2002; they made some amendments to the International convention for the Safety
 of Life at Sea, called SOLAS 1974, and the ISPS Code came into existence.  It has Part A and Part B. 
 Part A has mandatory provisions and Part B has guidance provisions.  Sir, it was to be implemented by
 all countries in the world with effect from 1
st July, 2004, and accordingly, all the member state
 Governments have taken steps to update security measure in respect to shipping as well as ports in
 accordance with the ISPS Code.  However, in the Merchant Shipping Act, these provisions had to be
 reflected and, therefore, the Ministry has prepared the Report and submitted it to the Parliament."
 
14.                   The Committee takes note of the fact that in order to ensure continuity of EXIM trade the Government
 has entered into this agreement.  The Committee agrees with the views of the Government that if the ISPS Code is not
 implemented the Indian ships & port facilities may act as a non-tariff barrier for sea borne commerce. It appears to the
 Committee that current assessment of security threat to shipping sector is basically the consequence of 9/11 attack on
 U.S.A.  Terrorism has a much longer history, however, International Maritime Organization ignored that fact and
 suddenly woke up to the threat of security and agreed unanimously to the evolution of new measures relating to ships
 and port facilities post 9/11.  The Committee does not approve the contention of the Secretary that the ISPS Code
 provides both voluntary as well as mandatory provisions.  The Committee feels that security perception is a sovereign
 function and it is country specific. It is not fair, therefore, to confuse between our own security requirements and
 demands of international trade.  Protecting the nation, is a sovereign function of the Government. The Committee,
 therefore, recommends the Department of Shipping to look into the national priorities and interests while implementing
 the ISPS code.
 
15.
                                     The Committee expressed apprehension that Department of Shipping is encroaching upon the law
 making powers of the Parliament so far as framing the laws are concerned.  In response, the Department of Shipping
 informed that the code recognizes the rights of sovereign nations and specifically provides;
"Nothing in this Code shall prejudice the rights or obligations of States under international law"
 

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
16.                The Department of Shipping further informed the Committee that ISPS Code has come into existence through
 an amendment of SOLAS, which came in force internationally on 25th May 1980.  India had ratified this convention on
 16th June 1976.  The aforesaid amendments were deemed to have been accepted on 1st January 2004 unless prior to that
 date more than one third of the contracting Governments to the convention or contracting Governments the combined
 fleet of which constitute not less than 50% of the gross tonnage of the world's merchant fleet have notified their
 objections to the amendments.  Since this has not happened, amendments to SOLAS have come into effect.  Since ISPS
 Code is being implemented under this amendment to SOLAS, no fresh ratification is required.  The present amendment
 Bill is to give legislative backup to ISPS Code.  Therefore, there is no encroachment upon the law making powers of
 Parliament.
 
17.                   The Committee recognizes that our constitution empowers the Government to enter into international
 agreements and no subsequent ratification by the Parliament is necessary.  However, if such agreements warrant any
 legislative change subsequently, then powers of the Parliament are final.  Therefore, the Government should be mindful
 of that flexibility.
 
FORMATION OF MARITIME SECURITY ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
18.                   As regards involvement of Merchant Shipping into the business of security, which is essentially the job
 of the Naval Force or the Armed Forces and formation of a Maritime Security Advisory Committee under the Ministry
 of Defence, the Department of Shipping vide their O.M. dated 17.02.2005 informed the Committee that the role of
 Naval forces or the Armed forces is in no way perceived to be different post-ISPS Code implementation.  In fact,
 International Maritime Organization is not the body to deliberate upon the role of Armed forces in relation to their
 sovereign powers in protecting their national security interests and therefore the Code had no intention to discuss such
 issues.  As already stated, the scope of the ISPS Code and the SOLAS chapter XI-2, based on which the Merchant
 Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004 has been prepared, is confined to only preventive measures to deter and detect.  It is
 clarified that the objective of the code is to establish an international frame work involving cooperation between
 contracting Governments, Government agencies, local administrations, shipping and the port industry to detect security
 threats and take preventive measures against security incidents affecting ships or port facilities only.  The role of
 Armed forces is to respond to any security incident, which may be reported by the ships or port facilities.  Hence the
 objective of ISPS Code in no way clashes with already established role of law enforcement agencies, naval forces or the
 armed forces.  Moreover, jurisdiction of coast guard and navy commences outside the port limit whereas the ISPS Code
 is concerned with port facility security, which is always inside the port limit.  Port Security in the country has been
 traditionally covered by the CISF, Port Police, State Police and in some cases by Private Security i.e. very similar to the
 practice followed by Airports. Port & Ship Security involves screening the cargo, access control, ship port interface and
 interaction with custom etc.  All such issues come under the control of Civilian Authorities.

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 
19.                                     During the course of evidence tendered on 23.02.2005, the Secretary of Department of Shipping
 deposed before the Committee that;
"Sir, I agree with you on the first point that the National Security Council and the security agencies
 from the Ministry of Defence are ultimately in charge of the security of the country.  In the IMO also,
 this point was clearly conceded that the sovereign Government and the armed forces have their role to
 play once a terrorist threat has been realised.  But the ISPS Code aims at preventing a terrorist
 situation from developing, both in terms of ships and ports.  Therefore, what we did in the Committees
 that we appointed, for the purposes of ISPS Code,  ---- one under my chairmanship and another under
 the chairmanship of the DG Shipping, who is the designated authority -- the representatives from these
 forces have been associated, Navy as well as Coast Guard.  I have the details of names of persons who
 attended these meetings.  That means we have taken the input from them while devising these
 measures and the main objective of the ISPS is to put in place a system.  Sir, the moment there is a
 security threat, it is informed to the security people, whether it is the police at a smaller level or the
 Navy at the larger level.  They will be immediately put on alert."
 
20.
                The Department of Shipping vide their O.M. dated 1.03.2005 further informed the Committee that they have
 formed various levels of interaction with intelligence agencies, defence agencies and appropriate law enforcement
 agencies, and the following Committees have been constituted to implement ISPS Code in India.
(i)        Review Committee, chaired by Secretary (Shipping) comprising of representatives from Ministry of
 Shipping, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Finance,
 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gases, Coastguard, Navy Customs, Gujarat Maritime Board, Maharashtra
 Maritime Board, Indian National Ship Owners' Association and Chairman and Managing Director, Shipping
 Corporation of India;
(ii)        Steering Group, chaired by Director General of Shipping comprising of representative from Ministry of
 Shipping, Directorate General of Shipping, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs, Coastguard, Indian
 Navy and Indian National Ship Owners' Association.
(iii)       Port Security Advisory Committee, chaired by Chairman of the Major Ports or Chief executives of
 Maritime Boards comprising of - Port Facility Security Officer and representatives from Coast Guard, Navy,
 State/Centre Intelligence agencies (e.g. Intelligence Bureau), Local Police, Customs, Central Industrial Security
 Force (CISF) or other security Agency incharge of Port Security and Mercantile Marine Department.
 
21.
                                     While carrying out Port Facility Security Assessment, Indian Register of Shipping, the designated
 Recognized Security Organization (RSO), had taken the inputs of Navy, Coast Guard, Intelligence Bureau, and Local
 Police etc. 
 
22.
                                     The Amendments relating to ISPS Code have come into force as part of Safety of Life at Sea
 Convention for which Ministry of Shipping is the nodal agency.  The role of Defence agencies is of advisory nature and
 they have already been included in the Committees.  In addition, the Directorate General of Shipping has been sending

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 security related information to the National Security Council Secretariat, and the same is discussed in the National
 Security Council fortnightly intelligence summary meetings.  The meeting is attended by officers of Ministry of
 Defence (all the three wings), Coast Guard, IB, MHA, MEA, etc. It is also proposed to request National Security
 Council (NSC) to nominate their representative in the Maritime Security Review Committee, which is functional under
 the chairmanship of Secretary (Shipping).  This would facilitate, to take on board the views of National Security
 Council while implementing ISPS Code.
 
23.
                                     The Committee notes that IMO is not the body to deliberate upon the role of Armed forces in relation to
 their sovereign powers in protecting their national security interest and the scope of ISPS Code is confined to only
 preventive measures to deter and detect and the role of armed forces is to respond to any security incident reported by
 ships or port facilities. The Committee feels that the problem of security is very old and the security requirements are
 becoming far too complex to be handled in the manner they were being handled in the past.  Therefore, an international
 organisation which is primarily engaged in commercial activity through sea route should not have been involved in the
 business of security and some defence related agencies i.e. Navy and Armed forces should have essentially dealt with
 this kind of a code.  The Committee therefore, recommends for creation of a Maritime Security Advisory Committee to
 report on and make recommendations on National Maritime Security matter under the Ministry of Defence so that all
 commerce handled by the Port and Ships would achieve appropriate security coverage.
 
COMPETENCE OF PORT AUTHORITY TO ADDRESS SECURITY ISSUES
24.
                The Committee expressed apprehension that the port authorities all over the world are not competent enough in
 addressing the security issues so far as the terrorist activities are concerned.  In response, the Department of Shipping
 stated that the port authorities are competent to address the security issue so far as terrorist activities are concerned. 
 But it is also a fact that the existing practices on ships and port facility security were not considered adequate at the
 international level.  Prior to adoption of ISPS Code, there were a large number of port facilities all over the world
 including some in India, which did not even have boundary fencing, and effective access control in place.  ISPS Code
 has been implemented to adopt uniform practices understood by each port and ship. 
 
25.                   The Committee notes that the port authorities are competent to address the security issue so far as
 terrorist activities are concerned. But, the existing practices on ships and port facilities security are not considered
 adequate at the international level. The Committee, however, recommends that all port facilities and Indian vessels
 should have comprehensive security plans that are evolved by port authorities and shipping companies in conjunction
 with the Indian Navy and the Coast Guard besides setting up local port security committees for better coordination of
 efforts of central, state and local law enforcement and security agencies.
 
AUTHORITY FOR TAKING DECISION ON THE SECURITY PERCEPTION
26.                   As regards authority for taking decision on the security perception, the Department of Shipping vide their

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 O.M. dated 17.02.2005 informed the Committee that the contracting Government is the authority for taking decisions
 on the security perception.  Chapter XI-2/3 of SOLAS (obligations of contracting Government with respect to security)
 states:
"Administrations shall set security levels and ensure the provisions of security level information to ships entitled
 to fly their flag.  When changes in security level occur, security-level information shall be updated as the
 circumstance dictates.  Contracting Governments shall set security levels and ensure the provision of security-
level information to port facilities within their territory, and to ships prior to entering a port or whilst in a port
 within their territory.  When changes in security level occur, security-level information shall be updated as the
 circumstance dictates."
 
27.                   The Department of Shipping in its written replies dated 17.02.2005 informed the Committee that
 primarily, the security levels will be issued by designated authority i.e. D.G. Shipping, based on intelligence inputs
 received from I.B., local police, State Government, Navy, Coastguard etc. However, it is envisaged that security levels
 for the major ports can be declared by the respective Chairman in consultation with the Port Security Advisory
 Committee which consists of representatives from local law enforcement agencies, Navy, Coast Guard, Customs,
 Immigration, etc.  As regards other ports, the security levels will be declared by respective State Maritime Boards in
 similar manner.  The ships generally are required to operate at least at the same security levels as that of the concerned
 port.  In case of any higher threat, it is envisaged that the security level of a particular ship or a group of ships can be
 raised in consultation with or under delegation of D.G. Shipping. The overall security of ports and other areas of
 commercial and strategic importance has been and would continue to be with the appropriate law enforcement
 agencies/Defence services of the country to protect against any internal or external aggression.
 
28.                   The Department of Shipping vide their O.M. dated 1.03.2005 further stated that the security requirements
 under ISPS Code cover prevention and detention aspects and the DG Shipping is competent and equipped to handle
 these aspects.  A Communication Centre in the office of DG Shipping has been specially set up to meet the
 communication and coordination related requirements of ISPS Code on Indian ships, on Indian shores and ISPS
 complaint Indian Ports.  This Communication Centre is manned 24 hours x 7 days basis.  The equipment fitted in the
 Communication Centre is capable of receiving Ship Security Alert from any Indian ship anywhere in the world.  The
 Communication Centre would also receive communication from any foreign maritime administration/agency for
 rendering assistance to their ships in Indian waters.  The Communication Centre is capable of coordinating the efforts
 required in handling any ISPS related security incident.
 
29.                   The Committee notes that DG Shipping is the competent authority and equipped with enough
 paraphernalia to handle the security matters as maintained in the Merchant Shipping Act 1958.  The Committee feels
 that the security concerns are growing day by day and there is a need to institutionalize the security element.  The
 Committee therefore, recommends that, even if, the DG Shipping oversees the functions, for securing maritime
 environment, there should be a Maritime Security Advisory Committee to deal with security matters and to make

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 recommendation on National Maritime Security issues.
 
SECTION 3 (44A) (ii)
30.                   To a query about whether the present Bill is exhaustive enough to address the issue to security at Indian
 Maritime transport sector besides detecting/assessing security threats and suggesting preventive measures against
 security incidents affecting ships or port facilities used in the International trade.  The Department of Shipping
 informed the Committee that the present Bill adequately caters to the requirements of implementation of amendments
 to SOLAS and the ISPS Code.  Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Defence also have been consulted and their
 views have been taken on board by expanding
definition of security, with the addition of following text in 3(44A):-
"Against any other hostile act or influence"
 
31.                   The Department of Shipping further informed that any other hostile act or influence is meant to cover any
 activity, which may not have been covered in the scope of activities identified, and the same will be covered under the
 Rules in details, in consultation with the Ministries concerned.
 
32.                   During the course of evidence tendered on 23.02.2005, the Secretary of Department of Shipping deposed
 before the Committee that;
"Sir, I have to agree, yes.  When we went to the Cabinet with this proposal, there was a discussion. Some
 Ministry suggested that we should not restrict it to terrorism and sabotage in the ISPS Code.  A
 suggestion came from the Ministry that we add more factors like drugs and other things.  So, we brought
 them in.  We went back to the Ministry of Law if there are any specific instruments, laws and
 conventions and they said a few words or clauses in your Act may lead to a problem of interpretation,
 and, therefore, you only put it here, which is not found in any other Act. We will try to make it more
 concrete at the time when rules will be made under this section."
 
33.                   The Committee is not in agreement with the replies furnished by the Department of Shipping. The
 Committee is of the view that the terms "Against any other hostile act or influence" as mentioned in chapter II, Section
 3, Sub-Section 44A (ii) is too broad and therefore open to an interpretation.  The Committee feels that a good law must
 be very specific and should properly define the acts of violation otherwise it can be misused against anybody. The
 Committee therefore, recommends that the Department of Shipping should clearly specify and incorporate "any other
 hostile act or influence" in the Bill itself so as to make it more comprehensive and subject to monitoring.
 
SECTION 344L and 344Q
34.                   The Committee pointed out that the term 'such other authority' in Section 344L and 344Q for the purpose
 of issue of ship identification number and international ship security certificate is vague.  The Department of Shipping
 informed that as per the existing practice, IMO number is being allotted to the ships by the Lloyds Register.  The ship's
 inspection may be required to be done outside India since they trade all over the world.  Therefore to allow flexibility

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 for delegation of such activities to other agencies, the words 'such other authority' have been added.
 
35.                   The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department of Shipping.  The Committee is of the
 firm opinion that the term 'such other authority' in Section 344L and 344Q for the purpose of issue of ship identification
 number and international ship security certificate is vague and requires specific mention in the act itself.  The
 Committee feels that flexibility for delegation of authority may further lead to its misuse and as a result of which the
 security may be compromised.  The Committee therefore recommends that the term 'such other authority' should be
 defined in the Act itself to avoid any misinterpretation.
 
SEAMEN IDENTITY DOCUMENT
36.                   As regards the present practice for issuing seamen identity document, the Department of Shipping vide
 their O.M. dated 1.03.2005 informed the Committee that presently the Indian seafarers are issued with Continuous
 Discharge Certificate(CDC).  Since the Seamen Identity Document has got some additional security features, which
 will assist in establishing the genuineness of the document and the identity of the seaman concerned, the Department of
 Shipping is in the process of establishing necessary infrastructure for issuance of the Seamen Identity Document
 without causing any harassment to the seafarers.
 
37.                   The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is in the process of establishing necessary
 infrastructure for issuance of the Seamen Identity Document without causing any harassment to the seafarers since it is
 the most vital document which establishes the genuineness and the identity of the Seamen.  However, the Committee
 feels that there is definitely a necessity to rationalize the method of issuance of identification document.  The
 Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to rationalize the method of issuing identification document in a
 completely transparent and objective manner without leaving any scope for its subjective application in the future.
 
SECTION 344J 
38.                   According to the provisions contained in Section 344J only the crew which is working in vessels with
 capacity beyond 500 gross tonnage is at security risk and the crew working at vessels below 500 gross tonnage are not
 at security risk.  On being pointed out by the Committee that how the crew of vessels with less capacity than 500 gross
 tonnage are not at security risk.  The Department of Shipping informed the Committee that under Part IXB Section
 344J which defines the applicability of ISPS Code to ship and port facilities reads as under: -
344J. (1) Subject to sub-section(2), this part shall apply to:-
(a)       the following types of ships engaged on international voyages, namely:-
(i)        Passenger ships including high-speed passenger craft;
(ii)       Cargo ships including high-speed craft of five hundred gross tonnage and above;
(iii)      Mobile offshore drilling units:

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
Provided that Central Government may extend the application of this Part to those ships, which are exclusively
 engaged on coastal voyages.
(b)       The port facilities serving ships referred to in clause (a):
Provided that the Central Government may, after taking decision, on the basis of port facility security
 assessment carried out under this part, extend the application of this part to those ports facilities which, although used
 primarily by ships not engaged on international voyages, are occasionally required, to serve ships arriving or
 departing on international voyages.
 
39.                   The Department of Shipping further stated that although the ISPS Code is applicable for the categories
 mentioned in 344J.1a(i)-(iii), however in Section 344J itself the Central Government has kept provisions to extend the
 application of ISPS Code to those ships which are exclusively engaged on coastal voyages and may be of less than 500
 gross tonnage.  Similarly, for the port facility security assessment, implementation of ISPS Code can be extended to
 those port facilities, which are used primarily by ships not engaged in international voyages.  DG shipping is already
 seized of the matter.  As and when necessary security concerns can be suitably extended to ships below 500 gross
 tonnage, ships operating on coastal run and also to ports not engaged in international trade.  Therefore, Section 344J has
 provisions to take care of all the Merchant Shipping Class ships.
 
40.                   As far as individual seamen are concerned, Seamen Identity Document under Convention No. 185
 (which revises Convention No.108), will be issued as per the new proposed Section 99A whereby "biometric system of
 identification" is provided in the Seamen Identity Document, which will fall under Chapter II of the Merchant Shipping
 (Amendment) Bill, 2004.  Issuance of Seamen Identity Document does not fall under Part IXB Section 344J, as
 mentioned above.  This convention was adopted by International Labour organization in order to meet the requirements
 as a result of security threat emerging globally, and in order to provide the reassurance to the maritime nations, there
 arose a need for a document which positively identifies a seaman thereby, preventing unauthorized person from gaining
 entry into foreign territories in the garb of a seamen. 
41.                   Further, the convention No. 185 does not prescribe any tonnage of the vessels for issuance of Seamen
 Identity Document, as Seamen Identity Document is to be issued to an individual seaman, and therefore there is no co-
relation between the tonnage of the ship and the Seamen Identity Document, Seamen Identity Document therefore, will
 be issued to all the seamen who are eligible under Merchant Shipping Act for Continuous Discharge Certificate. 
 Section 99A also does not refer to any gross tonnage of the vessel, where the issue of Seamen Identity Document to all
 seamen is covered in the proposed amendments.
 
42.                   During the course of evidence tendered on 23.02.2005, the Secretary of Department of Shipping deposed
 before the Committee that;
" Sir, on the second point, you talked about small boats would not be able to meet the requirements of

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 security, those below 500 GT, may face harassment.  Today, nothing-below 500 GT are applying for
 ISPS Code recognition.  But ISPS has left it to the discretion of contracting government to decide how
 and what should be done.  At the moment, we are only concentrating on 500 GT, should not come and
 spoil the places where ISPS compliant ships are there.  The terminology, they use for this is, "infect". 
 This is an area in which we are yet to come up with a policy.  We will take care of that.  Sir, my
 experience is, when you say very clearly to the port trusts, it leads to harassment to smaller boats; they
 would say, "No alternative facility is available outside ISPS complaint ships" straightaway.  Such is the
 thing when you don't make adequate alternative provisions.  What we are saying is, "you allow the boats
 to come".  If people are to be kept outside, some provision should be done so that harassment is
 avoided.  Normally, it is not done and only refusal would be there.  When we say that you allow the
 boats to come, they would do alternative arrangements so that people are not harassed, because at other
 places, they would not have facilities."
 
43.                   The Committee notes with dismay that Section 344J contains contrary provision, which are
 discriminatory to the Seamen working below 500 gross tonnage vessels in the name of security risk.  However, the
 Committee notes that the proviso to 344J empowers the Central Government to extend the application of ISPS Code to
 certain ships and port facilities and DG Shipping is already seized of the matter.  The Committee recommends that the
 Department of Shipping should revisit the provisions of Section 344J with a view to protect the right of the Seamen and
 ensure that no harassment is caused to the Seamen working in the smaller vessels.
 
IMPACT OF THE BILL ON THE EMPLOYEES/UNIONS OF MAJOR PORTS
44.                   The Committee desires to know the impact of the Merchant Shipping  (Amendment) Bill, 2004 on the
 employees of the Major ports of the country.  The Department of Shipping vide  their O.M. dated 1.03.2005 stated that
 the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004   stipulates amendment to Indian Port Act, 1908 with the intention of
 implementation of ISPS Code to ports of the country.  For this purpose, a new section 68D is intended to be inserted in
 Indian Ports Act, 1908.   The proposed amendment will not have any adverse impact on the employees of ports.  On the
 contrary, it will instill greater awareness amongst them about the maritime security concerns.  Further, the present Bill
 will also not interfere in the working of the employees of the ports and implementation of ISPS Code does not hamper
 the interest of employees in any manner.  On the contrary, the security aspects will further add quality to the work
 involvement of the employees. There are no provisions proposed or intended in the Amendments, which may go
 against the employees of the port or impinge upon any commercial or trade union activities.
 
45.                   The Committee notes that the present Bill broadly has been brought before the Parliament with a view to
 implement ISPS Code in the Ships and Ports facilities and hopes that as it has been assured by the Department of
 Shipping also that the proposed amendments neither have any adverse impact on the employees of ports nor impinge
 upon any commercial or trade union activities.  The Committee, however, have doubts that in the name of the security,
 trade union activities may be checked. The Committee therefore recommends that the employees/Unions of the major
 ports should not be made victims on account of proposed maritime security measures observed at the port & ships and
 the trade unions rights should also be protected and if necessary, a provision for protecting the interest of the employees

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 and legitimate trade union activities should also be incorporated in the bill itself.
SHORE LEAVE
46.                   The Committee desires to know from the Department of Shipping as to how the human element related
 aspects will be taken care of under the ISPS regime and what are provisions for shore leave for seafarers who go on
 voyages of very long duration.  During the course of evidence tendered on 23.02.2005, the Secretary of Department of
 Shipping deposed before the Committee that; 
"Sir, on shore leave, I fully agree with you.  There is a resolution of the IMO also on this that human element
 must be taken into consideration.  In India, you would not find where we have denied shore leave to any other
 flagship.  We are quite humane in that regard.  In difficulty or in terms of illness to the seafarers, our ports'
 people immediately help them.  When our seafarers go to other countries, they are not given that shore leave. 
 After the September 11 event, they say, "No".  The ILO has also considered this issue and we are also putting
 these things before the Member countries.  In India, of course, the human element will be the foremost.  So far,
 the Ministry has not received any complaint. But if you have any suggestions on it, we will welcome that."
 
47.                   The Committee notes with anguish that 'human element' has not been given due consideration in the Bill
 and no provision has been made to see that the seafarers are granted leave under the ISPS security regime.  The
 Committee is of the opinion that shore leave is absolutely imperative from the humanitarian point of view.  The
 Committee recommends that shore leave be institutionalized within the framework of law and a clause be inserted in
 the proviso to section 344 (M).
 
GENERAL OBSERVATION
48.                   The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating official amendments and taking
 into account its recommendation in respect of Sections 3(44A), 344L, 344Q and 344J of the bill along with the
 recommendations contained in paras 14, 17, 23, 25, 29, 37, 45 and 47 above.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
AT A GLANCE
 
REASONS FOR ADOPTION OF ISPS CODE AND PROTECTION OF NATIONAL INTEREST
 
The Committee takes note of the fact that in order to ensure continuity of EXIM trade the Government has entered into
 this agreement.  The Committee agrees with the views of the Government that if the ISPS Code is not implemented the
 Indian ships & port facilities may act as a non-tariff barrier for sea borne commerce. It appears to the Committee that
 current assessment of security threat to shipping sector is basically the consequence of 9/11 attack on U.S.A.  Terrorism
 has a much longer history, however, International Maritime Organization ignored that fact and suddenly woke up to the
 threat of security and agreed unanimously to the evolution of new measures relating to ships and port facilities post
 9/11.  The Committee does not approve the contention of the Secretary that the ISPS Code provides both voluntary as
 well as mandatory provisions.  The Committee feels that security perception is a sovereign function and it is country
 specific. It is not fair, therefore, to confuse between our own security requirements and demands of international trade. 
 Protecting the nation, is a sovereign function of the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
 Department of Shipping to look into the national priorities and interests while implementing the ISPS code.
 (Para 14)
 
ENCROACHING UPON THE LAW MAKING POWERS OF THE PARLIAMENT

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 
The Committee recognizes that our constitution empowers the Government to enter into international agreements and no
 subsequent ratification by the Parliament is necessary.  However, if such agreements warrant any legislative change
 subsequently, then powers of the Parliament are final.  Therefore, the Government should be mindful of that flexibility.
(Para 17)
 
FORMATION OF MARITIME SECURITY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
 
The Committee notes that IMO is not the body to deliberate upon the role of Armed forces in relation to their sovereign
 powers in protecting their national security interest and the scope of ISPS Code is confined to only preventive measures
 to deter and detect and the role of armed forces is to respond to any security incident reported by ships or port facilities.
 The Committee feels that the problem of security is very old and the security requirements are becoming far too
 complex to be handled in the manner they were being handled in the past.  Therefore, an international organisation
 which is primarily engaged in commercial activity through sea route should not have been involved in the business of
 security and some defence related agencies i.e. Navy and Armed forces should have essentially dealt with this kind of a
 code.  The Committee therefore, recommends for creation of a Maritime Security Advisory Committee to report on and
 make recommendations on National Maritime Security matter under the Ministry of Defence so that all commerce
 handled by the Port and Ships would achieve appropriate security coverage.
 (Para 23)
 
COMPETENCE OF PORT AUTHORITY TO ADDRESS SECURITY ISSUES
 
The Committee notes that the port authorities are competent to address the security issue so far as terrorist activities are
 concerned. But, the existing practices on ships and port facilities security are not considered adequate at the
 international level. The Committee, however, recommends that all port facilities and Indian vessels should have
 comprehensive security plans that are evolved by port authorities and shipping companies in conjunction with the
 Indian Navy and the Coast Guard besides setting up local port security committees for better coordination of efforts of
 central, state and local law enforcement and security agencies.
(Para 25)
 
AUTHORITY FOR TAKING DECISION ON THE SECURITY PERCEPTION
 
The Committee notes that DG Shipping is the competent authority and equipped with enough paraphernalia to handle
 the security matters as maintained in the Merchant Shipping Act 1958.  The Committee feels that the security concerns
 are growing day by day and there is a need to institutionalize the security element.  The Committee therefore,
 recommends that, even if, the DG Shipping oversees the functions, for securing maritime environment, there should be
 a Maritime Security Advisory Committee to deal with security matters and to make recommendation on National
 Maritime Security issues.
 (Para 29)
SECTION 3 (44A) (ii)
The Committee is not in agreement with the replies furnished by the Department of Shipping. The Committee is of the
 view that the terms "Against any other hostile act or influence" as mentioned in chapter II, Section 3, Sub-Section 44A
 (ii) is too broad and therefore open to an interpretation.  The Committee feels that a good law must be very specific and
 should properly define the acts of violation otherwise it can be misused against anybody. The Committee therefore,
 recommends that the Department of Shipping should clearly specify and incorporate "any other hostile act or influence"
 in the Bill itself so as to make it more comprehensive and subject to monitoring.
 (Para 33)
SECTION 344L and 344Q
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department of Shipping.  The Committee is of the firm opinion that
 the term 'such other authority' in Section 344L and 344Q for the purpose of issue of ship identification number and
 international ship security certificate is vague and requires specific mention in the act itself.  The Committee feels that
 flexibility for delegation of authority may further lead to its misuse and as a result of which the security may be
 compromised.  The Committee therefore recommends that the term 'such other authority' should be defined in the Act

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 itself to avoid any misinterpretation.
 (Para 35)
SEAMEN IDENTITY DOCUMENT
 
The Committee notes that the Department of Shipping is in the process of establishing necessary infrastructure for
 issuance of the Seamen Identity Document without causing any harassment to the seafarers since it is the most vital
 document which establishes the genuineness and the identity of the Seamen.  However, the Committee feels that there
 is definitely a necessity to rationalize the method of issuance of identification  document.  The Committee recommends
 the Department of Shipping to rationalize the method of issuing identification document in a completely transparent
 and objective manner without leaving any scope for its subjective application in the future.
 (Para 37)
SECTION 344J 
 
The Committee notes with dismay that Section 344J contains contrary provision, which are discriminatory to the
 Seamen working below 500 gross tonnage vessels in the name of security risk.  However, the Committee notes that the
 proviso to 344J empowers the Central Government to extend the application of ISPS Code to certain ships and port
 facilities and DG Shipping is already seized of the matter.  The Committee recommends that the Department of
 Shipping should revisit the provisions of Section 344J with a view to protect the right of the Seamen and ensure that no
 harassment is caused to the Seamen working in the smaller vessels.
 (Para 43)
 
IMPACT OF THE BILL ON THE EMPLOYEES/UNIONS OF MAJOR PORTS
 
The Committee notes that the present Bill broadly has been brought before the Parliament with a view to implement
 ISPS Code in the Ships and Ports facilities and hopes that as it has been assured by the Department of Shipping also
 that the proposed amendments neither have any adverse impact on the employees of ports nor impinge upon any
 commercial or trade union activities.  The Committee, however, have doubts that in the name of the security, trade
 union activities may be checked. The Committee therefore recommends that the employees/Unions of the major ports
 should not be made victims on account of proposed maritime security measures observed at the port & ships and the
 trade unions rights should also be protected and if necessary, a provision for protecting the interest of the employees
 and legitimate trade union activities should also be incorporated in the bill itself.
 (Para 45)
SHORE LEAVE
The Committee notes with anguish that 'human element' has not been given due consideration in the Bill and no
 provision has been made to see that the seafarers are granted leave under the ISPS security regime.  The Committee is
 of the opinion that shore leave is absolutely imperative from the humanitarian point of view.  The Committee
 recommends that shore leave be institutionalized within the framework of law and a clause be inserted in the proviso to
 section 344 (M).
(Para 47)
GENERAL OBSERVATION
 
The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating official amendments and taking into account its
 recommendation in respect of Sections 3(44A), 344L, 344Q and 344J of the bill along with the recommendations
 contained in paras 14, 17, 23, 25, 29, 37, 45 and 47 above.
(Para 48)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
                        The Committee met at 12.00 noon on Friday, the 7 th January 2005 in Room No.139, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
                        MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri S.S. Chandran
4. Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
5. Shri Janardhana Poojary
6. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
7. Shrimati Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Anil Basu
9. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
10. Shri Samik Lahiri
11. Shri Sudam Marandi   
12. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
13. Shri Ravindra Naik
14. Shri Manabendra Shah
15. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
16. Shri Sartaj Singh
17. Shri Chengara Surendran
SECRETARIAT
      Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
      Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
                 
2.                     *                                               *                                                                    *
3.                     The Chairman then informed the members that the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the
 Speaker, Lok Sabha, had referred the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004, as introduced and pending in the
 Lok Sabha, to the Committee for examination and report.  The Committee decided to consider the Bill and to hear the
 Secretary, Department of Shipping in connection with the subject at its next meeting to be held on the 17 th January
 2005.
 
4.                     *                                               *                                                                    *
5.                     *                                               *                                                                    *
6.                     The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.20 p.m.
 __________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to matters not included in this Report.
XIX
NINTEENTH MEETING
                        The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 17th January 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.      Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.      Shri S.S. Chandran
4.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
5.      Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
6.      Smt. Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
7.      Shri Ramdas Athawale
8.      Shri Raj Babbar
9.      Shri Anil Basu
10.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
11.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
12.  Shri Sudam Marandi 
13.  Shri Ravindra Naik
14.  Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
15.  Shri Manabendra Shah
16.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
17.  Shri Chengara Surendran
18.  Shri Umakant Yadav
      SECRETARIAT
 Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
       Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
 Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING
       Shri D.T. Joseph, Secretary
       Shri Susheel Kumar, Joint Secretary
       Shri G.S. Sahni, Director-General
       Shri R.B. Budhiraja, Chairman (IPA)
       Shri K.P. Bakshi, Chief Executive Officer
       Capt. M.M. Saggi, Nautical Advisor,
       Shri I.N. Bose, Sr. Principal Surveyor
        Dr. Anup Kumar Candra, Chairman, Kolkata Port Trust
 
2.                     At the outset, the Ministry officials made a Power Point presentation on the Merchant Shipping
 (Amendment) Bill, 2004.  A hard copy of the presentation was kept.  The Committee thereafter took up the Merchant
 Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004 for consideration and heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Shipping on
 the Bill.  On a query from the Chairman, the Secretary, Department of Shipping while presenting his views, also
 explained the circumstances, which necessitated amendments in the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1958 and
 replied to the points raised by the Members on the subject.   The Chairman, however, directed to the Ministry to prepare
 a detailed note on the Bill regarding the circumstances which compelled India to abide by the ISPS Code.
 
3.                     A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
4.                     The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.10 P.M.
 
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
                        The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 27 th January 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.      Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Shri S.S. Chandran
3.      Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
4.      Shrimati Hema Malani
5.      Shri Janardhan Poojary
6.      Smt. Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
7.      Shri Anil Basu
8.      Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
9.      Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal 
10.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
11.  Shri Ravindra Naik
12.  Shri Manabendra Shah
13.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh
15.  Shri Chengara Surendran
       SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
      Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
                       
2.                     The Committee while taking up examination of the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004,
 considered the Questionnaire prepared by the Secretariat on the various provisions of the Bill.  After some discussion,
 the Committee approved the Questionnaire and directed the Secretariat to obtain the reply from the Department of
 Shipping thereto.  The Committee also decided to hear the views of the experts on the Bill during its next meetings.
 
3.                     The Committee further decided to have its next meetings on 14th and 15th February 2004. 
 
4.                     The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M.
XXI
TWENTY-FIRST MEETING
                        The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 14th February 2005 in Committee Room 'E', Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.      Shri Nilotpal Basu –  Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Shri Dara Singh Chauhan
3.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
LOK SABHA
4.      Shri Ramdas Athawale
5.      Shri Anil Basu
6.      Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
7.      Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak 
8.      Shri Dushyant Singh
9.      Shri Madan Lal Sharma
10.  Shri Sartaj Singh
      SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
      Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
      Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES
1.     Shri Raman Puri,
        Vice Admiral, Ministry of Defence
2.
         Shri M.P. Pinto,
              Ex-Secretary, Ministry of Shipping
                                                                                               
 
2.                     At the outset, Shri Raman Puri, Vice Admiral, Ministry of Defence made a Power Point presentation on
 the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004 before the Committee. A hard copy of the presentation was kept. The
 Committee, thereafter, took up the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004 and heard the views of S/Sh. Raman
 Puri, Vice Admiral, Ministry of Defence and M.P. Pinto, Ex-Secretary, Ministry of Shipping on the Merchant Shipping
 (Amendment) Bill, 2004. 
 
3.                     A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
 
4.                     The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M. 
XXII
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING
                        The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 15 th February 2005 in Committee Room 'E',
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
      MEMBERS PRESENT
1.      Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Shrimati Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
3.      Shri Anil Basu
4.      Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
5.      Dr. K. Dhanaraji
6.      Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak 
7.      Shri Samik Lahiri
8.      Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
9.      Shri Madan Lal Sharma
10.  Shri Sartaj Singh

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
       SECRETARIAT
 Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
 Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
  REPRESENTATIVES
         Shri P.K. Samantaray,
         Working President, Indian National Port and Dock Worker’s Federation
 
           
2.                     *                                               *                                                                     *
 
3.                     Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Shri P.K. Samantaray, Working President, Indian National
 Port and Dock Worker's Federation on the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004. 
 
4.                     A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
 
5.                     *                                               *                                                                    *
 
6.                     The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. 
 
________________________________________________________
*** Relates to matters not included in this Report.
XXIII
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING
                        The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 23
rd February 2005 in Committee Room 'A',
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
      MEMBERS PRESENT
1.      Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.      Shri S.S. Chandran
4.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
5.      Shri Raj Babbar
6.      Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak 
7.      Shri Samik Lahiri
8.      Shri Manabendra Shah
9.      Shri Dushyant Singh
      SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
(i)    REPRESENTATIVE OF ALL INDIA PORT & DOCK WORKERS FEDERATION
            Shri Abdulgani Y. Serang
            General Secretary
    (ii)               REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
            Shri D.T. Joseph, Secretary
            Shri Susheel Kumar, Joint Secretary
            Shri G.S. Sahni, Director-General
            Shri R.B. Budhiraja, Chairman (IPA)
           Capt. M.M. Saggi, Nautical Advisor,
           Shri I.N. Bose, Sr. Principal Surveyor
           Shri Dinesh Kumar, Deputy Secretary
           Shri I. Mujumdar, Sr. Vurveyor (IRS)
           Capt. Rodrigues, Deputy Conservator, Mumbai Port Trust
 
2.                     The Committee heard the views of Shri Abdulgani Y. Serang, General Secretary, All India Port  & Dock
 Workers Federation and representatives of the Ministry of Shipping on the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill,
 2004. 
 
3.                     A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
4.                     The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
XXXV
THIRTY-FIFTH MEETING
                       
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 6 th June 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
                        MEMBERS PRESENT
1.               Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Chandran
3. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
4. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
5. Smt. Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anil Basu
7. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
8. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
11. Shri Samik Lahiri
12. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
13. Shri Ravindra Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
                  Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
                  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
      Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
 
2.                     *                                               *                                                                     *

89th Report of Committee on T & T
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/89threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:09:16]
3.                     The Committee then considered the draft Report on the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004 and
 after some discussion, adopted the report with minor modifications.
 
4.                     *                                               *                                                                     *
5.                     The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.15 p.m. to meet again on 20th June 2005.
 
 
________________________________________________________
*** Relates to matters not included in this Report.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------