  
DEPARTMENT -
ON 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT 
Issues related to Security at Airports in India 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT 
related to Security at Airports in India 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  December, 2015 
aid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  December, 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
(Saka)  
REPORT NO.  
230  
TWO HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT   
related to Security at Airports in India  
2015 ) 
December, 2015 ) 

2 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 
 

3 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT  
Issues related to Security at Airports in India 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  December, 2015 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  December, 2015 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)  
 


4 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS         (iii)-(iv) 
4. REPORT              
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE  0 
 6. 
7. ANNEXURES         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 e. 
                             1- 32
33-38
MINUTES
46-50
39-45

5 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2015-2016) 
(Constituted on 1 st  September, 2015) 
 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi 
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap 
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
8. Kumari Selja 
9. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
10. Vacant 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
12. Shri Vinod Chavda 
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
14. Km. Arpita Ghosh 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri P. Kumar 
17. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
18. Yogi Aditya Nath 
19. Shri  Kristappa Nimmala 
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
21. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
22. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy  
23. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
24. Shri Prathap Simha 
25. Shri Dushyant Singh  
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
27. Shri Rakesh Singh 
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
(i) 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary S tanding Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authori zed by the Committee, do hereby 
present on its behalf this Two Hundred Thirtieth Re port on “Issues related to Security 
at Airports in India". 
2. The violent incident which occurred at Karipur I nternational Airport at 
Kozhikode on 10 th  June, 2015 involving the employees of Airports Aut hority of India 
and Central Industrial Security Force was an eye op ener regarding the security system 
available at Indian airports.  With this backdrop, the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e decided to take up the Issues 
related to Security at Airports in India for examination and Report.   
3. The Committee heard the views of the Ministry of  Civil Aviation, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Airports Authority of India, Bureau o f Civil Aviation Security, Central 
Industrial Security Force and Intelligence Bureau d uring its meeting held on the 10 th  
July, 2015.  The Committee visited the Delhi Intern ational Airport to have on-the-spot 
study of the security arrangements at the Delhi Air port on 31 st  August, 2015 and heard 
the security agencies, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Home Affairs, and GMR on various 
aspects of security at Delhi Airport. The Committee , during its study visit to Mumbai 
and Kochi in October, 2015 also heard the views of MIAL, GVK and CIAL, the 
Airport operators as well as various agencies invol ved in providing security to these 
airports.  
4.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of Ministries of Civil 
Aviation, Home Affairs, Airports Authority of India, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security, 
Central Industrial Security Force, Intelligence Bur eau, Government of Maharashtra and 
other stakeholders for placing before the Committee , the material and information 
desired in connection with the subject and for clar ifying the points raised by the 
Members. 
5.  The Committee considered and adopted the Report  at its meeting held on the 
18 
th   December, 2015. 
 
 
 
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH 
NEW DELHI;          Chairman,  
December, 18, 2015        Department-related Parlia mentary Standing 
Agrahayana 27, 1937 (Saka )                Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

7 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAI : Airports Authority of India 
ACP   : Assistant Commissioner of Police 
AEP : Airport Entry Passes 
APSC  : Air Port Security Committee 
ARC  : Aviation Research Centre 
ASG : Aviation Security Group 
ATCs : Air Traffic Services 
AVSEC : Aviation Security 
BCAS  : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BDDS  : Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad 
BIAL  : Bangalore International Airport Limited 
CCS   : Cabinet Committee on Security 
CCTV : Closed-Circuit Television 
CIAL  : Cochin International Airport Limited 
CISF  : Central Industrial Security Force 
CoS : Committee of Secretaries 
COSAH : Committee of Secretaries on Aircraft Hijack  
COSCA : Commissioner of Security, Civil Aviation 
CRPF  : Central Reserve Police Force 
CSIA : Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport 
CTCP : Counter-Terrorism Contingency Plans 
DFMD : Door Frame Metal Detectors 
DG : Director General 
DGCA : Director-General Civil Aviation 
DIAL : Delhi International Airport Limited 
DIG : Deputy Inspector General 
ETD : Explosive Trace Detection 
GHA  : Ground Handling Agents 
GMR : Grandhi Mallikarjuna Rao 
GoM  : Government of Maharashtra 
GVK  : Gunupati Venkata Krishna 
HHMD : Hand-held Metal Detectors 
HIAL : Hyderabad International Airport Limited 
IB : Intelligence Bureau 
IBSS  : In-line Baggage Screening System 
ICAO    : International Civil Aviation Organization 
IEDs   : Improvised Explosive Devices 
IG : Inspector General 
IGI : Indira Gandhi International 
IGIA : Indira Gandhi International Airport 
IRB : India Reserve Battalion 
LEI : Lack of Effective Implementation 
MCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 
(iii) 

8 
 
MCGM  : Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai 
MHA  : Ministry of Home Affairs 
MIAL : Mumbai International Airport Limited 
 
MIHAN : Multi-Modal International Cargo Hub and Air port 
MMRDA : Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Auth ority 
MoCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation 
NCASP  : National Civil Aviation Security Programme  
NSG : National Security Guards 
OMDA  : Operation, Management and Development Agree ment 
P.S.   : Police Station 
PAPs  : Password Authentication Protocol 
PCR   : Police Control Room 
PIDS : Perimeter Intrusion Detection System 
PSF  : Passenger Security Fee 
QRT : Quick Reaction Team 
REM  : Rapid Eye Movement 
RGI : Rajiv Gandhi International 
SOPs  : Standard Operating Procedures 
SRA : Slum Rehabilitation Authority 
UT : Union Territory 
VHF   : Very High Frequency  
XBIS : X-ray Baggage Inspection System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

9 
 
Report 
Airport Security is integral part of National Security. The objective of providing 
security to airports is to safeguard the passengers , crew, ground personnel, the general 
public and the airport infrastructure against unlaw ful acts as per International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) Standards and Recommen ded Practices laid down in 
Annexure-17 to the Chicago Convention.  Annexure – 17 (Security) of International 
Civil Aviation Organization  requires that all Cont racting States shall establish and 
implement a written National Civil Aviation Securit y Programme (NCASP); shall have 
a designated appropriate authority to be responsibl e for development, implementation 
and maintenance of NCASP; shall allocate tasks and co-ordinate activities related to 
aviation security.  
2. The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) is the designated agency for 
providing security in accordance with the Internati onal Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) regulations.  The broad security architecture is laid down by the BCAS in terms 
of codified five documents.  They are called Nation al Civil Aviation Security 
Programme, National Civil Aviation Security Trainin g Programme, National Civil 
Aviation Security Quality Control Programme and Bom b Threat Contingency Plan to 
deal with hijacking. 
3.  Airport security in the country is looked after  by specialized Police agencies, 
State Police and airport security organizations, de pending on the security conditions 
prevalent in a particular area. Bureau of Civil Avi ation Security co-ordinates the 
working of the various agencies to ensure that all security norms are followed by them. 
4. The violent incident which occurred at Karipur I nternational Airport at 
Kozhikode on 10 th  June, 2015 involving the employees of Airports Aut hority of India 
and Central Industrial Security Force was an eye op ener regarding the security system 
available at Indian airports.  With this backdrop, the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultur e decided to take up the Issues 
related to Security at Airports in India for examination and Report. 
5. The Committee heard the views of the Ministry of  Civil Aviation, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Airports Authority of India, Bureau o f Civil Aviation Security, Central 
Industrial Security Force and Intelligence Bureau d uring its meeting held on the 10 th 
July, 2015.  The Committee visited the Delhi Intern ational Airport to have on-the-spot 
study of the security arrangements at the Delhi Air port on 31 st  August, 2015 and heard 
the security agencies, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Home Affairs, and GMR on various 
aspects of security at Delhi Airport  
6. The Committee, during its study visit to Mumbai and Kochi, also heard the 
views of GVK and CIAL, the Airport operators as wel l as various agencies involved in 
providing security to these airports.  

10 
 
7. The issues dealt with by the Committee on the is sues related to Security at 
Airports in India and the response of the Ministrie s of Civil Aviation and Home Affairs 
and other agencies thereon and the observations/ re commendations of the Committee 
have been enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Policy on security at airports 
 
8. The Committee was informed that the Commissioner  of Security, Civil 
Aviation (COSCA), Bureau of Civil Aviation Security  (BCAS) is designated by 
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MCA) as appropriate aut hority for development, 
implementation and maintenance of National Civil Av iation Security Programme 
(NCASP) of India in line with Annexure 17 of Chicag o Convention of International 
Civil Aviation Organization. COSCA has been empower ed to issue directions under 
Section 5A of Aircraft Act 1934 with respect to civ il aviation security matters. He is 
also empowered to exercise all powers and duties co nferred under the Aircraft 
(Security) Rules 2011. Ministry of Civil Aviation i s the nodal Ministry for all matters 
relating to Civil Aviation.  
9. The Advisory Committee for Civil Aviation Securi ty is headed by the 
Secretary (Civil Aviation) which meets every year. This Committee is responsible to 
advise Government on matters relating to Civil Avia tion Security, recommend and 
review the effectiveness of security measures and procedures, and suggest enactment of 
such legislation as is found necessary and provide for co-ordination, at the national 
level, of all matters relating to the security.  
10. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS)  lays down Aviation Security 
(AVSEC) norms in accordance with ICAO Annex-17 for Airport Operators, Aircraft 
operators, Regulated Agents, Caterers, Ground Handl ing Agents, Central Industrial 
Security Force/Aviation Security Group and State/Union Territory Police personnel.  
11. It was further informed that implementation of security rules and regulations is 
monitored by BCAS through Quality Control activities (security audits and inspections, 
security surveys and security tests to check profes sional efficiency and alertness of 
security staff and mock exercises to test efficacy of contingency plan and operational 
preparedness). AVSEC training is imparted to securi ty personnel of all agencies 
concerned with civil aviation. BCAS also carryout p lanning and coordination of 
AVSEC matters.  
Present status of security at airports  
12. On the matter of present status of security at Indian airports, the Committee 
was informed that major threats (acts of unlawful interference) are hijacking – unlawful 
seizure of aircraft; hostage taking on board aircra ft / aerodromes; forcible intrusion on 
board aircraft / aerodrome / aeronautical facility;  sabotage of airport / aircrafts and 
terrorist attack on airport.  
13. India is amongst the most terrorism affected co untries. Latest threat inputs 
include surgically implanted explosives for unlawfu l interference in civil aviation 
operations, Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) hid den in printer ink and toner 

11 
 
cartridges, inputs like Terrorists looking to hijac k aircraft from airports using trained 
pilots and inputs point to increasing sophisticatio n in terrorist Modus Operandi and the 
threat to hijack aircrafts / forcible intrusion at smaller airports.  India has been rated 
highly in terms of aviation security in the last ICAO audit in 2011. The parameter, Lack 
of Effective Implementation (LEI) for India stood a t 10.75% against global average of 
34.01%. 
 
Security arrangements at airports 
 
14. On the subject of existing security arrangement s at the airports in the country,  
the Ministry informed the Committee that Standard O perating Procedures (SOPs) have 
been issued by BCAS in the form of AVSEC Circulars/  Orders regarding some 
important issues like procedure of passengers and c arry-on baggage screening, items 
banned for carriage on-board the aircraft, dealing with cases of detection of arms and 
ammunition during screening of passengers or baggag e, screening of hold baggage, 
security of cargo, courier and mail, access of vehi cles up to the aircraft and the list of 
persons exempted from pre-embarkation security checks.  
15. Categorization of airports, on the basis of int elligence inputs as well as threat 
and risk, has been made for the 98 airports (Hyper- sensitive – 26, Sensitive –56 and 
Normal – 16).  
16. It was also informed that in the aftermath of h ijacking of IC-814 in December 
1999 from Kathmandu, the Committee of Secretaries t ook a decision to deploy CISF at 
the airports. The security of Airports is covered b y the State / Union Territory Police, 
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) and Centra l Reserve Police Force (CRPF)/ 
India Reserve Battalion (IRB). CISF was inducted in to airports consequent to IC-814 
hijacking (24 th December, 1999) as decided by Committee of Secretar ies in a meeting 
held on 7 th  January, 2000. CISF was first inducted at Jaipur A irport on 3 rd  February, 
2000.  As on date, Central Industrial Security Forc e (Aviation Security Group) has 
taken over the security of 53 airports of Airports Authority of India and 06 Joint 
Venture/ Private Airports. The airports at Jammu an d Kashmir, Mizoram, etc are 
covered by State Police with the support of CRPF / IRB and rest of the airports are 
manned by Local Police.  
17. In view of potential security threats and curre nt aviation security scenario, 
State/UT Police have been requested to ensure that all operational airstrips / 
aerodromes in their jurisdiction including those be longing to flying clubs are properly 
guarded and all necessary measures are taken to ens ure that no unlawful interference 
takes place with civil aviation operations, especia lly with regard to hijacking and 
operation of rogue aircrafts which may be used as w eapons. Also to ensure that all 
those airstrips / aerodromes which are not in use c urrently are actually made non-
operational so that no rogue aircraft can make use of the same.  
18. The security infrastructure is provided by the Airport Operators. Some 
security functions are allocated to Airport Operato rs (in-line hold baggage screening), 
Aircraft Operators (screening of registered baggage , cargo, mail, catering, company 

12 
 
stores and security of aircraft) and Regulated Agen ts (screening of cargo / courier / 
mail).  
19. All authorized persons, employees, casual labou r, passengers and vehicles 
while gaining entry into airside from any gate(s) a re subject to security checks/frisking, 
baggage search, if any, by the Airport Security Personnel manning those gates.  
20. Screening of passengers, staff and visitors at the entry gates of the airport 
through Door Frame Metal Detectors (DFMD)/Hand-held  Metal Detectors (HHMD) 
and physical frisking on random basis are carried o ut depending on local situation and 
inputs received from the intelligence agencies.  In case of suspected baggage, additional 
measures like screening through X-ray Baggage Inspe ction System (XBIS) and 
Explosive Trace Detection (ETD) may also be taken.  
21. It was further informed that Closed-circuit Tel evision (CCTV)   is mandatory 
at all operational airports.  Monitoring of CCTV is to be done by all agencies concerned 
at unified CCTV Control Room.  It is the responsibi lity of Airport Security Unit of 
State Police and ASG (CISF) to monitor CCTV coverin g all areas of the airport.  Other 
agencies like AAI, Customs, Immigration and Airline  operators are authorized to 
depute their representatives in the Control Room fo r monitoring activities in their 
respective areas.  The recorded cassettes are retained for a period of one month to allow 
any concerned agencies to review later.  
22. Perimeter wall of 8" with 1½" overhang fencing has been prescribed around 
the airport.  Watch towers are to be installed ever y one km or as per the local survey 
keeping in view the threat to a particular airport.   Similarly, perimeter lighting and 
perimeter roads are prescribed for mobile and foot patrolling to prevent any 
unauthorized entry / intrusion into the airports. P erimeter Intrusion Detection System is 
also prescribed for installation.  
23. Manpower for surveillance in and around the air ports is also provided on the 
basis of requirements assessed by joint security survey team.  
24. All authorized personnel working with Ground Ha ndling Agents (GHA) while 
leaving airport from any gate(s) are subject to security checks (frisking/baggage search) 
by the airport security personnel manning those gat es.  Similarly, all staff when exiting 
the security restricted area of airports is to be f risked on random basis so that any 
element of preparation of an unlawful act can be detected.  
25. Airport Operators, Airline Operators, GHAs and other agencies are required to 
have security clearance and approved security programme before operation.  
26. All persons operating in the aviation environme nt need to undergo Aviation 
Security (AVSEC) awareness training.  Security rela ted personnel need to qualify in 
AVSEC Basic Training.  Screeners are mandated to qu alify in screener training.  
Refresher courses are prescribed for various training programme.  
27. The Ministry submitted that the following is th e mechanism existing to deal 
with hijacking situations:  
i. Aerodrome Committee at airport level;  
ii. Central Committee at National level; 

13 
 
iii. Committee of Secretaries on Aircraft Hijack (COSAH); and  
iv. Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS): Apex Body. 
28. The Cabinet Secretary is the Chairman of COSAH.  DGCA is the Chairman of 
Central Committee with COSCA as the Convener. 
29. The Quick Reaction Team (QRT) of State Police /  CISF / CRPF is responsible 
for cordoning of hijacked aircraft till the arrival of NSG, strengthening of perimeter and 
crowd management.  Counter Terrorism Contingency Pl an including various agencies 
i.e ., CISF, NSG, Local Police, etc. are in place at Airports.  
Role of Ministry of Home Affairs in Civil Aviation Security 
 
30.  When asked about the role of the Ministry of Home A ffairs on  the issue of 
Security at Indian airports, the Committee was info rmed that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MHA) has an important role in ensuring Civ il Aviation security in the country.  
Whereas BCAS frames the rules and regulations for c ivil aviation security, Central 
Industrial Security Force, which is functioning und er MHA, acts as the implementing 
agency for the guidelines framed by BCAS.  CISF is also entrusted with drawing up 
airport-wise Counter-Terrorism Contingency Plans (C TCP) and is at the forefront of 
activities in this regard.  Currently CTCP is avail able only at Delhi and Mumbai 
airports where CISF has been entrusted with securit y of the city side area. CISF also 
has its own intelligence wing and is part of the mu lti agency centre which disseminates 
intelligence and coordinates action at the airports. 
31. The Intelligence Bureau also plays an important  role in providing intelligence 
inputs related to civil aviation security.  Further , Bureau of Immigration under 
Intelligence Bureau screens incoming and outgoing p assengers from and to other 
countries.   
32. It was further informed that the National Secur ity Guard (NSG) under MHA is 
involved in Civil Aviation Security through deploym ent of Sky Marshals on aircrafts 
operating on sensitive sectors for prevention of an d to act as first responders to any 
incident involving hijacking of an aircraft.  NSG i s also the primary Contingency 
Response Force for anti-terrorist operations at airports. NSG maintains a Task Force for 
this purpose ready to move at 30 minutes notice.  
Role of other agencies in Civil Aviation Security 
 
33.  As per the status note furnished by the Ministry of  Home Affairs on the subject, 
the following agencies are involved in civil aviation security:- 
i. Airlines  - Airlines are responsible for screening of registere d baggage and 
cargo.  Airlines are also responsible for security of their aircraft.   
ii. Airport Operators -  Airport Operators are responsible for provision of  
security infrastructure such as In-line Baggage Screening Systems at the airports 
and also for coordination of various security related activities at the airports. 

14 
 
• Airports Authority of India (AAI) Operates 125 airp orts (including non-
operational). 
• Six JVC Airports i.e.  Delhi (DIAL), Mumbai (MIAL), Nagpur (MIHAN), 
Cochin (CIAL),  Hyderabad (HIAL) and Bangalore (BIAL). 
• One airport is under Civil Administration Diu. 
• Air Traffic Services (ATCs) at all Airports in India are provided by the AAI.  
iii. State Police - State Police is responsible for law and order and c rime control 
related issues at the airports.  Apart from this, a t certain airports where CISF is 
yet to be deployed, State Police Force is the prima ry security agency for 
security related functions such as pre-embarkation security checks, protection of 
airport premises and intelligence/surveillance. 
iv. Defence - Deployment of Quick Reaction Teams at Civil enclaves for anti-hijack 
cordon. 
Threat perception and Security Categorization of airports  
34. When asked about the threat perception and the provision of adequate security 
at the airports in the country, the Committee was i nformed that threat perception to all 
operational airports in the country is reviewed by BCAS in consultation with the 
Intelligence Agencies and based on the inputs recei ved, airports are categorised into 
three categories viz ., Hypersensitive, Sensitive and Normal. Currently,  out of 98 
operational airports in India, 26 airports are cate gorised as Hypersensitive (18 under 
CISF security cover), 56 categorised as Sensitive ( 37 under CISF security cover) and 
16 are categorised as normal (4 under CISF security  cover).  Table showing category-
wise list of airports under CISF security cover is at Annexure-I.  
Background on Induction of CISF at Airports  
35. The Ministry of Home Affairs, in its Status Not e furnished to the Committee on 
the subject has stated that before induction of CIS F at airports, different State Police 
Forces used to provide security at airports. Despit e the fact that the BCAS was the 
regulator framing policies and guidelines for unifo rm implementation across the States, 
the set up lacked semblance of uniformity. In the b ackdrop of hijacking of Indian 
Airlines Flight IC-814 from Kathmandu on December 24, 1999, airport security matters 
were reviewed by the Government and it was decided that airports security should be 
entrusted to a single dedicated Force instead of di fferent State Police Forces with 
divergent work culture and practices. The Committee  of Secretaries (CoS) in its 
meeting held on the 7 th  January, 2000 decided to assign the task of aviati on security at 
Indian airports to the CISF. The dedicated CISF con tingent earmarked for aviation 
security has been notified as Aviation Security Group (ASG). The first Airport Security 
Unit of CISF was inducted at Jaipur Airport on Febr uary 3, 2000. Presently, CISF is 
deployed at 59 operational airports out of 98 operational airports with a total strength of 
around 22000 personnel.  
 
 

15 
 
Role of CISF  
36. The Aviation Security Group of CISF is responsi ble for all the areas of airport 
security including Perimeter Security, Access Contr ol, Terminal Building Security, 
Apron Security, Surveillance, anti-hijacking pre-em barkation checks, Passenger 
Handling etc.    
37. The role of CISF is categorized in the followin g three operational units:- 
i) Anti-hijacking Unit  dealing with Pre-embarkation security check of 
passengers and cabin baggage; and Access control of  passengers, 
visitors, staff of various agencies, catering perso nnel, cargo and courier 
into the airport; 
ii) Protection Unit  dealing with the  Protection of airport & perimeter; 
Quick Reaction Team; and Cordoning of aircraft duri ng contingencies 
(except civil enclaves) ; and  
iii) Intelligence & Surveillance Unit  dealing with the  Surveillance at airports 
for security. 
Measures taken to strengthen the security arrangements 
  
38.  The Committee was informed by the Ministry that the  following measures have 
been taken to strengthen the security arrangements at airports:- 
I. Perimeter Security  – This is ensured through perimeter wall of standar d height as 
specified by BCAS, as well as watch towers, perimet er road, illumination, patrolling 
arrangements etc. as per BCAS specifications. At me tro airports, automatic Perimeter 
Intrusion Detection System (PIDS) has been installe d at IGI Airport, New Delhi and 
RGI Airport, Hyderabad.  
39. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation while  deposing before the Committee 
informed that out of the requirement of 580 km boun dary wall for covering Indian 
airports, 547 km is available.  26 kms of boundary wall has been constructed so far and 
work is going on for construction of another 4 kms.   He also informed the Committee 
that 538 watch towers are functioning against the r equirement of 629 watch towers in 
the airports.  Works have already been started for the construction of 62 watch towers 
and for the remaining 29 watch towers, works have to start. 
40. On the issue of installation of Perimeter Intru sion Detection System (PIDS) in 
Indian airports, the Secretary apprised the Committ ee that PIDS has been installed at 
the Delhi International Airport.  A portion of the perimeter of the airport has been 
placed under PIDS on pilot basis.  The imported PIDS is not functioning properly in the 
Indian conditions and the Ministry of Civil Aviatio n is looking out for a technology to 
suit the Indian conditions which is cost effective as compared to the construction of 
watch towers and manning the towers through CISF.   
1. Access Control 
 – Entry at airports is regulated by Airport Entry Passes 
(AEP) of different categories issued by the BCAS. E ntry of passengers is 
through boarding tickets.  

16 
 
2. Anti Hijacking Measures  – These include frisking and checking of 
passenger and their baggage through electronic aids . Passengers are also 
subjected to surveillance and profiling. Further me asures taken include 
Behaviour Detection Training for random screening, deployment of Dog Squads 
and Bomb Detection and Disposal Squads, Closed Circ uit Television (CCTV) 
etc.  
3. Anti Sabotage Measures 
 – Aircraft are subjected to anti sabotage checks 
at originating station and guarded till take off. B aggage is supervised from 
check-in Counter till loading into the aircraft by airlines security staff and  is  
subjected to X-ray examination and / or physical ch eck. In-line Baggage 
Screening System (IBSS) is being installed at Metro  airports in India and 
consists of five levels of detection wherein suspic ious baggage is successively 
sent to the higher levels, depending upon the resul ts of checks at the lower 
levels.  
 4. Measures against terrorist attacks 
 – Approach roads to airports are 
manned by armed guards and Quick Reaction Teams (QR Ts). QRT is also 
deployed at the Terminal Building to thwart any armed intrusion. QRT of CISF/ 
State Police are to hold the situation till the arr ival of NSG QRT in case of an 
armed attack.  
5. Training  
– CISF trains its personnel in tune with the Nation al Civil 
Aviation Security Training Programme. Its personnel  are also trained specially 
for counter-terrorism, surveillance, Quick Reaction  Team, courtesy and 
behaviour, dog handling, bomb detection and disposa l, etc. CISF personnel 
undergo Basic Aviation Security Course with 17 vari ed training modules as per 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) St andards. CISF personnel 
also undergo soft skills training and behaviour detection training.  
6. Mock Drills  – Mock drills, decoy checks etc. are conducted at all 
airports regularly to check the efficacy of various  plans and to fine tune the 
efficiency of the security agencies to meet any sudden eventuality.  
Kozhikode Airport Incident  
41. There was a fight between Fire Service Official s of Airports Authority of India 
and CISF personnel at the Calicut airport on the 10 th  June, 2015 in which one CISF 
official was killed. The issue got media coverage w orldwide.  There was widespread 
damage of airport property and the runway was block ed for some time. As a result, the 
airport was closed for six hours and four flights were diverted. 
42.  The Ministry of Home Affairs, in the Status Note furnished to the Committee on 
the issue, has stated that apart from the recent in cident of violence at Kozhikode 
International Airport on the 10 th  June, 2015 there has been no major security relate d 
incident at any airport since the induction of CISF in the airport sector. 
43. The Home Secretary informed the Committee that cases have been filed and 
that investigation is going on and let us wait for the conclusions.  The Home Secretary 
further stated that there is a disconnect amongst m ultiple agencies that are involved in 
ensuring security at the airports.  Lack of co-ordi nation between them is one of the 

17 
 
biggest problems this country faces today.  Therefo re, there is absolutely a case to 
improve intra-agency co-ordination at the airports. 
44. The Secretary, Civil Aviation submitted before the Committee that the 
Kozhikode incident was essentially due to the perce ption that the death of CISF 
constable had been caused by the fire service perso nnel of Airports Authority of India.  
It was this mistaken impression that led to the unf ortunate incidents and certainly, it 
should not have happened.  Steps have already been taken to ensure unity of command 
at the airport level wherein the Airport Director w ill now be overall in-charge of the 
Airport including the CISF personnel and their deployment.  
45. The Committee, during its deliberations, asked the Ministry of Civil Aviation as 
well as the Ministry of Home Affairs about the step s taken to avoid such incidents in 
future.  
46. The DG, CISF apprised the Committee about the m easures taken in the wake of 
the violent incident that happened at Karipur Airport on 10 
th  June, 2015 as follows:- 
(i) All Chief Airport Security Officers have been direc ted that it is their 
bounden duty to ensure that there is no source of  friction amongst the 
stakeholders and that they should take proactive an d corrective measures, if 
there is any problem; 
(ii) Supervisory officers have been directed to visit al l airports with a view to 
ascertaining and resolving any inter-agency friction; 
(iii) Special drive to have refresher courses in soft ski ll training for CISF 
personnel to ensure courtesy and good behavior; 
(iv) It has, however, been reiterated to all formations that there shall be no 
slackness in implementation of security measures to  ensure safety and 
security of the airports; and 
(v) A Board of Officers has been constituted to examine  the duty point-wise 
holding of weapons by CISF personnel at the airports. 
47. Further, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has int imated that subsequent to the 
Kozhikode Airport incident, a meeting was held betw een Regional Executive Director 
(Southern Region), Airport Director - Calicut of Ai rports Authority India and 
Additional DG, IG, DIG Southern Zone and Commandant  of CISF with emphasis on 
mutual co-operation and confidence building measure s as well as long term procedural 
and technical solutions needed for preventing re-oc currence of such unfortunate 
incidents. Similar meetings have also been held at all the major airports to create 
harmony among the agencies for smooth operations of the Air Services. 
48. The Ministry of Home Affairs vide  their communication dated the 14 th  
December, 2015 informed the Committee that the four  cases registered on the Calicut 
airport incident are still being investigated by th e local police and charges are yet to be 
filed. 
49. The Committee condemns the violent incident at Kari pur Airport. The 
Committee demands that the Government should ensure  that such incidents do 
not occur in future. The Committee notes that six m onths is more than sufficient 
time to complete the investigation. The Committee r ecommends that the 

18 
 
investigations may be completed at the earliest and  the guilty may be punished. 
Findings of investigations may be shared with this Committee as soon as it is 
submitted. 
Co-ordination mechanism at the airports 
 
50. The Home Secretary informed the Committee that he has already mooted the 
idea of a co-ordination mechanism at the airport level wherein the Airport Director who 
is an officer of the Airports Authority of India an d the Chief Security Officer who 
comes from the CISF meet more often.  They should h ave structured interactions and a 
dialogue with all the wings of the airport management.  
51. Another level of co-ordination can be between D G, CISF and Commissioner 
BCAS which as a standing Co-ordination mechanism wo uld meet once in three months 
along with the airport operator i.e.,  Airports Authority of India and CISF officers.  They 
can discuss the gaps in security infrastructure. 
52. The Home Secretary further assured the Committe e that he is going to constitute 
another standing mechanism at Home Secretary level wherein he, the Secretary, Civil 
Aviation, DG CISF and the Chairman Airports Authori ty of India would meet once in 
three months to look at the gaps in security infras tructure and also look at what is 
happening at the airports and suggest remedial and corrective measures for the 
problems. 
53. The Secretary, Civil Aviation while deposing be fore the Committee submitted 
that as per the Standard Operating Procedures the A irport Director may supervise the 
operational functioning of CISF in so far as the de ployment on airport security duties is 
concerned. 
54. The Committee noted the suggested co-ordination mec hanisms and hope 
that it will be implemented soon to prevent any loo pholes in the security 
apparatus.  
Security concerns in Civil Aviation Security 
 
55. As per the earlier Committee of Secretaries' de cision, the airport security at all 
airports was to be taken over by CISF gradually. So  far, CISF has been deployed at 59 
airports.  However, considering the high cost of de ployment of CISF and the low scale 
of operations at many airports making CISF deployme nt further unviable, a proposal to 
reduce CISF deployments and instead going for State  Police, etc. is under 
consideration.  
56. BCAS is in acute need of restructuring to fulfi ll its mandate. A proposal to 
increase its strength to 970 has been submitted. 
57. The Ministry also stated that the list of perso ns exempted from frisking and 
the list of vehicles permitted access to airside is  very long, creating problems in the 
security architecture. 
1. Cargo Security  – Security of Cargo is a major cause of concern du e to the 
following reasons :- 
• Private security guards are deployed for access control duties. 

19 
 
• Involvement of multi agencies i.e.,  Security Guards of Airport 
Operators, Security personnel of Cargo handling agents and CISF. 
• The CCTV surveillance cameras are generally not ins talled from the 
point of view of security and the feed from those c ameras is also not 
available at the CISF Control Room.   
• In the backdrop of the attack at Karachi Airport, a  fresh survey of the 
Cargo Complex at various airports would be desirabl e so that this weak 
link in the aviation security may be addressed. 
2. Perimeter security - Perimeter Security is a weak link at most airports.   At 
present there is a gap of 1 kilometer between two w atch towers. It is humanly not 
possible for sentries to have a clear ‘line of sigh t’ at such a distance.  Operationally, for 
foolproof security, a ‘line of sight’ distance of 3 00 meters should be the optimum 
distance. There is no alternative mode of communica tion at watch towers which is a 
hindrance to quick communication. The present Walki e-Talkie system is a one way 
system and can be jammed during any contingency. He nce, there is a need for 
intercoms at each watch tower along the perimeter. 
3. Need for uniform format of e-ticket or provision  of machine readable bar 
coded tickets - At present, there is no uniformity in the format of  e-tickets.  CISF has 
detected 36 cases in the year 2014 in which printou ts of fake/cancelled e-tickets were 
used for gaining entry into the terminal building. 
4. Augmentation of CISF staff- While the number of flights has increased, the 
strength of CISF at airports has not kept pace with  the changing requirements.  
Augmentation proposals of CISF strength at 13 airpo rts are pending with the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation, while similar proposals in respe ct of 08 other airports are pending 
with the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security for approval since long.   
 During the deliberations of the Committee, the iss ue of shortage of CISF staff 
for airport security was raised.  It was informed t hat out of the required strength of 
24,333 CISF personnel for manning 59 Indian airport s which are controlled by the 
CISF, the current deployment is 22,411 only.  DG CI SF while deposing before the 
Committee accepted the shortage of strength in the Aviation Security Group of CISF 
and assured the Committee that necessary steps will  be taken to maintain the vacancies 
level to a minimum. 
5. Deficiency of Security Gadgets- There is shortfall in Random Screening 
Equipment (X-BIS, DFMD, HHMD & ETD), Communication Equipment (VHF, 
walkie-talkie and hands free), BDDS equipment etc. 
6. Installation of CCTV Cameras & clearance of shad ow zones  
o Installation of CCTV system does not exist at 06 ai rports (Dimapur, Jorhat, 
Lilabari, Silchar, Tezpur & Khajuraho) 
o Full coverage of CCTV not available at 33 airports – blind spots remain.  
o Provision of digital Video recording system for 30 days does not exist at 20 
airports.  
o Video Analytic Features need to be activated at all airports  
7. Dog Squads not available at 6 airports (Coimbatore, Agra, Gwal ior, Porbandar, 
Portblair and Diu) 

20 
 
8. Counter Terrorist Contingency Plan (CTCP) by CISF at approach roads 
available only at Delhi and Mumbai. The same needs to be put in place at 20 more 
international and hyper-sensitive airports. 
9. Deficiency of Family & Barrack accommodation for  ASG personnel  
60. It was further informed that out of the require ment of 13241 barracks 
accommodation, only 10951 are available at present.   The deficient 2290 barracks are 
spread over 26 airports.  As far as the family acco mmodation is concerned 3807 units 
are available against the requirement of 11020.  Th e deficient 7213 are units spread 
over 56 airports in the country.   
Security at Delhi Airport 
 
58. The Committee, during its visit to Indira Gandh i International Airport, Delhi on 
31 st  August, 2015 heard the views of  the Ministries of  Civil Aviation and Home 
Affairs, Central Industrial Security Force, Delhi P olice and Delhi International Airport 
Limited on the security related issues of Delhi Air port.  The Airport operator, Delhi 
International Airport Limited briefed the Committee  on the existing security system 
available at the airport – both at the city side and the airport side.   
59. The Delhi Police, during the deliberations, app rised the Committee on their role 
in providing security to Delhi Airport. They also h ighlighted the grey areas, where the 
existing system needs to be strengthened. The repre sentatives of Delhi Police flagged 
the below-mentioned requirements/lacunae :- 
(i) Bullet-Proof Vehicles are required; 
(ii) Inadequate CCTV  coverage; 
(iii) The old building of P.S. Domestic Airport was acqui red and demolished 
by the DIAL and no land was allotted in lieu of  the same; 
(iv) A five floor new building has been erected but only  a portion of the 
ground floor has been given for the police station and ACP/Sub-Div 
office is insufficient for smooth functioning. Either an additional floor or 
separate land may please be allotted for the same;  
(v) No space allotted for Aerocity police post; 
(vi) Rent is levied by DIAL for the domestic police stat ion building and the 
land allocated for the T-III P.S.; 
(vii) Electricity charges are being charged by DIAL which  are significantly 
higher in comparison to BSES rates; 
(viii) Jungle area around T-3 is vulnerable place from sec urity point of view.  
Private land of DIAL has neither boundary/fencing n or is protected by 
guards.  It can be used by anti-social elements; 
(ix) DIAL was asked to erect all weather 'Machans' in th e said area and no 
decision has been taken as yet; 
(x) Clearing shrubs and  bushes not done on a regular basis; 
(xi) Three vulnerable villages viz.,  Mahipalpur/ Rangpuri, Shahbad 
Mohamadpur and Mehram Nagar adjoining IGI Airport c ause security 
threat; and 
(xii) Watch towers at 300 mtrs distance required. 

21 
 
60. Regarding the systemic loopholes in the prevent ion of human trafficking, the 
Committee was told that the following are the areas of concerns:- 
(i) Checking and segregation of arriving International and domestic 
passengers from International side is not done near Transit Area; 
(ii) Procedure of issuing boarding cards to international passengers in transit 
is not fool proof; 
(iii) No immigration counter in transit Area; 
(iv) No system to monitor conduct/behavior of airlines staff; and  
(v) Ticketing counters on International side of Transit  Area are not covered 
with CCTV Cameras. 
61. In this regard, the point- wise response of DIA L is given as follows:- 
(i) The Delhi Police has been making various security arrangements outside 
the terminal area, including putting up barricades,  posting manpower 
and upgrading mobile patrolling through extra deplo yment of PCR vans 
and Motor-cycles.  If Delhi Police considered it as  an essential security 
measure to deploy Bullet-proof vehicles around the city side area and 
approach road of IGI Airport, they can do so.  DIAL  welcomes this 
steps, if it is so needed to upgrade security; 
(ii) With regard to rental charges it was informed that the following 
areas/buildings at the IGI Airport are in occupation of Delhi Police as on 
date: 
(a) Ground Floor of G+5 Building (Built up area-520 Squ are Meters) 
opposite Terminal-IB for Police station; 
(b) Traffic Inspector's office opposite Terminal-1B at G+5 Building; 
(c) Land and built up space of 1200 sq. m (250 sq.m. bu ilt-up & 950 
sq. m land) opposite CISF barracks, Mahipalpur for Airport Police 
Station.  This Police station was shifted to a loca tion near the 
Terminal-2.  However, even after the shifting, the building and 
land at Mahipalpur has not been handed back to DIAL  till date.  
Surprisingly, the issue has been raised by Delhi Po lice in front of 
the Committee even though it was never discussed wi th DIAL 
before the resolution.  The said premises were hand ed over to 
Delhi Police more than 5 years back; 
(d) 1600 sq. m (built-up 1165 sq. m & 450 sq. m. land) near Terminal 
2 for Airport Police Station, this was earlier oper ating from the 
accommodation mentioned at (c) above;  
(e) Traffic Inspector's office at T2 near pass section;  
(f) 500 Sq. m land near ARC Hanger for storage of vehicles; 
(g) 2960 Sq. m land near T-3 for a new Police Station building; 
(h) Space inside Terminal-3 (16 Sq. m) for courtesies by Delhi Police. 

22 
 
62. DIAL informed that neither any agreement has be en signed nor any license 
fee/ rentals have been received from Delhi Police t ill date for any of the above 
mentioned premises.  Despite repeated reminders, De lhi Police is skipping the matter.   
Even with respect to the land provided for new poli ce station near terminal -3, Delhi 
Police says that the matter of payment of license f ee for this land has been forwarded 
to the Ministry of Home Affairs and will be paid on  the basis of the decision of MHA.  
The matter is pending with MHA for long without any  decision communicated to us 
despite repeated requests.  It is imperative for De lhi Police to at least sign the License 
Agreement for legalizing their occupational rights on the land and built up spaces at IGI 
Airport. DIAL also submitted as follows: 
(i) the Perimeter Intrusion Detection System (PIDS) has  been made 
serviceable and working satisfactorily.  This has b een verified by CISF and 
they are operating system; 
(ii) there are a total of 41 watch towers at IGI Airport  which are more than the 
requirement mandated by BCAS vide BCAS circular No.18/2002.  All the 
watch towers are being manned by the CISF on a roun d-the-clock basis.  
The watch towers are located all around the perimeter and have been placed 
after complete survey by the CISF which is tasked f or protecting the 
airport; 
(iii) matter regarding installation of Body scanners and Cargo scanners for the 
Airports in India is under consideration of MoCA and BCAS; 
(iv) immigration authorities of Government of India may like to keep a 
Complaint Registration book in the office of the AF RRO and passengers 
can lodge their complaints there.  The telephone nu mber of the AFRRO 
could also be given wide publicity.  The presence o f a very senior officer 
like the AFRRO in the Airport on a round-the-clock basis itself is a huge 
inbuilt advantage of immigration to control the activities in the premises; 
(v) with regard to the replacement of damaged  scan mac hines, it is informed 
that the scan machines are regularly maintained.  As and when any machine 
is found to be malfunctioning, it is immediately at tended to and 
rectified/replaced; 
(vi) Air Port Security Committee (APSC) meeting is held regularly on a 
monthly basis.  As mandated by BCAS, it is held on the 3 rd  Thursday of 
every month and the minutes of the meeting are circ ulated to all 
participants and the BCAS.  The meeting is attended  by all the concerned 
stakeholders including DIAL Security team, DIAL Ope rations Team, 
DIAL maintenance Team, Airliner operators, AOC Chai rman, CISF, 
Immigration, Customs, Delhi Police etc.  In additio n, in case of specific 
alerts received from our intelligence agencies/Home Ministry etc., a special 
APSC meeting is convened at short notice; and 
(vii) DIAL is extremely conscious of security in and arou nd the airport and 
constantly reviews its Security and Contingency pla ns.  Any grey areas 

23 
 
identified/observed are immediately looked into and addressed.   Last week 
we conducted a walkthrough with the AOC Chairman an d representatives 
of airlines, through the Baggage Handling System an d CCTV coverage 
thereof  to identify, if there are any grey areas that need to be plugged. 
63.  The Committee expresses its serious concern over t he grey area and 
security related problems as mentioned by Delhi Pol ice. It is equally appalled to 
see the existing interface between the Delhi Police  and DIAL in respect of security 
related issues at the Airport. It reflects a lack o f mutual confidence in one another 
as well as required co-ordination between the two. Otherwise, Delhi Police, instead 
of taking up these issues with the Parliamentary Co mmittee and DIAL giving 
point-wise clarification before it, the two should have mutually resolved them. 
BCAS and the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Home Affairs also appeared to 
have remained unconcerned in this regard.  IGI Airp ort, being one of the most 
sensitive Airport in the existing security scenario, such gaps are sure to lead to any 
disaster at any time. 
64.  The Committee notes the various concerns expressed  by the Delhi Police as 
regards the security at Delhi International Airport . The Committee observes that 
the issues are very serious and need immediate atte ntion of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Home Affairs and various other stakeho lders involved. The 
Committee recommends that all the issues need to be  considered for immediate 
redressal and status note be submitted to the Committee containing steps taking in 
these regards. 
65. As regards payment of rent and electricity charges by Delhi Police to DIAL 
for the space occupied by them and signing of Licen se Agreement, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may ta ke immediate decision in 
those matters as the Delhi Police is under that Min istry, discharging sovereign 
function of maintenance of security in and around the IGIA.  
66.  As regards providing space to the Delhi Police in the Delhi International 
Airport, the Committee directs the Ministry of Home  Affairs to find out a 
workable solution in consultation with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and BCAS to 
provide an adequate space to discharge their sovere ign duty of security in the 
International Airport at Delhi.  
 
Security at Mumbai Airport  
 
67. As regards the Chhatrapati Shivaji Internationa l Airport, Mumbai, the 
Committee, during its study visit to Mumbai on 13 th  October, 2015 was informed that :- 
1.  Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumb ai is one of the busiest airports 
in India; 
2. CSIA handled 36.63 million passengers in the yea r 2014-15 and is expected to 
handle 40 million passengers in the current fiscal year 2015-16; 
3. MIAL has been mandated to undertake operations, management and 
development of the CSIA, pursuant to the Operation,  Management and 

24 
 
Development Agreement dated April 4, 2006 (the "OMD A") entered into 
between MIAL and AAI. 
68. The Committee, during its visit to Mumbai on 13 th  October, 2015, heard the 
views of Mumbai International Airport Limited, Airp orts Authority of India, Central 
Industrial Security Force, Mumbai Police, State Gov ernment of Maharashtra and the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Issues related to  security at Mumbai International 
Airport.  
69. The Mumbai International Airport Limited also r aised the issue of deployment 
of 3797 CISF personnel as against the sanctioned st rength of 3996.  They have also 
placed a demand of additional 882 persons for the d omestic operations from T2, which 
is pending approval from the Ministry of Civil Avia tion. Various police agencies and 
stakeholders have expressed the view that the airpo rt security is adequately provided 
with all the modern equipments with the active invo lvement of the airport operator i.e.,  
MIAL. 
70. The Committee was informed that cargo operation s inside the airport is another 
cause of concern as far as security of the airport is concerned.  The cargo complex is 
accessed by more than 5000 casual employees daily f or their work.  These employees 
do not have validated entry passes and have an easy  access to apron side also.   The 
security agencies expressed their apprehension over  the issue and requested the 
Committee to look into the matter. 
71. During the meeting, the issue of presence of sl ums in the vicinity of the airport 
area which are posing a security threat to the safe ty, security and operations of the 
airport was raised.  The Committee decided to take up the matter in detail and requested 
the Housing Department and Slum Rehabilitation Auth ority of State Government of 
Maharashtra and Mumbai International Airport Limite d to submit the necessary 
information on the issue. 
72.  The Mumbai International Airport Limited, in t heir written submission, 
informed the Committee  that 308.95 areas of airport land is encroached and  around 4 
lakh people are staying there. Slums at Chhatrapati  Shivaji International Airport have 
been existing for the past several decades and that  it was part of the Demised Premises 
when the Airport was handed over to the Joint Ventu re Company.  Major concentration 
of these 35 slum pockets is on the eastern side of the airport site area, particularly along 
Airport’s operational area boundary wall.  Slums are a security threat to the Airport and 
rehabilitation of slum dwellers is essential to rel ease land for Airport development and 
to ensure security of the CSIA.   
73.  The Mumbai International Airport Limited has f urther submitted the details of 
projects proposed to be constructed in the area occ upied by the slums. Aeronautical 
area of CSIA is to be expanded and airport operational facilities are to be constructed in 
the part of land currently occupied by slums.  Airc raft parking stands (apron), taxiway 
extension, airside perimeter road, perimeter securi ty wall, airport maintenance 
compound, general aviation parking, aircraft hanger s are some of the works to be taken 
up in the land under encroachment.  
74. Regarding the steps taken by different authorit ies to rehabilitate the slum 
dwellers the Committee was informed by GVK (MIAL) t hat in the past, Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) had taken up s lum rehabilitation of some 

25 
 
hutments located in Kranti Nagar slum area, on the eastern side of CSIA located near 
Mithi River.  This was done by MCGM for widening of  existing Mithi River Channel.  
In 2007, MIAL appointed Housing Development and Inf rastructure Limited (HDIL), as 
an agency for taking up slum rehabilitation on its behalf.  In 2009, Government of 
Maharashtra appointed Mumbai Metropolitan Region De velopment Authority 
(MMRDA) as Special Planning Authority for CSIA, HDI L, with collector (Mumbai 
Suburban District), had taken up survey of some of the slums at CSIA to initiate slum 
rehabilitation.   However, this work was not comple ted and the process was stopped 
midway. In 2011, MMRDA had taken up rehabilitation of approximately 600 slum 
hutments in Bamanwada area of CSIA (near NAD colony ) for construction of Sahar 
Elevated Road. Since 2013, MIAL has been requesting  Government of Maharashtra for 
formulation of appropriate slum rehabilitation sche me for Airport to enable feasible 
resolution of slum rehabilitation issue of CSIA. 
75. In 2014, the Minister of Civil Aviation,  reque sted Hon'ble Chief Minister of 
Maharashtra to prepare and implement Airport Specif ic Slum Rehabilitation Scheme 
for CSIA. 
76. The Committee was further informed that as part  of the proposed Airport 
Specific Slum Rehabilitation Scheme (and also as pe r the current Slum Rehabilitation 
Authority Scheme of Government of Maharashtra), a c onstructed tenement of 25 sq. 
mtrs. (269 sq.ft) of carpet area is to be given aga inst each hutment (based on 
eligibility), along with related community level in frastructure like balwadis, health 
clinics, roads, open area, parking etc.  The slum r ehabilitation scheme also provides for 
rehabilitation of existing shops/commercial establishments. 
77. There is a hillock near runway 27 end of CSIA, along with Mithi River, which 
overlooks the operational area of CSIA. The hillock  is completely covered by slums 
with a clear view of Airport operations and aircraf t.  In view of this, the hillock and the 
slums on it are a serious security concern.  The sl ums on the hillock are to be 
rehabilitated and the hillock itself is to be remov ed for construction of taxiway 
extension for runway 27.  This is a priority projec t for CSIA and has been included in 
MIAL's priority list of critical slum pockets requi ring immediate slum rehabilitation, 
submitted to Government of Maharashtra.  Currently,  Mumbai Police and CISF 
personnel keep constant vigil on the slums on this hillock and ensure security of Airport 
operations. 
78. The Housing Department of State Government of M aharashtra has submitted 
the details of action taken by them on the relocati on of slums of CSIA,  steps that are 
needed to be taken to make settlement of the slums to relocate to some other areas and 
also the present status of slums.  As stated in the  agreement between the Mumbai 
International Airport Limited and the Mumbai Metrop olitan Region Development 
Authority (MMRDA) dated the 12 
th  December, 2006 approximately 80,000 families 
were expected to be living on the airport land.  Th ey have further stated that the slum 
dwellers are demanding rehabilitation on the same l and.  The airport land is owned by 
Airports Authority of India. The policy in this regard has to be finalized by the Airports 
Authority of India and the Ministry of Civil Aviati on.  There is no concrete plan of 
rehabilitation proposed or submitted by Mumbai International Airport Limited.  A large 
number of hutments and huge area of encroachment ha s made the issue complicated 
and sensitive, which needs specific solution and policy intervention.   

26 
 
79. It was also informed that the State Government and Mumbai International 
Airport Limited have signed a State Support Agreeme nt on the 27 th  April, 2006 
according to which the State Government has to prov ide support to Mumbai 
International Airport Limited and Airports Authorit y of India in clearing the 
encroachments.  The Government of Maharashtra has s tated that the Mumbai 
International Airport Limited is duty bound to relo cate the slums with the assistance of 
Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority.  Mumbai International Airport 
Limited has not provided a comprehensive and concre te plan of rehabilitation and 
resettlement of all concerned project affected persons on the entire airport land. 
80. As regards the agencies responsible for rehabil itation of the slum dwellers, the 
Government of Maharashtra informed the Committee th at prime responsibility of 
rehabilitation is of MIAL as per the agreement betw een MIAL and AAI (OMDA 
Agreement).  MMRDA is a nodal authority appointed b y State Government of 
Maharashtra to assist MIAL in the airport slum reha bilitation.  Housing Department, 
Government of Maharashtra, Slum Rehabilitation Auth ority, the Additional Collector 
and Dy. Collector CENC (REM) are also responsible t o the rehabilitation of slum 
dwellers.  
81. The Government of Maharashtra (Housing Departme nt) has further informed 
the Committee that so far, seven slum rehabilitatio ns schemes are under 
implementation at different locations in the area o f Municipal Corporation of Greater 
Mumbai viz.,  at Kurla, Mahul, Bhandup, Mulund and Andheri (Annexure-II). 
82. The Committee was further informed by the Gover nment of Maharashtra that as 
per the agreement between MIAL and MMRDA, MIAL shal l bear the entire project 
cost including incidental expenditure and will pay the agency charges to MMRDA as 
determined under Article III. 
• MIAL shall procure the land and tenements required and handover to MMRDA 
for rehabilitating the Password Authentication Protocols. 
• MIAL shall make available to MMRDA necessary funds for providing 
temporary transit accommodation including any out o f pocket expenses are 
required by MMRDA. 
• MIAL will procure the tenements under four different options. 
• Procure the Government or private land and build th e tenements through the 
contractors. 
• Procure the tenements through private developments under SRA scheme. 
• Procure the tenements by assigning the developmenta l rights to private 
developers on their land. 
• Purchase of tenements from the Government agencies or from the market.  
MIAL shall pay fees concurrently with the reimburse ment of cost to MMRDA 
in accordance with Article III. 
83. The entire cost of procurement of tenements, de veloping of on-site 
infrastructure and off-site infrastructure shall be  borne by MIAL.  After procuring the 
tenements in consultation with MMRDA, MIAL shall ha ndover the tenements in good 

27 
 
condition with all the physical and social amenitie s to MMRDA for shifting the PAPs. 
MMRDA shall shift the families as per the priority area given by MIAL. 
84.  The Committee finds it pertinent that the issue of  encroachment of airport 
land and adjoining hillock by slum dwellers is settled at the earliest. In this regard, 
the Committee took note of the replies furnished by  MIAL and the Housing 
Department, Government of Maharashtra on various as pects of the 
encroachment . 
85. The Committee observes that the 35 pockets of slums  in airport and the 
slums hillock along the Mithi River are potential t hreat to the aircrafts and the 
CISA airport.  The problems are persisting for the last so many years.  The 
Committee feels that the Governmental agencies, bot h at the Centre and the State 
level, could not rationally judge the menace of slu ms inside the airport area as a 
potential security threat.  Mumbai is the commercia l capital of the country.  Any 
breach of security at the airport will have far reaching consequences. The threat is 
perennial and no amount of policing could provide a dequate security to the 
airport if the slums are allowed to exist and flour ish inside the airport. The 
Committee feels that the Government agencies are ha ppily unconcerned about the 
airport security at CSIA, Mumbai.  In Mumbai International Airport, a disaster is 
waiting to happen at any moment in view of these da ngerously placed 
encroachments overlapping operational areas, of the  Mumbai Airport. The 
Committee calls upon all the agencies such as AAI, Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
BCAS, State Government of Maharashtra and MIAL to w ake up from their 
slumber and see the danger looming large on the Mum bai Airport.  The 
Committee expresses its serious concern on this and  strongly recommends that all 
the slums must be removed and relocated from the ai rport area.  There is no 
justification for allowing encroachers inside the a irport area and Committee is of 
the view that so long as this area is occupied by t he slum dwellers, the Mumbai 
airport is sitting on a ticking bomb until it is re located. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that MIAL along with Government of Mahar ashtra should come 
forward immediately with adequate proposals to reha bilitate the slums taking 
support of various Governmental agencies.  
86.  The Committee understands that MIAL has been pursu ing with the 
Government of Maharashtra (GoM) for rehabilitation of hutment dwellers at 
CSIA since taking over operations of CSIA in 2006.  The Committee hopes that 
the Government of Maharashtra will expedite its approval for the Airport Specific 
Slum Rehabilitation Scheme for CSIA, to enable the slum rehabilitation process 
quickly. 
Security at Cochin Airport 
 
87. The Committee, during its visit to Cochin, hear d the views of the Cochin 
International Airport Limited, Airports Authority o f India, Central Industrial Security 
Force, Kerala Police, State Government of Kerala and the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
the Issues related to security at Cochin International Airport.  
88. The representatives of the Cochin International  Airport Limited briefed the 
Committee on the measures taken by various agencies  including the airport operator, 
airlines operators and the Central Industrial Secur ity Force for strengthening the 

28 
 
security of the airport.  The stakeholders involved  in providing security to the Cochin 
Airport had expressed their satisfaction with the f acilities and instruments provided by 
CIAL- the airport operator.  The CISF and the secur ity agencies informed the 
Committee that the Cochin Airport has all the moder n equipments to provide adequate 
security to the airport. 
89. The representatives of the Cochin International  Airport Limited, during the 
deliberations of the meeting, placed the demand for  deployment of 917 CISF personnel 
based on the new survey conducted on the basis of i ncrease in passenger flow which 
stands at 61 lakh per annum as on 1 
st  April, 2015.  The current deployment of 494 CISF 
personnel is based on the 2007 survey for 25 lakh passengers' inflow at that time.  
90.  The Committee compliments the CIAL, CISF and other  security agencies 
for providing security to the Cochin Airport. 
Security of the Airports a Sovereign Function 
  
91. The Committee noted that the CISF is providing service to the airports on the 
basis of payment made to them.  The Home Secretary,  while deposing before the 
Committee, informed that CISF is a zero cost force.   It is deployed for security of 
airports, vital installation and Government Buildin gs on payment.  Therefore, resources 
have to raised and there is no way of deployment of  CISF without the payment.  The 
Home Secretary further stated that due to this reas on, presently CISF is deployed only 
in 59 airports and 39 airports are still not with the CISF, which means that they are with 
the State Police.  From the national security persp ective, the Home Ministry would like 
all these airports to be covered under CISF.   
92. The Secretary, Civil Aviation while deposing be fore the Committee, submitted 
that since the year 2000, Rs.130 is levied on every  departing passenger as security 
component of the PSF.  The security expenditure is met from the PSF security 
component.  For the year 2014-15, total collection of PSF Security component is 
Rs.1132 crores and the expenditure on security is a round Rs.1319 crores.  Besides, 
some amount is collected from cargo side also.  So,  there is a deficit of around Rs.200 
crores.  Thus the fund available is less than the fund required for security purposes. 
93. The Home Secretary submitted to the Committee t hat he is not really very sure 
as to how much of the PSF security component is rea lly being spent on security or is it 
being spent on something else.  It is also not clea r whether there was a concurrent audit 
of this amount being spent on security by the airpo rt operator.  He suggested that the 
entire PSF security component should be put on an e scrow account so that it is not 
spent for any other purpose.   
94. The Secretary, Civil Aviation submitted to the Committee that when providing 
security at airport is, actually a sovereign functi on, it does not and should not matter 
whether we fully meet the requirement of funds or n ot.  If there is a security 
requirement which has to be met, it should be met b y the Ministry of Civil Aviation or 
the Government of India, the sovereign. The Secreta ry further informed the Committee 
that CISF is providing security cover to Delhi Metr o considering it as a sovereign 
function.  The Delhi Metro does not pay a single pa isa for the CISF which is deployed 
in various metro stations.  Payments and salaries f or CISF are met by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Government of India.  The Secretary, Civil Aviation further stated that 
the since it is a sovereign function, Government has no option to depute private firms to 

29 
 
provide security to the airports.  The Secretary emphasized that sovereign function must 
be discharged by the Government and fund constraint should not be seen as an obstacle.   
95.  The Committee observes that National Security cann ot be compromised.  
Civil Aviation Security is a very integral and impo rtant element of national 
security.  Airport complex is a crucial infrastruct ure.  Any large scale 
damage/terrorist attack on the airport complex will  be catastrophic with far 
reaching grave implications for the citizens and the economy.  Investments flowing 
into the country depends on the state of the securi ty and safety.  The Committee 
further notes that the airports have been categoriz ed as hyper-sensitive, sensitive 
and normal.  Operational airports in hyper-sensitiv e categories are 26 out of 
which only 18 airports have been provided with CISF  security cover.  Which 
means that eight hyper-sensitive airports are not p rovided the security cover of 
CISF.  In sensitive category, there are 56 airports , out of which 37 are covered by 
CISF and 19 are not covered.  In the normal categor y of 16 airports, only 4 are 
provided with CISF security and 12 are not covered.   Thus, out of 98 functional 
airports, only 59 are covered with CISF security cover and 39 are not under CISF.  
Explanations given to the Committee was lack of fun ds for providing CISF 
security cover at all the 98 airports. 
96.  The security must be adequate and in proportion to  the threat perception.  
Funds should not come in the way of providing secur ity.  The Committee 
recommends that the security component of PSF needs  to be enhanced to 
commensurate with the security expenditure and ensu re that security is not 
compromised at all the airports in India and the  P SF security component must be 
deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India. 
97.  The Committee recommends that Airport Security sho uld be absolute.  The 
Committee observes that Security of the Airports is  an integral part of National 
Security and therefore, recommends that providing s ecurity should be a sovereign 
function. Adequacy of PSF Security component collec tion should not be the 
criteria for providing security. If CISF security c over can be given to the Delhi 
Metro, why cannot all the operational airports be p rovided with CISF security 
cover?  
97A. The Committee feels that ideally, the CISF sec urity cover should be 
provided to all the 70 odd airports which are havin g normal scheduled operations. 
But to begin with, the Committee recommends that al l the Airports rated hyper-
sensitive from security angle be given to CISF as s oon as possible followed by the 
sensitive airports. In view of shortages of manpowe r and logistics available with 
CISF, security of normal airports can continue with  State Police for the time 
being. But these airports also be given all modern equipment, training etc.  
Dedicated Security Force 
 
98. The Civil Aviation Ministry had a proposal for a dedicated Security  
Force i.e.,  Civil Aviation Security Force for manning the security affairs of the Airports 
in India.  While deposing before the Committee, the  Home Secretary submitted to the 
Committee that the Ministry of Home Affairs is not in favour of that.  He submitted that 
there is no need of having another dedicated Force when there is already a dedicated 
Force.  In 2000, it was so decided after the hijack ing of IC-814 that CISF would cover 

30 
 
all the airports.  CISF has a huge force of 1,45,00 0.  Twenty two thousand officials of 
CISF have been specially earmarked for airport secu rity.  They are called the Security 
Aviation Group.  CISF is able to rotate these officials and make sure that the age profile 
is also maintained.     
99. On the issue of Civil Aviation Force, the Secre tary, Civil Aviation stated that 
core competency of the Ministry of Civil Aviation o r the Airport Authority of India is 
not to raise force and run a security agency.  It i s the core competency of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs and CISF.  It is better that the ci vil aviation security remains with a 
specialized agency such as CISF.  He did not suppor t the idea of Civil Aviation 
Security Force. 
100.  The Committee noted the arguments of Home Secretar y and Secretary, 
Civil Aviation and observes that there is no need f or a separate Civil Aviation 
Force at this juncture and that Airport Security ca n remain with the CISF and 
Ministry of Home Affairs especially in view of the fact the IB, NSG and other 
Police Forces have a substantial role to play in ai rport security are also under the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.   
101. The Committee, after examining the papers/documents  submitted to it and 
hearing the arguments of various stakeholders on th e subject, could understand 
that there are multiple agencies involved in providing security at Indian airports. 
102. The Committee notes that  Bureau of Civil Aviation Security is responsible 
for laying down the standards for pre-embarkation s ecurity and anti-sabotage 
measures in respect of civil flights and ensuring t heir compliance through regular 
inspections and security audits.  Commissioner of S ecurity, Bureau of Civil 
Aviation Security has been empowered to issue Direc tions under Section 5A of 
Aircraft Act, 1934 with respect to civil aviation security matters. 
103.  The Committee also notes that whereas BCAS frames the rules and 
regulations for civil aviation security, the Centra l Industrial Security Force which 
is functioning under the Ministry of Home Affairs a cts as the implementing 
agency for the guidelines framed by BCAS.  The Inte lligence Bureau plays an 
important role in providing intelligence inputs rel ated to civil aviation security.  
National Security Guard (NSG) under the Ministry of  Home Affairs is also the 
primary Contingency Response Force for anti-terrorist operations at airports.   
104. The Committee was at a loss to find that the post o f the Commissioner of 
Security, BCAS, the Appropriate Authority for the d evelopment, implementation 
and maintenance of National Civil Aviation Security  Programme of India, is lying 
vacant for the last two-and-a-half years.  The Comm ittee would like to know the 
reasons for keeping this important and sensitive po st vacant for more than two 
years.  The Committee may also be apprised on the s teps taken to fill up the post 
on priority. 
105.  The Committee finds that the violent incident invo lving employees of 
Airports Authority of India and the Central Industr ial Security Force at Karipur 
Airport in Kozhikode on  10 
th  June, 2015 raises a question mark over the 
effectiveness of the existing co-ordination mechani sm between various agencies 
involved in providing security at Indian airports.  When the issue was raised 
during the deliberations, both the Home Secretary a nd Civil Aviation Secretary 

31 
 
assured the Committee to look into the matter and to address the   shortcomings in 
the system.  The Committee hopes that apart from co nducting various meetings to 
address the issues related to airport security with  agencies involved in the process, 
both the Ministries will have a periodical review o f the performance of the co-
ordination mechanism so that any grey areas identif ied could be addressed 
immediately. 
106.  The Committee also feels that the issue of deficie ncy of security gadgets and 
installation of CCTV cameras and clearance of shado w zones at various airports 
should be taken up on priority so that such deficie ncies do not become a cause for 
concern in the Indian airport security system. As i t is said that the performance in 
the battlefield is obviously known before hand if w e are not fully equipped with 
the modern equipments to fight with the enemy.  The  Committee, therefore, hopes 
that PDIS which is currently operating on pilot bas is at Delhi Airport should be 
reviewed and efforts should be made to remove the flaws found in the system.  The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation should also look out for  such PDIS technology which 
could function properly in the Indian conditions.    
107.  The Committee desires that the areas of concern on  providing security to 
Delhi Airport, expressed by the Delhi Police should  be given due consideration.  
The Ministry of Civil Aviation and Delhi Internatio nal Airport Limited are urged 
to look into the problems faced by the Delhi Police on the city side as well as within 
the T-3 terminal building of  Delhi Airport. 
108.  The Committee also hopes that the issue of relocat ion and rehabilitation of 
slum dwellers from the vicinity of Mumbai Internati onal Airport will be settled as 
soon as possible so that the encroached land is bro ught within the control of 
airport operator and the necessary expansion works of Mumbai Airport are 
commenced shortly.  Upon that, the present security threat to the Mumbai Airport 
will automatically wither away.  The Committee afte r cross examination of the 
Governments and concerned organizations has come to  the conclusions that the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, State Government of Mah arashtra, Mumbai 
International Airport Limited and Airport Authority  of India should sit together 
to sort out the long pending issues which have pres ently become the major issue of 
threat  to Mumbai airport. The Committee also reque sts the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Government of Maharashtra to take a le ad in settling the issues with 
no loss of time.  
109. The Committee desires that vacant posts in the Avi ation Security Group of 
CISF which is manning the Indian airports through t he length and breadth of the 
country are filled up at the earliest so that the e xisting security apparatus is 
strengthened.  
110.  There is an involvement of multiple agencies in pr oviding securities at 
Indian airports and the Committee has found a lack of proper co-ordination 
between the agencies.  The Committee, therefore, re commends that a think tank 
may be created to bring out a proper co-ordination involving all the stakeholders 
to help the Commissioner of Security, BCAS to perform his duties satisfactorily. 
111.  The Committee finds it quite scary to know that th e security of 8 of our 
hyper-sensitive and 19 of our sensitive airports ar e not covered by the CISF which 

32 
 
has now become the only specialized force for aviat ion security; now question is 
who is then guarding these airports and how secure these airports are? In these 
existing threats perceptions at our airports, the c ountry can ill- affords such a 
situation to continue any more. The Committee finds that aviation security has not 
received the attention and importance that it deserves. The Committee feels that in 
view of several gaps and lack of unified command an d control for the multiple 
agencies involved, there is an urgent need for havi ng an Aviation Security policy 
in the country for ensuring fool proof security at our airports before a major 
untoward incident takes place in the Country. 
 
  

33 
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS-AT A GLANC E 
  
Kozhikode Airport Incident 
 
 The Committee condemns the violent incident at Kari pur Airport. The 
Committee demands that the Government should ensure  that such incidents do 
not occur in future. The Committee notes that six m onths is more than sufficient 
time to complete the investigation. The Committee r ecommends that the 
investigations may be completed at the earliest and  the guilty may be punished. 
Findings of investigations may be shared with this Committee as soon as it is 
submitted. 
(Para 49) 
Co-ordination mechanism at the airports  
 The Committee noted the suggested co-ordination mec hanisms and hope 
that it will be implemented soon to prevent any loo pholes in the security 
apparatus.  
(Para 54) 
Security at Delhi Airport  
 The Committee expresses its serious concern over t he grey area and 
security related problems as mentioned by Delhi Pol ice. It is equally appalled to 
see the existing interface between the Delhi Police  and DIAL in respect of security 
related issues at the Airport. It reflects a lack o f mutual confidence in one another 
as well as required co-ordination between the two. Otherwise, Delhi Police, instead 
of taking up these issues with the Parliamentary Co mmittee and DIAL giving 
point-wise clarification before it, the two should have mutually resolved them. 
BCAS and the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Home Affairs also appeared to 
have remained unconcerned in this regard.  IGI Airp ort, being one of the most 
sensitive Airport in the existing security scenario, such gaps are sure to lead to any 
disaster at any time. 
(Para 63) 
 The Committee notes the various concerns expressed  by the Delhi Police as 
regards the security at Delhi International Airport . The Committee observes that 
the issues are very serious and need immediate atte ntion of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Home Affairs and various other stakeho lders involved. The 
Committee recommends that all the issues need to be  considered for immediate 
redressal and status note be submitted to the Committee containing steps taking in 
these regards. 
(Para 64) 
 As regards payment of rent and electricity charges by Delhi Police to DIAL 
for the space occupied by them and signing of Licen se Agreement, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs may ta ke immediate decision in 
those matters as the Delhi Police is under that Min istry, discharging sovereign 
function of maintenance of security in and around the IGIA.  

34 
 
(Para 65) 
 As regards, providing space to the Delhi Police in  the Delhi International 
Airport, the Committee directs the Ministry of Home  Affairs to find out a 
workable solution in consultation with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and BCAS to 
provide an adequate space to discharge their sovere ign duty of security in the 
International Airport at Delhi.  
(Para 66) 
Security at Mumbai Airport   
 The Committee finds it pertinent that the issue of  encroachment of airport 
land and adjoining hillock by slum dwellers is settled at the earliest. In this regard, 
the Committee took note of the replies furnished by  MIAL and the Housing 
Department, Government of Maharashtra on various as pects of the 
encroachment . 
(Para 84) 
 The Committee observes that the 35 pockets of slums  in airport and the 
slums hillock along the Mithi River are potential t hreat to the aircrafts and the 
CISA airport.  The problems are persisting for the last so many years.  The 
Committee feels that the Governmental agencies, bot h at the Centre and the State 
level, could not rationally judge the menace of slu ms inside the airport area as a 
potential security threat.  Mumbai is the commercia l capital of the country.  Any 
breach of security at the airport will have far reaching consequences. The threat is 
perennial and no amount of policing could provide a dequate security to the 
airport if the slums are allowed to exist and flour ish inside the airport. The 
Committee feels that the Government agencies are ha ppily unconcerned about the 
airport security at CSIA, Mumbai.  In Mumbai International Airport, a disaster is 
waiting to happen at any moment in view of these da ngerously placed 
encroachments overlapping operational areas, of the  Mumbai Airport. The 
Committee calls upon all the agencies such as AAI, Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
BCAS, State Government of Maharashtra and MIAL to w ake up from their 
slumber and see the danger looming large on the Mum bai Airport.  The 
Committee expresses its serious concern on this and  strongly recommends that all 
the slums must be removed and relocated from the ai rport area.  There is no 
justification for allowing encroachers inside the a irport area and Committee is of 
the view that so long as this area is occupied by t he slum dwellers, the Mumbai 
airport is sitting on a ticking bomb until it is re located. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that MIAL along with Government of Mahar ashtra should come 
forward immediately with adequate proposals to reha bilitate the slums taking 
support of various Governmental agencies.  
(Para 85) 
 The Committee understands that MIAL has been pursu ing with the 
Government of Maharashtra (GoM) for rehabilitation of hutment dwellers at 
CSIA since taking over operations of CSIA in 2006.  The Committee hopes that 
the Government of Maharashtra will expedite its approval for the Airport Specific 

35 
 
Slum Rehabilitation Scheme for CSIA, to enable the slum rehabilitation process 
quickly. 
(Para 86) 
Security at Cochin Airport  
 The Committee compliments the CIAL, CISF and other  security agencies 
for providing security to the Cochin Airport. 
(Para 90) 
Security of the Airports a Sovereign Function   
 The Committee observes that National Security cann ot be compromised.  
Civil Aviation Security is a very integral and impo rtant element of national 
security.  Airport complex is a crucial infrastruct ure.  Any large scale 
damage/terrorist attack on the airport complex will  be catastrophic with far 
reaching grave implications for the citizens and the economy.  Investments flowing 
into the country depends on the state of the securi ty and safety.  The Committee 
further notes that the airports have been categoriz ed as hyper-sensitive, sensitive 
and normal.  Operational airports in hyper-sensitiv e categories are 26 out of 
which only 18 airports have been provided with CISF  security cover.  Which 
means that eight hyper-sensitive airports are not p rovided the security cover of 
CISF.  In sensitive category, there are 56 airports , out of which 37 are covered by 
CISF and 19 are not covered.  In the normal categor y of 16 airports, only 4 are 
provided with CISF security and 12 are not covered.   Thus, out of 98 functional 
airports, only 59 are covered with CISF security cover and 39 are not under CISF.  
Explanations given to the Committee was lack of fun ds for providing CISF 
security cover at all the 98 airports. 
(Para 95) 
 The security must be adequate and in proportion to  the threat perception.  
Funds should not come in the way of providing secur ity.  The Committee 
recommends that the security component of PSF needs  to be enhanced to 
commensurate with the security expenditure and ensu re that security is not 
compromised at all the airports in India and the  P SF security component must be 
deposited in the Consolidated Fund of India. 
(Para 96) 
 The Committee recommends that Airport Security sho uld be absolute.  The 
Committee observes that Security of the Airports is  an integral part of National 
Security and therefore, recommends that providing s ecurity should be a sovereign 
function. Adequacy of PSF Security component collec tion should not be the 
criteria for providing security. If CISF security c over can be given to the Delhi 
Metro, why cannot all the operational airports be p rovided with CISF security 
cover?  
(Para 97) 
 The Committee feels that ideally, the CISF securit y cover should be 
provided to all the 70 odd airports which are havin g normal scheduled operations. 
But to begin with, the Committee recommends that al l the Airports rated hyper-

36 
 
sensitive from security angle be given to CISF as s oon as possible followed by the 
sensitive airports. In view of shortages of manpowe r and logistics available with 
CISF, security of normal airports can continue with  State Police for the time 
being. But these airports also be given all modern equipment, training etc.  
(Para 97A) 
Dedicated Security Force  
 The Committee noted the arguments of Home Secretar y and Secretary, 
Civil Aviation and observes that there is no need f or a separate Civil Aviation 
Force at this juncture and that Airport Security ca n remain with the CISF and 
Ministry of Home Affairs especially in view of the fact the IB, NSG and other 
Police Forces have a substantial role to play in ai rport security are also under the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.   
(Para 100) 
 The Committee, after examining the papers/document s submitted to it and 
hearing the arguments of various stakeholders on th e subject, could understand 
that there are multiple agencies involved in providing security at Indian airports. 
(Para 101) 
 The Committee notes that  Bureau of Civil Aviation Security is responsible 
for laying down the standards for pre-embarkation s ecurity and anti-sabotage 
measures in respect of civil flights and ensuring t heir compliance through regular 
inspections and security audits.  Commissioner of S ecurity, Bureau of Civil 
Aviation Security has been empowered to issue Direc tions under Section 5A of 
Aircraft Act, 1934 with respect to civil aviation security matters. 
(Para 102) 
 The Committee also notes that whereas BCAS frames the rules and 
regulations for civil aviation security, the Centra l Industrial Security Force which 
is functioning under the Ministry of Home Affairs a cts as the implementing 
agency for the guidelines framed by BCAS.  The Inte lligence Bureau plays an 
important role in providing intelligence inputs rel ated to civil aviation security.  
National Security Guard (NSG) under the Ministry of  Home Affairs is also the 
primary Contingency Response Force for anti-terrorist operations at airports.   
(Para 103) 
 The Committee was at a loss to find that the post o f the Commissioner of 
Security, BCAS, the Appropriate Authority for the d evelopment, implementation 
and maintenance of National Civil Aviation Security  Programme of India, is lying 
vacant for the last two-and-a-half years.  The Comm ittee would like to know the 
reasons for keeping this important and sensitive po st vacant for more than two 
years.  The Committee may also be apprised on the s teps taken to fill up the post 
on priority. 
(Para 104) 
 The Committee finds that the violent incident invo lving employees of 
Airports Authority of India and the Central Industr ial Security Force at Karipur 

37 
 
Airport in Kozhikode on  10 th  June, 2015 raises a question mark over the 
effectiveness of the existing co-ordination mechani sm between various agencies 
involved in providing security at Indian airports.  When the issue was raised 
during the deliberations, both the Home Secretary a nd Civil Aviation Secretary 
assured the Committee to look into the matter and to address the   shortcomings in 
the system.  The Committee hopes that apart from co nducting various meetings to 
address the issues related to airport security with  agencies involved in the process, 
both the Ministries will have a periodical review o f the performance of the co-
ordination mechanism so that any grey areas identif ied could be addressed 
immediately. 
(Para 105) 
 The Committee also feels that the issue of deficie ncy of security gadgets and 
installation of CCTV cameras and clearance of shado w zones at various airports 
should be taken up on priority so that such deficie ncies do not become a cause for 
concern in the Indian airport security system. As i t is said that the performance in 
the battlefield is obviously known before hand if w e are not fully equipped with 
the modern equipments to fight with the enemy.  The  Committee, therefore, hopes 
that PDIS which is currently operating on pilot bas is at Delhi Airport should be 
reviewed and efforts should be made to remove the flaws found in the system.  The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation should also look out for  such PDIS technology which 
could function properly in the Indian conditions.    
(Para 106) 
 The Committee desires that the areas of concern on  providing security to 
Delhi Airport, expressed by the Delhi Police should  be given due consideration.  
The Ministry of Civil Aviation and Delhi Internatio nal Airport Limited are urged 
to look into the problems faced by the Delhi Police on the city side as well as within 
the T-3 terminal building of  Delhi Airport. 
(Para 107) 
 The Committee also hopes that the issue of relocat ion and rehabilitation of 
slum dwellers from the vicinity of Mumbai Internati onal Airport will be settled as 
soon as possible so that the encroached land is bro ught within the control of 
airport operator and the necessary expansion works of Mumbai Airport are 
commenced shortly.  Upon that, the present security threat to the Mumbai Airport 
will automatically wither away.  The Committee afte r cross examination of the 
Governments and concerned organizations has come to  the conclusions that the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, State Government of Mah arashtra, Mumbai 
International Airport Limited and Airport Authority  of India should sit together 
to sort out the long pending issues which have pres ently become the major issue of 
threat  to Mumbai airport. The Committee also reque sts the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Government of Maharashtra to take a le ad in settling the issues with 
no loss of time.  
(Para  108) 
 The Committee desires that vacant posts in the Avi ation Security Group of 
CISF which is manning the Indian airports through t he length and breadth of the 

38 
 
country are filled up at the earliest so that the e xisting security apparatus is 
strengthened.  
(Para 109) 
 There is an involvement of multiple agencies in pr oviding securities at 
Indian airports and the Committee has found a lack of proper co-ordination 
between the agencies.  The Committee, therefore, re commends that a think tank 
may be created to bring out a proper co-ordination involving all the stakeholders 
to help the Commissioner of Security, BCAS to perform his duties satisfactorily. 
(Para 110) 
 The Committee finds it quite scary to know that th e security of 8 of our 
hyper-sensitive and 19 of our sensitive airports ar e not covered by the CISF which 
has now become the only specialized force for aviat ion security; now question is 
who is then guarding these airports and how secure these airports are? In these 
existing threats perceptions at our airports, the c ountry can ill- affords such a 
situation to continue any more. The Committee finds that aviation security has not 
received the attention and importance that it deserves. The Committee feels that in 
view of several gaps and lack of unified command an d control for the multiple 
agencies involved, there is an urgent need for havi ng an Aviation Security policy 
in the country for ensuring fool proof security at our airports before a major 
untoward incident takes place in the Country. 
(Para 111) 
 
  

39 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2014-15) 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, the 10 th July, 2015 in Committee Room 
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
Rajya Sabha  
2. Shri Rajeev Shukla  
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap 
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore  
6. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
7. Kumari Selja  
8. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee  
Lok Sabha 
9. Mohammed Faizal 
10. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
11. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
12. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
14. Shri Rajesh Pandey  
15. Shri Srinivasa Reddy Ponguleti 
16. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
17. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
18. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
19. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
20. Shri K. C. Venugopal  
21. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri N.K. Singh, Additional Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri L.C. Goyal Secretary 
2. Shri  Jaideep Govind Additional Secretary 
3. Shri V. Vumlunmang Joint Secretary (PM) 
4. Shri Sailesh Joint Secretary (P. II) 
5. Shri Harish Chander Director 
6 Ms. S. Chowdhury Director 
CENTAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE 
7. Shri. Surender Singh  Director-General  
8. Shri R.K. Pachnanda  Additional Director-General  
9 Shri Ajay Kumar  Assistant Director-General  
INTELLIGENCE BUREAU  
10. Shri P.K. Bharadwaj Joint Director 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
11. Shri Rajiv Nayan Choubey Secretary 
12. Shri Arun Kumar Joint Secretary 
13. Shri G. Asok Kumar Joint Secretary 
14. Shri Suyash Narain Director  
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY 
15. Shri. B.B. Dash  Jt. Commissioner of Security  
16. Shri R.N. Dhoke Addl. Commissioner 
17. Shri M.T. Baig Asstt. Commissioner  
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
18. Shri R.K. Srivastava Chairman 
19. Shri G.K. Chaukiyal Member (Operation) 
20. Shri Pankaj Jain E.D. (KID) 
21. Smt. Neera Rawat Director (Security) 
22. Shri R.K. Malik GM (Security) 
 

41 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
that the representatives of Ministries of Home Affairs and Civil Aviation  have been called to 
discuss the issues related to Security at Airports in India.   The Chairman also informed the 
Committee that the subject could not be taken up for discussion during the last meeting since 
the Home Secretary was not able to attend the meeting on that day. 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Home Secretary ,  Director-General, CISF 
and other officials and asked the Home Secretary about the arrangement the CISF has for  
providing security at the airports , existing interface between all the agencies involved in the 
operation of airports,  proposed creation of dedicate d security force for guarding the Indian 
airports by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, staff strength and organizational capabilities of 
CISF in providing security at airports and special training giv en to the CISF for handling hi -
tech equipment as also for the development of soft skills to deal with the passengers with 
required etiquette and discipline.   The Committee also expressed concern about the incident 
that took place at Kozhikode International Airport, Karipur on 10th June, 2015. 
4. The Home Secretary apprised the Committee on the role of Ministry of Home Affairs 
and CISF in the aviation security of the country and the different agencies involved in that 
process.  The Secretary also assured the Committee that  the incident which occurred at 
Kozhikode Airport should be seen as stand alone incident, it was not a result of any gap in 
the system that is in place.  However, all the necessary action will be taken once investigation 
findings come out.   The Home Secretary was not in favour  of creation of dedicated security 
force for airports under Ministry of Civil Aviation as it will not have the required expertise as 
that of the Central Industrial Security Force  (CISF) which was currently doing that job  very 
well.  He requested the Committee to look into the issue of adequate budgetary allocation for 
airport security as the current allocation is meager.  He also raised the issue of delay on the 
part of Ministry of Civil Aviation for making payment to CISF for their services provided at 
the airports.   When asked abou t asking more funds for airport  security by the Ministry of 
Home on Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) , Secretary argued that it may not be possible as 
aviation security was not treated as a sovereign function.  
5.  The Secretary accepted the lack of an effective  co-ordination between CISF, Bureau 
of Civil Aviation Security and all other agencies involved in ensuring airport security:- CISF,  
BCAS, airport operators, aircraft operators, ground handling agencies who are performing 

42 
 
some very important aspects of airport security.  DG, CISF informed the Committee about 
the organizational capabilities and man power of CISF in providing security to airports and 
also training facilities available to personnel of CISF at various levels. 
6. Then the witnesses withdrew. 
7.  Thereafter, t he Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
other officials to the meeting and expressed the Committee’s concerns over the recent violent 
incident involving employees of Airports Authori ty of India and Central Industrial Security  
Force on 10th June, 2015 at Calicut International Airport at Karipur which resulted in closure 
of Kozhikode Airport for six hours.  The Chairman in his opening remarks raised all the 
issues which were discussed with the Home Secretary earlier. 
8. The Secretary, in his presentation , informed the Committee on the existing security 
arrangement at the Indian airports and the role of different agencies under the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, involved in that process.  He also submitted that the incident which occurred 
at Kozhikode Airport may not be seen as a security lapse.   He also informed the Committee 
on the Standard Operating Procedure used for providing security at airports in the county and 
also the various levels  of co -ordination between inter -Ministerial agencies and intra -
Ministerial agencies.  The Secretary also stressed on the need for enhancement of the security 
component of the Passenger Service Fee on the air fares since  the expenditure spent on 
security is more than what is collected from the departing passenger under this head.     The 
Secretary informed the Committee that creation of dedicated security force for Indian airports 
will complicate the security operations and that the Ministry will not proceed  further on this 
matter.  Neither the Ministry of Civil Aviation nor the Airports Authority of India has the 
core competency to raise a Force and run a security agency.  It should rest with  the  Ministry 
of Home Affairs and CISF. 
9. The Secretary, Ministry  of Civil Aviation suggested that the security at the airports 
may be considered as a sovereign function and adequate security may be provided based on 
the threat percep tion at various airports.  The s ecurity component of the passenger fee 
collected may be  directly credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  Sovereign function 
must be discharged by the Government and the fund constraint should not affect the security 
preparedness.   

43 
 
10. The Commissioner, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security  (BCAS) informed th e 
Committee on their role in providing security at Indian airports and their co -ordination 
mechanism with various security agencies.  He gave an overview of the operation of various 
agencies involved at airports on the basis of the broad security architecture laid down by the 
BCAS.  He also informed the Committee that all the airports in the country are subject to 
annual security audit followed by inspection by the officials  of BCAS. 
11. Members also raised queries on various points to which the officials responded.  The 
Committee directed the Ministries to furnish the replies to all the unanswered queries in 
writing at the earliest. 
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
13.       The meeting adjourned at 5.15 p.m. to meet again on 17th July, 2015. 
 
  

44 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2015-16) 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, the 18th December, 2015 in Committee 
Room 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap 
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
6. Kumari Selja 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
8. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
9. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
10.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
11. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
15. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
16. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
17. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
 Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director 
 Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcome d the Members to the meeting.  Thereafter, the 
Committee considered draft Report on the Issues related to 'Security at Airports in India'.  After 
some discussion, the Committee adopted the report with minor changes and decided to presen t 
the Report to the Parliament on 21st December, 2015. 

45 
 
3. The Committee, accordingly, authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri Kiranmay 
Nanda M.P. and in his absence Kumari Selja, M.P. to present the Report in Rajya Sabha.  Shri 
Ram Charitra Nishad, M.P.  and in his absence, Km. Arpita Ghosh , M.P. was authorized to lay 
the Report on the Table in Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2015. 
4. The Committee decided to undertake a study visit either in the last week of January or 
first week of February, 2016 to Goa, Hyderabad and Bengaluru for on-the-spot visit to Airports, 
Ports, National Highways, National Waterways, Libraries, Museums, Monuments and places of 
tourism importance.  The Committee authorized its Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha to obtain permission for the study visit. 
5. The meeting was adjourned at 3.30 P.M. 
 
 
 

 
Annexure-I 
(vide para 34 of Report) 
LIST/ CATEGORIZATION OF AIRPORTS UNDER CISF COVER  
Hyper-Sensitive Sensitive Normal 
S.NO Airport S.No Airport S.N Airport S.N 
o. 
Airport 
1. Amritsar   1.  Agra 20.   Bhopal 1 . Gwalior 
2. IGI Delhi   2.  Chandigarh  21.   Bhuj 2 . Madurai  
3. Jaipur   3.  Indore 22.   Goa   3 . Rajkot 
4. Varanasi  4.  Bhuntar 23.   Nagpur   4 . Bhavnagar 
5. Lucknow  5.  Kanpur 24.   Vadodara   
6. Agartala 6.  Shimla 25.   Calicut     
7. Bagdogra  7.  Udaipur 26.   Cochin     
8. Guwahati   8.  Dehradun 27.   Coimbatore    
9. Imphal 9.  Khajuraho 28.   Mangalore    
10. Kolkata   10.  Dibrugarh 29.   Tirupati   
11. Raipur 11.  Dimapur 30.   Trichy    
12. Bangalore   12.  Gaya  31.   Trivandrum     
13. Chennai  13.  Jorhat 32.   Vizag    
14. Hyderabad   14.  Lilabari 33.   Tezpur   
15. Mumbai   15.  Patna  34.   Shillong   
16. Pune  16.  Ranchi 35.   Bhubaneswar    
17. Jodhpur 17.  Silchar 36.   Diu   
18. Ahmedabad 18.  Aurangabad 37.   Portblair   
  19.  Porbandar   
 
  
 Total 59 Airports under CISF cover  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46

 
 
       Annexure-II  
(vide  para 81 of Report) 
Chart-I 
 
1) Premier project at Village Kurla, Kurla (West). 
(1.A)  Last revised Letter of Intent is issued on 0 1/07/2015 for 17346 Nos. of 
Rehab Residential & 737 Nos. Rehab commercial tenements. 
(1.B)  IOA & Commencement Certificate for 30 Nos. o f Rehab buildings are 
issued and work of construction is nearing completi on, the work of infrastructural 
facilities is under progress. 
2)     Bhandari Project at Village Kurla, Kurla (East). 
(2.A)  Last revised Letter of Intent is issued on 1 6/10/2009 for 1834 Nos. of 
Rehab Residential tenements. 
(2.B)  IOA & Commencement Certificate for all 4 Nos . of Rehab buildings were 
granted and work is nearing completion. 
3)     Kilburn Project at Village Nahur, Nahur (West). 
(3.A) Revised Letter of Intent is issued on 26/09/2 012 for 2004 Nos. of Rehab 
Residential tenements. 
(3.B) IOA & Commencement Certificate were granted t o all 4 Nos. of Rehab 
buildings and work is in progress. 
4)     Mahul-I project at Village Mahul, Chembur. 
(4.A) Letter of Intent is issued on 16/06/2010 for 416 Nos. of Rehab industrial 
tenements. 
5)     Mahul-II project at Village Mahul, Chembur. 
(5.A) Letter of Intent is issued on 29/06/2010 for 451 Nos. of Rehab industrial 
tenements. 
6)     Bombay Oxygen  project at Village Nahur, Mulund (West). 
(6.A) Letter of Intent is issued on 17/08/2010 for 2919 Nos. of Rehab residential 
tenements. 
(6.B) IOA & Commencement Certificate were granted t o all 3 Nos. of Rehab 
buildings and work is in progress. 
7)     Popular Car Bazar project at Village Mulgaon, Andheri (East). 
(7.A) Last revised Letter of Intent is issued on 07/02/2013 for 1300 Nos. of Rehab 
residential tenements. 
(7.B) IOA & Commencement Certificate were granted t o all 3 Nos. of Rehab 
buildings and work is in progress. 
  
47

 
Chart-2 
 
Tenement details of 3.11 Projects of M/s. HDIL 
Sr. 
No. 
Scheme No. of 
Tenements 
Proposed as 
per last LOI 
No. of 
Tenements 
for which 
OCC 
granted 
No. of 
Tenements 
Handed over 
to MMRDA 
Balance No.  
of Tenements 
under 
construction 
1 Premier ‘L’ Ward Kurla 18644 6139 697 12505 
2 Bhandari ‘L’ Ward Kurla 1882 0 0 1882 
3 Bombay Oxygen ‘T’ Ward Nahur 3009 0 0 3009 
4 Kilburn ‘S’ Ward Bhandup 2064 0 0 2064 
5 Popular Carbazaar K/E Andheri 1339 0 0 1339 
6 Mahul Chembur CTS No. 611 456 0 0 0 
7 Mahul Chembur CTS No. 604, 605 420 0 0 0 
 Total 27814 6139 697 20799 
 
 
 
 
48

Annexure- III 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri L.C. Goyal Secretary 
2. Shri  Jaideep Govind Additional Secretary 
3. Shri V. Vumlunmang Joint Secretary (PM) 
4. Shri Sailesh Joint Secretary (P. II) 
5. Shri Harish Chander Director 
6 Ms. S. Chowdhury Director 
CENTAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE 
7. Shri. Surender Singh  Director-General  
8. Shri R.K. Pachnanda  Additional Director-General  
9 Shri Ajay Kumar  Assistant Director-General  
INTELLIGENCE BUREAU  
10. Shri P.K. Bharadwaj Joint Director 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
11. Shri Rajiv Nayan Choubey Secretary 
12. Shri Arun Kumar Joint Secretary 
13. Shri G. Asok Kumar Joint Secretary 
14. Shri Suyash Narain Director  
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY 
15. Shri. B.B. Dash  Jt. Commissioner of Security  
16. Shri R.N. Dhoke Addl. Commissioner 
17. Shri M.T. Baig Asstt. Commissioner  
 
49

AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
18. Shri R.K. Srivastava Chairman 
19. Shri G.K. Chaukiyal Member (Operation) 
20. Shri Pankaj Jain E.D. (KID) 
21. Smt. Neera Rawat Director (Security) 
22. Shri R.K. Malik GM (Security) 
 
***** 
50