 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
284 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Seventy Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Seventy Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on3rd February, 2021) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iv) 
3. ACRONYMS               (v) - (vii) 
4. REPORT         1-61 
CHAPTER-I-     RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
CHAPTER-II-  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY  
CHAPTER-III- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
CHAPTER-IV- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
                               
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   62-66  
    6. MINUTES         67-70 
        
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. *Kumari Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
10. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 11. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
12.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
13.  Shri Anto Antony 
14.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
15.  Shri Tapir Gao  
16.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
17.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
18.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
19.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
20.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
21.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
22.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
23.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
24.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
25.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
26.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
27.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
28.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
30.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
31.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
_________________________________________________________  
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020 
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd April, 2020 and re-nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd 
July, 2020 
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
  
(i) 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. *Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
10. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat   
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
________________________________________________________  
*Shri Raj Babbar  ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020 
**Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 
 
 
(ii) 

SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present 
on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred and Eighty Fourth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained 
in its Two Hundred and Seventy Fifth Report on Demands for Grants of Ministry of Tourism. 
2.  The Two Hundred and Seventy Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  3rd March, 
2020  to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Seventy Sixth  Report were  received from the Ministry of Tourism on            
26th August, 2020. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  6th          
October, 2020.   
 
 
 (T.G. VENKATESH) 
NEW DELHI;                                                      Chairman, 
October 6 , 2020                                          Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
14 Asvina, 1942 (Saka)                              Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

ACRONYMS 
 
 
   AAI        :    Airports Authority of India
  
ADG :       Additional Director General 
 
BE : Budget Estimates 
 
CBSP : Capacity Building for Service Providers 
 
CFA : Central Financial Assistance 
 
CISF : Central Industrial Security Force 
 
COVID : Corona Virus Disease 
 
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility 
 
CSSS : Champion Sector in Services Scheme 
 
DG : Director General 
 
DIHM : Delhi Institute of Hotel Management 
 
DIPAM : Department of Investment and Public Asset Management 
 
DPPH : Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality 
 
DPR : Detailed Project Report 
 
EAP : Externally Aided Project 
 
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee 
 
FCI : Food Craft Institutes  
 
FFO : Film Facilitation Office 
 
FTAs : Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
 
FY : Financial Year 
 
GDP : Gross Domestic Product 
 
GFC : Good for Construction Drawing 
 
GRT : Gross Register Tonnage 
   
   GST : Goods and Services Tax 
 
(v) 

   HCE : Hotel Catering Establishment 
 
IGST : Integrated Goods and Service Tax 
  
IHM : Institutes of Hotel Management 
 
IIB&B : Incredible India Bed & Breakfast 
 
IITF : Incredible India Tourist Facilitator 
 
IITTM : Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management 
 
IMCCTS : Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector  
 
ITDC : India Tourism Development Corporation 
 
IWAI : Inland Waterways Authority of India 
 
JS : Joint Secretary 
 
LTF : Linguistic Tourist Facilitator 
 
MICE : Meetings Incentives Conferencing and Exhibitions 
 
MoT : Ministry of Tourism 
 
NCHMCT : National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology 
 
NFDC : National Film Development Corporation 
 
NH : National Highways 
 
NITI : National Institute for Transforming India 
 
NPC : National Productivity Council 
 
NR : Northern Railways 
 
NSC : National Steering Committee 
 
NWs : National Waterways 
 
NWR : North-West Railways 
 
OPMD : Overseas Promotion & Publicity Including Market Development Assistance 
 
PAT : Profit After Tax 
 
PBT : Profit Before Tax 
 
PIDDC : Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits  
(vi) 

PMC : Project Management Consultants 
   PPP : Public Private Partnership 
 
PRASHAD : Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation 
 
RCS-UDAN : Regional Connectivity Scheme- Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
 
RE : Revised Estimates 
 
ROE : Return on Equity 
 
SDS : Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
 
SFC : State Financial Corporation 
 
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle 
 
TDC : Tourism Development Corporation 
 
TFC : Tourist Facilitation Centre 
 
TIFF : Toronto International Film Festival 
 
UC : Utilization Certificate 
 
UN : United Nations 
 
UP : Uttar Pradesh 
 
UT : Union Territory 
 
VGF : Viability Gap Funding 
 
VRS : Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
 
WAPCOS : Water and Power Consultancy Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vii) 

1 
 
 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism 
on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred Seventy Fifth Report 
on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of the Ministry of Tourism which was presented to both 
the Houses of Parliament on 3rd March, 2020.  
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 26 th August, 2020 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:-  
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.:  23, 27, 28, 29, 30 , 31, 57, 60, 62, 84, 87, 101, 102, 121, 123, 124,  
125, 133, 134, 148, 151, 152, 157, 171, 172, 175, 176, 177, 179, 181, 183, 184, 185, 
186, 188, 189, 190, 193, 195 
Total: 39 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 32, 56, 74, 76, 77, 86, 99, 100, 118, 122, 132, 147, 173, 178, 191, 
192, 196 
Total: 17 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.:  24, 25, 26, 33, 58, 59, 61, 75 , 85, 119, 120, 126, 146, 149, 150, 
156, 174, 180, 182, 187, 194 
Total: 21 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.:  Nil  
Total:   Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
  
  
ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2020-21 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1. The Committee notes that due to broad budgetary cuts imposed by the Ministry of 
Finance, the Ministry has witnessed a reduction in allocation of funds for the Financial Year 
2020-21 and has been allocated only Rs. 2499.83 crore as against its projected dem and of 
Rs. 2647.25 crore.             (Para 23) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
  
1.1. Factual Statement. Noted by the Ministry. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
2. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that the difference in the 
projection made by it and the allocation given for the financial year 2020 -21 is not high and 
that if additional funds are required, it would move the Ministry of Finance for add itional 
allocation at the RE 2020 -21 stage.  The Committee observes that availability of adequate 
resources to the tourism sector is sine qua non for achieving the tourism growth as well as 
inclusive growth.  Since development of tourism infrastructure is capital intensive, the 
Committee apprehends that with the budgetary allocation of Rs.2499.83 crore for 2020 -21, 
which, in the opinion of the Committee, is low, it would be difficult for the Ministry to take up 
significant activities related to on-going infrastructure development of the sanctioned tourism 
circuits/destinations and also development of new tourism products of global standards.  If 
the tourism sector has to play a major role in faster and inclusive growth, the infrastructure 
bottlenecks need to be unleashed.  The Committee notes that more than half of the allocation 
of the Ministry for 2020-21 is devoted for the schemes relating to infrastructure development.  
In most of the States/UTs, the outlay for tourism is meagre and the Central Government  has 
dominance in the domain of public resource mobilization by way of collection of tax revenue. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry be provided a higher financial outlay at the RE 
2020-21 stage.  The Committee would like the Ministry of Tourism to  bring the above 
recommendation to the notice of Ministry of Finance and also intimate the Committee of their 
response in this regard.             (Para 27) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.   The 
recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to the Ministry of Finance for 

3 
 
necessary action  vide Ministry of Tourism ref . No. G -20017(5) /2019-20 B&A dated 
27.05.2020.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
3. Since the consumption demand arising from tourist expenditure has a multiplier effect 
on the economy, the expansion of the tourist sector can lead to large scale employment 
generation and poverty alleviation. Needless to men tion, tourism has huge potential to 
stimulate overall economic growth and any increase in the outlay for tourism sector can 
propel our country to a faster growth trajectory and will lead to large scale employment 
generation and alleviation of poverty. If o ur country can tap its full potential of the tourism 
sector, it can play a major role for faster and inclusive growth; but for this to happen, the 
budgetary provisions for the Ministry has to be enhanced substantially.  By doing so, tourism 
infrastructure could be strengthened/ upgraded, conservation and development of all 
heritage sites could be undertaken and completed and last mile connectivity to tourist 
destinations could be improved. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government 
should acco rd priority status to the tourism sector and enumerate a fiscal roadmap for 
generating and allocating more financial resource for tourism so that the full potential of a 
vibrant sector could be tapped.          (Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
3.1. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  The   
allocation for the tourism Sector is increa sing year after year.   During the Financial Year 
2020-21, Rs. 2499.83 crores have been allotted  to Ministry of Tourism, which is the highest 
ever allocation of fund made to   the Ministry of Tourism.  The BE allocation during 2018-19 
was Rs. 2150 Crore and during 2019 -20 it was Rs. 2189.22 Crore.    From the BE allocation, 
it is evident that the Ministry of Finance is increasing the budgetary out lay for the flagship 
programmes of this Ministry viz., Swadesh Darshan and PRASHAD.  Also, the allocation for 
advertising and publicity to make India a preferred tourist destination is increasing over the 
years.  Further, recommendations of the Committee h ave been conveyed to the Ministry of 
Finance for necessary action.  
  
Recommendation/Observation  
  
4. The Committee notes with dismay the huge mismatch between the projected demand 
for funds and actual allocations made for the Ministry of Tourism for the years 2018 -19 and 
2019-20 as well.  The pattern of shortfall in allocation of funds indicates that budg etary 
requirements are being projected by the Ministry more on the basis of theoretical 
anticipation rather than on actual trend of requirement. The Ministry’s reply that the 
Schemes/Projects undertaken by them are of continuous nature and that the targets  are fixed 
and funds are released as per budgetary allocation by the Ministry of Finance suggests the 
casual and routine manner in which the Budget Estimates are being prepared and the 
Ministry is not very serious about the activities to be undertaken by t hem.  Tourism is 

4 
 
important for both economic growth and employment generation and the corpus of funds 
should not have been arbitrarily decided without reference to any ground reality.     (Para 29) 
  
5. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to have the entire requirement of 
funds realistically assessed after collecting timely information on requirement of funds from 
the State Governments and other stakeholders and take steps to rectify and improve upon the 
existing system of assessing requiremen t of funds. The Ministry should formulate 
Schemes/Programmes which can be implemented in a time -bound manner.  The Committee 
desires to be apprised of the specific action taken in this regard.      (Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
5.1. The projection of demands of funds under the schemes are finalized after assessment 
of  the targets set for the ensuing year with realistic approach, position of the approved 
projects under execution, projects under pipeline and requests for the projects received fr om 
the State Governments/ UTs. Further, these are continuing schemes and any shortfall in funds 
due to re duced allocation at RE stage, can be met from the next year’ s budget. It is also 
submitted that during the preceding four years, all funds allocated under various Schemes 
were successfully utilized.  Further, keeping in view the experience gained and challenges 
faced by the Ministry in operation of various Schemes, scheme guidelines f or various 
schemes are amended as and when required.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
6. The Committee takes serious note of the fact that the Ministry has kept the unspent 
provisions of Rs. 43.18 Crore till the close of the financial year 2018 -19 and surrendered the 
same on 29.03.2019 totally disregarding the provisions of General Financial Rules which 
states that unspent provisions in a grant should be surrendered as soon as they are foreseen, 
without waiting for the last day of the year.  The Committee deprecates such a casual 
approach of the Ministry in adhering to the fiscal discipline and desires the Ministry to avoid 
such lapses in future and surrender unspent budgetary provisions timely so that st arved 
projects/schemes are not deprived of the same.        (Para 31) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
6.1. The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.   The Program 
Divisions of the Ministry have been advised to intimate the amount of savings to Budget & 
Accounts Division of the Ministry well in Advance. 
 
INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF TOURIST CIRCUITS AROUND SPECIFIC 
THEMES (SWADESH DARSHAN) 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
7. The Committee takes note of the remedial measures formulated by the Ministry  for 
effective implementation of the projects sanctioned under the SDS and would like the  

5 
 
Ministry to carry out an appraisal of their efficacy so that the avowed objective of developing 
world class infrastructure in the circuit destinations, promoting cult ural and heritage value 
of the country and providing complete tourism experience with varied thematic circuits under 
the Scheme could be achieved.                    (Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. Ministry ensures regular review and monitoring of the sanctioned projects for the 
effective implementation of the Swadesh Darshan Scheme. A detailed last review of all the 
sanctioned projects was undertaken by the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism with all th e States/ 
UTs and Implementing Agencies in January – February, 2020. As a follow -up incessant 
exercise, review meetings were also taken by the Joint Secretary (Tourism) in June, 2020 
with States/ UTs in order to address various issues related to the scheme such as financial and 
physical progress of the projects, UC pendency with the Implementing Agencies, other 
auxiliary issues related to the projects etc. The Ministry of 
Tourism is regularly and aggressively monitoring the progress of the projects at vario us 
levels. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
8. The Committee recommends that for bette r promotion of rural tourism, a cluster 
approach may be pursued rather than a stand -alone approach and more and more Rural 
Circuit Projects may be sanctioned and implemented  for promotion of niche tourism and 
more funds may be earmarked for rural circuits under the SDS.      (Para 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should pursue with all the State 
Governments the matter of setting up of a State Level Monitoring Committee to remove 
various impediments like delays in land acquisition and statutory clearances so that time 
overrun in Buddhist Circuit Pr ojects is minimized.  This would also speed up execution of 
Buddhist Circuit Projects within the approved cost.        (Para 62) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
DOMESTIC PROMOTION  AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKET  
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
10.  During his speech from Red Fort last year, Prime Minister Modi  had urged Indians 
to visit at least 15 domestic destinations by the year 2022.  As a part of the Prime Minister's 
vision and in a bid to encourage more footfall on domestic tourist destinations, the Ministry 

6 
 
of Tourism has launched the "Dekho  Apna Desh" campaign.  The Committee notes that there 
have been media reports that the Ministry of Tourism would fund travel expenses of tourists 
who visit 15 tourist destinations in the country under the "Dekho Apna Desh" campaign.  It 
has now been clarified that the  Ministry has no scheme for funding the travel expenses of 
tourists visiting destinations in the country under the "Dekho Apna Desh" campaign.  
However, the Ministry proposes to give recognition to select domestic travellers who 
undertake visits to various  tourist destinations in the country through random selection for 
which details are being finalized.  Apparently, there is lack of policy stance on the incentives 
to be given under the "Dekho Apna Desh" campaign. The Committee expects the Ministry to 
quickly spell out its policy stance on the issue with greater clarity and in unambiguous terms.  
The Committee desires to be apprised in this regard.        (Para 84) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1. Taking the online pledge  by the citizens of the country to travel to 15 destinations in 
the country before 2022 on MyGov platform is one of the main activity under the Dekho 
Apna Desh Campaign. In order to encourage the citizens of  the country to take the said 
pledge, the Ministry of Tourism has decided to give gift hampers in the form of Dekho Apna 
Desh and Incredible India merchandise like T -Shirts, caps, mugs, pen etc. to select people 
who have taken the pledge. The selection of such persons is done peri odically on a   random 
basis through software application.   
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
11. The Ministry should also provide facilities for Domestic Tourism to sustain the 
growth rate of 11.91%. The Committee desires to be apprised of the precise steps  taken in 
this direction.              (Para 87) 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
11.1. Ministry of Tourism has taken several steps to provide facilities to all tourists 
including domestic tourists as per details given below:- 
  
i. Launched the Swadesh Darshan Scheme with a vision to develop theme based tourist 
circuits. 
ii. Launched the National Mission on Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage 
Augmentation Drive (PRASHAD) Scheme for holistic development of identified 
pilgrimage destinations. 
iii. Identified 17 Iconic Sites in the country for development by seeking convergence with 
other Central Ministries/Departments/State Governments /Urban local bodies. 
iv. Launched the Adopt a Heritage Project for development and maintenance of tourist 
amenities at heritage sites/monuments and other tourist sites. 
v. Launched 24x7 toll free multi-lingual tourist helpline. 
vi. Revamped Incredible India website for providing information on tourism 
sites/destinations in different States/ Union Territory Administrations. The 

7 
 
information on  website is available in different international languages including 
Hindi language. 
vii. Lunched Buddhist website – indiathelandofbuddha.in to promote and showcase the 
rich Buddhist Heritage in India. 
viii. Launched Incredible India Tourist Facilitator Certification  Programme, a pan -India 
online learning program. There are two categories of IITF Certification Programme 
i.e., Basic and Advanced (Heritage & Adventure) with an optional specialization 
programme of fluency in spoken foreign language other than English. 
ix. New mountain peaks have been opened for mountaineering/trekking to give boost to 
adventure tourism in the country. 
x. Lowering of G.S.T. on hotels rooms with tariffs of  ₹1,001 to ₹7,500/night to 12% and 
for ₹7,501 & above to 18%. 
  
OVERSEAS PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKET 
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
 
Recommendation/Observation   
12. The Committee notes that during 2019 -20, the Ministry had undertaken a number of 
promotional activities under the Overseas Promotion and Marketing  like joint promotions, 
food festivals, organisation of Trade Fairs and Road Shows, Hospitality Programmes, know 
India Seminars for more focused marketing in major and potential source markets, etc.  The 
Committee recommends that the Road Shows focusing on  Niche Tourism Products like 
Adventure Tourism, Medical Tourism, Eco Tourism etc. should also be organised in major 
overseas source markets.                            (Para 101) 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
12.1 The Ministry of Tourism promotes India as a holistic destination at the Road Shows 
held in the tourism generating markets overseas. Focus is also given to the promotion of 
Niche tourism products such as adventure, medical, MICE, cruise etc. In addition, these niche 
tourism segments are also promoted  by the India Tourism Offices overseas at travel 
shows/exhibitions, Know India Seminars, print/electronic/outdoor and online media etc.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
13. The Committee observes that the medium of Cinema is a powerful instrument for 
promotion of tourist destinations.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to 
leverage the medium of cinema for promotion of Indian tourism in overseas markets, the 
Ministry should partner with International Film Festivals world-wide.             (Para 102)  
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
13.1. The observation is noted and participation would be considered as per merits and 
availability of budget .   Also, the recommendations of the Committee were  brought to the 

8 
 
notice of Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and National Film Development 
Corporation (NFDC) for taking appropriate action at their end. 
 
13.2. NFDC has now stated that  Ministry of Tourism can be integrated with NFDC in 
its two important verticals i.e., Film F acilitation Office (FFO) and NFDC Film Bazaar in 
following areas:-  
a.  Indian tourism can be promoted at key  international film festivals and markets in 
India and abroad such as Marche Du Film (Cannes Film Market), European Film Market in 
Berlin, Hong Kong Film Market (FILMMART),  Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF), 
IFFI, Film Bazaar, under the Ministry of Tourism's  brand "Incredible India". This  integrated 
with the Ministry of  I&B’s “Film in India” campaign  would enhance the reach of India as a 
filming destination amongst the global film industry, leading to greater film tourism. An 
integrated multi -media publicity and advertising campaign can give fillip to India’s 
positioning as a preferred filming destination. 
b.  The Ministry of Tourism can support the creation and deve lopment of a location 
database which will specifically highlight and showcase the top end cinematic locations 
across India for filmmakers. The database so created m ay be showcased on the FFO web 
portal www.ffo.gov.in and also at the festivals and markets m entioned above. FFO can also 
come out with a hard copy “Location Compendium” to market at its various national and 
international events.  As a matter of fact  Film Tourism is already  promoted by FFO in 
partnership with various State Governments and State Film Tourism Departments.  Presently, 
only those states participate who are either approached  by the Industry Association, FFO or 
the film tourism  directly showcases interest in participati on. State representations from  Goa, 
Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Delhi,  Jammu & Kashmir and  Odisha have participated from 
2016 to 2020. 
c.  With a view to ensure consistency  a film office can be taken by the MoT at  NFDC 
Film Bazaar, for promoting tourism within the country and for showcasing locales as filming 
destinations for domestic and international film p roducers who visit the Bazaar, a  special 
session for the MoT at the Film Bazaar’s Knowledge Series can also be cu rated to showcase 
the diversity of locations in the country. 
d.   An award like "Incredible India award” can be instituted to enhance the brand 
"Filming in India and value of Film bazaar alongwith an International event which also 
promotes shooting in India apart "for one of the projects from Co-production Market to shoot 
in that particular region for the XXX amount. This shall encourage other film 
makers/producers to participate in the Co -Production Market not only from India but from 
across the Globe for shooting in India. This synergy will enable the increase of India’s share 
in world tourist arrivals in the country, since increased filming in India will lead to greater 
film induced tourism. 
e.  Ministries of Tourism and Culture can partner with NFDC for participation in all film 
festivals, where NFDC takes its delegation. This could be proposed in the following ways:- 

9 
 
i. MoT can give consolidated presentations, release a campaign &  undertake marketing 
of Indian Film Tourism Destinations and sponsor the evening networking 
programmes. 
ii. MoT can send few officials for G2B meetings for promoting the destinations & 
address the inquiries  from various producers/film makers . MoT may also have  a 
special section during the International Film Festival of India in Goa & The Film 
Bazaar where campaigns can be launched and India can be showcased as a potential 
Film tourist destination as IFFI & Film Bazaar is attended by a large international 
audience comprising of film makers / sales agents / producers/ directors/ film 
commissions and various other international stakeholders.  
iii. MoT can sponsor elements of promotional efforts undertaken through NFDC in 
advertising in print & electronic media, road sho ws, India evenings, city branding on 
flagpoles etc & joint advertising.   
iv. They can also introduce a booth for Film Tourism Inquiries  across Film Festivals 
wherever such a format is available in partnership with NFDC. 
v. MoT can also partner with NFDC  to organise curated and  guided trips for the Film 
Bazaar Delegates from international film fraternity visiting India during IFFI 
and Film Bazaar. 
TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation/Observation   
14. The Committee observes that the tourism industry is very dynamic because of rapid 
changes in customer preferences and travel patterns.  The Committee, therefore, desires to 
know as to what measures have been taken to ensure that the various training programmes 
designed by the Ministry mirror human resources  needs and are strictly need -based and 
demand driven.          (Para 121) 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
14.1. Keeping in mind the customer preferences and travel patterns, the Ministry of 
Tourism had initiated destination based skill development training program me under the 
scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers (CBSP) on a pilot basis in the last 
financial year i.e., 2019-20.  This programme in the current financial year i.e., 2020-21, is 
being upscaled to more destinations. 
  
14.2. The Ministry of Tourism had also introduced a Linguistic Tourist Facilitator (LTF) 
training programme to create trained manpower in different foreign languages excluding 
English to facilitate tourists visiting India from different language speaking countries and to 
upgrade the skill of the existing service providers to deal effectively with foreign tourists in 
their own languages. 
  
14.3. Tourism Awareness and Sensitization Programme is also conducted under the CBSP 
Scheme for the local stakeholders i.e., taxi/ auto driver s, dhaba / hotel staff, traffic police, 
rickshaw pullers etc. around the site.    

10 
 
  
14.4. Ministry of Tourism has already launched an online certification course "Incredible 
India Tourism Facilitator".  The objective of Incredible India Tourist Facilitator (IITF) 
Certification Programme is to provide online training and accreditation of the Tour 
Facilitators through a centralized PAN India e -learning module. The institution of tourist 
facilitators would be a basic component of the infrastructural requirement  both for 
International and Domestic tourism. There are two categories of IITF Certification i.e., Basic 
& Advanced (Heritage & Adventure). The programme is designed in a manner that the users 
can learn at their own time, space, path and pace.  
  
14.5. Presently 5000+ number of candidates have registered for the IITF certification 
programme. The programme will benefit the Indian economy in general and Indian tourism in 
specific. It would enable creation of a pool of well trained and professional tour fac ilitators. 
Thus it would help in creating additional employment even in remote areas. It will help the 
tourists, as they would be able to get the support of tourist facilitators, who would be locally 
grown, at reasonable price. The program is a digital ini tiative enabling Indian citizens to 
develop and enhance skills associated with tourism thereby incorporating knowledge about 
facilitating tourists across the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation   
15. The Committee notes that in order to scale up, the Ministry has initiated the 
Destination Based Skill Development Training Programme at various iconic sites and rolled 
it out from 13 Institutes. The Ministry further proposes to expand the programmes to 150 
tourist destinations during 2020 -21.  The Committe e desires to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard.          (Para 123) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
15.1. The Ministry of Tourism had initiated the Destination Based Skill Development 
training programme under the scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers (CBSP) at 
seven iconic sites and rolled out from 13 institutions in FY 2019-20. The Ministry of Tourism 
is in the process to scale -up destination based programme to 150 tourist destination. The 
Ministry of Tourism has identified the 150 destinations at PAN India level in the process of 
mapping implementing agencies on the basis of geographical location to implement the skill 
development programme. A total target of 30 ,000 persons to be trained is set for conducting 
Destination Based training programme for the F .Y. 2020-21.  The programme will be rolled 
out in the field subject to the evolving situation of Covid-19 pandemic.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
16. The Committee welcomes the Entrepreneurship Programme initiated as it is a key 
intervention to enable the under privileged to set up small enterprise and overcome the 
barriers to economic participation.  The Committee expects to be apprised of the physical 
progress made under the above Programme during 2019-20.     (Para 124) 

11 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
16.1. The Ministry of Tourism has launched Entrepreneurship Programme with the 
objective of facilitating micro and small business start -ups under the scheme of Capacity 
Building for Service Providers. It covers the trades of (i) Cook – Tandoor, (ii) Barman, (iii) 
Bakers, (iv) H omestay (Multi-Skilled Caretaker) and (v) Halwai – Indian Sweets under this 
Programme. A total of 1,820 trainees have been trained / certified in FY 2019-20. 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
17. The Committee gathers from the information made available to it that the Ministry is 
considering to set up 4 Food Craft Institutes.  The Committee expects that all issues relating 
to setting up of the 4 FCIs be addressed in right earnest and that the funds earmarked for 
them be utilized fully. The Committee would like to be informed of the achievements made 
vis-a-vis the targets fixed in this regard. The Committee also recommends that hospitality and 
tourism training institutes may also be set up in rural areas to conduct training for the local 
community so that the opportunities for the poor can be expanded.     (Para 125) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
17.1. Out of the 4 propos ed FCIs, Ministry of Tourism had  already conveyed its ''in -
principle" approval in respect of  3 new FCIs in the State of Madhya Pradesh (FCI at 
Shadool, FCI at Balaghat and FCI at Dhar).   Funds for these 3 FCIs will be released once the 
Society in the name of FCIs is formed and required area of developed land is transferred in 
the name of FCI Societies by the State Government.   All these three Institutes  are located in 
the rural and tribal area. 
CRUISE TOURISM 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
18. Cruise Tourism is a supply -driven market and cruise lines are always in search of 
new markets and destinations.  India’s enchanting and exotic destinations could catapult 
India as one of the leading cruise destinations.  But for that to happen, stable and consistent 
operating conditions will have to be concretized because cruise line companies which 
typically plan two to three years ahead, need to know that the basic conditions of operating 
are stable and consistent.  The Committee, therefore, recommends th at the Ministry of 
Tourism in collaboration with Ministry of Shipping should expedite appropriate policy 
measures for developing India’s largely untapped and hitherto small cruise market and pull 
cruise vessels to its shores.  The Committee desires to be u pdated on the progress made in 
this regard.                   (Para 133) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1. This Ministry  brought to the notice of Ministry of Shipping about the 
recommendations of the Committee. The reply of Ministry of Shipping is as follow:- 
  

12 
 
(a) The following steps have been taken by the Government to promote Cruise Tourism 
in India: 
i. A delegation comprising  Secretary (Shipping), Chairmen of two cruise ports and 
Economic Advisor, Ministry of Tourism had participated in the Sea Trade Cruise 
Global h eld in Miami in April, 2019.   This forum was utilized to create awareness 
about cruise shipping in India and the various steps taken in this sector for ease of 
doing business. 
ii.  Foreign flag vessels carrying passengers had initially been allowed to call at Indian 
Ports till 5 th February, 2024 without obtaining a licence from Director General of 
Shipping.  This facility has been extended for a further period of 5 years till 
5th February, 2029. 
iii. Standardized Operating Procedures (SOPs) for cruise vessels have b een revised and 
operationalised w.e.f. November, 2017 at all Major Ports. Thereafter a Monitoring 
Committee for implementation of the SOPs was formulated comprising officials from 
Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Tourism and CISF. 
iv. To address the manpower, coordination and logistic issues, for handling cruise vessels 
at Ports, Port Level Committees with Chairman of respective Major Ports Trust with 
Secretary Tourism of concerned State as Vice -Chairman and Regional Directors of 
respective regions as conveners have been Constituted by Ministry of Tourism. 
v. E-visa facility has been extended to five sea Major Ports namely Mumbai, Goa, 
Mangalore, Cochin and Chennai. Immigration counters have been set up at the 
aforesaid five Major Ports visited by cruise ships.  
vi. To make India attractive to Cruise passengers and to promote cruise tourism in the 
country, Ministry of Home Affairs has at the request of Ministry of Shipping, 
exempted cruise tourists arriving with e -visa from the requirement of biometric 
enrolment for a period of three years i.e. till 31.12.2020 vide their order   20th 
December, 2017.  This will facilitate in expeditious immigration clearance of cruise 
passengers with e-Visa   enabling them to spend more time on shore. 
vii.  The port charges have been reduced a nd all Major Ports are to charge a uniform 
single rate of $0.35 per GRT for first 12 hrs of stay.   Ports will not charge any other 
rate like berth hire, Port dues, pilotage, passenger fee etc from cruise liners.   The 
above rate has been made effective from 3rd November, 2017 and will remain in force 
for a period of three years. 
viii. Concession of 40% on composite port charges of USD 0.35 per GT for 1st 12 hours 
of stay is given to domestic cruise vessels for 75 -100 calls in a year and 50% 
concession for calls ex ceeding 100 in a year for a period of three years i.e. up to 
3.11.2020 (coinciding with validity of composite Port Charges order) at all Major 
Ports except Mumbai  Port, where concession of 20% for 100 calls or more in a year 

13 
 
(1st October to 30 th September) will be applicable. Further extension of this 
rationalisation of tariff for few more years is also being considered and processed. 
ix. The Ports do not levy any priority/ousting/shifting charges for berthing the cruise 
vessel.  
x. Walk-in berthing/ preferential berthing to home port cruises without any extra charge. 
xi. To address manpower, coordination and logistic issues for handling cruise vessels at 
ports, Port Level Committees with chairman of the respective Major Port Trust as 
Chairman, Secretary Tourism of the concerned state as Vice -Chairman and Regional 
Director of the respective region of Ministry of Tourism as Convener have been 
constituted. 
xii. Immigration counters have been set up at five Major Ports visited by cruise ships.   
(b)  In addition, the M inistry has taken up the following tax related issues with the 
Ministry of Finance: 
i. Customs duty exemption on consumption of goods and services on international 
cruise ships when they are in Indian waters and travel from one port to another port to 
ensure a competitive position of India globally and ease of doing business for cruise 
operations in the country. 
ii. Sale of the cruise tickets/ packages attract s GST at a rate of 18% while sale of airline 
ticket attracts GST of 5% for economy class and 12% for other  classes.  On the 
similar lines, the travel by cruise ships is charged at 5% rate for travel in a 
single/double room cabin and 12% for travel by suites. 
iii. The IGST should be exempted on import of cruise vessels in India.   In pre -GST 
regime cruise ships were exempted from customs duty. 
iv. GST may be exempted for goods supplied on board at home Ports for cruise lines to 
promote making Indian ports as home Ports.To stimulate Indians to purchase tickets 
domestically and to retain the profits in India, it is suggeste d that GST on sale of 
international tickets by domestic sale agents be also exempted. 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
19. The Committee also observes that many of India’s destinations are in its interiors and 
water-based tourism is well -developed in some States like Kerala, Goa, West Bengal etc. 
However, a lot remains to be done to develop river cruise that connects interior tourist 
destinations. The Committee, therefore, desires to be kept apprised of the steps taken and the 
achievement made towards developing river cruise in the country.     (Para 134) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 

14 
 
19.1. This Ministry brought to the notice of Inland Waterways Authority of India, Ministry 
of Shipping the recommendations of the Committee.   The reply of Inland Waterways 
Authority of India (IWAI) is as follow:- 
(i)        The IWAI Act, 1985, Section I envisages Inland Waterways Authority of India 
(IWAI) is to develop and regulate National Waterways for cargo shipping and 
navigation and thus development of river cruise tourism is not mandated with IWAI. 
However, the infrastructure developed for transportation on National Waterways by 
IWAI include fairway , terminals, jetties, navigation aids etc. They are used by the 
river cruise tourism operators who are from private sector. IWAI’s role is technical 
facilitator. 
(ii)         River cruise tourism has been a regular feature on National Waterway (NW) -
1(Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly river system) and NW -2 (river Brahmaputra) since 
several years. Various cruise operators viz., M/s Heritage River Cruises Pvt. Ltd., M/s 
Vivada Inland Waterways and M/s Assam Bengal Navigation Company operate their 
cruise vessels on NW-1, NW-2 and Sunderbans waterways. 
(iii)National Waterway (NW) -1 (Ganga - Bhagirathi-Hooghly river system from 
Allahabad to Haldia), NW – 2 (River Brahmaputra from Dhubri to Sadiya), NW -3 
(West Coast Canal from Kottapuram to Kollam along with Udyogmandal and 
Champakara Canals) have already been developed with fairway navigational aids, 
jetties and terminals with mechanized equipment handling facilities for loading and 
unloading of cargo. 
(iv) In addition to NW -1 & NW -2, NW -3 in Kerala is also a world renowned touris t 
destination for domestic and foreign tourists where house boat tourism with food and 
accommodation facilities are available. The area of operation of these boats includes 
Vembanad lake of Alapuzha, Kuttanad area and Ashtamudi lake of Kollam area in 
NW-3. 
(v)            IWAI under Ministry of Shipping provides navigational channel & assists in 
embarking/ disembarking facility to operators/ passengers. IWAI has 
engaged WAPCOS Limited for preparation of an action plan & detailed road map for 
development of river cruise tourism in India. 
19.2. In a recent initiative, sanction order of Rs 2803.05 lakh dated 19.12.2019 under the 
scheme ‘Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development” has been 
issued by ID -Division, Ministry of Tourism for deve lopment of nine main points of 
embarkation/disembarkation of river cruise on National Waterways 1 and 2 proposed to be 
executed through IWAI by March, 2021.  The tender for assignment of job is under process, 
design of jetties and amenities to be constructe d on shore has been finalised, and the 
confirmation regarding availability of suitable and sufficient land at appropriate locations 
along NW-1 and 2 is being worked out simultaneously.  
CONNECTIVITY  
Recommendation/Observation  
  

15 
 
20. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that a total amount of Rs. 225 
Crore has been earmarked for a period of three years for “Extending Incentives for 
Improving Air Connectivity” under the Champion Services Sector Scheme.  But a perusal of 
Demand No. 98 for 2020 -21 pertaining to the Ministry of Tourism reveals that an amount of 
Rs. 123.00 Crore has been allocated in BE 2020 -21 for the Scheme of Champion Services 
Sector Scheme.  Obviously, there is lack of clarity in this regard.  The Committee  would, 
therefore, like the Ministry to explain in unambiguous terms, the dichotomy in the matter.  
                   (Para 148) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
  
20.1. Recognizing the important role that services sector plays in driving India’s growth, 
the ‘Action Plan for Champion Sectors in Services’ was accorded approval by the Union 
Cabinet, whereby, it was decided to give focused attention on 12 services sectors. ‘T ourism 
and Hospitality Services’ was identified as one of the 12 Champion Services Sectors. 
Ministry of Tourism was identified as the nodal Ministry to finalize the sectoral scheme for 
‘Tourism and Hospitality Services’ under Champion Services Sectors Scheme. 
  
20.2. On 6 th September, 2019, the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) accorded 
approval to the umbrella scheme, Champion Services Sectors Scheme, and sectoral schemes 
of six Nodal Ministries including Ministry of Tourism. 
  
20.3. EFC has approved a t otal budget of Rs.535.40 Crore for implementing the following 
components of the tourism sectoral plan over a period of three years under the Champion 
Services Sectors Scheme: 
( Rs in Crore) 
Sl. No. Components of Tourism Sectoral Plan Total Cost Budget 
Allocation 
(BE2020-21) 
1. Creation of Tented Accommodation in Buddhist 
Circuit and Marketing & Promotion of these 
destinations and accommodations 
140.00 34.00 
2. Extending Incentives for Improving Air 
Connectivity 
225.00 50.00 
3. Capacity Building Programmes in & Around 
Iconic Sites [Language training of Tourist 
Facilitators] 
90.00 20.00 
4. Incentives to Tour Operators in Emerging Markets 75.00 17.00 
5. Promotion of MICE Tourism 5.40 2.00 
  Total 535.40 123.00 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  

16 
 
21. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism has signed an MoU with the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways for development of roadside amenities on 
National Highways and observes that some of the important tourist destinations in the 
country are still not connected properly.  The Committee, therefore, desires to be updated on 
the State road segments leading to important tourist destinations/circuits which have been 
identified for development by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.  The Comm ittee 
would also like to know the progress made towards developing wayside amenities on 
National Highways and the extent of private participation therein.     (Para 151) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
21.1. The Ministry of Tourism has signed an MoU with the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways for the development of roadside amenities on National Highways and accordingly 
one such projects is under implementation with collaboration with Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) viz., development of wayside amenities in the States of 
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar at Varanasi-Gaya; Lucknow -Ayodhya-Lucknow; Gorakhpur -
Kushinagar; Kushinagar- Gaya- Kushinagar. The sanctioned project cost is Rs. 17.93 Cr and 
the project is being implemented by Hindustan Prefab Limited. 
   
Recommendation/Observation  
22. The Committee also recommends setting up a core group comprising officers at the 
level of Joint Secretary of the Ministries of Civil Aviation, Culture, Road Transport & 
Highways, Shipping, Tourism and Railways to regularly coordinate on monthly basis, to 
suggest ways for connecting aspects of potential tourist spots and attracting  tourist flow in 
the country.           (Para 152) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
22.1. The Ministry of Tourism has constituted a Task Force vide Order dated 18.03.2020 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Tourism comprising officers of the level of 
Joint Secretary of the Ministries of Civil Aviation, Road Transport and Highways , Railways 
and other Ministries to look into connectivity and other important issues related to tourism. 
  
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF TOURISTS 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
23. The Committee takes note of the other measures initiated by the Ministry of Tourism 
such as a 24 7 Multi -Lingual Tourist Info -Helpline, adoption of the Code of Conduct for 
‘Safe and Honourable Tourism,” and Guidelines on Safety and Security of Tourists to ensure 
that widespread awareness on issues related to good behaviour towards tourist s, civic 
responsibilities and security and comfort of tourists, is generated.  The Committee desires to 
be apprised of the efficacy of these measures in bringing about an attitudinal change towards 
tourists.                  (Para 157) 
 


17 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
23.1. Ministry of Tourism, Govt. of India has given emphasis to sensitizing the stakeholders 
about the need/requirements  of tourists. With the help of Code of Conduct  for safe and 
honourable tourism , the stakeholders have been made to take a pledge to reiterat e their 
commitment to conduct  their business in  a befitting manner and protect  all individuals, 
especially women and children from derogatory acts which are contrary to the spirit of our 
country.  State Govts./UT Administrations have also  been requested to  put in place  Tourist 
Police and they should be sensitized and trained to the need/requirem ents of the tourists. The 
24x7 i nfo-helpline has been providing informat ion and assistance to tourists with the 
objective of facilitating them. All these measures are expected to bring in an attitudinal 
change towards the tourist. 
 
INDIA TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (ITDC) 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
24. The Committee notes that ITDC has registered a total turnover of Rs. 371.72 crore  in 
the financial year 2018 -19. It reported a profit before tax (PBT) of Rs. 57.91 crore during 
this period as compared to Rs. 21.25 crore in the corresponding period last year, clocking an 
increase of 63.30 %. It registered profit after tax (PAT) of Rs. 4 2.15 crore compared to Rs. 
17.71 crore in the previous financial year. Since one simple way to determine if a company 
has a good return on equity is to compare it to the average of its industry, the Committee 
desires to be apprised of ITDC's Return on Equi ty (ROE) and how the same compares with 
the average ROE in the hospitality sector.       (Para 171) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
24.1. ITDC's Return on Equity (ROE) for the Financial Year 2018 -19 was Rs. 5.38 in 
comparison with Rs. 3.13 for the Financial Year 2017-18. The ROE is dependent on the 
profit and financial efficiency. The ROE for 2018 -19 has improved over the previous year 
and is comparable to many hotels in the country. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
25. The Committee notes that as per the Disinvestment Policy of the Government of India, 9 
hotel properties including 3 joint venture properties have been transferred/handed over to the 
respective State Governments. The Committee observes that in modern times,  the success of 
hospitality business hinges on distribution and digital strategy. Distribution means having a wide 
portfolio of hotels - budget, mid-market, upscale, luxury, etc. - at key destinations. By transferring 
the management of these 9 hotels to St ate Governments who will run them as individual units, 
these hotels will lack the distribution strength that all the branded hotel chains - foreign or 
domestic - have been building. The Committee recommends that ITDC should reorient its strategy 
towards ma ximising the revenue by leveraging resources of its existing hotels through Public 
Private Partnership and consolidation of existing businesses.              (Para 172) 

18 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1. The hotels along with the management rights were transferred to respective State 
Governments as per the disinvestment policy of the Government of India. Managing the 
transferred hotels falls within the purview and jurisdiction of respective State Governments. 
  
25.2. In order to maximize revenue by lever aging resources of its existing hotels through 
Public Private Partnership etc., ITDC has Licensing Rules 2018 for licensing out areas on 
fixed period basis for running F&B outlets, car showrooms, shops and offices etc. in its 
hotels. All efforts are being made to strengthen other verticals of ITDC by leveraging on 
brand strengths of ITDC as a reputed brand. Strategy has been revised to reposition ITDC 
from being a hotel centric Corporation to a corporation offering one stop solution for all the 
travel, tourism and hospitality needs. This is evident from the fact that despite the impact of 
09 hotels being divested in the last 2/3 years, turnover and net profit have not gone down. 
  
25.3. Also, M/s Deloitte has been appointed by ITDC as consultant through a bidding 
process to prepare a comprehensive business plan comprising of short and long term strategy 
for the corporation. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
26. The Committee notes that the Working Group on Tourism of the 12 th Five Year Plan, 
in its Report, had suggested a number of strategies regarding development of the tourism 
sector like infrastructure, connectivity, human resource development and capacity 
augmentation, convergence among various agencies at Centre and State  level for 
development of tourism, taxation, incentives and facilitation of tourism sector etc.  The 
Committee desires to be apprised of the extent to which those recommendations have been 
taken into consideration by the Ministry while formulating its Policies and Programmes. 
              (Para 175) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
26.1. Ministry of Tourism has undertaken the following initiatives and programmes in the 
areas of infrastructure, connectivity, human  resource development, convergence among 
various agencies, taxation & facilitation for the development of tourism sector in the country: 
  
Tourism Infrastructure Development: 
 Launched the Swadesh Darshan Scheme with a vision to develop theme based tourist 
circuits. 
 Launched the National Mission on Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage 
Augmentation Drive (PRASHAD) Scheme for holistic development of identified 
pilgrimage destinations. 

19 
 
 Identified 19 Iconic Sites in the country for development by seeking convergence with 
other Central Ministries/Departments/State Governments /Urban Local Bodies. 
 Launched the Adopt a Heritage Project for development and maintenance of tourist 
amenities at heritage sites/monuments and other tourist sites. 
  
Facilitation: 
 e-Visa has been further liberalized and the visa fee has been substantially reduced. 
 Providing facility of e -Visa for 5 sub -categories i.e., e-Tourist visa, e -Business visa, 
e-Medical visa, e -Medical Attendant visa and e -Conference visa for nationals of 171 
countries. 
 Launched 24x7 toll free Multi-Lingual tourist helpline. 
 Revamped Incredible India Website for providing information on tourism sites/ 
destinations in different States/ Union Territory Administrations. The information on 
website is available in 3 international languages i.e., Arabic, Chinese and 
Spanish besides Hindi and English languages. The website translation is also being 
done in Japanese, Russian, French, German and Korean languages. 
 Lunched Buddhist website – indiathelandofbuddha.in to promote and showcase the 
rich Buddhist heritage in India. 
 New mountain peaks have been opened for mountaineering/ trekking to give boost to 
adventure tourism in the country. 
  
Human Resource Development: 
 Central Financial Assistance extended to the IHMs/FCIs/IITTM/ICI/ NCHMCT/ITIs/ 
Polytechnic Institutes/Universities/Govt. Colleges/Govt. Vocational Schools/PSUs 
etc. 
 Undertakes Capacity Building for Service Providers through Hunar Se Rozgar Tak, 
Skill Testing & Certification, Entrepreneurship, Linguistic Tourist Facilitator, 
Adventure Tourism Courses, etc. Programmes. 
 Launched the Incredible India Tourist Facilitators (IITF) certification programme, a 
Pan-India online learning program that is open to all, subject to fulfilment of 
eligibility criteria, and can be undertaken from anywhere in the country. The 
programme aims at creating a pool of trained professionals for f acilitating the visit of 
tourists at destinations across the country. There are two categories of IITF 
certification programme i.e., Basic & Advanced (Heritage & Adventure) with an 
optional specialization programme of fluency in spoken foreign language oth er than 
English. 
  
Connectivity: 
 Ministry of Tourism, in consultation with stakeholders had forwarded a list of 
important tourist destinations, to Ministry of Civil Aviation for augmenting air 
connectivity. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has approved 46 to urism routes for 
inclusion under RCS -UDAN-3. Out of these 46 routes, 16 routes have been made 
operational. 

20 
 
 Ministry of Tourism has submitted a list of 50 tourism destinations to the Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways for improvement of road connectivity  in the first phase. 
In addition, MoRTH has also been requested for setting up of Wayside Amenities, 
prominent signages and beautification of the area, at a distance of 15 -20 Km on either 
side of the tourist destination where good road connectivity already exists. The States/ 
Union Territories have been requested to identify important tourism destinations 
requiring improved and efficient road connectivity or development of wayside 
amenities for taking up with the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways in the  
second phase. 
 Ministry of Tourism under the Swadesh Darshan and PRASHAD Schemes is 
providing last mile connectivity to improve accessibility to the destinations/ facilities 
being created as part of the projects sanctioned under the above schemes which 
include developing/improving approach road, nature trails, construction of helipads, 
river cruises, jetties, ropeways, passenger sheds, illumination, etc. Out of the 75 
Projects sanctioned under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, a total of Rs. 22,471 Lakh 
has been provided for the improvement of accessibility at 177 sites across the 
country. Under the PRASHAD Scheme, last mile connectivity has been provided in 
all the 30 projects sanctioned under the scheme. 
  
Convergence: 
 The Inter -Ministerial Coordination Committe e on Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) 
constituted under the chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary facilitates resolution of 
Inter- Ministerial issues involved in the development of tourism in the country. 
 Ministry of Tourism organizes State Tourism Ministers Confer ence for development 
of tourism sector in the country. The last State Tourism Ministers Conference was 
held on 20 th August 2019 at Ashok Hotel, New Delhi. Various issues pertaining to 
implementation of projects and developing synergy, etc.   were taken up i n the 
Conference. 
 Ministry of Tourism has constituted the National Tourism Advisory Council which 
acts as a ‘Think Tank’ of the Ministry and advises the Ministry on various policy 
matters relating to tourism. 
 Ministry of Tourism holds consultations with st akeholders from time to time to take 
suggestions/inputs on case to case basis. 
 
Taxation:  
 Lowering of GST on hotels rooms with tariffs of  ₹1,001 to ₹7,500/night to 12% and 
for ₹7,501 & above to 18%. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
  
27. The Committee feels that each State Government has a responsibility to identify and 
reserve suitable Government land for development of potential tourist locations and the land 
so reserved should not be used for any other purposes than for constructing hot els, shopping 
complexes, etc.  The Central Government should also play a pivotal role in this regard. 

21 
 
Central Ministries may also be advised to explore the possibility of identifying and reserving 
idle land for development of tourist locations.       (Para 176) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
27.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
Recommendation/Observation   
28. In order to promote tourism, the Committee would like the Ministry to act as a 
catalyst for building more amusement/theme parks on the lines of the Essel World, Mumbai 
and Disneyland, California.  In the coming years, such parks may be built in big metropolitan 
cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and funds should be earmarked for the purpose.  
            (Para 177) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
 
28.1. The recommendation of the C ommittee has been noted.  In pursu ant to the b udget 
announcement 2017-18, Ministry of Tourism intends to develop five Special Tourism Zones 
(STZs) across the country. The scheme is conceived to develop Special Tourism Zones on the 
similar lines of the smart cities challenge  whereby the Ministry of Tourism will be the 
funding agency for basic infrastructure and the respective State Government s shall contribute 
equity in the form of land. It is expected that establishment of these zones shall trigger a high 
level of competitiveness between the states and also between the r egions within the states. 
The process will foster new thinking and new ideas. Ministry of Tourism has also carried out 
the feasibility analysis for development of STZs in the country. Ministry has also engaged 
consultant M/s IDeck for undertaking the feasibility assessment of the scheme. 
  
28.2. Also, the guidelines f or Viability Gap Funding (VGF) is under revision, and after its 
finalization, proposals will  be taken up for consideration as per the provisions made in the 
guidelines. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
  
29. The Committee notes from the information furnished, that our country has targeted to 
increase its share in global tourist arrivals from the current 1.24% to 3% and double the number 
of domestic tourist visits from the current 1854.9 million to 3200 million visits.  If these ambitious 
targets are to be met, the country has to create appropriate employable skill in the population and 
also reduce the skill-gap.  The State Governments are major stakeholders in human resourc e and 
skill development.  The Committee would, therefore, recommen ds that the Ministry in co -
ordination with the State Governments should formulate a multipronged approach to bridge the 
skill gap in the tourism sector and should also launch a programme to upgrade the skills of the 
existing tourist service providers.                    (Para 179) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
 

22 
 
29.1. The Ministry of Tourism has initiated Destination Based Skill Development Training 
Programme at various iconic sties at Pan India level. The Ministry has projected a total target 
of 30,000 persons to be trained at 150 destinations under the scheme of Capacity Building for 
Service Providers (CBSP). The Ministry of Tourism has also invited applications from 
private institutions / organ izations for empanelment as implementing agencies for delivering 
skill development programs.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
30. The Committee notes that there is lack of reasonably priced accommodation near the 
tourist destinations in the country. Expensive  accommodation is a big deterrent not only for 
international tourists, but also for domestic tourists. The Committee would, therefore, like the 
Ministry to take up with the State Governments, the issue of promotion of Home Stays and 
earmark funds for the s ame so that the widening gap between supply and demand of the 
accommodation sector could be easily bridged.                (Para 181) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
30.1. The Ministry of Tourism conducts sensitization workshops for promotion of home 
stays/Incredible India Bed & Breakfast Establishments, in all States, through its domestic 
offices. This is an ongoing process. 
  
30.2. The Ministry of Tourism also conducts workshops for property owners to encourage 
them to get their properties accredited  under the Ministry of Tourism’s  Incredible India Bed 
& Breakfast / Home Stay scheme, so as to standardize these accommodation units, for 
international acceptance. 
  
30.3. With a view to encourage  Bed and Breakfast / Homestay establishments and also 
 simplifying the procedure of approvals,  the Ministry of Tourism has formulated the revised 
guidelines for classification and re -classification of Incredible India Bed and Breakfast 
Establishments and Incredible India Homestay Establishments, which were  notified on 
10.12.2018. These guidelines  constitute Common National Standards, which each State/ 
Union Territory may adapt to their requirements, while keeping the core tenets intact.   States/ 
UTs are free to build upon and introduce suitable parameters/ criteri a over and above the 
Common National Standards. 
  
30.4. The Ministry of Tourism is continuing to classify B&B/ Homestay establishments in 
all States/ UTs till such time the respective States/ UTs put in place their own mechanism for 
such classification, ba sed on the Common National Standards. The process of classification 
has been digitized and applications and fees thereof are now accepted and processed on the 
online platform (http://hotelcloud.nic.in) for time -bound compliance and speedy disposal of 
applications. 
  
30.5. The Ministry of Tourism, vide letter dated 09.01.2018,  requested State 
Governments/UT Administrations,   to give due weightage to development of mid segment 

23 
 
hotels which typically will fall in 3 Star and 4 Star categories, while earmarking/ auctioning 
of land for developing hotels. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
31. The Committee observes that cruise tourism in India is a niche product to promote 
and attracts tourists with specific interest. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry 
of Tourism to work in coordination with Ministry of Shipping towards establishing dedicated 
cruise terminals at all the Major Ports and also private Ports in the country. (Para 183) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
31.1. Ministry of Tourism is working in coordination with Ministry of Shipping towards 
establishing dedicated cruise terminals at all the Major Ports including private Ports in the 
country. The details of projects sanctioned for Cruise Terminals are as under. 
 The List of approved Cruise Tourism projects under scheme for Assistance to Central 
Agency:- 
(Rs. in Lakh) 
Year States Name of Projects Agency Amount 
 sanctioned 
Amount 
released 
2012-
13 
Tamil Nadu Cruise Passenger 
Facilities Centre in the 
existing Passenger 
Terminal at Chennai 
Port. 
Chennai Port 
Trust 
1724.66 1724.66 
2012-
13 
Kerala Dev. of dedicated cruise 
berthing facilities at 
Cochin Port 
Cochin Port 2243.32 2138.92 
2014-
15 
Goa Cruise Terminal 
Building at Mormugao 
Port Trust 
Mormugao Port 
trust 
879.04 767.187 
2016-
17 
Kerala Development of a 
Walkway/Promenade on 
Willington Island, 
Cochin, Kerala 
Cochin Port Trust 901.00 720.30 
 2016-
17 
Kerala Central Financial 
Assistance for upgrading 
of Births & Backup area 
of Ernakulam Wharf 
Cochin Port Trust 2141.00 1712.80 
 2016-
17 
Maharashtra Central Financial 
Assistance to Mumbai 
Port Trust for 
Development of Kanoji 
Angre Lighthouse as a 
Mumbai Port trust 1500.00 1500.00 

24 
 
tourist Destination 
2017-
18 
Maharashtra Up-
gradation/modernization 
to International Cruise 
terminal at Indira Dock, 
Mumbai.  
Mumbai Port 
Trust  
1250.00 1250.00 
2018-
19 
Goa Improvement of 
immigration facility and 
deepening of existing 
cruise berth at 
Mormugao  
Mormugao Port 
trust 
1316.40 658.20 
 2018-
19 
Kerala 
  
 Developing 
infrastructure at Cochin 
Port Cruise Terminal. 
Cochin Port Trust 120. 79 60.39 
 2018-
19 
Kerala 
  
Creation of additional 
tourism facilities at the 
Cochin Port Trust 
Walkway 
Cochin Port Trust 466.47   233.23 
2018-
19 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Construction of Cruise 
cum Cargo at Channel 
berth area in Outer 
Harbour of of 
Viakhapatnam 
Visakhapatnam 
Port Trust 
3850.00 1925.00 
2019-
20 
Kerala CFA for Development 
of Additional 
infrastructure in the new 
Cochin Port Trust 
Terminal 
Cochin Port Trust 1029.70 514.85 
  
31.2. Rural Tourism Circuit project approved under Swadesh Darshan Scheme is :- 
(Rs. in Crore) 
2018-19 Kerala 
  
Development of Malanad Malabar Cruise 
Tourism Project 
-- 80.37 0.00 
            
31.3. The matter will likely to be taken up in the forthcoming Joint Task Force meeting on 
cruise tourism with Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Sh ipping in order to plan the 
strategy in this regards. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
32. The Roads and Highway networks play an important role in tourism and also in the 
growth of Indian economy. The Committee is aware that the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways had taken up detailed review of National Highways network with a view to impr ove 

25 
 
the road connectivity to tourist places. The Committee desires to be apprised of the progress 
made so far in this regard.                      (Para 184) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
32.1. The Ministry of Tourism has submitted a list of 50 tourism destinations to the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways for improvement of Road Connectivity in the first 
phase. Where good road connectivity already exists, it has been requested that setting up  of 
wayside amenities, prominent signages and beautification of the area, at a distance of 15 -20 
km. on either side of the tourist destination may be considered. The Ministry has also 
requested States / Union Territories to  identify other important tourism destinations requiring 
improved and efficient road connectivity  or development of wayside amenities, which could 
be taken up with the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways in the second phase. Progress 
in work in respect of the 50 identified tourism desti nations is being followed up with the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
33. The Committee recommends that under the PRASHAD, the Ministry should develop a 
dedicated thoroughfare for use by pedestrians visiting Srisailam . The Araku Valley and 
Lambasingi in Visakhapatnam have great tourism significance and should be developed as 
tourist spots.                   (Para 185)  
Reply of the Ministry 
  
33.1. At present two projects viz., ‘Development of Amaravati  town, Guntur district as a 
tourist destination’ at the cost of Rs. 28.36 Crores and ‘Development of Srisailam temple at 
the cost of Rs. 47.45 Crores have been approved’ in the years 2015 -16 and 2017 -18 
respectively.  The Amaravati project is complete in all respect. Physical progress in Srisailam 
project is also more than 80% which could have been completed but for the reasons of 
lockdown @ Covid.  However, observations of the Committee have been noted. In case, the 
State Government of Andhra Pradesh sends  request to include any of said destinations under 
the scheme, the same would be considered appropriately. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
34. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministries of Civil Aviation, Shipping, Road 
Transport &  Highways, Culture, Tourism and Railways  are not only inter -related and 
interconnected but also have a common objective to improve connectivity and better 
amenities for the benefit of tourists, travellers and faster movement of freight within the 
country. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is a pressing need for having an effective 
co-ordination mechanism among these Ministries so that the policies and guidelines being 
formulated by them are executed seamlessly and can supplement each other in achi eving 
these objectives. This will not only increase effectiveness and efficiency, but will also help in 
utilization of funds and skilled manpower to the maximum possible extent. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that an easy-to-use interface should be made available which allows 

26 
 
hassle-free communication and co -ordination amongst them. A hotline number which is 
common to all these Ministries, may be established so that whenever emergency arises, there 
can be effective and prompt coordination among these M inistries and issues in hand can be 
resolved at the earliest.               (Para 186) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
34.1. The Ministry of Tourism has constituted a Task Force vide Order dated 18.03.2020, 
under the chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Tourism comprising senior officers of the 
Ministries of Civil Aviation, Road Transport and Highways, Railways and other Ministries, 
to look into connectivity and other important issues related to tourism. This is in addition to 
the existing mechanism of IMCCTS, wh ich is chaired by Cabinet Secretary, in order to sort 
out the inter-Ministerial issues. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
35. Since religious tourism is an important segment of domestic tourism, the Committee 
recommends that Kolanu Bharati Saraswati Temple, Mahanandi, Ahobilam, Yaganti Uma 
Maheshwar Temple, Veera Brahman Gaari Matham, Kadapa District, Andhra Pradesh 
should be developed under Spiritual Circ uit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme. The Committee 
also recommends that Mantralayam Raghavendra Swamy Varri Tem ple, Tumblam Jain and 
Ram Temple and Urukunda Eeranna Temple (Sri Narasimha Eranna Swamy Temple) and 
Jagannatha Gattu temple in Kurnool District, Andhra Pradesh should be developed under 
PRASHAD Scheme.                   (Para 188) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
  
35.1. At present two projects viz., ‘Development of Amaravati  town, Guntur d istrict as a 
tourist destination’ at the cost of Rs. 28.36 Crores  and ‘Development of Srisailam t emple at 
the cost of Rs. 47.45 Crores  have been approved’ in the years 2015 -16 and 2017 -18 
respectively.  The Amaravati project is complete in all respect. Physical progress in Srisailam 
project is also more than 80% which could have been completed but for the reasons of 
lockdown @ Covid.  However, observations of the Committee have been noted. In case , the 
State Government of Andhra Pradesh sends request to include any of said destinations under 
the scheme, the same would be considered appropriately. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
36. The Committee has come to know that the State Government of Telangana has sent a 
proposal for development of Alampur - Jagulambha Temple, which is one of the Shakti 
Peethams, located in Telangana. For this, the Committee recommends that Telangana's 
proposal should be considered promptly and that the above scheme should be included for its 
development under PRASHAD Scheme.        (Para 189) 
 Reply of the Ministry 

27 
 
  
36.1. In the concept meeting held on 22.09.2019, "in-principle" approval for the project was 
granted.  Further, in the meeting of the Mission Directorate held on 20.02.2020, the project 
was cleared.  As further course of action, Department of Tourism of the State Government 
has to submit revised Draft DPR for the project for consideration in the m eeting of Central 
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC).   The project will be placed before the 
CSMC after receipt of the draft DPR. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
  
37. The Committee notes that an allocation of Rs. 450 Crore  has been made in BE 2020 -
21 under the Scheme of Overseas Promotion and - Publicity for promotion of Indian tourism 
in overseas source markets.  The Committee recommends that an audit may be carried out to 
assess the efficacy of expenditure in promoting to urism in overseas source market and it 
should be ensured that value from money is derived from the money spent under the above 
head.                                    (Para 190) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
37.1. An amount of Rs. 450.00 Crore  has been allocated under the OPMD Scheme in B.E. 
2020-21,of which Rs. 440.00 Crore has been allocated for Advertising & Publicity for 
activities under Global Media Plan, promotional activities through the India Tourism Offices 
overseas, Head Quarters and Marketing Development Assistance. The expenditure incurred 
under the above is audited by the external and internal audit on a regular basis. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
  
38. The Committee also recommends inclusion of Srirangapatna, Melukote, Mandya  
District (Karnataka) for inclusion and development under the PRASHAD Scheme.  (Para 193) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1. In consultation with the State Government of Karnataka, Chamundeshwari Temple 
has been identified for selection for development of pilgrimage tourism infrastructure under 
PRASHAD Scheme.   The project submitted by the State Government is under active 
consideration.  Further, recommendations of the C ommittee have been noted. In case , the 
State Government of Karnataka submits to include any of said destinations under the scheme, 
the same would be considered appropriately. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
  
39. The Committee observes that to overcome the aspect of seasonality and promote 
India as a 365 -days tourism destination, it is necessary that the potential of adventure 
tourism is harnessed fully.  To give a fillip to the growth of adventure tourism, it is i mportant 
that adventure tourism activities like paragliding, parasailing, aero -sports including skydive 
etc. are encouraged.  The Committee is, however, constrained to note that no dedicated 

28 
 
budgetary provision has been made in BE 2020 -21 of the Ministry f or promotion of the 
abovesaid activities.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that sufficient outlay be 
earmarked for the adventure tourism activities including paragliding, parasailing, aero 
sports etc.            (Para 195) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
39.1. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  The matter 
would be taken up in the Forthcoming Task Force Meeting on adventure tourism in order to 
plan the strategies in this regards. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2020-21 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
1. The Committee takes note of the fact that the annual growth rate of the Tourism 
Sector in India is 5.2% and its contribution to GDP is 5.06%. According to UN World 
Tourism Organisation Report (2011), for diversified economies, the contribution of tourism 
to national GDP is over 10% for countries where tourism happe ns to be the main driver of 
national economy. Quite apparently, despite having a strong domestic tourist base which is 
likely to grow further on the back of a rapidly rising middle class with increased disposable 
incomes and having many World Heritage sites and rich fauna, our country has not been able 
to exploit its tourism potential to the fullest possible extent and the tourist sector has not 
proved to be the proverbial engine of growth for our economy. For a country of our size, with 
wealth of attractions and experiences, this underperformance represents significant foregone 
economic value. Since tourism in the country has the potential to emerge as a key economic 
driver through economic growth and employment generation, the country can make a giant 
leap towards achieving 5 trillion dollar economy by tapping the enormous potential of the 
tourism sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the strategies adopted for 
promotion and development of the tourist sector should be recalibrated to harness the  full 
potential of Indian tourism and double the current contribution of tourism to GDP in the next 
5 years. The Committee would like the Ministry to prepare a vision document, chalking out a 
road map for accelerating the expansion of the tourism sector an d helping achieve a 5 
trillion dollar economy by 2025 by way of a substantial contribution from the tourism sector. 
The Committee, therefore, desires that policy measures may be initiated by the Ministry to 
accelerate the growth momentum of the tourism sec tor and raise the contribution of tourism 
from the current 5.06% to 10% of GDP.         (Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
1.1. Tourism is a rapidly evolving industry that has become increasingly competitive in 
the global arena. It is gaining universal acce ptance as an engine of economic growth and has 
forward and backward linkages with other sectors and ability to create more employment 
opportunities for the disadvantaged sections of the society. In order to realize the full 
potential of the tourism sector,  Ministry of Tourism formulates policies for infrastructure 
development, product development, human resource development, publicity & promotion, 
regulation, research, analysis, monitoring and evaluation, etc. State Governments and the 
private sector act as  the main spring of activities and provide the necessary dynamism and 
speed for implementation of these policies/ schemes to enable the growth and development of 
tourism sector in India. 

30 
 
  
1.2. The role for the development of the tourism sector has been further expanded with the 
Government of India articulating a vision of India becoming a $5 Trillion economy by 2024 -
25, to give a sharper focus to higher economic growth.   The Sectoral Group of Se cretaries 
(SGoS) - Group 7 on Economy which is represented by 12 Ministries/ Departments including 
Ministry of Tourism has adopted the above vision and has formulated development plans for 
different sectors including tourism. 
  
1.3. The SGoS Tourism Sector al Plan aims at several interventions over a period of 5 
years to enhance the visitor experience for increasing the number of foreign and domestic 
tourists and includes the following action points:- 
  
  Developing Buddhist Tourist Circuit 
  Tented accommodation at Buddhist sites (CSSS-Tourism & Hospitality Services) 
  Development of Iconic Tourist Sites 
  Development of infrastructure at Buddhist sites attempt to link Buddhist Circuit with 
Golf Tourism 
  Promote Buddhist heritage in Far East and South East Asian Markets Launch of 
localised campaigns across platforms for promotion of Buddhist sites (CSSS -
Tourism and Hospitality Services) 
  Information related to various places, tourist packages and activities of interest to 
tourists on Incredible India Website 
  Effective use of Television and Social Media to promote tourism 
  Develop and promote lesser known tourist spots 
  Identify countries from which not a single tourist is coming to India 
  Organize various events and programmes involving foreign participation at Statue of 
Unity 
  Development of wayside amenities 
  Incentive to foreign tour operators (CSSS-Tourism & Hospitality Services) 
  Incentives for improving Air Connectivity (CSSS -Tourism & Hospitality Services) 
  Improving the benchmark of India in the Global Competitive Index as a tourism 
destination 
  Development of cruise tourism along the coast and particularly Andaman & Nicobar 
and Lakshadweep 
  Tourism for different segments e.g. beach, medical, wedding tourism etc. 
  Development of Infrastructure- Artha Ganga 
  Rail connectivity - Introduction of tourist trains connecting pilgrimage sites and 
upgradation of railway stations within the pilgrimage circuits. 
  Air Connectivity- Development of airport at 20 tourist destinations 
International air connectivity to Buddhist Circuit and North East from South East 
Asia. 
Introduction of flights to Buddhist sites under RCS- UDAN scheme 

31 
 
Helicopter services to hilly areas and destinations in North East Region. 
Air connectivity to underused and unused airports to take tourism to the remotest 
corners of the country. 
Customs/ Immigration facilities to enable greater presence of international flights at 
airports located in tourist destinations. 
  Skill Development – Destination Level Skill Development 
Tourist Facilitator Certification (TFC) Programme 
  A facility of GST card to lessen the burden of GST to attract tourists 
 
INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF TOURIST CIRCUITS AROUND SPECIFIC 
THEMES (SWADESH DARSHAN) 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee is constrained  to observe that under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
(SDS), out of the 77 projects sanctioned so far for Rs. 6035.70 Crore, only 9 Projects have 
reached their logical conclusion and the remaining projects have witnessed physi cal 
progress ranging from 50% to 90% and 10 projects have not even  taken off due to non -
release of funds. The Committee also notes that no new projects have been sanctioned during 
2019-20, though the Ministry has not adduced any reasons for this.  The Com mittee further 
notes with serious concern that against the sanctioned provision of Rs. 6035.70 Crore under 
the SDS, only Rs. 3744.00 crore have so far been released.  It is a matter of anguish for the 
Committee that such substantial variations have occurre d between the sanctioned provisions 
and the actual release and expenditure.  Obviously, these instances betray absence of a sound 
budgetary mechanism for assessing the actual requirements of funds.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry sh ould address this issue squarely and devise a 
foolproof mechanism to overcome the deficiencies in the existing system of assessing the 
requirement of funds under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme.       (Para 56) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
  2.1. Out of the earlier 77 projects sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan Scheme, 1 project 
has been dropped.  
2.2. The total capital outlay for the Circuits / Projects comes to Rs5848 crores (as on 
31st July, 2020) out of which Rs. 4089.37 crores (as on 31 st July, 2020) have been released 
by the Ministry of Tourism to the respective States / Union Territories for the 
implementation of the projects. 
2.3. The total capital outlay as on date for the Circuits / Projects comes  to Rs. 5865 
crores out of which Rs. 3877 cr ores have been released till 31 st May, 2020 by the Ministry 
of Tourism to the respective States / Union Territories for the implementation of the 
projects. The funding pattern for the projects sanctioned upto October, 2017 is as follows:- 
 
 

32 
 
S. 
No Instalment Amount to be released Condition 
1. 1st 20% of the sanctioned cost of 
the project 
On sanction of the project 
2. 2nd 30% of  the sanctioned cost  of 
the project  minus 
unutilized amount of 1st 
instalment 
After utilization of minimum 75% of 
the first instalment and submission of 
UC in the prescribed format 
3. 3rd 30% of  the sanctioned cost  of 
the project  minus 
unutilized amount of 2nd 
instalment 
After utilization of 100% of 1st 
instalment and minimum 75% of the 
second instalment and submission of 
UC in the prescribed format 
4. 4th 15% of  the sanctioned cost  o 
the project  minus 
unutilized amount of 3rd 
instalment 
After utilization of 100% of 1st and 
2nd instalment and minimum 75% of 
the third instalment and submission of 
UC in the prescribed format 
5 Physical 
Completion 
of          the 
Project 
No release of 
funds.                 Milestone for 
100%physicalcompletion 
of the project 
Certificate of 100% physical 
completion of the project from 
Implementing Agency countersigned 
by Administrative Secretary. UC of 
the amount released so far to be 
submitted in the prescribed format. 
Final project cost to be frozen. Excess 
amount, if any, to be refunded to the 
Ministry. 
6. 5th 5%          of                the 
sanctioned cost 
After successful O&M of Toilet TFC, 
Cafeteria facilities for one year as 
certified by an independent agency. 
7. Final 
Closure of 
the Project 
No release of 
funds.                 Milestone for 
final closure of the project 
Final Utilization Certificate of funds 
released to the Implementing Agency 
to be submitted and project closed by 
the Ministry 
  
2.4. The funding pattern for the projects sanctioned since November, 2017 is as follows: 
  
S. 
No Instalment Amount to be released 
1. 1st 30% of the project cost on submission of work orders, Good for 
construction DPR with GFC statuary approvals from respective 
agencies for construction initiation and detailed BOQs 

33 
 
2. 2nd 30% of the project cost after receipt of utilization certificate for the 
first instalment 
3. 3rd 25% of the project cost after receipt of utilization certificate for the 
second instalment 
4. 4th 10% of the project cost on completion of the work and receipt of 
utilization certificate. 
5 5th 5% of the project cost after successful O&M of Toilet, TFC and 
Cafeteria facilities for one year as certified by an independent agency. 
 
2.5. Implementing agencies can approach the Ministry of Tourism for release of next 
instalment of fund after submission of UC for 75% of released funds. 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON PILGRIM AGE REJUVENATION AND HERITAGE 
AUGMENTATION DRIVE (PRASHAD) 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
3. The Committee feels constrained to note that since its launch in January, 2015, the 
accumulated amount released for all the sanctioned projects under the PRASHAD is Rs. 
505.15 Crore against the sanctioned 28 Projects for Rs. 840.20 Crore.  Out of these 28 
approved projects, only two projects, viz, Development of Karuna Sagar Valmiki Sthal at 
Amritsar approved in the year 2015 at the cost of Rs. 6.45 Crore and Construction of Tourist 
Facilitation Centre at Vrindavan, Mathura approved in the year 2014 -15 at t he cost of Rs. 
9.36 Crore have been completed.              (Para 74) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. During the recent past, more thrust has been given for completion of the ongoing 
projects rather to approve new project under the scheme.   At present total 9 projects are 
complete under PRASHAD Scheme .  Seven more projects would have been completed but 
for the current situation @ covid -19.  The number of approved projects has gone to 30 with 
total sanctioned project cost of 918.86 crores with total release of R s. 530 crore 
approximately. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
4. The Committee is constrained to note nil progress in respect of four PRASHAD 
Projects, namely, (i) Development of Omkareshwar,  (ii) Cruise tourism in river Ganga  
(Varanasi), (iii) Development of Varanasi II and (iv) Development of Trimbakeshwar (Nasik) 
during the year 2017 -18. The Committee is further constrained to note that the reasons 
behind the lack of progress in implementing them were the deficiencies in project formulation 
and delay in obtaining all required clearances.  It is obvious that the efforts of the Ministry 
towards operationalization of the above projects have been undertaken in a piecemeal 
manner.  Though the Ministry has informed the Committee th at appropriate corrective 
measures have been taken to eradicate the deficiencies in project formulation and obtain all 

34 
 
necessary approvals, the Committee desires that the Ministry should regularly monitor the 
progress of the above projects at higher levels , particularly so, as it relates to the creation of 
tourist infrastructure.           (Para 76)  
Reply of the Ministry 
  
4.1. As replied in Para 74  of the Action Taken Note above, during the recent past more 
thrust has been given for completion of the ongoing projects rather to approve new project 
under the scheme.  At present total 8 projects are complete under PRASHAD Scheme.  Seven 
more projects would have been completed but for the current situation @ Covid -19.  As 
regards project viz., development of Omkareshwa, after initial delay in execution of project 
due to excavation of ancient structure below the temple, the progress has been accelerated 
considerably and it is more than 50% at present. Initial delay in cruise tourism project in 
Varanasi was there in awarding of work for manufacturing of cruise boat.   Now the project is 
complete up to 95%, which could have been completed but for the lockdown.   After initial 
delay in start of execution for the reasons for revision in the project, execution of Va ranasi – 
II Project has also been speeded up and at present it is more than 40%.   As regards project 
viz., development of Trimbakeshwar, the project has been reviewed in Jan, 2020 and all the 
components of execution of which could not be started for want o f approvals/ NOCs from 
various authorities, have been proposed for removal and complete the project at the earliest.   
Review of the projects is being given special thrust by the Ministry of Tourism to ensure 
timely completion of the projects. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee notes that against the sanctioned outlay of Rs. 840.02 Crore under the 
PRASHAD, a total of Rs. 505.15 Crore  has been released.  The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the variations, if any, between the sanctioned provision and the actual 
expenditure incurred under the PRASHAD.          (Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
5.1. The approved project viz., development of Karuna Sagar Valmiki Sthal at Amritsar  in 
the year 2015 at the cost of Rs. 6.45 Crore has been successfully completed with the actual 
cost of Rs. 6.40 crores without any deviations in the components.  The approved project in 
the year 2014-15 viz., construction of Tourist Facilitation Centre at Vrindavan, Mathura at the 
cost of Rs. 9.36 Crore has been completed within the approved cost with no deviations.   All 
other six projects have been completed within the approved cost as per approved plans except 
the projects ‘Development of Patna Sahib’ and ‘Development of Mathura-Vrindavan as Mega 
Tourist Circuit’ where deviations of minor nature in the locations and costs have been 
noticed.  Actual quantum of deviations in the cost will be available on receipt of related 
documents from the respective State Governments. 
 
DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKET 
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
 

35 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee is pleased to note that during 2018, domestic tourist visits registered a 
growth of 11.91% over the previous year. Promotion and Publicity not only keeps the 
heritage alive, but also contributes to the economy of the nation. The Committee feels that 
there is a need for targeted intervention, whereby, Domestic Promotion and Publi city is 
provided with more funds for promotional expenditure.        (Para 86) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
6.1. The Budget Estimates (B.E.) for Domestic Promotion and Publicity including 
Hospitality (DPPH ) for Financial Year 2020 -21 is Rs. 140.00 crore  as against Rs. 129.50 
crore in 2019-20 . 
 
6.2. As it is believed that post lockdown domestic tourism will be the first to take off once 
the situation improves and travel is resumed. The Ministry of Tourism has drawn out an 
action plan for promoti ng Domestic Tourism under over all theme of ‘Dekho Apna Desh’. 
The Ministry is in the process of developing a distinct logo for Dekho Apna Desh and also 
launching advertisement campaigns in the domestic markets. This would also include social 
awareness campaig n on social distancing and travel safety. The objective is to beat the 
lockdown fatigues, promoting lesser known destinations, those regions that have been 
unaffected or less effected by COVID -19, promoting visits to wilderness and off beat 
locations throu gh driving holidays and facets of responsible consumption viz., responsible 
tourism. 
  
6.3. Social Awareness campaign  - Developing radio jingles on hygiene, social distancing 
during travel and launch of nationwide radio campaign are planned. The objective is to instil 
a sense of confidence in people feeling safe and secure venturing out once more. 
 
OVERSEAS PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKET DEVELOPMENT 
ASSISTANCE 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
  
7. The Committee observes that if India’s share in global international tourists arrivals 
is to be increased to 3% as suggested by the NITI Aayog, brand India will have to be 
promoted and marketed overseas aggressively.  It is in this context that the Committ ee 
deprecates the Ministry of Finance for reducing the budgetary allocation to Rs. 312.39 Crore 
at the RE 2019 -20 stage.  The Committee desires that instead of resorting to budgetary cut 
exercise under the Scheme – Overseas Promotion and Marketing includin g Marketing 
Development Assistance, the Ministry of Finance should focus on quality of marketing and 
publicity expenditure under the above Scheme.         (Para 99) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  

36 
 
7.1. The decision to reduce the overall budgetary allocation of the  Ministry of Tourism is 
taken by the Ministry of Finance. During the financial year 2019 -20,the budget allocated at 
R.E. 2019 -20 under the scheme of Overseas Promotion and Publicity including Marketing 
Development Assistance (OPMD) was Rs. 312.39 crore. Th e said fund was reallocated for 
judicious utilisation under the Global Media Plan, by the India Tourism Offices overseas and 
Marketing Development Assistance. 
    
Recommendation/Observation 
  
8. The Committee takes note of the fact that the allocation for the Overseas Promotion 
and Marketing has been increased to Rs. 450.00 Crore in BE 2020 -21 and that the Ministry 
proposes to undertake a number of promotional activities for promotion of our count ry's 
tourism.  The Committee observes that the presence of India tourism offices in key source 
markets is critical to promote India as a tourist destination.  As of now, the Ministry has 08 
overseas offices for promotion of Indian tourism abroad.  The Comm ittee is of the view that 
the Ministry should evaluate the size and strength of overseas offices with a view to 
expanding them in the established and potential markets which increasingly contribute to 
global traffic and where there is no presence of Indian  overseas offices.  The Committee 
desires to be kept apprised of the action taken in this regard.     (Para 100) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
8.1. The Ministry of Tourism restructured its overseas offices on the directions of the 
Government and consolidated its  14 overseas India Tourism offices into 8 overseas India 
Tourism offices. These offices are located to function as global marketing hubs to cover 
various important source markets. In addition, the Ministry has also initiated the process for 
appointment of Tourism Management Agencies in identified markets  to supplement the 
efforts of the ITOs overseas and assist them for wider and effective marketing of India and its 
varied tourism products. 
 
TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation/Observation   
9. India faces huge deficit in quality human resources. The Scheme – Assistance to 
IHMs/FCIs/IITTM/NIWS has been formulated to expand and upgrade existing Institutes of 
Hotel Management/Food Craft Institutes, Indian Institutes of Tourism & Travel 
Management, National Council for Hospitality and Travel Management and also to set up 
such new institutes to meet the requirements of trained manpower in the tourism and 
hospitality industry.  As of now, 46 Institutes of Hotel Management and 14 Food Crafts 
Institutes have been set up with the support of the Ministry and one Central IHM at 
Jagdishpur, Uttar Pradesh is under construction. Against the budgetary provision of Rs. 
61.00 Crore in RE 2019 -20, an amount of Rs. 49.02 Crore has been incurred as on 
07/02/2020 under this Scheme.  The Committee apprehends that the budgeted funds would 
witness under -utilization which may have a bearing on creating and upgrading the 

37 
 
institutional infrastructure for training and certification of manpower resources in the 
hospitality sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that concerted efforts be made to 
spend the allotted money.          (Para 118) 
Reply of the Ministry  
 
9.1. During the financial year 2019 -20 under the Scheme “Assistance to 
IHMs/FCIs/NCHMCT/IITTM etc.” allocation of fund at RE stage was Rs. 56.89 Cr. and the 
allocated fund was released by the end of the financial year i.e., 31.03.2020. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee notes that the Scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers is 
being implemented by the Ministry of Tourism through Institutes of Hotel Management, Food 
Craft Institutes, State Governments and their training/ academic institution s and other 
stakeholders in the private sector engaged in imparting training in the hospitality sector.  The 
Committee is of the view that CBSP, as conceived, may be unwieldy in ensuring co -
ordination which has led to under -achievement of its targets.  It would, therefore, be 
necessary to have a formalized central coordination structure for ensuring a well -focused 
approach to the skill development initiatives under CBSP.      (Para 122) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
10.1. The Scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers (CBSP) of the Ministry of 
Tourism is Central Sector Scheme and is  monitored centrally. The various stakeholders 
imparting education under the Hospitality related skill development are under the mentorsh ip 
and monitoring of Ministry of Tourism’s own Central Institutes of Hotel Management. 
However, Ministry is acceptive for improvement of delivery mechanism of the scheme. 
 
CRUISE TOURISM 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee observes that Cruise Shipping is one of the fastest growing 
components of the leisure industry world -wide.  The Indian economy is developing at a 
steady pace and became the fifth largest economy in 2019 surpassing the U.K. and France 
(as per IMF’s October 2019 World Economic Outlook).  India’s middle class possessing 
disposal incomes is also growing in number. Despite all these advantages, cruise tourism in 
India is still in its nascent stage and India does not even figure in the top ten in As ia in terms 
of Cruise line port calls.  India has a mere 285 cruise calls in FY 2018 -19 whereas Thailand 
and Malaysia get about 500 cruise calls a year.  The fact remains that India’s enormous 
cruise potential remains untapped despite being endowed with 7, 500 km of coastline.  To 
meet India’s untapped cruise potential, a high level Task Force was constituted in the year 
2015 with Secretary (Tourism) as Chairman and Secretary (Shipping) as co -Chairman.  Five 
years have elapsed since then.  The Task Force has  reviewed and updated the Standard 
Operating Procedure and a consultant has been jointly appointed by Ministry of Tourism and 
Ministry of Shipping for preparing an Action Plan and detailed blue print for the 

38 
 
development of cruise tourism in the country.  I t is really intriguing that despite acceptance 
of the report of the Consultant, no projects have been sanctioned for development of cruise 
tourism to the States during 2017 -18, 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. This, in the opinion of the 
Committee, speaks volumes of the Government’s inertia and lethargy in the matter.(Para 132) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
  
11.1. This Ministry is in the process of reintroducing the National Tourism Award for 
cruise tour operators from 2018-19 onwards in order to boost cruise tourism. The  details / list 
of projects sanctioned for cruise tourism under Assistance to Central Agency Scheme by 
Infrastructure Development Division of Ministry of Tourism and Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
is as under:- 
List of approved Cruise Tourism projects under scheme for Assistance to Central Agency. 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
Year States Name of Projects Agency Amount 
 sanctioned 
Amount 
released 
2012-
13 
Tamil Nadu Cruise Passenger 
Facilities Centre in the 
existing Passenger 
Terminal at Chennai 
Port. 
Chennai Port 
Trust 
1724.66 1724.66 
2012-
13 
Kerala Dev. of dedicated cruise 
berthing facilities at 
Cochin Port 
Cochin Port 2243.32 2138.92 
2014-
15 
Goa Cruise Terminal 
Building at Mormugao 
Port Trust 
Mormugao Port 
trust 
879.04 767.187 
2016-
17 
Kerala Development of a 
Walkway/Promenade on 
Willington Island, 
Cochin, Kerala 
Cochin Port Trust 901.00 720.30 
 2016-
17 
Kerala Central Financial 
Assistance for upgrading 
of Births & Backup area 
of Ernakulam Wharf 
Cochin Port Trust 2141.00 1712.80 
 2016-
17 
Maharashtra Central Financial 
Assistance to Mumbai 
Port Trust for 
Development of Kanoji 
Angre Lighthouse as a 
tourist Destination 
Mumbai Port trust 1500.00 1500.00 
2017-
18 
Maharashtra Up-
gradation/modernization 
Mumbai Port 
Trust  
1250.00 1250.00 

39 
 
to International Cruise 
terminal at Indira  Dock, 
Mumbai.  
2018-
19 
Goa Improvement of 
immigration facility and 
deepening of existing 
cruise berth at 
Mormugao  
Mormugao Port 
trust 
1316.40 658.20 
 2018-
19 
Kerala 
  
 Developing 
infrastructure at Cochin 
Port Cruise Terminal. 
Cochin Port Trust 120. 79 60.39 
 2018-
19 
Kerala 
  
Creation of additional 
tourism facilities at the 
Cochin Port Trust 
Walkway 
Cochin Port Trust 466.47   233.23 
2018-
19 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Construction of Cruise 
cum Cargo at Channel 
berth area in Outer 
Harbour of of 
Visakhapatnam 
Visakhapatnam 
Port Trust 
3850.00 1925.00 
2019-
20 
Kerala CFA for Development 
of Additional 
infrastructure in the new 
Cochin Port Trust 
Terminal 
Cochin Port Trust 1029.70 514.85 
  
11.2. List of approved project as Rural Tourism Circuit with component of Cruise Tourism 
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme .                     (Rs. in Crores) 
2018-19 Kerala 
  
Development of Malanad Malabar 
Cruise Tourism Project 
-- 80.37 0.00 
             
11.3. This Ministry had also brought to the notice of Ministry of Shipping about the 
recommendations of the Committee, who had stated that they do not provide funds for 
development of cruise tourism infrastructure. 
 
CONNECTIVITY 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
12. The Committee takes note of the fact that in -principle approval has been accorded to 
transfer land and working permission has been accorded to Airports Authority of India for 
completion of terminal building at Leh  Airport and the targeted date of completion of the 
project is 30th September, 2021.  The Committee would exhort the Ministry to ensure that this 

40 
 
project is completed within the designated timeline and the approved cost, which will enable 
the tourists to r each Leh without any hassle, thereby, contributing to improving the living 
conditions of people of Leh.                   (Para 147) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
  
12.1. The Ministry of Tourism has been following up the matter with Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, which has informed that the work for construction of the new terminal building at 
Leh has been awarded on 5 th September, 2018 at a cost of Rs. 323.19 Crore. The Ministry of 
Civil Aviation indicated that the completion period of the work is 36 months (including three 
winter and three rainy seasons). Considering the adverse weather conditions due to which a 
limited period is available for construction work at site, the project cannot be competed in a 
shorter time. 
 
INDIA TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (ITDC) 
 
Recommendation/Observation   
13. The Committee notes that for the financial year 2019 -20, the revised budget estimates 
for capital outlay was Rs. 17.75 crore which includes renovation of Hotel properties and 
catering units for Rs. 15.80 crore . The Committee observes that renovation and upgradation 
of hotel properties is a continuous activity. However, as a consequence of Disinvestment, no 
real attention has been given for upgradation and renovation of ITDC's hotel properties. The 
Committee is, therefore, of the considered opinion that in order to remain competitive and 
match the standards of the private players, ITDC would require more funding support from 
the Government of India. Since share capital of ITDC is small and not adequate to carry o ut 
major capital expenditures and capital ventures, the Committee recommends that the 
Government of India should provide more funding support to ITDC by way of equity infusion. 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action taken in its regard.  (Para 173) 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
13.1. In accordance with the disinvestment policy of the Government of India, the process 
of divestment of ITDC hotels has started since the year 2015. As a result, no major 
renovation of properties has been undertaken. Plans for renovation and upgradation of 
facilities have been made for Hotel the Ashok, Samrat Hotel and Taj Restaurant -Agra for the 
current Financial Year. However, with the recent decision of Government of India regarding 
The Hotel Ashok to be taken up on PPP basis by DIPAM, the proposal for any major 
renovation of Ashok has been put on hold. However, the works of repair and maintenance 
and any such work required to be carried out to maintain the day -to-day operations of a Five-
star hotel is only being carried out. Plans are also made for up -gradation of Taj Restaurant, 
Agra and renovation of rooms and lobby area of Hotel Samrat which is being undertaken 
during current F.Y. 2020-21.  
 
MISCELLANEOUS  
Recommendation/Observation  

41 
 
  
14. The progress of implementation of projects sanctioned by the Ministry should be 
monitored on a monthly basis by a High Powere d Project Monitoring Committee and it 
should be ensured that the funds released for the sanctioned projects do not remain idly 
parked, but are utilised productively for the intended purpose and a monthly Progress Report 
be submitted to the Minister for suitable direction, whenever the Projects are lagging behind. 
                    (Para 178) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
14.1. Ministry of Tourism regularly reviews the ongoing projects sanctioned under 
Swadesh Darshan & PRASHAD Schemes in the following ways:-  
  
(i)          State Review by MoT under the Chairmanship of DG / JS/ ADG is held at 
regular intervals wherein detailed project review is undertaken. 
(ii)          Regional Review Meetings by MoT under the Chairmanship of Secretary is held 
once in a year wherein physical & financial status of all projects is reviewed with the 
State Government Officials. 
(iii)Review at the level of Chairpe rson of Mission Directorate is done on regular basis to 
address the bottlenecks in implementation of PRASHAD projects. 
(iv) Video conferencing with States/UTs is done under the Chairpersonship of JS(T) on 
regular basis to address the bottlenecks in implementati on of Swadesh Darshan 
projects. 
  
14.2. The National Steering Committee (NSC) which is chaired by Hon’ble Minister of 
Tourism oversees all operations, steers, reviews and monitors overall performance of the 
schemes and provides guidance on specific issues related to the schemes; recommends mid -
course corrections in the implementation tools; and provides periodical oversight and review 
of proposed/ongoing projects. 
  
14.3. Ministry ensures that in order to avoid parking of funds, the subsequent funds for the  
projects are released after the utilization certificates for the funds released earlier are 
produced by State Govt./ UT Administrations. As regards Monthly Progress Report, most of 
the States/ UTs submit this document on regular basis. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
15. The Committee recommends that an audit of the expenditure incurred under the 
various tourism schemes should be conducted to make the implementation of these 
programmes effective so that actual benefits reach the intended target groups and d elivery 
systems are improved. Involvement of Local Member of Parliament could add value to the 
features of various programmes of the Ministry.        (Para 191) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  

42 
 
15.1. Ministry conducts third -party evaluation at a regular interval for effective 
implementation of the Schemes and for    continuation of the Schemes with suitable 
modifications agreed to by the SFC/EFC/competent authority. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
16. The Committee has been informed that the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh has 
forwarded proposals for development of Vismak Nagar, Dibang Valley District and Malani 
Tan, Lower Siang District in Arunachal Pradesh for inclusion under the PRASHAD Scheme.   
The Committee lends its support for the same and recommends their inclusion and 
development under the PRASHAD Scheme.                (Para 192) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
16.1. On the request from the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh project viz., 
development of Parasuram Kund, Lohit, Arunachal Pradesh is under active consideration in the 
Ministry – In the Concept Presentation Meeting held on 01.10.2018 project was agreed in -
principle.  In the MD meeting held on 15.07.2019 State Government was advi sed to submit 
revised draft DPR for revised MD meeting, which is awaited in the Ministry.   No other request 
from the State Government of Arunachal Pradesh for any project under PRASHAD Scheme is 
pending. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
17. The Prime Minister has taken keen interest to promote the tourism sector of our 
country globally.  In view of this, the Committee urges that the Ambassadors should take the 
initiative to propagate the idea of the Prime Minister of making India a major tour ism hub.  
The Ministry of External Affairs should also post an exclusive tourism officer in all the 
Embassies for doing the same.  The Ambassador should also conduct regular meetings with the 
stakeholders on the measures taken by the Government to promote tourism and also direct the 
officials posted in the Embassies to make the local public aware of the immense potential of the 
country’s tourism. The Committee desires that the feedback so received may be sent to the 
Secretary, Ministry of Tourism via Secret ary, Ministry of External Affairs to enable the 
Tourism Ministry to act on the feedback.                        (Para 196) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
17.1. The recommendation pertains to the Ministry of External Affairs. However, the India 
Tourism Offices overseas regularly collaborates with the Indian Missions in undertaking 
various promotional activities such as road shows, Know India Seminars, International Day of 
Yoga etc. with the objective to promote India and its varied tourism products among the loc als. 
Further, the inputs of the Indian Missions are also obtained by the India Tourism Offices 
overseas for inclusion in the Annual Action Plan for the year.   
 

43 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2020-21 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
1. The Committee also notes that less allocation as compared to the projected demand is 
not unique to the financial year 2020 -21.  Against the projected demands of Rs. 4320.42 
Crore and Rs. 4612.18 Crore for Financial Year 2018 -19 and 2019-20 respectively, Ministry 
of Finance provided Rs. 2150.00 crore and Rs. 2189.22 crore in BE 2018-19 and BE 2019-20 
respectively which were further reduced to Rs. 2113.48 crore and Rs. 1416.00 crore at RE 
2018-19 and RE 2019-20 stage respectively.          (Para 24) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
  
1.1. Factual Statement. Noted by the Ministry. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
1.2. The emphasis made by the Committee in Para 24 of its 275 th Report was on 
highlighting the huge variations in the Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates which 
was indicative of the shortcoming in the budgetary planning. The Committee would, 
therefore, like the Ministry to take corrective steps to arrest such an er ratic projection 
of requirement of funds and ensure realistic formulation of Budget Estimates. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
 
2. The Committee observes that tourism being a labour -intensive multi-sectoral activity 
characterised by multiple services and industries is a key driver of socio -economic progress 
as well as employment generation and economic development.  The tourism sector has the 
potential to stimulate other economic sectors through its backward  and forward linkages and 
cross-sectoral synergies with sectors like agriculture, handicrafts, transport, construction, to 
name a few.  It is thus evident that any higher investment made in the tourism sector can lead 
to large sale employment generation, a lleviate poverty and propel India to a faster growth 
trajectory.               (Para 25) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
  
2.1. Factual Statement. Noted by the Ministry. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 

44 
 
2.2. While recommending higher investment in the tourism sector, the Committee 
had expected the Ministry to formulate appropriate policy measures for spurring up 
higher investment in the tourism sector. This recommendation assumes added 
significance in view of the fact that the growth momentum in the tourism sector has 
witnessed a huge slump in the wake of the lockdown induced by the Covid-19 pandemic, 
causing significant disruptions in the Indian economy. The reply of the Ministry fails  to 
address the core concern of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the 
Ministry to quickly formulate an appropriate policy for getting more investments in the 
tourism sector so that the growth momentum in this vital sector could be revived. 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
  
3. The Committee is dismayed to note that despite its unique endowments of biodiversity 
and its rich culture and heritage, India’s total share in global international tourist arrivals 
remains a modest 1.24% against the target of 3% while, as per the Report of the Working 
Group of Tourism of the 12 th Five Year Plan, in about 150 countries of the world, tourism is 
one of the 5 top export earners and number one export earner in about 60 countries. When 
measured by the yardstick of its vast tourism resources, India’s low share of tourism arrivals 
is certainly below its potential.  Similarly, the contribution (direct and indirect) of tourism in 
the GDP and the total jobs in the country is estimated to be 5.06% and 12.75% respe ctively, 
which, in the considered opinion of the Committee, is inadequate and way below the massive 
potential that exists. The Committee wishes to point out that in many smaller and developing 
countries, the entire economy of the country depends on tourism  for its survival and tourism 
remains a major source of foreign exchange earnings. That being the case, the world's 
second largest country in terms of population, seventh largest by area, having 7500 km of 
coastline and one of the most endowed regions of t he world in terms of its tourism 
attractiveness, India receives less international tourists than its full potential.  Taking all 
these factors into account, the Committee apprehends that the shortfall of Rs. 147.42 crore in 
BE 2020-21 against the projected  demand of Rs. 2647.25 crore would seriously jeopardize 
the targeted tourism outcomes during the Financial Year 2020-21.          (Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. The   allocation of Rs. 2499.83 crores  during the Financial Year 2020 -21 is the 
highest ever allocation of fund made to  the Ministry of Tourism.   The BE allocation during 
2018-19 was Rs. 2150 Crore and during 2019-20 it was Rs. 2189.22 Crore.   The requirement 
of fund for the Ministry would be  reviewed at the time of RE and if the allocation is found 
insufficient, additional allocation would be projected to the Ministry of Finance at that 
stage.    
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
3.2. The Committee had pointed out an  adverse impact of the shortfall of Rs. 147.4 2 
crores on the targeted tourism outcomes. Instead of addressing this core concern of the 
Committee and arriving at empirically correct impact of the shortfall, the action taken 

45 
 
note only highlights projection of additional allocation at the RE stage, if the need so 
arises. The Committee, therefore, expects a factual note to be furnished detailing the 
entire gamut of issues on the targeted tourism outcomes due to shortfall of Rs 1 47.42 
crores in BE allocation.  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
4. The Committee notes from the information made available to it, that a substantial 
amount of Rs. 245.308 crore is involved in pending Utilization Certificates (UCs) under 
various Schemes/ Programmes of the Ministry.  Since conditionality regarding submission of 
UCs is an absolute bar for release of funds, the Committee apprehends that the pendency of 
UCs may impinge on the implementation of the flagship Schemes/Projects of the Ministry.  
The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should put in place a dedicated 
mechanism to ensure that all pending UCs are liquidated within a period of six months from 
the presentation of this Report.          (Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry  
 
4.1. In respect of infrastructure projects like Swadesh Drarshan, PRASHAD, etc. the 
Ministry of Tourism has aggressively taken up the matter of pending UCs with State/ UTs 
Administrations/ implementing agencies. The implementing agencies are being asked to 
refund amount unutilized during 2018 -19 or to liquidate the same at the earliest.    In addition 
to the regional review meetings,   periodic   reviews  on  the  progress  of  the projects are   
taken up with the State Governments / UTs and the implementing agenci es to   not  only  
resolve  the pending Utilization  Certificates  (UCs) but also to increase the momentum of the 
progress of  projects. 
 
4.2. In respect of the Capacity Building for Service Providers (CBSP) of the Ministry of 
Tourism, the Utilization Certi ficates amounting Rs.2.43 crore are pending. The Ministry of 
Tourism has already written to the concerned institute to furnish the utilization certificate 
immediately or refund the funds in the Consolidated Funds of India, in case funds are lying 
un-utilized. In other schemes also, matter is being taken up with concerned to expedite the 
matter. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
4.3. The Committee notes that the Ministry , in its Action Taken N ote, has simply 
shared the steps taken to liquidate pending U Cs; but skipped to mention  about a 
dedicated mechanism to resolve the issue of pending UCs within a specified timeline. 
The Committee deprecates the Ministry for choosing to remain silent on the issue and 
desires to be kept apprised of the mechanism evolve d for addressing the recurring 
problem of pending UCs within a given time-frame. 
 

46 
 
INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF TOURIST CIRCUITS AROUND SPECIFIC 
THEMES (SWADESH DARSHAN) 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee is of the view that though the Ministry reviews the progress of the 
projects constantly under the SDS, the absence of a dedicated monitoring mechanism at the 
State level is hampering the performance and goals of the projects sanctioned under it. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should, without further loss of time, take 
up the issue with the concerned State Governments at the highest level to understand their 
constraints in implementation of tourism projects and put in place a dedicated mechanism for 
implementation of the pr ojects as it has a direct bearing on the timelines set for these 
projects.  Such a focused monitoring would go a long way in speeding up long pending SDS 
projects crucial for enhancing the tourist attractiveness and realising the tourism potential of 
India’s assets.                 (Para 58) 
  
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Ministry of Tourism 
regularly monitors the progress of each project. The  Ministry of Tourism organizes Regional 
Review Meeting chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Tourism which is also attended by the 
State Governments during which each project is comprehensively monitored. In addition, site 
visit is also done by the PMC. The Ministry of Tourism is also regularly undertaking periodi c 
reviews with the State Government to oversee progress of individual project. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
5.2.   The Committee takes note of the measures in place to monitor the progress of 
implementation of projects under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme. The Committee would, 
however, recommend that a web -based monitoring system/ online portal should also be 
developed to monitor the progress level of the projects sanctioned under the SDS and it 
should also have a feature of uploading photos/ videos  made by the Project Monitoring 
Committee during its visit to the project site. This would ensure greater transparency 
and accountability. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee observes that rural tourism is among a few emerging areas of tourist 
interest world-wide.  Rural tourism is important because it helps in inclusive development of 
remote and backward areas by way of enhancing earning capacity and better livelihood for 
the rural population.  As of now, two projects with a sanctioned outlay of Rs. 125.02 crore 
have been approved under Rural Circuit out of which only Rs. 21.24 Crore has been released 
for a project in Bihar while no funds have been released for another sanctioned Rural Circuit 
in Kerala which is indicative of the snail’s pace of p rogress in the matter.  The Committee is 
of the opinion that had the Ministry made co -ordinated efforts with the State Government of 
Kerala, the handicaps in implementing the project could have been ironed out and the project 
could have kick started.        (Para 59)    

47 
 
   
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1. Since the scheme was under review, no fund could be released for the projects 
sanctioned in the year  2018-19 including the project covering Rural Circuit in Kerala. 
Approval  to  release  fund  for the 10 projects for   Rs. 627.40 Crore   sanctioned  during 
 2018-19  has  been  accorded  in  December, 2019   by the   Cabinet.  The Ministry had 
released Rs. 23.77 crores as the first instalment  in April, 2020 for the project Development of 
Malanad-Malabar Cruise Tourism. So far, the total fund released under Rura l Circuit is 
Rs.45.01 crores. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
6.2.  The Committee is constrained to note that against an amount of Rs. 627.40 
crores approved in December, 2019 for the 10 projects sanctioned under the Rural 
Circuit during 2018 -19, only Rs. 45.01 crores has been released so far which indicates 
that the Ministry has not exercised due diligence in its Budget formulation which may 
result i n massive financial underperformance under this Head. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should urgently address the pending issues 
pertaining to the implementation of the 10 projects and ensure their implementation in 
right earnest so that scarce resources are not kept locked up. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
7. The Committee is dismayed to note that all 5 Buddhist Circuit Projects costing Rs. 
355.26 Crore have witnessed time overruns.  The reasons attributed by the Ministry include 
land availability, delay in statutory clearances, delay in tendering work by implementing 
agencies, etc.  The Committee is of the firm view that had the Ministry completed pre -project 
activities including clearance before sanction of these projects or before award of contract, 
persistent problem of time overrun could have been easily avoided.  Now that the Ministry 
has revised the guidelines of the scheme in 2017, the Committee e xpects that the sanctioned 
Buddhist Circuit Projects would be implemented expeditiously and the issues related to time 
overrun would be resolved.  The Committee desires to be apprised of the outcome in this 
regard.              (Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
7.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. In addition, it is to state that 
in light of the revision of guidelines in 2017, the Ministry has revised the criteria for the 
release various instalments and the same has been communicated in M ay 2020. Now the 
following funding patter is adopted by the Ministry of Tourism. The funding pattern for the 
projects sanctioned upto October, 2017 is as follows:- 
 
S. 
No 
Instalment Amount to be released Condition 

48 
 
1. 1st 20% of the sanctioned 
cost of the project 
On sanction of the project 
2. 2nd 30% of the sanctioned 
cost of the project minus 
unutilized amount of 1st 
instalment 
After utilization of minimum 75% of the first 
instalment and submission of UC in the 
prescribed format 
3. 3rd 30% of the sanctioned 
cost of the project minus 
unutilized amount of 2nd 
instalment 
After utilization of 100% of 1st instalment and 
minimum 75% of the second instalment and 
submission of UC in the prescribed format 
4. 4th 15% of the sanctioned 
cost of the project minus 
unutilized amount of 3rd 
instalment 
After utilization of 100% of 1st and 2nd 
instalment and minimum 75% of the third 
instalment and submission of UC in the 
prescribed format 
5 Physical 
Completion 
of         the 
Project 
No release of 
funds.           Milestone for 
100%physical completion 
of the project 
Certificate of 100% physical completion of the 
project from Implementing Agency 
countersigned by Administrative Secretary. UC 
of the amount released so far to be submitted in 
the prescribed format. 
Final Project Cost to be frozen. Excess amount, 
if any, to be refunded to the Ministry. 
6. 5th 5%      of         the 
sanctioned cost 
After successful O&M of Toilet TFC, 
Cafeteria facilities for one year as certified by 
an independent agency. 
7. Final 
Closure of 
the Project 
No release of 
funds.  Milestone for final 
closure of the project 
Final Utilization Certificate of funds released 
to the Implementing Agency to be submitted 
and project closed by the Ministry 
  
7.2. The funding pattern for the projects sanctioned since November, 2017 is as follows:- 
S. 
No 
Instalment Amount to be released 
1. 1st 30% of the project cost on submission of work orders, Good for 
construction DPR with GFC statuary approvals from respective agencies 
for construction initiation and detailed BOQs 
2. 2nd 30% of the project cost after receipt of utilization certificate for the first 
instalment 
3. 3rd 25% of the project cost after receipt of utilization certificate for the 
second instalment 
4. 4th 10% of the project cost on completion of the work and receipt of 
utilization certificate 

49 
 
5 5th 5% of the project cost after successful O&M of Toilet, TFC, Cafeteria 
facilities for one year as certified by an independent agency 
  
7.3. The status of projects sanctioned under Buddhist circuit as on 31St July, 2020 is as 
under:- 
(Amount in crores) 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
State/ Year 
Project Name Amount 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
Physical 
Progress 
1 Madhya Development of Sanchi – 74.94 59.95 86% 
  Pradesh Satna – Rewa – Mandsaur       
  (2016- –Dhar       
  17)         
2 Uttar Development of 99.97 72.56 64% 
  Pradesh Srawasti, Kushinagar, and       
  (2016- Kapilwastu       
  17)         
3 Bihar Development of 98.73 48.69 36% 
  (2016- Buddhist circuit –       
  17) Construction of Convention       
    Centre at Bodhgaya       
4 Gujarat 
(2017- 
18) 
Development of 
Junagadh – Gir Somnath- 
Bharuch – Kutch – 
Bhavnagar- Rajkot – Mehsana 
28.67 17.40 63% 
5. Andhra 
Pradesh 
(2017- 
18) 
Development of: 
Shalihundam – Thotlakonda -
Bavikonda – Bojjanakonda- 
Amravati – Anupu 
52.34 26.17 72% 
    Total 354.65 224.77   
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
7.4. The Committee is constrained to note that there has been substantial under -
utilization of funds released against four out of the five projects under the scheme of 
Development of Buddhist Circuit. In a country like ours, where resources are scar ce, 
under-utilization of nearly 50% of allocation is a matter of great concern. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should atleast now take 
appropriate corrective measures to address the factors which have led to the financial 
underperformance and time overruns. 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON PILGRIMAGE REJUVENATION AND HERITAGE 
AUGMENTATION DRIVE (PRASHAD)  

50 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
8.  The Committee notes that the PRASHAD has been launched with the objective of 
holistic development of identified pilgrimage and heritage destinations and aims at 
infrastructure development.  Since the provision of infrastructure is a prerequisite towards 
improving the country’s tourism productive capacity and attracting more tourists, the delay 
being witnessed in the expeditious operationalization of PRASHAD projects is pathetic and is 
suggestive of laxity in the monitoring system of the Ministry and the Sta te Governments. This 
leaves the Committee wondering as to how the Ministry would achieve their envisaged 
objective of this Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the shortcoming 
noticed in implementation of the projects under the PRASHAD should  be addressed quickly. 
The Committee also recommends that the projects initiated under the PRASHAD should have 
a definite date of completion. Unless this is done, ambitious budgeting without commensurate 
capacity to deliver the desired outcomes under the PRASHAD would remain a futile exercise. 
The Committee also recommends that the achievements of the targets set under PRASHAD be 
analysed in detail for formulating remedial measures.        (Para 75) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
  
8.1. Keeping in view the experience gained and challenges faced by the Ministry during 
the last five years of operation of the PRASHAD Scheme, a proposal for modifications in the 
existing guidelines has been initiated.  Under the proposed revised guidelines, more thrust has 
been given for monitoring at the Central as well State levels.  More responsibilities for timely 
execution of the project have been proposed on the implementing and the executing agencies 
and their executives. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
8.2. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that a proposal for 
modifications in the existing guidelines has been initiated . The Committee sincerely 
hopes that the proposed measures will facilitate accelerating the pace of implementation 
of the projects under PRASHAD. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the 
efficacy of the new measures proposed. 
 
DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKET 
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee notes that the Scheme of Domestic Promotion and Publicity including 
Market Development Assistance was launched with the major objective of creating a general 
awareness amongst the domestic population about the tourist destinations and to deve lop 
tourist market within the country. The Committee observes that it is often seen that the 
researches pertaining to travel and tourism take place mainly on inbound and outbound 
tourist numbers and Domestic Tourism is given lesser importance. But, since d omestic 

51 
 
tourism generates income redistribution effect from tourists to local population and is also a 
catalyst for various other multiplier effects throughout the value chain, boosting local 
economy as well as national economy in the process, it should no t be regarded as opposed or 
an alternative to Overseas Tourism. Instead these two forms of tourism should complement 
each other. The Committee, therefore, recommends that statistical data should be collected 
for planning and evaluation of various Domestic Tourism Programmes and that deficiency in 
various types of domestic tourism statistics should be addressed.            (Para 85)  
 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
9.1. Our tourism economy is highly dependent on the domestic tourism. Ministry of 
Tourism has been co ntinuously focusing on domestic tourism potential by encouraging 
fellow countrymen to explore their own country, taking a much needed break within their 
own borders. This will be a winning strategy for India. 
  
9.2. The Scheme of Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality  (DPPH) of 
Ministry of Tourism is created with the objectives of increasing awareness about tourism 
destinations and products, promoting tourism within the country with focus on priority areas 
like the North - East and Jammu a nd Kashmir, spreading social awareness messages and 
promoting events which have tourism potential. 
  
9.3. The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India commissioned third party evaluation 
of Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality (DPPH) thro ugh National 
Productivity Council (NPC) to examine the measures used for domestic promotion and 
publicity vis-à-vis the available spectrum and assess the relative importance an d efficacy of 
the measures used and  to provide recommendations and suggestions on how the existing 
scheme could be made more effective, impactful and relevant. Also, whether the activities 
being undertaken are sufficient or require modification in terms of enhancement or deletion 
of some. Final Report from the NPC has also been recei ved “and is being examined in the 
Ministry.” 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
9.4. The Committee would like to know how much money out of the Domestic and 
Overseas Promotions and Publicity has been spent for promoting Niche Tourism.  
 
9.5. The Committee would also like the Ministry to develop a database pertaining to 
planning and evaluation of the tourist sites under Domestic Tourism Programme.  
 
9.6. The Committee would expect the Ministry to examine  the recommendations 
contained in the f inal Report of the National Productivity Council on a fast -track basis 
so that a coherent and consistent policy could be finalized. The Committee should be 
kept apprised of the final outcome in the matter. 
 

52 
 
TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
  
10. The Committee observes that there is significant potential for the tourist sector in 
India to generate jobs and absorb a substantially higher workforce.  However, India faces 
intense shortage of trained manpower at various levels of the tourist sector.  It is in this 
context that creating appropriate employable skills in the population assumes added 
significance.  The Committee is, therefore, constrained to note that there is huge variation 
between the annual target fixed and the actual achievement made in the matter of training 
and certification as the Ministry has been able to train/certify a total of 38,859 persons only 
under the Scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers against its annual target of 
1,01,900 persons during the year 2018 -19. The Committee desires to know the reasons for 
the same. Similarly, the Scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers could not achieve 
its targets during 2019 -20 as well.  Obviously, there are serious shortcomings in the 
implementation of the training pro grammes under CBSP.  This calls for serious 
introspection.  The Committee desires to be apprised of the remedial measures taken to 
overcome the shortcomings and achieve the intended targets.                (Para 119) 
Reply of the Ministry  
10.1. The Minist ry of Tourism had trained/ certified a total 38,859 persons against its 
annual target of 1,01,900 person in the year 2018 -19. A total of 27,208 candidates had been 
trained / certified against annual target of 57,430 persons in the year 2019-20. 
  
10.2. The quantum of response expected from private institutions for empanelment as 
implementing agencies for the skill development programms was not as encouraging as 
envisaged. 
  
10.3. Till the year 2015-16, the Hunar Se Rozgar Tak Programme was geared only towar ds 
the creation of employable skills. However with the adoption of common norms on skill 
development notified by the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, it has been 
made mandatory on the part of the training provider institutes to arrange p lacement/self-
employment for atleast 70% of the certified trainees within 3 months of completion of the 
courses. 
  
10.4. In view of the feedback received during monitoring of the various programmes, a new 
programme on entrepreneurship was launched. This may certainly help in capacity building 
for self -employment. The utilization of percentage of funds allocation was also increased. 
The details of funds utilization under the scheme for Capacity Building for Service Providers 
are as follows:-  
S.No Financial Year Funds Allocation 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Utilization of Funds 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Utilization percentage 
1 2018-19 26.40 26.14 99.02 % 
2 2019-20 28.35 28.30 99.82 % 

53 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.5. The Committee expects the Ministry to brace itself for a targeted action in this 
regard, so that there is absolute clarity on training guidelines to be issued to various 
private institutions/ implementing agencies for the upcoming tourism skill development 
programmes. 
10.6. The Ministry should develop a database that includes list of stakeholders of 
tourism industry alongwith the details of implementing agencies/ employers/ employed 
trainees etc. The Ministry of Tourism in coordination with Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship should also formulate policies/ schemes for 
generating opportunities of self employment for the unemployed trainees. 
Recommendation/Observation   
 
11. The Committee also wishes to emphasize that the skilled workforce in the tourism 
sector should not be lost sight of and the Ministry should undertake and implement 
appropriate policy measures for absorbing the existing certified trainees in the tourism and  
other related sectors.  The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the number of persons 
trained and employed under the various training skill upgradation programmes of the 
Ministry during 2019-20.         (Para 120) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1. Against an annual target of 57,430 trainees for the FY 2019 -20, a total of 27,449 
candidates have been certified / trained in various skill development programmes under the 
scheme of Capacity Building for Service Providers (CBSP) of the Ministry of Tourism . The 
Hunar Se Rozgar Tak – an initiative of this Ministry is a key programme one of the skill 
development programmes under which the courses are conducted for fresh trainees and 
employment is mandated under it. A total of 11,084 persons have been trained and certified 
in FY 2019 -20 and against this, information has been received that so far 2,473 trainees got 
employment. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
11.2. The performance of the Ministry in terms of achieving its target leaves too much 
to be desired against an annual target of 57,430 trainees for the FY 2019 -20, only 27,449 
candidates have been trained/ certified in various skill development programmes. The 
Committee apprehends that this mismatch between the target and the actual number of 
persons tr ained, would have a bearing on the growth of the tourism and hospitality 
industry, which continues to experience shortage of a skilled workforce. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should address this shortcoming  
seriously. 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
12. The Committee is aware that there is shortage of trainers specific to hospitality and 
tourism education and that the requirement of teachers would continue to be large and 
growing.  The Committee, therefore, desires to know as to how ma ny dedicated teacher 

54 
 
training Institutes have been set up under the Scheme Assistance to IHMs/FCIs/IITTM/NIWS 
and whether they are mandated to conduct customized training courses to cover the 
requirement of niche tourism products and new emerging areas spe cific to tourism. The 
Committee also desires to be apprised of the current production of trainers/teachers vis-a-vis 
their requirement annually.                  (Para 126) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1. There is no dedicated training institute to provide training to the teachers under 
the administrative control of Ministry of Tourism.   However, National Council for Hotel 
Management and Catering Technology NCHMCT an autonomous body under the Ministry of 
Tourism, being an apex body of the hospitality institu tes is providing training to the teachers 
with the objective to train hundred percent teachers of the hospitality institute. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
12.2. The Committee had specifically asked the Ministry , inter-alia, to apprise it of the 
number of dedicated teacher training institute s set up under the Scheme - Assistance to 
IHMs/FCIs/IITTM/NIWS and the current production of trainers/ teachers vis-à-vis 
their requirement. The reply of the Ministry is devoid of any such details. The 
Committee is astonished to find that the Ministry has not maintained relevant data and 
has been unable to provide such crucial information to the Committee. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendatio n contained in Para 126 of the 2 75th Report and 
expects the Ministry to collect the necessary data a s asked for and furnish the same to 
the Committee.  
CONNECTIVITY  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee is of the view that air connectivity is key  to unlocking India’s inbound 
tourism potential.  Some States including those in North Eastern Region and other hilly 
regions have great tourism potential, but lack air connectivity.  Though 36 tourism sectors/ 
routes have been accepted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation for incorporation under Regional 
Connectivity Scheme – UDAN-3 which aims to promote short haul routes and gives flexibility 
to airlines in designing their network, the Committee apprehends that operationalisation of 
these 36 routes/sectors w ould face challenge because UDAN is already facing serious issues 
with previous two rounds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of 
Tourism, in coordination with the Ministry of Civil Aviation, and through the Inter -
Ministerial Coordinati on Committee for Tourism Sector should focus on prioritizing 
operationalisation of these 36 tourist routes/sectors.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard.                 (Para 146)  
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1. The Ministry of Tourism, in consultation with stakeholders had forwarded a list of 
important tourist destinations, to the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Ministry of Civil 
Aviation has approved 46 tourism routes for inclusion under RCS -UDAN-3. Out of these 46 
routes, 16 routes are operational. 

55 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
13.2.  The Committee notes that out of 46 routes approved for inclusion under RCS -
UDAN-3, only 16 have been operationalized which suggests that the headway made is 
not satisfactory . The Committ ee notes that at its behest, an inter- Ministerial 
Coordination Committee for tourism sector has been set up. The Committee desires 
that this Committee should also act as a d edicated mechanism for planning, 
coordination and timely operationaliza tion of the remaining routes. Procedural or 
operational hurdles, if any, should also be resolved expeditiously through this 
Coordination Committee. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee notes that Rail is the most preferred mode of transport for d omestic 
tourists.  As per the Budget (2011 -12), 26 railway stations had been identified for joint 
development of tourist amenities by the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Railways.  
The Committee notes with concern that out of the 26 railway station s, only one has been 
completed and the remaining projects are still under implementation even after the lapse of 
ten years. This Scheme being conceived with the aim of improving railway stations for better 
tourist experience, the Committee expects the Mini stry to go into the factors attributable to 
the delay in implementation in detail and urgently address, in collaboration with the Ministry 
of Railways, the pending issues pertaining to implementation of the scheme of upgradation of 
the 26 railway stations.  Considering the fact that this Project has been languishing since 
long, the Committee desires to be furnished with a factual note detailing the current status of 
the Project and the Ministry’s plan of action for expediting its implementation.    (Para 149) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
14.1. In accordance with the railway budget announcement 2011 -12, Twenty Six (26) 
railway stations  have been identified for joint development of tourist amenities by the 
Ministry of Railways (MoR) and Ministry of Tourism (MoT), on  50:50 cost sharing basis. 
The identified railway stations are:- 
  
(1) Hyderabad ;(2) Hospet; (3) Agra Cantt.; (4) Rae Bareli; (5) Durgapura ;(6) Varanasi; (7) 
Kamakhya; (8) Haridwar; (9) New Jalpaiguri; (10) Gaya; (11) Madurai; (12) Rampurhat ; 
(13) Thiruvananthapuram; (14) Kurukshetra; (15) Amritsar; (16) Aurangabad; (17) Nanded; 
(18) Puri; (19) Tarakeshwar ; (20) Rameshwaram; (21) Tirupati; (22) Guwahati; (23) Jaipur ; 
(24) Ajmer (25) Chittorgarh; and (26) Dehradun .         
  
14.2. At present 21 railway  station projects have been sanctioned with a cost of Rs 105.52 
Cr. as Ministry of Tourism share. Of these the Puri railway station project is complete 
and Thiruvananthapuram, Agra, Guwahati & Tirupati are nearing completion. 
  
14.3. In the month of April,  2020, Ministry of Tourism, Govt. of India has constituted a 
high level Committee under the Chairpersonship of Additional Director General and 

56 
 
members drawn from Ministry of Railways to examine the way forward for effective 
implementation of the projects, work out the modalities of finalizing the project plan, 
monitoring of projects etc. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
14.4. The Ministry should apprise the Committee of the reasons for delay and the 
steps taken to address the same. 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
15. The Committee notes that a number of priority items aimed at ensuring cleanliness 
facilities at the railway stations have been identified.  Though cleanliness at railway stations 
has improved, it is not uniform across railway stations.  The Committee would, therefore, like 
the Ministry of Railways to conduct a third party audit and cleanliness ranking of the 
identified railway stations so that an assessment could be made as to the efficacy of measures 
taken for providing world class facilities at the identified railway stations.              (Para 150) 
Reply of the Ministry  
15.1. The recommendations of the Committee had been brought to the notice of Ministry of 
Railways and they have been requested to take necessary actions on the recommendations of 
the Committee. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
15.2. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the follow -up action taken by the 
Ministry of Railway s on the recommendation regarding conducting a third party audit 
and cleanliness ranking of the railway stations. 
 
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF TOURISTS 
  
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee observes that safety and security of tourists is of vital importance as 
any adverse impression in this regard has serious implications on tourist arrivals to the 
country.  In the past, there have been numerous incidents of crime reported agai nst foreign 
tourists in some popular destinations across the country.  In order to make India a safe 
tourist destination where tourists would feel safe and feel free to move around, the State 
Governments/ UT Administrations of Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnatak a, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh have set up tourist police in one form or the other.  The 
Committee recommends that in the light of the security concerns at to urist destinations, a 
committed and professionally trained tourist police should be deployed at all important 
destinations of tourist importance so that foreign and domestic tourists visiting tourist 
destinations are assured of their safety and security.  The Committee would, therefore, like 
the Ministry of Tourism to take up the matter up with the remaining States/UTs at the highest 

57 
 
level so that Tourist Police is set up in all important tourist destinations of each State/UT of 
tourist importance.           (Para 156) 
Reply of the Ministry  
16.1. The Ministry of Tourism has been regularly taking up the matter with State 
Governments/ UT Administrations to have a dedicated Tourist Police. The Ministry has also 
requested Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India vide D.O. letter dated 05.09.2018 to keep 
the issue of  tourist security as one of the agenda points for the meeting of DGPs of State 
Governments. The matter will be further pursued with the States / UTs.  
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
16.2. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the further progress made in the 
matter. 
INDIA TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (ITDC) 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
17. The Committee also recommends that ITDC should undertake detailed manpower 
study in all its units/ divisions so that deployment of human resources could be rationalized.     
             (Para 174) 
 Reply of the Ministry 
  
17.1. The process of manpower rationalization was carried out for ITDC’s Executives and 
Non-Executives of corporate office  in the year 2018.   Further for Hotel Catering 
Establishment (HCE) Units which had been disinvested, the sanctioned strength of such Units 
was abolished and the manpower that had not opted for VRS were posted in remaining 
ITDC’s properties / division and their posts were treated as supernumerary.  
  
17.2. The manpower rationalization of ITDC’s remaining hotel units and those against 
supernumerary posts has not been done as ITDC is still undergoing the process of 
disinvestment.  As per recommendation of the Committee, further exercises will be taken up 
after completion of disinvestment process of ITDC hotel units and adoption of new business 
development plan for ITDC. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
17.3. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this direction.  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee notes that the Scheme of Swadesh Darshan  was launched with the 
objective of developing tourist circuits on specific themes and as of now, 15 such Circuits 
have been identified for Integrated Infrastructure Development. Since the creation of tourist 

58 
 
infrastructure leads to overall economic growth , the Committee would like the Ministry to 
identify more tourism circuits and develop them in an integrated manner.                (Para 180) 
  
Reply of the Ministry 
  
18.1. The recommendation of the C ommittee has been noted. The already identified 15 
themes encompass a variety of tourist destinations which have potential to attract the tourist 
to the identified circuits. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
18.2.  The Ministry under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme must focus on developing 
tourism infrastructure under thematic tourist C ircuits with an objective to enhance the 
visiting experience of the tourists at the sites identified under various circuits under this 
scheme. The Committee reiterates that the Ministry should proactively seek proposals 
from State Governments/ UTs for the purpose of including more places of tourist 
interest under the identified Circuits. 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
19. The Committee notes that most of the international and domestic tourists visit 
enchantingly beautiful Kerala which is famous for its beautiful backwaters, unique culture 
and traditions and rich vegetation. The State is one of the most popular tourist destinations of 
the world. From the information made available, it seems that no major tourism project has 
been sanctioned for the State of Kerala in the recent past. The Committee, therefore, desires 
to know whether any tourist project forwarded by the State Government of Kerala for funding 
support from the Ministry of Tourism is pending approval. The Committe e also recommends 
that the approval to any such pending projects should be expedited.     (Para 182) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1. Observations of the Committee have been noted.  The MoT under Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme has approved the projects as below: 
(Rs. in Crores) 
S.No. Project and year Amount 
sanctioned 
Amount 
released 
1 Development of Pathanamthitta- Gavi- Vagamon- 
Thekkady as Eco Tourism Circuit in Idduki and 
Pathanamthitta Districts (2015- 16) 
  
76.55 
  
61.2 
2 Development of Sabarimala - Erumeli- Pampa-
Sannidhanam as a Spiritual Circuit in District 
Pathanamthitta (2016-17) 
  
100.0 
  
20.0 
3 Development of Sree Padmanabha Arnamula- 
Sabrimala-as a Spiritual Circuit (2016-17) 
  
92.22 
  
73.8 

59 
 
4 Development            of         Rural            
Circuit:Malanad Malabar Cruise Tourism Project 
(2018-19) 
80.37 23.8 
5. ‘Development of Sivagiri Sree  Narayan Guru 
Ashram – Arruvipuram – Kunnumpara Sree 
Subrahmania – Chembazhanthi Sree Narayana 
Gurukulam  under  Spiritual Circuit 
  
  
69.47 
  
  
-- 
  
19.2. Under PRASHAD Scheme, one project viz.,development of Guruvayur has been 
sanctioned in March, 2017 with the cost of Rs. 46.14 crores.   An amount of  Rs. 39.91 crore  
has been released for the project till date. At present physical progress of the project is more 
than 75%.  Most likely project could have been completed but is delayed due to Covid -19.  
Following two projects are under consideration in the Ministry of Tourism. 
i. St. Thomas International Shrine, Ernakulam, Malayattoor. 
ii. Cheraman Juma Mosque, Thrissur, Methala, Kodungallur. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
19.3. The Committee recommends that the approval to the two projects, i.e., (i) St. 
Thomas International Shrine, Ernakul am and (ii) Cheraman Juma Mosque, Thrissur 
may be expedited. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the decision taken in 
the matter. 
Recommendation/Observation  
 
20. Belum Caves in Kurnool District, Andhra Pradesh which are the second largest caves 
on the Indian subcontinent, have immense tourism value and are, therefore, of national 
importance.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the above Caves and Stone Age 
Kethavaram Rock paintings should be developed under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme (SDS).  
                    (Para 187) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
20.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The projects under the 
scheme are identified for development by States/ UT Government. The concept proposals are 
then submitted by States/UTs to the Ministry and accordingly, State/UT presents the concept 
proposal before the Central Steering and Monitoring Committee. The observations/ 
comments are then incorporated i n the concept proposal and DPRs are prepared by 
States/UTs which are submitted to the Ministry. The Ministry evaluates the DPR on various 
parameters. Thereafter, a Mission Directorate Meeting is held for such proposals and the 
observations/comments of the Ministry are discussed in detail with State/UTs. Accordingly, 
States/ UTs submit the final DPR and the requisite clearances/ documents for sanctioning the 
project by Central Steering and Monitoring Committee. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 

60 
 
 
20.2. Since Belum Caves which are renowned for their speleothem structures , hold 
historical significance in  the cultural heritage of India,  the Committee would like the 
Ministry to proactively pursue the matter of their development with the State 
Government of A ndhra Pradesh. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the 
action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
Recommendation/Observation  
  
21. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that no project under the 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme is pending for scrutiny by the Central Sanctioning & Monitoring 
Committee and observes that the above submission is factually incorrect.  The Committee has 
been informed that several proposals sent by the State Governments for inclusion under the 
SDS are pending approval by the Ministry of Tourism.  The Committee desires to be furnished 
with a list of such proposals indicating the date of their receipt in the Ministry, action taken 
thereon and shortcomings, if any, noticed.  The Committee also desir es to know whether the 
concerned Governments have been informed about the shortcomings noticed in this regard.  
                    (Para 194) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  
21.1. Sanctioning of  new projects under  Swadesh Darshan Scheme is under 
review. The proposals received for funding under Swadesh Darshan Scheme  may   
be considered on receipt of the approval accordingly. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
 
21.2. The Committee had sought information regarding proposals sent by the State 
Governments for inclusion under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, which are pending 
approval by the Ministry. The Committee feels pained to observe that the reply of the 
Ministry is generic in nature and does not  address the issue highlighted by the 
Committee. The Ministry ought to have taken caution and circumspection in 
formulating its reply and furnish ed the requisite information. The Committee hope s 
that the Ministry would be forthcoming with detailed informat ion so that the purpose 
for which the information was sought for in Para 194 of the 275th Report, is served. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- N i l - 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2020-21 
 The emphasis made  by the Committee in Para 24 of its 275 th Report was on 
highlighting the huge variations in the Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates which 
was indicative of the shortcoming in the budgetary planning. The Committee would, 
therefore, like the Ministry to t ake corrective steps to arrest such an erratic projection 
of requirement of funds and ensure realistic formulation of Budget Estimates. 
                  (Para: 1.2)  
While recommending higher investment in the tourism sector, the Committee 
had expected th e Ministry to formulate appropriate policy measures for spurring up 
higher investment in the tourism sector. This recommendation assumes added 
significance in view of the fact that the growth momentum in the tourism sector has 
witnessed a huge slump in the wake of the lockdown induced by the Covid-19 pandemic, 
causing significant disruptions in the Indian economy. The reply of the Ministry fails to 
address the core concern of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the 
Ministry to quickly formulate an appropriate policy for getting more investments in the 
tourism sector so that the growth momentum in this vital sector could be revived.   
                  (Para: 2.2) 
 
The Committee had pointed out an adverse impact of the shortfall of Rs. 147.42 
crores on the targeted tourism outcomes. Instead of addressing this core concern of the 
Committee and arriving at empirically correct impact of the shortfall, the action taken 
note only highlights projection of additional allocation at the RE stage, if the  need so 
arises. The Committee, therefore, expects a factual note to be furnished detailing the 
entire gamut of issues on the targeted tourism outcomes due to shortfall of Rs 147.42 
crores in BE allocation.           
                  (Para: 3.2) 
 
The Comm ittee notes that the Ministry, in its Action Taken Note, has simply 
shared the steps taken to liquidate pending UCs; but skipped to mention about a 
dedicated mechanism to resolve the issue of pending UCs within a specified timeline. 
The Committee deprecate s the Ministry for choosing to remain silent on the issue and 
desires to be kept apprised of the mechanism evolved for addressing the recurring 
problem of pending UCs within a given time-frame.       
                  (Para: 4.3) 
 
 

63 
 
INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT OF TOURIST CIRCUITS AROUND SPECIFIC 
THEMES (SWADESH DARSHAN) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the measures in place to monitor the progress of 
implementation of projects under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme. The Committee would, 
however, recommend that a web -based monitoring system/ online portal should also be 
developed to monitor the progress level of the projects sanctioned under the SDS and it 
should also have a feature of uploading photos/ videos made by the Project Monitoring 
Committee during its visit to th e project site. This would ensure greater transparency 
and accountability.          (Para: 5.2)  
The Committee is constrained to note that against an amount of Rs. 627.40 
crores approved in December, 2019 for the 10 projects sanctioned under the Rural 
Circuit during 2018 -19, only Rs. 45.01 crores has been released so far which indicates 
that the Ministry has not exercised due diligence in its Budget formulation which may 
result in massive financial underperformance under this Head. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should urgently address the pending issues 
pertaining to the implementation of the 10 projects and ensure their implementation in 
right earnest so that scarce resources are not kept locked up.           
                  (Para: 6.2) 
The Committee is constrained to note that there has been substantial under -
utilization of funds released against four out of the five projects under the scheme of 
Development of Buddhist Circuit. In a country like ours, where resources are sca rce, 
under-utilization of nearly 50% of allocation is a matter of great concern. The 
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should atleast now take 
appropriate corrective measures to address the factors which have led to the financial 
underperformance and time overruns.               (Para: 7.4) 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON PILGRIMAGE REJUVENATION AND HERITAGE 
AUGMENTATION DRIVE (PRASHAD) 
 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that a proposal for 
modifications in the existing g uidelines has been initiated . The Committee sincerely 
hopes that the proposed measures will facilitate accelerating the pace of implementation 
of the projects under PRASHAD. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the 
efficacy of the new measures proposed.                       
                  (Para: 8.2) 
DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKET 
DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 
  
 The Committee would like to know how much money out of the Domestic and 
Overseas Promotions and Publicity has been spent for promoting Niche Tourism. 
(Para: 9.4) 
The Committee would also like the Ministry to develop a database pertaining to 
planning and evaluation of the tourist sites under Domestic Tourism Programme.  

64 
 
 (Para: 9.5) 
 
The Committee would expect the Ministry to  examine the recommendations 
contained in the final Report of the National Productivity Council on a fast -track basis 
so that a coherent and consistent policy could be finalized. The Committee should be 
kept apprised of the final outcome in the matter.      (Para: 9.6) 
 
TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
           
     The Committee expects the Ministry to brace itself for a targeted action 
in this regard, so that there is absolute clarity on training guidelines to be issued to 
various private institutions/ implementing agencies for the upcoming tourism skill 
development programmes.                 (Para: 10.5) 
 
The Ministry should develop a database that includes list of stakeholders of 
tourism industry alongwith the details of implementing agencies/ employe rs/ employed 
trainees etc. The Ministry of Tourism in coordination with Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship should also formulate policies/ schemes for 
generating opportunities of self employment for the unemployed trainees.      (Para: 10.6) 
The performance of the Ministry in terms of achieving its target leaves too much 
to be desired against an annual target of 57,430 trainees for the FY 2019 -20, only 27,449 
candidates have been trained/ certified in various skill development programmes. The 
Committee apprehends that this mismatch between the target and the actual number of 
persons trained, would have a bearing on the growth of the tourism and hos pitality 
industry, which continues to experience shortage of a skilled workforce. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should address this shortcoming 
seriously.                    (Para: 11.2) 
The Committee had specifically asked the Min istry, inter-alia, to apprise it of the 
number of dedicated teacher training institutes set up under the Scheme - Assistance to 
IHMs/FCIs/IITTM/NIWS and the current production of trainers/ teachers vis-à-vis 
their requirement. The reply of the Ministry is d evoid of any such details. The 
Committee is astonished to find that the Ministry has not maintained relevant data and 
has been unable to provide such crucial information to the Committee. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation contained in  Para 126 of the 275 th Report and 
expects the Ministry to collect the necessary data as asked for and furnish the same to 
the Committee.            (Para: 12.2) 
 
CONNECTIVITY 
 
 The Committee notes that out of 46 routes approved for inclusion under RCS -
UDAN-3, only 16 have been operationalized which suggests that the headway made is 
not satisfactory . The Committee notes that at its behest, an inter - Ministerial 
Coordination Commit tee for tourism sector has been set up. The Committee desires 
that this Committee should also act as a dedicated mechanism for planning, 

65 
 
coordination and timely operationalization of the remaining routes. Procedural or 
operational hurdles, if any, should a lso be resolved expeditiously through this 
Coordination Committee.                     (Para: 13.2) 
The Ministry should apprise the Committee of the reasons for delay and the 
steps taken to address the same.               (Para: 14.4) 
The Committee desires  to be kept apprised of the follow -up action taken by the 
Ministry of Railways on the recommendation regarding conducting a third party audit 
and cleanliness ranking of the railway stations.       (Para: 15.2) 
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF TOURISTS  
 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the further progress made in the 
matter.             (Para: 16.2) 
INDIA TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (ITDC) 
 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this 
direction.                     
                         (Para: 17.3) 
MISCELLANEOUS 
The Ministry under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme must focus on developing 
tourism infrastructure under thematic tourist Circuits with an objective to enhance the 
visiting experience of the tourists at the sites ident ified under various circuits under this 
scheme. The Committee reiterates that the Ministry should proactively seek proposals 
from State Governments/ UTs for the purpose of including more places of tourist 
interest under the identified Circuits.         
                          (Para: 18.2)  
 
The Committee recommends that the approval to the two projects, i.e., (i) St. 
Thomas International Shrine, Ernakulam and (ii) Cheraman Juma Mosque, Thrissur  
may be expedited. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the decision taken in the 
matter.           (Para: 19.3) 
 
Since Belum Caves which are renowned for their speleothem structures, hold 
historical significance in the cultural heritage of India, the Committee would like the 
Ministry to proactively pursue the matter of their development with the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the 
action taken by the Ministry in this regard.        
                         (Para: 20.2) 
 
The Committee had sought information regarding proposals sent by the State 
Governments for inclusion under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, which are pending 
approval by the Ministry. The Committee feels pained to observe that the reply of the 
Ministry is generic in nature and does not address the issue highlighted by the 

66 
 
Committee. The Ministry ought to have taken caution and circumspection in 
formulating its reply and furnished the requisite information. The Committee hopes 
that the Minist ry would be forthcoming with detailed information so that the purpose 
for which the information was sought for in Para 194 of the 275th Report, is served.  
                        (Para: 21.2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


 
 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:0 0 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th October, 2020 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
3. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Margani Bharat 
5. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
6. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
9. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
10.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
12. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
13.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
At the outset, t he Chairman welcomed the Members to the  first meeting of the 
reconstituted Committee and sought their cooperation for its smooth and effective functioning. *
 * *. 
2. * * *. He then informed the Members that the next agenda of the meeting was 
to adopt two draft Reports on Action taken by the Government on Recommendations/  
* Relates to other matters. 
 
67

 
Observations made by the Committee in its Reports on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of the 
Ministries of Tourism and *  *   *. He informed the Committee that it is gratifying 
to note that out of 77 recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry of Tourism has accepted/ 
acted upon 56 recommendations and *    *  *. 
3. The Chairman then highlighted the fact that in pursuance of the Committee’s 
recommendation made in its 275 th Report, the Ministry of Tourism has constituted a Task Force 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Tourism comprising senior officers of the 
Ministries of Civil Aviation, Road Transport & Highways, Railways and other Ministries, to 
look into the connectivity and other related issues pertaining to tourism. *  * *.  
4. The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. *  * *. 
5.   The meeting adjourned at 3:50 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                               P. Narayanan 
6th October, 2020            Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Relates to other matters. 
 
 
 
68

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 28th January, 2021 in Committee 
Room No. 4, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Margani Bharat 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Dushyant Singh 
12. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director  
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses 
*   *   *. 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. * 
 *   *. 
3. *   *   *. 
 
* Relates to other matters 
 
 
69

4. *   *   *. 
5. *   *   *. 
6. *   *   *. 
7. *   *   *. 
8. *   *   *. 
9. *   *   *. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
10. The Committee then decided to present/lay the following Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on 3rd February, 2021:- 
i. *   *   *; 
ii. *   *   *; 
iii. *   *   *; 
iv. *   *   *; 
v. 284th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its 275 th Report on Demands for  
Grants (2020-21) of Ministry of Tourism; 
vi. *   *   *; and 
vii. *   *   *. 
11. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and in his 
absence, Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Rahul  
Kaswan, M.P. and in his  absence, Shri Tirath Singh Rawat, M.P. was authorized  to lay 
the above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13. The meeting adjourned at 11:58 A.M. 
 
 
New Delhi, P. Narayanan 
28th January, 2021 Director 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matters 
 
70