54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
                                   
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT & TOURISM
 
 
FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
FUNCTIONING OF BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 12.12.2001)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 12.12.2001)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
NOVEMBER 2001/AGRAHAYANA, 1923 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                                             
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                     
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT GLANCE
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                      
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT & TOURISM
(Constituted on 1st January 2001)
 
 *1.      Shri Khagen Das          –          Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3.         Shrimati Vanga Geetha
4.         Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
5.         Shri Nabam Rebia
6.         Shri Parmeshwar Kumar Agarwalla
7.         Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave
8.         Shri Vikram Verma
9.         Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
  **10.Shri S.S. Chandran
11.       Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
12.       Shri Satish Pradhan
+ 13.    Vacant
14.       Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia
15.       Shri Korambayil Ahammed Haji
             
LOK SABHA
Shri Sunder Lal Patwa
Shri Braj Mohan Ram

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
22.       Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra
23.       Shri Suresh Chandel
24.       Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
25.       Shri Srikantadatta Narasimharaja Wadiyar 
26.       Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
27.       Shri Balbir Singh
28.       Capt. Satish Sharma
29.       Shri K. Karunakaran
30.       Shrimati Margaret Alva
31.       Shri Anil Basu
32.       Shri S.P. Lepcha
33.       Shri G. Sreenivasa Rao
34.       Shri K. Srinivasulu
35.       Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
36.  Shrimati Reena Choudhary
37.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
__________________________________________________________________________________
* Appointed as the Member and the Chairman w.e.f. 11.6.2001 vice Shri Md. Salim who resigned his seat in the Rajya
 Sabha.
** Nominated w.e.f. 14
th August 2001.
+ Vacany caused due to retirement of Smt. Jayanti Natrajan w.e.f. 24th July 2001 from the Rajya Sabha
+ + Nominated w.e.f. 13th November 2001.
(i)
38.       Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
39.       Shri Akbor Ali Khandoker
40.       Shri Sukdeo Paswan
41.       Shri Hassan Khan
42.       Shri G.M. Banatwalla
43.       Shri P.C. Thomas
44.       Shri Ramsheth Thakur
# 45.        Shri N.T. Shanmugam
   
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
___________________________________________________________________________________
#   Nominated w.e.f. 26
th February 2001.
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport & Tourism, having
 been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, present this Fifty-Fourth Report on “Functioning of Border
 Roads Organisation”. 
2.         The Committee at its meeting held on the 10th October 2001 considered the subject and heard the Secretary and
 other officials of the Border Roads Development Board and Border Roads Organisation.
3.         The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Border Roads Development Board and Border

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
 Roads Organisation for placing before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with the
 subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members in the meeting.
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 28th November 2001.
 
NEW DELHI;
November 28, 2001
Agrahayana 7, 1923 (Saka)
 
KHAGEN DAS
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport & Tourism.
 
REPORT
Roads have traditionally been the principal mode of connectivity between places and in hilly areas; they are often the
 only mode available for the transportation of men and material. Apart from carrying traffic independently from point to
 point, our road system is the main feeder to the railway system, ports and harbours and thus forms a part of integrated
 transport network. The development and maintenance of the National Highways is the responsibility of the Central
 Government, which is normally carried out through the agency of the State Governments. The rest of the network i.e.
 State Highways, major District Roads and village roads is with the State Governments and Panchayat Raj Institutions.
 The Border Roads Organisation is entrusted with construction and maintenance of strategic roads in the hilly and
 difficult terrain areas.
2.         Protection of her borders is always an important task for any Nation in the World. Due to variation in
 geographical stature, the country like India has foremost and very important responsibility to guard her borders from
 the enemies. Roads near the borders i.e. border roads also play vital role in safeguarding the borders of the nation as
 they provide critical help to operational defence priorities.
3.         Keeping in view the importance of Border Roads Organisation, the Committee decided to make-an indepth-
study of functioning of the Border Roads Organisation. Giving the details of the evolution of the Border Roads
 Organisation, the Border roads Development Board in their brief stated that prior to independence, a general impression
 prevailed that the North and North East borders of the country were quite immune to any external aggression because
 of the mighty Himalayas. But the subsequent infiltration of armed insurgents in Kashmir in 1948 and the claim of
 China over Tibet generated an awakening in the psyche of the Indian leadership, that the Himalayas were no longer a
 reliable natural barrier against possible aggression from across the border. The early years of post independence era
 exposed India to 15000 kms long border needed to be protected. Intimately connected with it was the fate and future
 development of the vast, remote and economically backward North and North Eastern Region having a poor road
 communication network.
4.         With the Constitution having declared road development as a State subject, this responsibility continued in the
 North and North Eastern States to rest with the State PWDs even where the defence strategy and operations were
 involved. However, soon it emerged that the roads to the Border States were forbidding challenges, needing dedicated
 commitment, time and money. An overall slow progress saw critical operational defence priorities getting seriously
 delayed, over the first two Five Year Plans.
5.         It was, therefore, in 1960, that the need for a single executive body for road development in the remote north and
 North Eastern Region of the country was strongly felt. Thus, on 29
th March 1960, the Border Roads Development
 Board (BRDB), as an inter-ministerial body with the status of a department was set up, under the Chairmanship of the
 then Prime Minister, late Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, to co-ordinate an economically viable plan for expeditious execution
 of roads and other development projects, aimed primarily at enhancing the defence potential and at the same time
 accelerating the economic development of the North and North Eastern Border States. The Director-General (Border
 Roads) (DGBR) is the field arm of the Border Roads Development Board (BRDB).
6.         The Border Roads Organisation (BRO) was set up on 7
th May 1960, as a road construction executive force,
 partly integral to and in support of the Army and primarily conceived to meet its strategic requirements. Headed by a
 Director General Border Roads (DGBR), as the Executive head, it provided a General Reserve Engineer Force (GREF),
 as the execution force, to build and maintain roads, through an establishment of Chief Engineer Projects. The GREF is
 a unique force, conceived as an unarmed, civilian Organisation as per Article 33 of the Constitution, but modeled and
 trained on military pattern. This civil force in uniform was subjected to the CCS (C&A) Rules 1965 and also to the
 provisions of the Army Act and Rules for discipline.

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
7.         In 1991, the composition of the Border Roads Development Board was re-constituted, the Raksha Mantri was
 appointed as the Chairman of the Board. The present composition of the Board is as under:-
Raksha Mantri (Chairman)
ê
è Rajya Raksha Mantri (Vice Chairman)
          Minister of Road Transport & Highways
ê
______________________________________________________________________________
ê                                 ê               ê               ê                 ê                ê                ê
Cabinet Secretary
ê
Defence Secretary
ê
COAS
  ê
FA (DS) E-in-C DGBR DG (RD) Secretary,
 BRDB
CAS  
Secretary M/o Home Affairs
ê
Secretary (E), M/o External Affairs
 ê
Secretary, Planning Commission
ê
Secretary, M/o Road Transport and Highways
 
8.         With a humble beginning of just two projects-Project Tusker (renamed Project Vartak) in the East at Tezpur and
 Project Beacon in the West at Srinagar, the BRO grew within a short period of three years to seven Projects due to
 overwhelming response and result oriented functioning. Producing quality work with little time or cost overrun, even in
 the most adverse conditions of working is the hallmark of the BRO. Additional work, not only from the Army but also
 from other Central Government Ministries, State Government and Public Sector Undertakings got entrusted to the
 BRO. As a result, the BRO has grown further from strength to strength over the last four decades to become a vast and
 vibrant Organisation with thirteen Chief Engineer Projects spread across the length and breath of the country.
9.         Each project is headed by a Brigadier from the Corps of Engineers or a GREF officer of the rank of a Chief
 Engineer, a task force by a Colonel or a Superintending Engineer and functional platoons by a Captain or an Asst.
 Engineer.
10.       At present, the Border Roads Organisation employs approximately 70,000 casual paid labourers over and above
 33, 123 GREF personnel. Over the years, the Border Roads Organisation has diversified from road construction to
 flyovers, permanent bridges, and airfields, major building projects and in a modest way to allied works for
 hydroelectric and tunneling projects.
ROLE/FUNCTIONS OF THE BRODER ROADS ORGANISATION
The Government of India has laid down the role of Border Roads Organisation in times of peace and emergency/war i.e.
Role of Border Roads Organisation in Peace
To develop and maintain the operational road infrastructure of General Staff in the border areas.
To contribute to the socio–economic development of the border states.
Role of Border Roads Organisation in War
To develop and maintain roads to keep Line of Control through in original sectors and re-deployed sectors.
To execute additional task as laid down by the Government contributing to the war effort.
12.       During operations and emergencies, the BRO perform, apart from the basic-role of development/maintenance of
 roads, to keep the line of communication. The following tasks may be entrusted by the COAS/Army Commander: -
Construction/Maintenance of Advance landing Grounds, helipads and helidromes.
Handling of Stores in Advance maintenance Area, Corps Maintenance Area and Engineer stores dumps.
Construction of Bailey bridges.
DCB Filling Schemes, Flooding Schemes and repair/maintenance of canals.
To assist Engineers in construction of under ground command and control centres for formation Head Quarters.
13.       The works executed by the BRO are divided into two broad categories:-
General Staff Works- The works, which the BRO executes as per the requirements of the Military Operations
 Directorate of Army Headquarters (MO Dte), are called General Staff (GS) Works. These works are based on a ten-
year General Staff Road Perspective Plan finalised by the MO Dte, in consultation with Headquarter Commands. The

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
 current plan is for the period 1997-2007. Execution of GS Works is the primary task of the Border Roads Organisation.
(ii)        Agency/Deposit Works- Works other than for General Staff, which are carried out for the several Ministries of
 the Central Government are the Agency works. The works of Public Sector Undertakings, State Governments and some
 Semi-Government Organisations are called Deposit works. The BRO is also called upon to carry out Operational works
 for Army Formations. These Operational works are also categorised as Agency works.
14.       The Border roads Organisation functions on the concept of Management by Objectives, the objectives being the
 achievement of targets each year, as laid down by the BRDB. These targets are in terms of the sequential functional
 activities required to construct a road, an airfield, a permanent bridge or a building project.
SNOW CLEARANCE          
15.       The Border Roads Organisation also does the snow clearance activities in high altitude areas during summer and
 winter seasons.
16.       The completion of the summer snow clearance of the Srinagar –Zojila –Leh and the Manali –Sarchu-Leh roads
 in time and its maintenance throughout the year, contributed to the success of the armed forces in the ‘Operation Vijay’
 in 1999. This sustained activity also extended to several other operationally vital road sectors in the forward area, thus
 permitting the quick and timely re-deployment of forces by the Army. The maintenance of road communications
 continued throughout the Kargil operations. The post-Kargil situation required the development of several new roads as
 a time bound task. Project Himank, entrusted with this responsibility, progressed these road sectors with singular
 dedication and commitment, to meet the deadlines set.
17.       The overall achievements of the BRO since inception are: -
                        -Formation                   29,139 Kms
                        -Surfacing                     34,306 Kms
                        -Permanent Works       Rs. 2,329 crores.
                        -Major Port Bridges     16,601 Mtrs.
18.       At present there are 242 roads totaling 14723 kms in various stages of construction by the BRO. These include
 the General Staff Roads as well as National Highways.
19.       The Committee appreciates the functioning of Border roads Organisation in construction and maintenance of the
 border roads in the remote, inaccessible and far flung areas, which play vital role in operations of defence activities.
 The Committee also appreciates the works of Border Roads Organisation of summer snow clearance of the Srinagar-
Zojila-Leh and the Manali-Sarchu-Leh roads in time, which supplement the activities of the Armed forces. It also helped
 the Indian army to a great extent in success of “Operation Vijay” launched in Kargil during 1999. The work done by the
 BRO during that period was commendable.
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS BY BRODER ROADS ORGANISATION
20.       The Committee was informed that the Border roads Organisation has played a major role in developing and
 maintaining the national highways in border areas particularly in the North and North Eastern region of the country.
 The details of national highways entrusted to the BRO for development and maintenance are tabled below: -
 
S. No. NH    Number Name Length in   
 Kms
Remarks PMs       
 Package
Development and Maintenance by GS
1. NH1A Pathankot-Jammu-Srinagar-Uri 505  
2. NH22 Wangtu-Pooh 89  
3. NH31A Sevok-Gangtok 93  
Development by MOST and Maintenance by GS
1. NH 1B Batote-Kishtwar-Sinthan Pass 192  
2. NH-1C Domel-Katra 15  
3. NH 39 Dimapur-Kohima-Mao-Maram 129 1996
4. NH 44 Jowai-Rattachera-Curaibari-Agartala 416 1996/2000
5. NH 52 Jonai-Dirak 337  
6. NH 52A Banderdewa-Itanagar-Gohpur 61 1996/2000
7. NH 53 Badarpur-Silchar-Jiribam-Imphal 288 1996
8. NH 54 Silchar-Vairangte-Aizawl-Tuipang 561 1996
9. NH 54A Theriat-Lunglei 9  
10. NH 54B Venus Saddle-Saiha 27  
11. NH 58 Rishikesh-Joshimath-Mana 300  

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
12. NH-150 (Part) Kohima-Lainey-Jessami 130 2000
 
21.       Apart from above, there are six important National Highways and part of NH-150, which were entrusted to BRO
 by MORT&H only for development. These are listed below:-
S.No. NH From To Length (Km) Remarks PMs Package
1. 17B Verma Sada 18  
2. 16 Jagdalpur Maharashtra/AP
 Border
255  
3. 62 Duhdhnai Nangwalbibra 82 2000
4. 44 (Extn) Agartala Sabroom 132  
5. 44A Luipang Manu 110 2000
6. 150 (Part) Jessami Yanganpokpi 174  
7. 151 Karimganj Sutarkandi 14 2000
 
22.       Under the National Highways Development Programme (NHDP), the Border Roads Organisation has been
 entrusted with the work of four laning of NH-1A of Approximately 400 Kms Pathankot to Srinagar. This Sector has
 been divided in to three sub sectors
                                    Srinagar –         Jammu Sector
            Jammu   –         Pathankot (Km 80 to Km. 97.20)
            Jammu  –          Pathankot (balance sector)
The Committee observed that there was little or negligible participation of Border Roads Organisation the Golden
 Quadrilateral and North-South and East-West Corridor projects and wanted to know the reasons therefor. The
 Committee was informed that the Border Roads Organisation was not permitted competitive bidding for National
 Highways Projects and other State roads projects because BRO is a Central government Organisation. However, the
 BRO was willing to have active participation in the National Highways Development Programme and is confident of
 maintaining cost and quality of construction and the speed of execution matching to ones that of corporate sector.  If
 BRO may be permitted to undertake works on cost plus basis, then it is easy for the Organisation to take part in these
 projects.
24.   The Committee is constrained to the note that the Border Roads Organisation has little or negligible participation in
 the National Highways Development Programme which is limited only to those National Highways which fall in
 difficult, inaccessible and remote areas of border States. The Border Roads Organisation has not been allowed
 competitive bidding for National Highways Projects and other State roads projects just because of it being a Central
 Government Organisation. The Committee is of the opinion that the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) is
 yet to develop adequate institutional arrangements and therefore, it may not be possible for the NHAI to handle the
 National Highways Development Programme (NHDP) independently. On the other hand, the Border Roads
 Organisation is a well disciplined, motivated and the largest construction Organisation in the country equipped with
 proven capability and expertise developed over more than forty years in the area of the construction of roads, national
 highways, permanent bridges etc in border areas. The Committee has also been given impression that the potential of
 the Border Roads Organisation is not being fully exploited. The Committee, therefore, recommends that some
 mechanism be evolved which can ensure the participation of the Border roads Organisation in competitive bidding for
 National Highways projects and other state road projects. The Committee hopes that by increasing participation of
 Border Roads Organisation in NHDP and other state road projects, the country will be benefited by the expertise and
 experience of Border Roads Organisation in that area.
INADEQUATE GENERAL STAFF BUDGET
25.       The Border Roads Organisation is not funded under the Plan. It does not follow any five-year plan approach.
 The Army Head quarters had prepared a ten-year General Staff Road perspective plan for the period 1997-2007. The
 budgetary resources of the Border Roads Development Board are being utilised for implementing the perspective plan.
 However, the Annual Works Plan is prepared in consultation with the Army Headquarters. The Annual Works Plan for
 the period of 1997-2002 as approved by the Government, to confirm to the Ninth Five Year Plan is given below: -
ANNUAL WORKS PLAN
(1997 - 2002)
S/No Item Unit Targets
   GS Agency Total
1 Formation Kms 300 400 700

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
2 Surfacing Kms 540 1060 1600
3 Re-surfacing Kms 2400 - 2400
4 Permanent Works Rs lacs 5500@ 8500@ 14000@
5 Permanent Bridges Mtrs 600 600 1200
@ To be enhanced each year based on the escalation/inflation
26.       Each year, the overall targets to be achieved as per the approved Annual Works Plan are converted to a road-
wise Annual Works Plan targeting each work, an Annual Force Level Plan, re-distributing the functional platoons/RCCs
 based on the ground requirements and an Annual Equipment Plan indicating the holding, deficiency and planned
 procurement of plant and equipment. These are got approved by the Government each year. The detailed execution of
 the approved Annual Works Plan on ground is left to the DGBR and the Project Chief Engineers.
27.       The Committee was further informed that due to the limitations of General Staff budgetary support, the present
 ratio of General Staff works as compared to Agency works is 65: 35. Agency works are undertaken only after an
 approval in principle is accorded by the BRDB. The assessed cost is accepted by the Agency and a firm allotment is
 received from the Ministry or the funds are deposited by the Agency in the form of a cheque/draft drawn on the
 Controller of Defence Accounts (Border Roads). The Agency pays usage charges levied for the use of plant and
 equipment for execution of their works, since all plant and equipment are purchased from the GS budget. The charges
 so levied are incorporated in the GS budget as recoveries and are available in the financial year for expenditure. The
 financial workload of the BRO for GS and Agency works for the last 6 years is tabulated as under:-
Year GS (Rs Crs) Agency (Rs. Crs) Total (Rs Crs) % age
    GS Agency
1996-97 (RE) 411.60 245.61 657.21 62 38
1997-98 (RE) 524.27 351.66 875.93 60 40
1998-99 (RE) 580.00 408.34 988.34 59 41
1999-2000 (RE) 700.00 339.45 1039.45 67 33
2000-2001 (RE) 765.00 404.28 1169.28 65 35
2001-2002 (BE) 810.00 455.51 1265.51 64 36
 
28.       Since inception, the General Staff Road Perspective Plan 1997-2007 was upgraded in 1999 and with the addition
 of China Study Group/Operation Vijay roads, the budgetary support made available exclusively for the construction of
 GS Roads has become inadequate. The present level of funding stands at Rs. 338 crores per year for execution of
 original works.
29.       The cost of the balance work to be executed as per the upgraded General Staff Road Perspective Plan 1997-2001
 and covering the scope of work physically assessed on ground is approximately Rs. 3037 crores. With the addition of
 several roads now being proposed by Military Operations, Directorate of Army Headquarters, the balance cost is likely
 to go up to Rs. 3782 crores. This does not include the cost of construction of China Study Group Roads, which works
 out to approximately Rs. 536 crores. This work has been taken on deploying existing force levels. Thus, with the
 present level of funding for original works at Rs. 338 crores/year, the General Staff Road Perspective Plan 1997-2007,
 as upgraded and enhanced can be completed only by 2012. To complete the balance work by 2007, the budgetary
 support will need to be enhanced to Rs. 540 crores/year and maintained till 2007 with a provision of 10 percent
 enhancement each year to cater for escalation.
30.       The Border Roads Organisation plays vital role during the war and insurgent conditions. The Committee,
 however, constrained to note that the Organisation is facing crutch of funds for its General Staff works/projects. An
 amount of Rs. 338 crores per year was allocated exclusively for construction of General Staff Roads under the original
 General Staff Road perspective Plan 1997-2007. Thereafter, extra works have been assigned to the Border Roads
 Organisation. Consequent upon upgradation of General Staff Road Plan in 1999, addition of China Study Group roads
 and roads in Operation Vijay have put extra financial burden. The Committee is of the view that the amount of Rs. 338
 crores per year being allocated annually to the Border Roads Organisation is highly inadequate to carry out all these
 works by Border Roads Organisation.
31.       The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budgetary support to the General staff roads should be reviewed
 and enhanced to Rs. 540 crores per year as suggested by BRO and maintained till 2007 with a provision of 10 percent
 enhancement every year to cater to escalation so as to enable the Border roads Organisation complete the balance work
 by 2007.
SHORTAGE OF EQUIPMENTS
32.       The Committee was informed that the Border roads Organisation is having a large work force of about 33000

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
 GREF personnel supported by 70000 casual paid labourers which makes the Border Roads Organisation a labour
 intensive Organisation. But at the same time, the degree of mechanization has been one of the factors contributing to its
 success. However, the level of funding for providing a reliable and sustainable level of plant, vehicle and construction
 equipments (classified as category ‘A’ equipment) has not been adequate to fully meet the needs of the Organisation.
 The requirement of funds for these equipments presently stands at Rs. 198 crores. The annual budgetary allocation this
 year is Rs. 103 crores, resulting in a short fall of Rs. 95 crores for the next financial year in this regard. The Committee
 enquired about the minimum quantum of fund required annually for providing reliable and sustainable level of category
 ‘A’ equipments as well as cost replacement of equipments. The Committee was informed that the minimum quantum of
 funds required annually for the period 2002-2003 to 2005-2006 is as follows:-
 
 
S/N Year Total
1. 2002-03 114.58
2. 2003-04 125.95
3. 2004-05 137.05
4. 2005-06 150.83
33.       In the above table, a 10 percent escalation has been incorporated while working out the minimum quantum of
 funds required annually from 2002-2003 to 2005-2006. This requirement is for making up the deficiencies, which
 would occur on the down gradation of plant, vehicles and equipment after they have outlived their laid-down life. A
 temporary classification is permitted in the BRO, to which the plant, vehicles and equipment are down graded initially,
 before final down gradation of disposal through auction.
The Committee was further informed that the Border Roads Organisation holds earthmoving and road construction
 equipments such as bulldozers, excavators, tippers, load carriers, road rollers, compactors, Hot mix plants, pavers and
 other wider road construction equipment costed at Rs. 688.96 crores with a current depreciated value of Rs. 430.46
 crores. The following criterion is followed when equipment is auctioned: -
Equipment having completed the minimum laid down service life and beyond economical repair.
Accident and premature failure cases, where courts of inquiries and held and equipment auctioned after sanction of the
 competent financial authority.
During the year 2000-2001, equipment worth Rs. 2.14 crores (depreciated value) have been identified for their auction.
35.       The Committee is of the view that the level of funding for providing a reliable and sustainable level of plant,
 vehicle and construction equipments have not been adequate to fully meet the needs of the Organisation. Therefore, the
 Committee recommends that the allocation of adequate funds should be made available to the Border Roads
 Organisation for the coming financial years as to avoid deficiencies which might occur due to down gradation of plant,
 vehicles and equipments.
36.       The Committee is pained to note that the Border Roads Organisation is holding equipments worth of Rs. 688.96
 crores with a current depreciated value of Rs. 430.46 crores. The Committee is of the view that the unrepaired,
 accidental, premature and used equipments can be auctioned. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
 Organisation should proceed actively for the auction of machines and take special dispensation of the government to
 reduce the upset price where it is required, otherwise the machineries will deteriorate further and might become junk
 material. Further, the Organisation should, at regular internals, review the equipment and dispose of such items of
 machinery, which can no longer be used economically instead of building up of inventory of obsolete equipment.
SHORTAGE OF OFFICERS IN THE CIVIL ENGINEERING CADRE
37.       The Committee was informed that rising deficiency in Civil Engineering Cadre in the Border Roads
 Organisation continues to be a cause of concern. The Civil Engineering Cadre officers in the Border Roads
 Organisation are recruited through Engineering Services Examination by UPSC at AEE (Civil) level. The BRO is
 deficient by almost 50.65 percent of AEEs (Civil) due to poor intake and large-scale resignation of the AEEs (Civil)
 recruited through UPSC. The yearly state of intake and resignation of AEEs (Civil) for the last five years is given
 below: -
 
YEAR WISE INTAKE AND RESIGNATION STATE OF DIRECT ENTRY AEEs (CIVIL) DURING LAST
 FIVE YEARS
Calender No. of
 Vacancies
 Projected
  Total Service Put In Total
 percentage
 Resigned
Percentage
 Resigned
 within Two

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
 years of
 Service of
 Total
 Resigned
  Nos
 Joined
Nos
 Resigned
<1
yr
1-2
yr
 
2-3
yr
>3
yrs
  
1996 49 32 16 03 08 03 02   
1997 90 07 05 - 04 01 - 71% 80%
1998 94 08 10* 02 06 01 01 125%* 8%
1999 116 20 13 09 02 - 02 65% 85%
2000 122 28 12 06 03 - 03 67% 75%
 
Total: 471 95 56 20 23 05 08 66% 77%
* Including previous years
After analyzing the above data it is revealed that
number of vacancies are rising every year, rather than reducing or remaining constant;
Out of 471 vacancies projected, only 95 officers joined the Organisation and out of them 56 have resigned;
an average of 66 percent of Direct Entry AEEs (civil) resign prematurely after joining the BRO, further, of the above 66
 percent, 77 resigned within first few years of joining the BRO.
38.       The Committee was further informed about the main reasons for poor intake and large number resignation were
 as follows: -
To work in harsh and uncongenial climatic and ground conditions, inhospitable terrain in the far-flung and remote
 borders where adequate schooling, communication and medical facilities are not available.
Working in hostile environment of borders without adequate security cover.
Lack of adequate compensation for the harsh conditions that officers are required to work-in.
Lucrative packages offered by the private firms and public sector corporations offering jobs to engineers in the
 infrastructure development sector.
Relatively softer nature of jobs in other Government Departments.
39.       The representatives of Border Roads Organisation informed the Committee that the despite a large number of
 vacancies, even in crucial category of officers, the work assigned to the Border Roads Organisation has not been
 allowed to suffer and in majority of cases the Organisation had exceeded the targets.
40.       While considering the above-mentioned reasons for deficiency of the officers in the Civil Engineering Cadre, the
 issue was brought to the notice of the Government. The Government had constituted a High Level Committee to
 recommend improvements in terms and condition of services of GREF personnel. Accordingly, the Committee
 submitted its report on 6
th September 2000 and made recommendations on the following points: -
Grant of North East concessions at par with other Central Government Employees
Enhancement of casual leave.
High Altitude allowance (Project Allowance)
Double HRA in Kashmir Valley
Improvement in ration scale
Issue of Concession Voucher/Free Pass by Rail
Enhancement in ex-Gratia amount in cases of death due to accidents and hostilities.
41.       The North-East Concessions package comprises of additional TA on transfer; additional LTC; road mileage
 allowance; travel by Air (for officers) children education allowance; joining time while proceeding on/returning from
 leave; double HRA and retention of government accommodation at last duty station.
42.       The Committee was informed that a number of retired GREF personnel had approached the Courts for grant of
 North East Concessions to them and all judgments were in their favour. The Supreme Court also rejected the
 Government’s appeal against the same. A decision was thus taken by the Government to de-link the “North East
 Concessions” from the Committee’s Report and process it separately.
43.       After detailed deliberations, the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, has agreed in principle to grant
 the concessions provided the MOD confirms that grant of the concessions above will not give undue benefits to the
 GREF personnel over the Indian Army Personnel. These have been complied with.

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
44.       The High Level Committee had also recommended enhancement of casual leave of GREF personnel to 15 days
 in a year. However, the Department of Personnel & Training (DOPT) did not accept the same and accordingly it was
 requested for restoration of the casual leave to 12 days. The DOPT have expressed no objection to this proposal
 provided approval of the Cabinet is taken. The case is being processed to seek the Cabinet approval.
45.       As regards the other recommendations made by the High Level Committee, not much headway has been made.
The Committee is aware of the fact that the Border Roads Organisation personnel have to work under harsh and rough
 climatic conditions in hostile remote areas of borders. Sometime their lives are in danger or in miserable conditions.
 However, the concessions and facilities extended to these personnel are not adequate. It is pity that since inception
 Border Roads Organisation has not been paid any special attention to make the service conditions attractive in
 comparison to that of other Government departments as a result of which number of vacancies have remained unfilled
 coupled with frequent resignations in category of officers in Border Roads Organisation. The Committee notes with
 concern that even though the High level Committee had recommended for grant of North East concessions to its
 personnel at par with other Central government employees but the government has delinked the “North-East
 Concessions” from the Committee’s Report and process it separately without any justifiable reasons. The Committee,
 therefore, strongly recommends that the Government should on priority basis review their stand on the
 recommendations of High Level Committee keeping in view of the difficulties faced by the BRO personnel and
 consider the grant of all North-East concessions to the personnel of the Border Roads Organisation who are working in
 North East region.
The Committee is also of the view that the nature of work of Border Roads Organisation is of strategic importance to the
 nation and their work should not be allowed to suffer due to the shortage of officers/engineers in the Organisation. The
 working conditions in the Border Roads Organisation are relatively of difficult nature in comparison to other
 Government departments. The Committee finds no justification comparing status of BRO at par with other Government
 Organisations. The work of BRO is operational, technical and specialized and always play vital role in case of any
 emergency and war. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that the Border Roads Organisation should be
 given a special status and efforts be made to attract the talented professionals in the field by offering lucrative packages
 so that the Government can avoid and stop deficiency of officers in the BRO.
The Committee appreciates that despite shortage of officers, Border Roads Organisation has exceeded its targets in
 respect of formation, permanent works, permanent bridges etc.
SHROTAGE OF CLOTHING
The Committee found that the Border Roads Organisation has been facing shortage of clothing for the rank and file for
 long time. Giving the reason therefor, the BRDB informed the Committee that due to mismatch of the budget allotment,
 the clothing articles as per authorization could not be procured and provided to GREF personnel. The requirement
 versus allotment of budget during the last 11-years for the purpose is tabulated as under: -
Financial Year Fund requirement (Rs. in
 lacs)
Fund Allotted (Rs. in lacs) % age allotted
1991-92 872.29 660.00 75%
1992-93 620.44 556.00 90%
1993-94 830.85 404.00 49%
1994-95 854.18 450.00 53%
1995-96 950.00 260.00 27%
1996-97 959.00 500.00 52%
1997-98 1332.65 320.00 24%
1998-99 1817.18 120.00 56%
1999-2000 1884.17 1300.00 69%
2000-2001 2268.86 1350.00 60%
2001-2002 2661.07 2050.00 77%
50.       The cumulative effect of this mismatch of budget to actual requirements over the last many years has resulted in
 an acute deficiency in clothing. The stage has now reached, where the yearly requirement has touched approximately
 Rs. 27 crores. The limited General Staff Fund availability has not permitted this deficiency to be fully made good.
 There is a need for an assured level of funding at Rs. 27 crores per year and be maintained for the next three years, for
 making up the cumulative deficiency, as well as, to cater for replacement.
51.       The Committee feels sorry to note that there is shortage of clothing for GREF personnel. The GREF personnel
 are deployed in high altitude areas and working in highly uncongenial environment in the North East and Kashmir
 Valley, where the wear and tear is extremely high. In such conditions, the deficiency of clothing may not only affect the

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
 morale but also the performance of the personnel of Organisation. The cumulative effect of shortage of availability of
 funds has been that the annual requirement of funds is now about Rs. 27 crores. Against this requirement, the
 government has provided Rs. 18.50 crores and 20.50 crores during 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 respectively. The
 Committee strongly recommends that full requirement of funds for clothing is provided during the current year itself
 and in future adequate funding be provided for clothing.
DEDICATED SECURITY COVER TO THE BRODER ROADS ORGANISATION
The General Reserve Engineer Force is a force in uniform. But, it is not authorized to carry weapons. The Committee
 was informed that out of the 13 Projects, nine are in insurgency/disturbed areas, where the GREF personnel and
 equipment are easy targets for hostile and anti-National elements. Only four Projects are free from this menace. This
 leads to security problems, for which the Border Roads Organisation depends on the State police or the Army. Apart
 from having an adverse effect on the progress of execution of works, the hostile scenario directly affects the morale of
 personnel and the synergy of the Organisation. The GREF has, therefore obtained the following forces from the Army
 to provide a limited security cover:-
 
S. No. Item No. Available Deployment Remarks
(a) Army Pioneer Companies 3 Coys 2 in J&K, 1 in NE  
(b) Army Sappers 300 Nos NE Region In lieu of GREF Pioneers.
 Used for Security Duties
(c) Infantry Territorial Army
 Companies
4 Coys 2 in J&K, 2 in NE  
 
53.       The representatives of BRO informed the Committee that the security cover available to BRO is inadequate,
 more so with the withdrawal of two TA companies in the North-East by 31
st March 2002. It is, therefore, proposed to
 raise 2 numbers of TA battalions comprising of a total of 10 numbers TA Companies for a dedicated security cover to
 the BRO. This case has been referred to the Ministry of Defence for sanction. On raising of 4 numbers of TA
 companies, forming on TA Battalion in Phase-I, by March 2002, 4 numbers of existing TA companies will be
 surrendered to the Army, since these have been taken from the Army by the BRO on a temporary basis. The balance 6
 numbers of TA Companies, forming the second TA Battalion will be raised in Phase II, during 2002-03.
54.       The Committee notes that the GREF personnel work in insurgent/Border areas, affected by the militancy, where
 equipments and GREF personnel are targeted. The Committee feels that the present security cover to the BRO
 personnel is inadequate which affects the projects. There is an urgent need for additional and adequate security cover to
 be provided to the GREF personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposal of the Border Roads
 Organisation for sanction of creation of Territorial Army Battalions should be processed on priority and Territorial
 Army Battalions be formed at the earliest.
MEDICAL FACILTIES AVAILABLE TO BRO PERSONNEL
Border Roads Organisation/General Reserve Engineering Force personnel are entitled for medical
 treatment/reimbursement of medical expenses under the provisions of Central Service (Medical Attendance) rules 1944.
 In stations where CGHS scheme is in operation, they are covered under it (in stations like Delhi, Pune, Nagpur,
 Chandigarh etc.) In these stations, GREF personnel pay monthly contributions at the prescribed rates of the
 Government to avail CGHS facilities. There have been problems in the remote and difficult areas due to scarce
 availability of Civil Hospitals/medical resources. They have now been made entitled to emergency medical facilities at
 remote and difficult localities from Armed Forces Medical Services w.e.f. 31
st August 20-01. In life threatening
 situations the patients may be transferred to Zonal/Command Hospitals in the chain of evacuation and in emergency
 conditions, when the transfer to another Service hospital is recommended, the patient will be transferred by the Service
 transport by rail/by air.
56.       The Committee wanted to know whether the BRO personnel were satisfied with the existing medical facilities.
 The Committee was informed that since the BRO personnel were subjected to army rules and regulations for the
 purpose of discipline, they could not make any representation expressing their dissatisfaction with regard to existing
 medical facilities. The Government also has so far not ascertained satisfaction level of BRO personnel with regard to
 the available medical facilities. However, the Secretary, BRDB during his field tours observed that most of the BRO
 personnel posted in remote border areas did not appear to be satisfied with the existing medical facilities.
The Committee observes that BRO personnel are deployed in remote, far-flung, inaccessible and difficult terrain but the
 existing medical facilities available to them are inadequate. No serious efforts have been made by the Government to

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
 provide proper medical facilities. The Committee is constrained to note that at present only emergency medical
 facilities are available to BRO personnel at Zonal/Command Hospitals. The Committee therefore recommends that they
 should be provided general medical facilities in the hospitals of the Armed Forces considering BRO personnel just as
 members of the Armed Forces.
COMPENSATION/EMPLOYMENT TO DEPENDENTS/WIDOWS OF BRODER ROADS ORGANISATION
 PERSONNEL
58.       In the brief on Border Roads Organisation supplied by BRDB in connection with the functioning of Border
 Roads Organisation, the Committee was informed that the employment of widows of Border Roads Organisation
 personnel, who had died while in service, was not permitted. There are over 156 such deserving cases. It has now been
 decided to permit them for employment on compassionate grounds.
The Committee was further informed that GREF personnel who were killed in accidents and hostilities are not being
 compensated at par with Defence personnel on the ground that they are covered by Workmen’s compensation Act.
 Benefits available to defence personnel range from Rs. 5 to Rs. 7.50 lakhs, whereas entitled GREF personnel will get
 Rs. 2.50 lakhs to 4.50 lakhs in case of accidents (under WCA) and Rs. 2 lakhs in case of hostilities. The
 recommendation of the High Level Committee that benefits to GREF personnel under the WCA should continue and
 the extra amount be paid to them on Ex-Gratia basis so as to bring them at par with Central Government
 Servants/Service personnel is under consideration, as part of the package of the High Level Committee
 recommendations.
60.       The Committee is constrained to note the indifferent attitude of the Government towards the widows and
 dependents of Border Roads Organisation personnel who laid down their lives while serving the Organisation. More
 than 156 cases for employment on compassionate ground are still pending. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
 these cases should be expeditiously settled and employment should be provided to the next kin of the deceased
 personnel of Border Roads Organisation. Possibility should be explored that the widows of the deceased personnel
 should be posted at nearby places so that their family life is not disturbed.
61.       The Committee is unhappy to note that the personnel of the Border Roads Organisation are being discriminated
 in case of compensation on death due to accident or hostilities. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
 compensation should be given to the families of the deceased BRO personnel at par with that given in the case of other
 Central Government Organisation/Departments and Government should also give priority to implement the High Level
 Committee recommendation in this regard.
AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS OF BRODER ROADS ORGANISATION
62.       The Committee observed that the brief on Border Roads Organisation supplied by BRDB did not consist of
 Audit Reports on the accounts of the Border Roads Organisation. The Committee enquired about the reasons therefor.
 In their reply, the representatives of Border Roads Organisation submitted before the Committee that the Border Roads
 Organisation is not a corporate Organisation where the accounts are audited. The Border Roads Organisation does not
 prepare balance sheets of profit and loss accounts. The accounts of Border Roads Organisation are audited by he
 Controller and Auditor General of Defence Accounts. The same rule, as applied to other departments, is applied while
 auditing of accounts of the Border Roads Organisation.
63.       The Committee is surprised to note that the Border Roads Organisation is spending the public money/funds but
 no auditing of accounts is being done by Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The Committee is of the view that
 if the account relating to similar activities of other Organisations are being audited by the Comptroller and Auditor
 General, then there is no justification for not getting the accounts of Border Roads Organisation audited in the similar
 way. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the accounts of the Border Roads Organisation should be got audited
 by the Comptroller and Auditor General, as is being done in the case of any other Government Organisations.
 
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS REPORT
AEE                             :           Assistant Executive Engineer            
BCC                            :           Bridge Construction Company
BRDB                          :           Border Roads Development Board
CDA (BR)                   :           Controller of Defence Accounts (Border Roads)
COAS                         :           Chief of Army Staff
CSG                            :           China Study Group
DG (RD)                      :           Director General           (Roads)
DMC                           :           Drain Maintenance Company
DGBR                          :           Director General Border roads

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
E in C                           :           Engineer in Chief
FA (DS)                       :           Financial Advisor
GREF                          :           General Reserve Engineer Force
IFA (BR)                     :           Integrated Financial Advisor (Border Roads)
MO (Dte.)                    :           Military Operations, Directorate of Army Headquarters
M/O RT &H                :           Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
RCC                            :           Road Construction Company
TA                               :           Territorial Army
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
The Committee appreciates the functioning of Border roads Organisation in construction and maintenance of the border
 roads in the remote, inaccessible and far flung areas, which play vital role in operations of defence activities. The
 Committee also appreciates the works of Border Roads Organisation of summer snow clearance of the Srinagar-Zojila-
Leh and the Manali-Sarchu-Leh roads in time, which supplement the activities of the Armed forces. It also helped the
 Indian army to a great extent in success of “Operation Vijay” launched in Kargil during 1999. The work done by the
 BRO during that period was commendable.
(Para 19)
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS BY BRODER ROADS ORGANISATION
The Committee is constrained to the note that the Border Roads Organisation has little or negligible participation in the
 National Highways Development Programme which is limited only to those National Highways which fall in difficult,
 inaccessible and remote areas of border States. The Border Roads Organisation has not been allowed competitive
 bidding for National Highways Projects and other State roads projects just because of it being a Central Government
 Organisation. The Committee is of the opinion that the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) is yet to develop
 adequate institutional arrangements and therefore, it may not be possible for the NHAI to handle the National
 Highways Development Programme (NHDP) independently. On the other hand, the Border Roads Organisation is a
 well disciplined, motivated and the largest construction Organisation in the country equipped with proven capability
 and expertise developed over more than forty years in the area of the construction of roads, national highways,
 permanent bridges etc in border areas. The Committee has also been given impression that the potential of the Border
 Roads Organisation is not being fully exploited. The Committee, therefore, recommends that some mechanism be
 evolved which can ensure the participation of the Border roads Organisation in competitive bidding for National
 Highways projects and other state road projects. The Committee hopes that by increasing participation of Border Roads
 Organisation in NHDP and other state road projects, the country will be benefited by the expertise and experience of
 Border Roads Organisation in that area.
(Para 24)
The Border Roads Organisation plays vital role during the war and insurgent conditions. The Committee, however,
 constrained to note that the Organisation is facing crutch of funds for its General Staff works/projects. An amount of
 Rs. 338 crores per year was allocated exclusively for construction of General Staff Roads under the original General
 Staff Road perspective Plan 1997-2007. Thereafter, extra works have been assigned to the Border Roads Organisation.
 Consequent upon upgradation of General Staff Road Plan in 1999, addition of China Study Group roads and roads in
 Operation Vijay have put extra financial burden. The Committee is of the view that the amount of Rs. 338 crores per
 year being allocated annually to the Border Roads Organisation is highly inadequate to carry out all these works by
 Border Roads Organisation.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budgetary support to the General staff roads should be reviewed and
 enhanced to Rs. 540 crores per year as suggested by BRO and maintained till 2007 with a provision of 10 percent
 enhancement every year to cater to escalation so as to enable the Border roads Organisation complete the balance work
 by 2007.
(Paras 30 &31)
SHORTAGE OF EQUIPMENTS
The Committee is of the view that the level of funding for providing a reliable and sustainable level of plant, vehicle and
 construction equipments have not been adequate to fully meet the needs of the Organisation. Therefore, the Committee
 recommends that the allocation of adequate funds should be made available to the Border Roads Organisation for the
 coming financial years as to avoid deficiencies which might occur due to down gradation of plant, vehicles and
 equipments.

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
The Committee is pained to note that the Border Roads Organisation is holding equipments worth of Rs. 688.96 crores
 with a current depreciated value of Rs. 430.46 crores. The Committee is of the view that the unrepaired, accidental,
 premature and used equipments can be auctioned. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Organisation should
 proceed actively for the auction of machines and take special dispensation of the government to reduce the upset price
 where it is required, otherwise the machineries will deteriorate further and might become junk material. Further, the
 Organisation should, at regular internals, review the equipment and dispose of such items of machinery, which can no
 longer be used economically instead of building up of inventory of obsolete equipment.
(Paras 35 & 36)
SHORTAGE OF OFFICERS IN THE CIVIL ENGINEERING CADRE
The Committee is aware of the fact that the Border Roads Organisation personnel have to work under harsh and rough
 climatic conditions in hostile remote areas of borders. Sometime their lives are in danger or in miserable conditions.
 However, the concessions and facilities extended to these personnel are not adequate. It is pity that since inception
 Border Roads Organisation has not been paid any special attention to make the service conditions attractive in
 comparison to that of other Government departments as a result of which number of vacancies have remained unfilled
 coupled with frequent resignations in category of officers in Border Roads Organisation. The Committee notes with
 concern that even though the High level Committee had recommended for grant of North East concessions to its
 personnel at par with other Central government employees but the government has delinked the “North-East
 Concessions” from the Committee’s Report and process it separately without any justifiable reasons. The Committee,
 therefore, strongly recommends that the Government should on priority basis review their stand on the
 recommendations of High Level Committee keeping in view of the difficulties faced by the BRO personnel and
 consider the grant of all North-East concessions to the personnel of the Border Roads Organisation who are working in
 North East region.
The Committee is also of the view that the nature of work of Border Roads Organisation is of strategic importance to the
 nation and their work should not be allowed to suffer due to the shortage of officers/engineers in the Organisation. The
 working conditions in the Border Roads Organisation are relatively of difficult nature in comparison to other
 Government departments. The Committee finds no justification comparing status of BRO at par with other Government
 Organisations. The work of BRO is operational, technical and specialized and always play vital role in case of any
 emergency and war. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that the Border Roads Organisation should be
 given a special status and efforts be made to attract the talented professionals in the field by offering lucrative packages
 so that the Government can avoid and stop deficiency of officers in the BRO.
The Committee appreciates that despite shortage of officers, Border Roads Organisation has exceeded its targets in
 respect of formation, permanent works, permanent bridges etc.
(Paras 46,47 & 48)
SHORTAGE OF CLOTHING
The Committee feels sorry to note that there is shortage of clothing for GREF personnel. The GREF personnel are
 deployed in high altitude areas and working in highly uncongenial environment in the North East and Kashmir Valley,
 where the wear and tear is extremely high. In such conditions, the deficiency of clothing may not only affect the morale
 but also the performance of the personnel of Organisation. The cumulative effect of shortage of availability of funds
 has been that the annual requirement of funds is now about Rs. 27 crores. Against this requirement, the government has
 provided Rs. 18.50 crores and 20.50 crores during 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 respectively. The Committee strongly
 recommends that full requirement of funds for clothing is provided during the current year itself and in future adequate
 funding be provided for clothing.
(Para 51)
DEDICATED SECURITY COVER TO THE BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION
The Committee notes that the GREF personnel work in insurgent/Border areas, affected by the militancy, where
 equipments and GREF personnel are targeted. The Committee feels that the present security cover to the BRO
 personnel is inadequate which affects the projects. There is an urgent need for additional and adequate security cover to
 be provided to the GREF personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposal of the Border Roads
 Organisation for sanction of creation of Territorial Army Battalions should be processed on priority and Territorial
 Army Battalions be formed at the earliest.
(Para 54)
MEDICAL FACILITIES AVAILABLE TO BRO PERSONNEL
The Committee observes that BRO personnel are deployed in remote, far-flung, inaccessible and difficult terrain but the
 existing medical facilities available to them are inadequate. No serious efforts have been made by the Government to

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
 provide proper medical facilities. The Committee is constrained to note that at present only emergency medical
 facilities are available to BRO personnel at Zonal/Command Hospitals. The Committee therefore recommends that they
 should be provided general medical facilities in the hospitals of the Armed Forces considering BRO personnel just as
 members of the Armed Forces.
(Para 57)
COMPENSATION/EMPLOYMENT OT DEPENDENTS/WIDOWS OF BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION
 PERSONNEL
The Committee is constrained to note the indifferent attitude of the Government towards the widows and dependents of
 Border Roads Organisation personnel who laid down their lives while serving the Organisation. More than 156 cases
 for employment on compassionate ground are still pending. The Committee, therefore, recommends that these cases
 should be expeditiously settled and employment should be provided to the next kin of the deceased personnel of Border
 Roads Organisation. Possibility should be explored that the widows of the deceased personnel should be posted at
 nearby places so that their family life is not disturbed.
The Committee is unhappy to note that the personnel of the Border Roads Organisation are being discriminated in case
 of compensation on death due to accident or hostilities. Therefore, the Committee recommends that compensation
 should be given to the families of the deceased BRO personnel at par with that given in the case of other Central
 Government Organisation/Departments and Government should also give priority to implement the High Level
 Committee recommendation in this regard.
(Para 60 & 61)
AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS OF BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION
The Committee is surprised to note that the Border Roads Organisation is spending the public money/funds but no
 auditing of accounts is being done by Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The Committee is of the view that if
 the account relating to similar activities of other Organisations are being audited by the Comptroller and Auditor
 General, then there is no justification for not getting the accounts of Border Roads Organisation audited in the similar
 way. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the accounts of the Border Roads Organisation should be got audited
 by the Comptroller and Auditor General, as is being done in the case of any other Government Organisations.
(Para 63)
MINUTES
*XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 10
th October 2001 in Room No. 63, First floor, Parliament
 house, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Khagen Das - Chairman
 
            RAJYA SABHA
 
Shrimati Vanga Geetha
Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
Shri Nabam Rebia
Shri Vikram Verma
Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
Shri S.S. Chandran
Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia
 
LOK SABHA
 

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
Shri Braj Mohan Ram
Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
Shri Suresh Chandel
Shri Vilas Muttemwar
Shri Balbir Singh
Shri Anil Basu
Shri K. Srinivasulu
Shrimati Reena Choudhary
Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
Shri Akbhor Ali Khandoker
Shri Sukdeo Paswan
Shri G.M. Banatwalla
Shri Ramsheth Thakur
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additinal Secretary
Shrmati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE BORDER ROADS DEVELOPMENT BOARD AND BORDER ROADS
 ORGANISATION
 
Shri Santosh Kumar, Secretary
Lt. Gen. Prakash Suri, Director General of Border Roads
Brig. M. Swaminathan, Deputy Director General
Brig. B.S. Dhaliwal, VSM, Deputy Director General
Shri R.K. Sawhney, VSM, Director
Mrs. Deepa Sengar, Deputy Secretary
________________________________________________________________________
* Minutes from 1
st to 12th meetings relate to other matters.
 
2.         *                      *                      *
 
3.         The Committee then took up the examination of the “Functioning of Border Roads Organisation” and heard the
 views of the Secretary, BRDB on the subject. The Secretary, BRDB and the officers of the BRO, while presenting their
 views, replied to the points raised by the Members.
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.55 P.M.
_______________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to matter not included in this Report.
*XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 28
th November 2001 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.         Shri Khagen Das - Chairman

54th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/54threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:53:12]
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shrimati Vanga Geetha
Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
Shri Nabam Rebia
Shri Parmeshwar Kumar Agarwalla
Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave
Shri S.S. Chandran
LOK SABHA
Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
Shri Vilas Muttemwar
Shri G. Sreenivasa Rao
Shri K. Srinivasulu
Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Shri Akbhor Ali Khandoker
Shri Hassan Khan
Shri N.T. Sanmugam
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered its draft Fifty-Fourth Report on the “Functioning of Border Roads Organisation” and
 after some discussion adopted the Report with slight modifications.
3.         The Committee then decided to present the said Report to both the Houses of Parliament on Wednesday, the 12
th
 December 2001. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Smt. Vanga Geetha and Shri Satish
 Pradhan to present the Report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Anil Basu and in his absence Shri Vilas Muttemwar to lay
 the Report on the Table of Lok Sabha.
The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
_____________________________________________________________________­_______
* Minutes 14
th meetings relate to other matters.
 