1 
 
  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2018/ Agrahayana,  1940 (Saka) 
 
  
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
264 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Fifty Eighth Report on the Demands for Grants (2018-19) 
of the Ministry of Culture 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on   14th  December, 2018) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 14th  December, 2018) 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 

3 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Fifty Eighth Report on the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the 
Ministry of Culture 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  14th  December, 2018) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  14th  December, 2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2018/ Agrahayana,  1940 (Saka) 
 


4 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS               (iv)-(v) 
4. REPORT         1- 
CHAPTER-I-   RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
CHAPTER-II-  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY  
CHAPTER-III- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
CHAPTER-IV- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
                               
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE    
    6. *MINUTES          
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________________________________  
*To be appended at printing stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2018-19) 
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2018) 
1. Shri Derek O'Brien   - Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Praful Patel 
7. Kumari Selja  
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi 
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
13. Shri Vinod Chavda 
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh 
16. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar 
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
18. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, AVSM (Retd.) 
19. Shri P. Kumar  
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala 
21. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
22. Shri Rajesh Pandey  
23. Shri Rajesh Ranjan (Pappu Yadav) 
24. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy  
25. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
28. Shri Rakesh Singh 
29. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
30. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari  
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal  
 
 
 
(i) 
 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
 Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present 
on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred and Sixty Fourth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained 
in its Two Hundred and Fifty Eighth  Report on Demands for Grants (2018 -19) of the 
Ministry of Culture. 
2.  The Two Hundred and Fifty Eighth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 6th March, 
2018  to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Fifty Eighth Report was received from the Ministry of Culture on 31st July, 
2018. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the           
26th November, 2018.   
 
 
 DEREK O'BRIEN 
NEW DELHI;                                           Chairman, 
November 26, 2018                                           Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
5 Agrahayana, 1940                             Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                               Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

8 
 
ACRONYMS 
ACC : Appointment Committee of the Cabinet 
ADG : Additional Director General 
ASI : Archaeological Survey of India 
BE : Budget Estimates 
BTI : Buddhist Tibetan Institution 
CCRT : Centre for Cultural Resources and Training 
CDAC : Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
DG : Director General 
DoPT : Department of Personnel Training 
DR : Deputy Registrar 
DU : Delhi University 
FoI : Festival of India 
FY : Financial Year 
HCM : Hon‘ble Culture Minister 
HPC : High Powered Committee 
HRD : Human Resources Development 
ICH : Intangible Cultural Heritage 
ICT : Information and Communication Technology 
ID : Identity Document 
IGNCA : Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
IGNOU : Indira Gandhi National Open University 
IGRMS : Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya 
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology 
INA : Indian National Army 
INI : Institute of National Importance 
JDG : Joint Director General 
KMMMT : Komagata Maru Martyr‘s Memorial Trust 
KF : Kalakshetra Foundation 
LDC : Lower Division Clerk 
LIC : Life Insurance Corporation 
LKA : Lalit Kala Akademi 
MAKAIAS : Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of Asian Studies 
MoA : Memorandum of Associations 
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding  
MP : Member of Parliament 
MTS : Multi Tasking Staff 
NCF : National Cultural Fund 
NCSM : National Council of Science Museum 
NER : North East Region 
NGMA : National Gallery of Modern Art 
NICSI : National Informatics Centre Services Incorporated 
NM : National Museum 
NMI : National Museum Institute 
NML : National Mission on Libraries 
NMM : National Mission for Manuscripts 
NMML : Nehru Memorial Museum and Library 
NNM : Nava Nalanda Mahavihara 
 
                        (iv) 

9 
 
NRLC : National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural 
Property 
NSD : National School of Drama  
NVLI : National Virtual Library of India 
MAKAIAS : Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of Asian Studies 
OM : Office Memorandum 
PMO : Prime Minister‘s Office 
PS : Private Secretary 
RE : Revised Estimates 
RRRLF : Raja Rammohun Roy Library Foundation 
RRs : Recruitment Rules 
SA : Sahitya Akademi 
SBI : State Bank of India 
SCSC : Search-cum-Selection Committee 
SLP : Special Leave Petition 
SNA : Sangeet Natak Akademi 
SSC : Staff Selection Commission 
UGC : University Grants Commission 
UNESCO : United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission 
UT : Union Territories 
VC : Vice Chancellor 
VIP : Very Important Person 
ZCC : Zonal Culture Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture on 
the observations / recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred and Fifty Eighth Report 
on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Culture which was presented to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 6th March, 2018. 
 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 31 st July, 2018, in 
respect of all the observations/recommendation s contained in the 258 th Report. The replies 
have been categorized as follows:—  
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations / Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 28, 30, 32, 56, 63, 73                                                                                                
Total: 7 
 
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations / Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 8, 17, 24, 26, 35, 37, 39, 41, 43, 52, 54, 59, 61, 68, 71, 76, 82, 
84, 87, 88, 89                                                                                         
Total: 21 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 15, 19, 45, 46, 60, 70, 78, 80, 85, 86  
Total: 10 
 
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations / Observations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Ministry are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: 33, 50, 57, 65, 66, 83  
Total: 6 
 
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those 
recommendations/observations which have been categorized as interim replies by the 
Committee should be furnished at the earliest. 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
MINISTRY’S PROJECTED DEMAND vis-à-vis Budgetary Allocation 
 
1. The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation for 2018 -19 has been marginally 
increased by 3.83% more than the budgeta ry provisions at BE 2017 -18 which is not an 
increase at all considering the inflation. This Committee is unhappy to note that Culture has 
not been given due attention and totally ignored by the Government. The allocated amount is 
short by Rs. 999.7 crore a gainst the projected amount. The Committee was informed by the 
Ministry that due to the cut in the allocation the functioning of ASI and various museums may 
be affected. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue for an increase in 
budget allocation during RE 2018 -19 as the activities undertaken by the Ministry of Culture 
are very crucial in maintaining the cultural identity of the nation by highlighting and 
preserving its rich cultural heritage.           
 (Para 11 of the 258th Report) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Efforts will be made by the Ministry to get the allocation enhanced at RE 2018 -19 to 
undertake the activities of the Ministry which have been adversely effected due to marginal 
increase of Budgetary allocation at BE 2018-19. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.2 The Committee notes the reply.  
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
 
2. The Committee is happy to note the progress made in the matter of providing e -
ticketing facility in ASI protected ticketed monuments and museums as it makes it convenient 
for visitors to plan their visit to the monuments in advance and help them to avoid the hassle 
of waiting at the ticket counters. The Committee desires that the facility of e -ticketing may be 
introduced in the remaining ASI protected monuments as well. 
 (Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The instruction of the Committee for introduction of e -ticketing facilities in the 
remaining protected monuments has been followed for implementation. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.2 The Committee may be  kept apprised of the progress made by ASI in this 
regard. 
 

12 
 
3. The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Department and hopes that in 
the long run the spirit to maintain cleanliness in all the protected sites is sustained with same 
zeal and enthusiasm. 
 (Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 All out efforts would be made to sustain the enthusiasm shown in the cleanliness. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
4. The Committee hopes that the upgradation work in the 100 identified monuments are 
completed within a fixed timeframe so that in future other monuments are identified as 
Adarsh Monuments for upgradation as there is an urgent need to upgrade a large number of 
monuments which are in a poor state of preservation.        
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Efforts would be made to identify the monuments to declare them as Adarsh 
Monuments so that their preservation and up-gradation could be taken up. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2 The Committee notes the reply  and would like to be informed of the details of 
identified monuments. An action plan may also be prepared to preserve & upgrade the 
identified monuments in a time bound manner. 
 
CULTURAL MAPPING OF INDIA 
 
5. Cultural mapping embraces a broad definition of cultural resources which includes a 
wide range of tangible resources such as arts and heritage organizations, cultural 
occupations and industries, cultural and natural heritage – among others. It also explores the 
areas of intangible cultural  assets – the stories, traditions and unique quality of life that 
shape our identity and sense of place. It is a dynamic concept. It will help in building better 
information on the cultural assets in our country . A cultural asset inventory will be created,  
i.e., the project will produce a baseline database of cultural resources in the country. The 
Committee recommends that committees may be formed in different parts of the country to 
provide input and advice to the mapping project. These committees may be c omprised of a 
wide cross section of rural, urban, municipal, cultural, business and communit y 
representatives and interests for  Cultural Policy to provide a broad framework to support 
cultural planning and cultural development.  
(Para 56) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Observation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2 The Committee notes the reply. 

13 
 
 
NATIONAL CULTURAL FUND (NCF) 
 
6. The Committee recommends that the ongoing projects under NCF should be 
monitored in regular intervals and the working of the Project Implementation Committee for 
each project should also be scrutinized regularly so that delay and pendency can be avoided 
by timely sorting out of problems. 
 (Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Observations of the committee have been noted down for compliance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
STEERING COMMITTEE ON BUDDHIST CIRCUIT 
 
7. The Committee takes note of the initiative and recommends that concerted efforts in 
the right direction should be an ongoing process. 
 (Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 In view of the recommendation of the committee, the concerted efforts are being 
taken with stake holders. To review the progress on the various issues taking in the 1 st and 
2nd meeting of Steering Committee, a meeting with all stakeholders on the agenda points of 
coordination on development of Buddhist Circuit is being taken shortly with regard to ASI, 
the initiative as enumerated would be continued as an ongoing process with regar d to the 
terms of reference and jurisdiction of Archaeological Survey of India. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
7.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
  

14 
 
   
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2018-19) OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
1. The Committee is distressed to note that against a projection of Rs. 3156.23 crore at 
RE 2017-18 an amount of Rs 2666.94 crore as ceiling of RE 2017 -18 was allocated by the 
Ministry of Finance which is a further reduction from budgetary allocation at BE 2017 -18. 
The Committee notes with dismay that though the Ministry of Culture has demanded more 
allocation at RE stage in 2017 -18 for  works including the preservation of monuments, the 
Ministry of Finance reduced the allocation which is a clear indication that the Government is 
giving least priority to the activities of Ministry of Culture. 
 (Para 8 of the 258th Report) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Against the projection of Rs. 3156.23 crore at Revised Estimates (RE) 2017 -18 the 
Ministry was allocated Rs. 2666.94 crore. This reduction is mainly on account of reduction in 
total scheme allocation. However, the allocation for 2018 -19 has be en increased marginally 
by 3.83% of BE 2017 -18 to Rs. 2843.32 crore. The Ministry would take up the issue of 
enhancing the allocation at RE 2018-19 with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.2 The Committee may be kept apprised of the reply received from the Ministry of 
Finance regarding enhancing the allocation at RE 2018-19 stage. 
 
12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN 
 
2. In this regard, the Committee suggests that as the Ministry of Culture largely deals 
with sectors of Art and Culture where outp uts may not be quantified, however a progress 
report on qualitative terms may be provided to the Committee. As regards a number of 
schemes projects/activities where achievement are quantifiable the performance of the 
Ministry is very poor. It again shows i nefficiency on the part of the Ministry. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take every possible step to ensure that the stipulated 
outputs are achieved on time. 
 (Para 17) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The Ministry is in agreement with the observations of the Committee with regard to 
the measurement of outputs in qualitative terms and Ministry would make all out efforts to 
showcase the outputs in terms of qualitative aspects.  

15 
 
2.2 Ministry implements a n umber of schemes through its organiz ations/autonomous 
bodies/NGOs.  Besides, this other schemes such as Repertory Grant, Financial Assistance to 
Cultural Institutions with National Presence, Financial Assistance for Building Grants 
including Studio Theatre s, Financial Assistance for Tagore Cultural Complexes and Scheme 
for Pension and Medical Aid to Artistes are also implemented by the Ministry.   
2.3 There are established monitoring mechanisms under the existing guidelines of scheme 
components/schemes to e nsure quantitative and qualitative outcomes of activities being 
undertaken by the grantee organization. The Ministry periodically ensures whether the 
stipulated outputs are being achieved on time by periodic evaluation of the schemes/projects 
by Expert Committees constituted for this purpose and also through physical inspections/field 
visits by officials /experts. The measurable output and outcome indicators under the different 
schemes are also defined by the Ministry and the same are also monitored by the Ministry. To 
measure the quantitative and qualitative achievement of the autonomous bodies, MoUs are 
signed with them with regard to the targets to be achieved during the year.  These targets are 
monitored periodically at the level of senior officers of th e Ministry.  The annual 
achievements in respect of the schemes and autonomous bodies are reflected in the Annual 
Report of the Ministry. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.4 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
 
3. The Committee welcomes the initiative taken to construct boundary walls for ASI 
protected monuments and removal of encroachment from centrally protected 
monuments/sites. The Committee recommends that every effort should be made to construct 
boundary walls and fencing to each of the 3686 nationally protected monuments in a time 
bound manner. The Committee hopes that construction of boundary walls will go a long way 
in preventing further encroachment of monuments. The Committee recommends that steps 
should be tak en so that no new encroachment takes places on such sites as removal of such 
encroachment is a very cumbersome process. The Committee may also be provided a list of 
monuments/sites from where encroachments have been removed. 
 (Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The construction of boundary walls and removal of encroachment are ongoing 
process. The suggestion of the Committee would be followed. A list of monuments/sites from 
where encroachment has been removed is given below: - 
   
Details of encroachments partially removed from the centrally protected monuments during 
the last three years 
Sl. 
No. Name of monument Locality District State 
1. Mahadev Temple Belpan Bilaspur Chhattisgarh 

16 
 
2. Chaiturgarh Fort Lapha Korba 
3. Danteshwari Devi Temple Dantewada South Baster 
4. Asafi Imambara Lucknow Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 
5. Warren Hasting‘s House Barasat North 24 Parganas West Bengal 
6. Ther Mound Sirsa Sirsa Haryana 
7. Mosque of Ali Vardi Khan Sarai AlaVardi, Gurgaon 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
4. The Committee is unhappy to note the delay in implementation of e -Governance in 
ASI and fails to understand the delay. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
take proactive steps to ensure that e -Governance is implemented in ASI at the earliest. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 (Para 26) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The process for selection for vendor for implementation of e -governance in ASI has 
been completed and the work awarded to National Informatics Centre Services Incorporation 
(NICSI) through empanelled vendor. The contract for development of software signed with 
NICSI. The whole process shall be completed within one year from the date of s igning of 
agreement. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2 The Committee notes the reply  and hopes that necessary follow up  action to 
implement the recommendation of the Committee should be taken up by the Ministry in 
right earnest. 
 
5. The Committee appreciated the measures taken by ASI for extending social security 
schemes to the contractual employees and recommends that welfare measures for workers 
are of immense importance for any organization as the country is progressing and a decent 
Human Development Index needs to be achieved.          
(Para 35) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Welfare measures as prescribed from time to time are extended to the contractual 
employees of ASI. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
6. The Committee notes that since the rule is clear there should not be any problem in 
carrying out demolition orders in future. However, the Committee recommends that Legal 
Consultant at the Circle level should be engaged to expedite the cases with regard to 
encroachment and illegal/unauthorized constructions in the ASI protected monuments. 

17 
 
(Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Legal Consultants have been engaged at ASI Headquarters. All Circles have been 
directed to avail services of Legal Consultants at ASI Headquarters. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
REGIONAL CENTRES OF NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA 
 
7. The Committee is unable to comprehend the delay in granting the status of Institution 
of National Importance to NSD. The Committee desires to receive a status report on the issue 
of grant of the status of Institution of National Importance to the National School of Drama. 
The Committee recommends that the opening of new Regional Centres of National School of 
Drama should be carried on so as to facilitate the young people across the country to have 
access to such great infrastructure and pursue their interest in the field.      
(Para 39) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 National School of Drama (NSD) Society has taken a decision on t he 
recommendation of the Sub -Committee constituted by them to defer the proposal for 
opening of new centres till the status of ―Institution of National Importance‖ is granted to 
NSD by the Government. The status of the proposal sent to Prime Minister‘s Off ice (PMO) 
for declaring NSD as an ―Institution of National Importance‖ is as under:-   
7.2 A draft  Bill provided by NSD was re -drafted in the Ministry taking into account 
present and future requirement, i.e. (i) declare NSD, Delhi an Institution of Nationa l 
Importance; and (ii) establish in future as well similar schools with the identical status. In 
consultation with Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department, draft Cabinet 
Note and Draft Bill were prepared.   After having approval of Hon‘ble C ulture Minister 
(HCM), a copy of the Note for Cabinet was forwarded to the Principal Secretary to the Prime 
Minister for comments. However the Prime Minister‘s Office vide their letter dated 
17.05.2016 had returned the Cabinet Note with following observations:-  
(i) the conferring of ‗Institution of National Importance‘ by way of Central Act is nothing 
but creation of a University by a central legislation. The same purpose can also be 
served if the Institution gets a status of a ‗deemed University‘. 
(ii) autonomy for the Institution may be more for the ‗Deemed University‘ than the 
Institution created by way of special Act as they (Special Act) may contain certain 
conditionalities. 
7.3 PMO also advised NSD to engage with Human Resources Development 
(HRD)/University Grants Commission (UGC) and reclaim its status as a ‗Deemed to be 
University‘. Cabinet Secretary also discussed the same on 29.7.16and the CoS recommended 
as ―The NSD is a highly reputed even without being an INI. The  proposal may be re -
examined by the Ministry‖. 
7.4 The matter was placed before the NSD Society in its meeting  dated 28.11.2016. 
Society discussed the matter at length and unanimously resolved that efforts be made to get 

18 
 
the status of ‗Institute of National Importance‘ considering  the valuable contribution of NSD 
in the field of Theatre and Training. A delegation led by Prof. Waman Kendre, Director, NSD 
also met Private Secretary (PS) to Hon‘ble Prime Minister and apprised the position to him. 
7.5 A Cabinet Note for ―Declaring National School of  Drama, Delhi as an Institution of 
National Importance‖ was again forwarded to PMO  vide note dated 3.5.2017. PMO vide its 
e-mail dated 29.5.2017 had sought more justification to the need of a new law.  Reply to the 
same was conveyed to PMO vide ID Note dat ed 22.09.2017.  No further communication in 
the matter received from PMO so far. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
7.6 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee notes that more than a year has 
passed and the matter is still pending with PMO. The Committee recommends that the 
matter may be pursued with PMO. 
 
PLAN ASSISTANCE FOR STATE AKADEMIS 
 
8. The Committee observes that the Central Akademis can provide basic platform to the 
State Akademis to work effectively at the grass root level to preserve and promote the diverse 
cultural heritage of the country. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Culture 
is focusing some attention to the State Akademies which are in a poor financial condition. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of C ulture should devise some scheme 
specifically to help the financial needs of the State level Akademis as they are a neglected lot 
at present. 
              (Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The three Akademies of this Ministry i.e. Sahitya Akademi (SA), Sangeet Natak 
Akademi and Lalit Kala Akademi are already working in collaboration with state 
Akademies.  
8.2 Sahitya Akademi organizes several literary programmes in collaboration with the 
State Akademies across the country. Sahitya Akademi and the State Akademies also 
collaborate during the participation in book fairs and festivals.  
8.3 Lalit Kala Akademi provides financial assistance for organizing Camps/ Workshops/ 
Exhibitions/ Seminars on fine/ visual art to various organizations including the State 
Akademies under the Scheme Financial Assistance to Art Organizations by Ministry of 
Culture.  
8.4 Sangeet Natak Akademi has been providing assistance to the State Akademies in the 
field of perfo rming Arts and also conducting programmes in collaboration with State 
Akademies.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.5 The Committee notes the reply  and hopes that the Ministry will make periodic 
assessment to monitor the benefits of its assistance to State Akademies.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE HIGH POWERED COMMITTEE 

19 
 
 
9. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has taken some initiatives towards 
implementing the recommendations of the High Powered Committee and recommends that 
concerted steps should be taken to implement the recommendations of the HPC so that the 
concerned cultural institutions can be function efficiently and give optimum output. The latest 
status on the implementation of HPC recommendations by various institutions may be 
furnished to the Committee. 
(Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The process for implementation of the recommendations of the High Powered 
Committee (HPC) has been initiated. As per the recommendations of the HPC, this Ministry 
is in the process of finalizing the existing  Memorandum of Associations (MoAs) of 
concerned autonomous organizations. With the approval of HCM and in consultation with 
Department of Legal Affairs as well as Legislative Department of Ministry of Law & 
Justice, the MoA of Lalit Kala Akademi has recent ly been amended and notified on 
27.4.2018.  The amendment in MoA of National School of Drama has been finalized with 
the approval of HCM and the same is being referred to Ministry of Law & Justice for its 
vetting.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
VACANCIES EXISTING IN VARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS OF THE MINISTRY 
 
10. The Committee takes cognizance of the unfilled senior level vacancies existing in 
various Organizations of the Ministry of Culture and desires to be apprised of  as to how 
these organizations are functioning without such senior level people. The Committee desires 
to be apprised of the outcome with regard to the steps taken to fill all these vacancies so far. 
The Committee urges upon the Ministry that the Recruitme nt Rules and other related matters 
should be finalized well in advance in co-ordination with the concerned authorities.     
(Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of organization 
and Name of post  
Status 
1. Vice Chancellor, Nava 
Nalanda Mahavihara, 
Bihar 
 
As per UGC (Institution to be University) (third 
Amendment) Regulation, 2016 vide Notification dated 
8th February, 2016, the Recruitment Rules (RRs) for the 
appointment of Vice Chancellor of Nava Nalanda 
Mahavihara (NNM), Nalanda, Bihar have been revised with 
the approval of Hon‘ble Culture Minister. 
The post was advertised on 07.04.2017 for calling the 

20 
 
application in various newspapers. However, due to some 
discrepancies were raised between Recruitment Rules (RRs) 
and advertisement, the post of Vice -Chancellor, NNM, 
Nalanda was re-advertised on 11.11.2017 in the Employment 
News and various newspaper for calling of the applications. 
The last date of the application was 13.12.2017. In the 
meantime, the composition of the Search -cum-Selection-
Committee (SCSC) was forwarded to DoPT for their 
approval. However, DoPT observed that there may be clash 
of office of profit on nomination of Shri Narendar Jadhav‘s, 
Member of Parliament (MP) (Rajya  Sabha) for SCSC for 
appointment of Vice Chancellor (VC), NNM. The matter has 
been forwarded to Rajya Sabha Secretariat for their 
view/observation. Since, no response had been received from 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, the Ministry vide letter dated 
07.12.2017 and 03.01.2018 had reminded to Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat in this regard. The Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide 
OM dated 10 th January, 2018 has informed that the matter 
has been taken up with the Ministry of Law and Justice and 
the comments/opinion of the M/o Law & justice are still 
awaited.   
As the matter has been pending for about 2 years after 
creation of post of VC, NNM, Nalanda and as no 
observation/view has been received from Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat after passing of 5 months, hence, with the 
approval of HCM, a new composition of SCSC including the 
name of Prof. K.T.S. Sarao, Prof., Dept. of Buddhist Studies, 
Delhi University (DU) in place of Shri Narendar Jadhav, MP 
(Rajya Sabha) has been forwarded to DoPT for their 
approval. Efforts are being taken by the Ministry to fill up 
the post of Nava Nalanda Mahavihara (NNM), Nalanda. 
 
2. 
 
Archaeological Survey 
of India 
 
Filling up of some posts have been pending due to non -
availability of eligible candidates for promotion as well as 
direct recruitment. Further, the Recruitment Rules for some 
of the posts are under modification which is being pursued 
with DoPT /UPSC/M/o La w. Through constant efforts taken 
by the Department, amendment / framing of recruitment 
rules in respect of 27 different categories of posts have been 
got notified in the official gazette. Necessary action for 
filling up the said posts have been initiated in accordance 
with the notified rules.  
2.  ASI has taken up review and amendment of the existing 

21 
 
recruitment rules of another 22 posts with a view to facilitate 
speedy filling up of vacancies. ASI has taken care to ensure 
that the conservation and protection of the centrally protected 
are not adversely affected due to the shortage of manpower 
by resorting to outsourcing of services wherever feasible in 
accordance with the rules. 
3. National Museum The post of Director General, National Museum (NM) is 
already filled up. One post out of two posts of Additional 
Director General, NM was filled through central staffing 
scheme. However, after completion of tenure, the incumbent 
has been repatriated and the post has fallen vacant again. 
Action for filling up the post is being taken. For the other 
post advertisement has been issued 4 times, but no 
applications were received. For the 2 posts of Joint Director 
General, NM, advertisement has been issued many times, but 
no applications were received from eligible candi dates. As 
advised by UPSC amendment of RRs for the post of ADG 
and Joint Director General  (JDG) is under process. 
Amendment of RRs for the various other posts of National 
Museum are underway. 
4. National Gallery of 
Modern Art 
The post of DG, NGMA has been  filled in December, 2016.   
For the posts of Directors in all the 3 branches of NGMA i.e. 
Delhi, Mumbai and Bengaluru, UPSC could not find a 
suitable candidate on Deputation and Direct Recruitment 
despite many attempts. Amendment of RRs for the post is 
underway. Meanwhile, DoPT has been requested to fill the 
post from Central Staffing Scheme keeping the RRs in 
abeyance. Recently, DOPT has posted Deputy Secretary 
through Central Staffing Scheme while keeping RR in 
abeyance. Recruitment Rules in respect of a ll Group-A & C 
posts and 9 categories of Group -B posts in NGMA have also 
been notified.  In respect of 4 categories of Gr. B posts, 
discussion with UPSC for amendment is underway. 
5. National Research 
Laboratory for 
Conservation of 
Cultural Property 
(NRLC) 
The post of Director General (DG), NRLC has been filled up. 
The process of filling up the other senior level posts is 
already underway. RRs in respect of three Group A posts and 
nine Group B posts of NRLC have been revised. 
6. Indian Museum  
 
 
 
The post of Director has been filled recently. Indian Museum 
has also been directed  to finalize the proposal of revision of 
RRs on priority. 
7. Victoria Memorial The post of Secretary & Curator is filled up.  Revision of 

22 
 
RRs is under process.  
8. National Counci l of 
Science Museums 
(NCSM)  
For filling up the post of Director General, applications have 
been received in response to the advertisement issued on 
3.9.2017. The constitution of Search -cum-Selection-
Committee for selection of candidate for the post of DG,  
NCSM is underway. Revision of RRs is under process. 
9. Salarjung Museum  The process for selection of the Director is at an advanced 
stage. The Selection Committee has selected the candidate 
and the recommendations of the Selection Committee have 
been sent to Appointment Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) 
for approval. Recruitment Rules (RRs) in respect of all the 
posts in Salar Jung Museum have been notified. 
10. Allahabad Museum  Filling up the post of Director, Allahabad Museum is under 
process. Recruitment Rules (RRs) in respect of all the posts 
in Allahabad Museum have been notified. 
11. National Museum 
Institute (NMI) 
The senior level post of Registrar and one Professor 
(Conservation) has been filled in National Museum Institute 
(NMI). 
12. Director, Maulana Abul 
Kalam Azad Institute of 
Asian Studies 
(MAKAIAS), Kolkata 
MAKAIAS has been directed to re -advertise the post of 
Director.  At present, Shri  Vinay Kr. Srivastava, Director, 
Anthropological Survey of India, Kolkata has been entrusted 
the additio nal charge of the Director, MAKAIAS w.e.f 
01.09.2017 till further orders. All efforts are being carried 
out for amending existing RRs of the various posts and 
filling up the existing vacancies at various levels. 
13. Director, Indira Gandhi 
Rashtriya Manav 
Sangrahalaya (IGRMS), 
Bhopal 
The extension has been given to the present Director of 
IGRMS.  All efforts are being carried out for amending 
existing RRs of the various posts and filling up the existing 
vacancies at various levels. 
14. National Library, 
Kolkata 
Director General 
Revision of Recruitment Rules for the post of Director 
General, National Library is under process in consultation 
with DoPT/UPSC.  DoPT has vetted the RRs and advised to 
seek views of Deptt. Of Exp. M/o Finance on remuneration 
to be paid to contractual appointee to the post.  Views of the 
M/o Finance are awaited.   DoPT has also been requested to 
fill up the post from available panel of officers, keeping RRs 
in abeyance for a specified time period.  Additional charge 
has been assigned to Director General, Raja Rammohun Roy 
Library Foundation, Kolkata. 
15. Khuda Bakhsh Oriental 
Public Library, Patna 
Director 
The Appointment Committee of Cabinet has advised to 
initiate a fresh selection process for the post of Director, 
Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library.  The post was 
advertised on 09.12.2017. A meeting of the Search -cum-

23 
 
Selection Committee was held on 05.04.2018.   
16. Central Secretariat 
Library, Delhi 
Director 
The post of Director, Central Secretariat Library was 
advertised on1 6.09.2017 and the last date for receipt of 
applications was 15.12.2017.  Applications received are 
under processing for sending a proposal to UPSC. 
17 Lalit Kala Akademi The post of Secretary, Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA) is vacant 
since 1.11.2017. The said post is being advertised by 
Akademi. 
 
* In addition to above, efforts are being made for filling up the vacancies existing at various 
levels in various organizations including amendment of Recruitment Rules. Efforts are being 
made to conduct DPC for filling up posts by promotion. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.2 The Committee notes  that there is substantial progress in filling up of vacancies 
of various institutions under the Ministry of Culture. 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF KOMAGATA MARU MEMORIAL 
 
11. The Committee is happy to note the progress made towards construction of Komagata 
Maru Memorial. The Committee desires that the Ministry should monitor the construction of 
the Komagata Maru Memorial and apprise the Committee of the progress made in this 
regard.              
(Para 54) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Under the Commemoration of Centenary of Komagata Maru incident, a project for 
construction of Komagata Maru Memorial on land belonging to Kolkata Port Trust at Budge 
Budge in West Bengal had been approved . The cost of construction of the Memorial is 
Rs.2.34 crore which is to be borne by Ministry of Culture. A Project Management Committee 
has been constituted with members from the Ministry, Komagata Maru Martyr‘s Memorial 
Trust (KMMMT) and Kolkata Port Trus t. The Committee held its first meeting on 
2ndJuly,2015 to sign a tripartite agreement and also approved the design of the Memorial. 
After completion, the Memorial will be maintained by Komagata Maru Martyr‘s Memorial 
Trust. 
11.2 Ministry has released a sum of Rs. 1.00 crore on 30.12.2016 to the Kolkata port Trust 
as first installment of funds for construction work. Necessary clearance for erection of main 
structure has been obtained from the local authorities. Estimates for the civil work have been 
sanctioned by the Deputy Chairman, Kolkata Port Trust, while estimates for the electrical 
works have been prepared but approval of the competent authority is awaited. The 
construction of the Memorial will be done in a period of one year from the date of its sta rt. 
The Ministry is regularly monitoring the progress of the Memorial with the Kolkata Port 
Trust. 
 

24 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
11.3 The Committee notes the reply  and would like to be informed of the 
developments in the matter. 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON LIBRARIES 
 
12. The Committee is happy to note that Development of Libraries and Archives got Rs. 
99.81 crore in BE 2018 -19 which is 100% increase in budget allocation in comparison to 
2017-18. The Committee while recognizing the importance of National Miss ion on Libraries 
desires to have a progress report on the creation of National Virtual Library of India (NVLI). 
The Committee also wants to be apprised of the utilization of fund allocated so far. The 
Committee recommends that the work related to the schem es under National Mission on 
Libraries should be completed within the extended time provided and accordingly, necessary 
steps should be taken.            
(Para 59) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 
 
A. Progress on creation of National Virtual Library of India (NVLI). 
 
NVLI is being created as a comprehensive database of digital resources of India to 
facilitate federated searching through multilingual user interfaces.  This will facilitate digital 
connectivity of Cultural Resources in India.  Development of the NVLI have been entrusted 
to Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Bombay in collaboration with Centre for Development 
of Advanced Computing (CDAC), Pune and IGNOU, Delhi in Action Research Mode to be 
completed in 3 years at estimated cost of Rs.72.34 crore. 
A prototype development has been done and demonstrated.  Minicloud has been 
established at IIT, Bombay.  More than 11 lakh metadata has been collected and curated.  
Soft launch of NVLI Web Portal has been done on 15 th February, 2018.Data collection has 
been affected due to Intellectual Property Rights  and other legal issues. Technical difficulties 
in respect of porting huge quantum of data and format incompatibility are being sorted out. 
B. Utilization of allocated fund  
Utilization of fund allocated for NVLI is as under: 
Year 
Amount 
approved/allocated for 
NVLI 
(Rs. in lakh) 
Amount released to IIT 
Bombay for NVLI 
(Rs. in lakh) 
Amount utilized 
(Rs. in lakh) 
2016-17 3380.64 3100.00 0994.38 
2017-18 2124.05 1542.26 2059.66 
Total 5504.69 4642.26 3054.04 
 
C. Steps taken for completion of NML within the extended time 
 

25 
 
Meetings of various Committees of National Mission on Libraries are held regularly for 
approval of proposal and release of fund to ensure timely completion of National Mission on 
Libraries. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
12.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
13. The Committee is impressed by the information that under the capacity building 
programme about 2100 library professionals would be trained on modern techniques of 
library services and application of ICT in modernization of library services. However, the 
Committee wants to know whether infrastructure is available to train professionals in such a 
large scale. The Committee recommends th at steps must be taken well in advance to create 
infrastructure and formulate plan to train such a large number of library professionals. 
(Para 61) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Training Programmes are conducted in collaboration with Universities where experts 
from the universities and authorized experts give hands on training to library professionals.  
The programmes are conducted on regional basis.  2100 library professionals are proposed to 
be trained in five years through 60 capacity building programmes with 35 trainees in each 
programme. 19 training programmes have been organized in various parts of the country and 
727 no. of library professionals have been trained.  1373 library professionals will be trained 
during 2018-19 and 2019-20.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
13.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME AND WELFARE FUND 
 
14. The Committee notes that the amount allocated under the Scheme has not been 
utilized fully for the last three years. The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for such 
underutilization.             
(Para 68) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 Life Insurance Corporation (LIC) has been engaged as service provider for disbursing 
pension amount to the existing beneficiaries since April 2009. The disbursement of pension 
to the beneficiaries depends on furnishing of Life Certificate and Income Certif icate by them 
every year to the service provider and found these certificates to be in order. As per scheme 
guidelines annual income of the beneficiary artist including income of the spouse should not 
be more than Rs.48,000/-.   
14.2 Out of the total benef iciaries of 3882 (this excludes 1625 new artistes included in 
Aug. 2017), pension to average 3376 beneficiaries have only been disbursed during 2014 -15, 
2015-16 and 2016 -17 for want of the requisite certificates viz. Life & Income Certificates 
from the beneficiaries.  

26 
 
14.3 Keeping this in view, provision of furnishing of digital life certificate by the 
beneficiaries has been made so that the certificate may not be misplaced in transit post.  
Further, engaging of SBI in place of LIC is being explored as also  furnishing of only 
undertaking in lieu of furnishing of income certificate every year is being proposed with a 
view to ensure smooth disbursal of pension to the beneficiaries. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
14.4 The Committee notes the reply  and hopes that with the change of service 
provider and other measures, the Ministry can expect to utilise the allocated funds to an 
optimum level. 
 
15. The Committee is happy to note that an increased number of beneficiaries have been 
recommended for fina ncial assistance. However, the Committee wants to be apprised of the 
rules/guidelines followed in recommending such beneficiaries. The Committee recommends 
that the contributions of the artistes should be valued and they should be provided financial 
assistance without creating a cumbersome process under the Artistes Pension Scheme. The 
Committee would also like to know the amount that is being disbursed to artists under the 
Scheme.             
 (Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 The applications of artistes are shortlisted for placing before Expert Committee on the 
basis of eligibility criteria prescribed under scheme guidelines, which are indicated in reply to 
point No.70 above. The contribution/work of shortlisted artistes is evaluated in the meeting of 
duly constituted Expert Committee for this purpose comprising heads of various cultural 
organizations under Ministry of Culture and also assisted by eminent artistes in different 
fields of art and culture who have proven their exp ertise in their respective fields and 
therefore are competent enough in judging the contribution/work of artistes.  
15.2 As on date, in any circumstances the contribution of Central Government and State 
Government/UT Administration altogether will not exce ed Rs.4000/ - per month per 
beneficiary in which contribution of State Government/UT Administration should be at least 
Rs.500/- per month per beneficiary. Out of Rs.4000/ -, the monthly contribution of allowance 
of Central Government will be less to the exte nt the monthly contribution of allowance being 
provided to the applicant by State Government/UT Administration. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
15.3 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
GLOBAL ENGAGEMENT & INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION 
 
16. The Committee takes  note of the initiative. The Committee desires that the 
effectiveness and usefulness of various festivals of India may be studied and reviewed to 
ensure that the money is spend for useful purpose. 
   (Para 76) 
Reply of the Ministry 

27 
 
16.1 
I. As part of the Government‘s focused strategy for strengthening international cultural 
relations and enhancing India‘s soft power, Ministry of Culture is mandated with the 
responsibility of organizing Festivals of India abroad. Festival of India (FoI) scheme under 
which F estivals of India are organized, has recently been reviewed and as a way of 
rationalization merged with another Scheme viz. Grant in aid to Indo Foreign Cultural 
Societies into a single Scheme titled ―Scheme for Promotion of International Cultural 
Relations‖. Both Schemes share common objectives. 
II. The Ministry of Culture has organized Festivals of India in 18 countries during 2016 -
17 and in 14 countries in 2017 -18. In addition, celebrations for 70 th Anniversary of India‘s 
Independence were also organized in 55 countries during 2017-18.  It is proposed to organize 
Festivals of India in 22 countries during 2018-19.   
III. After the Festivals of India are over, reports are received from the Missions which 
indicate that these festivals are very effective and useful in showcasing the cultural heritage 
of India.  The benefits accrued from the festivals held abroad are summarized below: 
 Large number of people in general and Very Important Persons (VIPs), government 
officials, academicians, business community and members of diplomatic corps attend 
these festivals.   
 In additional these festivals also reach people through social, electronic and print 
media for which the publicity is done by the Missions. 
 These provide opportunity to the local people to watch live pe rformances of different 
art forms. 
 There has been an increase in awareness and keenness to know and learn about Indian 
culture. 
 There has been an interest shown by people to learn different art forms in India 
 Indian artists do get opportunity and experience/exposure to perform abroad. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
16.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
 
17. The Committee takes notes of the initiatives and recommends that the Ministry should 
ensure that enough fund is allocated under this head and also monitor its utilization. The 
Committee notes that some of the Reports of Anthropological Survey of India are ready for 
publication. The Committee recommends that the Reports may be revaluated with the help of 
experts to e nsure that wrong findings are rectified. The Ministry should also have a 
mechanism in place to verify the reports submitted under various projects of Anthropological 
Survey of India. 
(Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 The reports of the Anthropological Survey of India are based on data and information 
collected from the field by scientific personnel of the Survey and reports are published after 

28 
 
holding workshops on the said reports of the projects wherein external exper ts are also 
involved in discussion. It has an established screening and evaluation mechanism for 
publication of any research report. Only after proper discussion and evaluation the report is 
sent for publication. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
17.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
18. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take steps to protect various 
local art forms available in various parts of the country as most of the art forms are dying 
due to lack of recognition. The Ministry of Culture in co-ordination with Ministry of Tourism 
may make efforts to recognize few local arts and organize small cultural evenings for tourists 
at some dedicated places in various parts of the country. 
(Para 84) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 The seven Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) are taking steps on regular basis to protect 
various local art forms available in various parts of the country. The Ministry of Culture is 
giving full co -operation to Ministry of Tourism for organizing major cultural eve nts for 
tourists like Paryatan Parv, Bharat Parv, Cultural festival at Varanasi etc. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
18.2 The Committee notes the reply  and would like to know  about the steps taken by 
the ZCCs to protect local art form. It also feels that events like Paryatan Parv, Bharat 
Parv, etc. are not a proper platform to provide recognition & protection to local art 
forms as these events turn into a picnic spot & sales counter  for the tourists & local 
people. 
 
19. The younger generation needs to know the composite culture of India and its various 
nuances. The Committee recommends that youngsters should be encouraged by various 
schemes to visit libraries, museums and cultural centres. 
 (Para 87) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Ministry of Culture organizes various cultural festivals like Rashtriya Sanskriti 
Mahotsavs, Sanskriti Mahotsav, cultural events etc. to spread awareness amongst the younger 
generation about the composite culture of India and its various nuances through its various 
organizations and schemes. Through the museums public awareness campaign is carried out 
to attract younger generation to visit museums through their website and Social Media like 
Facebook, Youtube, Twitter etc. The museums organize programmes for youth and children 
such as Summer Camps, Workshops, Seminars, Art appreciation courses, Special weeks etc. 
which are publicized. The schools are also encouraged to bring their students for museum 
visits through outreach programmes. 

29 
 
19.2 Nehru Planetarium under Nehru Memorial Museum and Library (NMML) organizes 
shows about space and promoting education in astronomy. These shows are attended by 
school Children in special group at concessional rates. The Inst itution places considerable 
emphasis on research activities and on the extension of research facilities to scholars. 
Seminars, workshops etc are conducted which is very useful for young generation.  
19.3 Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya (IGRMS), Bhopal: IGRMS organises 
volunteer internship programmes, various special events on the occasion of International 
Museum Day, World Environment Day and also on World Photography day to increase the 
interest of young visitors to museum and library etc. Triba l Literature Festival is also 
conducted by IGRMS. 
19.4 Libraries are holding many programmes for increasing literary awareness among 
youngsters such as quizzes, meets with authors and summer camps etc.  Libraries also 
organize various outreach activities for children and youth to attract them towards library and 
promote reading habits.  Raja Rammohun Roy Library Foundation (RRRLF), in order to 
attract the youngsters to the libraries provides assistance for improvement of library services 
like modernization, advocacy and outreach, construction/renovation library building, library 
web services, establishment of career guidance section, children section, creation of facilities 
for specially abled readers etc. 
19.5 The Akademies i.e. Sangeet Natak Akademi (SNA) , Sahitya Akademi (SA), Lalit 
Kala Akademi (LKA), National School of Drama (NSD), Centre for Cultural Resources and 
Training (CCRT), IGNCA and Kalakshe tra Foundation (KF) through its various schemes, 
programs/activities made awareness among people includin g youngsters to know  about 
Indian culture.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
19.6 The Committee appreciates the different programmes and initiatives being 
implemented by th e Ministry to spread awareness amongst the younger generation of 
our country. The Committee is also keen to understand whether there are mechanisms 
in place for evaluating the impact of such initiatives on the basis of which the Ministry 
may strive in its endeavour to improve engagement. 
 
20. The Committee was informed that present ly the permanent exhibition in National 
Library, Kolkata is done without following sound criteria for selection of names. The 
Committee re commends that there should be a criteria for selection of the names for 
permanent exhibition in National Library, Kolkata. 
(Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The selection criteria for 
permanent exhibition in National Library is as under: 
Name of the Personalities Basis of Selection 
Rishi Bankim Chandra 
Chatterjee/Chattopadhyay 
He was an iconic writer, poet and journalist.  He was the 
composer of India‘s national song ‗Vande Mataram‘ 
originally in Sanskrit stotra personifying India as a mother 

30 
 
goddess and inspiring activists during the Indian 
Independence Movement. 
Chattopadhyay wrote thirteen novels and several serious, 
serio-comic, satirical, scientific and critical treatises in 
Bengali. His works were widely translated into other regional 
languages of India as well as in English. 
Significant material is available at the National Library. 
Gurudev Rabindranath 
Tagore 
First Non-European Nobel Laureate in Literature. A Legend, 
who reshaped Bengali literature and music, as well as Indian 
art with Contextual Modernism in the late 19 th and early 20 th 
centuries. Already N ational Library has installed a statue of 
Tagore. National Library has got a significant collection of 
Tagore literary and art works. 
Netaji Subhas Chandra 
Bose 
One of India‘s most iconic political figures, his contribution in 
Indian Freedom movement thro ugh Indian National Army 
(INA) is unforgettable.   
Shyama Prasad Mukherjee 
 
At the age of 33, he became the world‘s youngest Vice -
Chancellor of the Calcutta University and held the office from 
1934 to 1938. 
He was a Minister for Industry and Supply under the Nehru 
Government. 
 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
20.2 The Committee notes the reply. 
 
21. The Committee has noticed that the persons working as guides mostly give 
explanation and details of the monuments based on wrong and baseless information, many a 
times such information are misleading also. This may be due to ignorance or deliberate 
action. The Committee is aware that every monument has its own history and importance 
based on scientific and historic facts. The tourist who visit the monuments should be given 
correct information by the guides. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should 
be skilled guides in the monuments and museums and strict guidelines for giving licenses to 
such guides should be followed to maintain credibility of information given to public and 
unauthorized guides should not be allowed to such places. The Committee recommends that 
proper documentation and maintenance of data in every site / museum of the country is 
essential and should be strived for. 
 (Para 89) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 The issue of wrong or distracted information given by the tourist -guide including 
more emphasis on popular information is always remain point of concern. This may perhaps 
due to lack of authentic information available with the guides. It may be mentioned h ere that 
most of the guides are not well versed with historical facts/information. In the matter raised 

31 
 
by Deepak Dan in Petition (W.P. No. 4180 of 2015 / SLP (c) No. 30715 of 2014 Deepak Dan 
v/s DG, Tourist & others), the Hon‘ble Supreme Court of India ha d directed ASI to come up 
with a policy for guides. Accordingly, ASI has framed Guide Policy and notified the same on 
31.01.2017 which specify test and training to assess caliber of guides so that correct 
information is passed on to visitors and skilled guides are made available at monuments. 
21.2 Museums which are under the aegis of Ministry, appoint only skilled lectures in 
accordance with the strict eligibility criteria as per the provisions of RRs on permanent and 
contractual basis. No guides are appoin ted on license in museum. However, the 
recommendations of the Committee for maintenance of data at the sites/monument have been 
noted down for compliance.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
21.3 The Committee hopes that implementation of the Guide Policy  will minimize the 
issue of false/factually incorrect information being provided by the guides in tourist 
monuments. 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
12th FIVE YEAR PLAN 
 
1. The Committee takes note of the expenditure made by the Ministry of Culture under 
the Plan and Non Plan heads. The Committee observes that there has been underutilization 
to the tune of Rs.1046 crore under the Plan head since 2012 -13. Underutilization definitely 
shows inefficiency on the part of the Ministry. The Committee may be apprised of the 
hindrances in the way of optimum expenditure. The Committee recommends the Ministry 
should revisit the framework under which the expenditure was  made during 12 thplan to 
identify the reasons for underutilization of funds so as to avoid repetition of the mistakes in 
its future endeavors. 
(Para 15 of the 258th Report) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The utilization of Plan funds during 12 th Plan period (2012-2017) is given in the table 
below: - 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Plan Expenditure BE RE 
2012-13 864.00 864.00 803.79 
2013-14 1537.00 1470.00 1380.13 
2014-15 1835.00 1500.00 1418.58 
2015-16 1485.00 1417.00 1283.19 
2016-17 1755.00 1710.10 1544.78 
Total 7476.00 6961.10 6430.47 
 
1.2 From the above table, it may kindly be seen that against Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs. 
7476.00 crore for the entire 12 th Plan period, the RE was reduced to Rs. 6961.10 crore, 
thereby the underutilization of funds is Rs. 530.63 crore against the RE during the entire plan 
period. The less utilization against RE ceiling was mainly due to various reasons like less 
number of pro posals received under schemes, delay in the meeting of various committees 
under schemes, delay in schemes executions, less utilization by Autonomous Bodies etc. 
Efforts are already being undertaken to address this issue. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.3 The Committee notes that the reasons provided by the Ministry for the non -
utilization of funds are routine in nature, and desires that proactive steps are taken in 
order to make better utilization of funds in the future.  The Committee may be apprised 
about the steps/efforts being taken to address the issue mentioned by the Ministry so as 
to avoid under utilization of funds in the future. 

33 
 
AUDIT PARAS 
 
2. The Committee recommends that an Inquiry Committee may be constituted to look 
into the facts and cir cumstances which led to failure of the Ministry of Culture to fill up key 
posts in National Gallery of Modern Art for over a decade. The Committee wants to be 
apprised of the current status in the matter. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 85 posts in National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA) were created in January, 2011 
including the following key posts in Group A  for manning the affairs of all the 3 branches:-  
Level Number of posts 
Director Two 
Curator Five 
Deputy Curator Eight 
Deputy Director (Programme) One 
Deputy Director (Admn.& Fin.) One 
Assistant Director (Admn.&Fin.) Two 
 
2.2 However, framing and amendment of RRs in these cases could be finalized only in 
August, 2014, October, 2014 and April, 2015. After that the process of filling the posts by 
various methods initiated, details of which are as under:- 
Director – Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) could not find a suitable 
candidate for the post on Deputation and Direct Recruitment (DR) despite 3 -4 
attempts. Amendment of RRs for the post is underway and pending amendment of 
Recruitment Rules (RRs),  Department of Personnel Training (DoPT) has been 
requested to fill the post from Central Staffing Scheme keeping RRs held in abeyance. 
Recently, DOPT has posted Deputy Secretary  through Central Staffing Scheme while 
keeping RR in abeyance. 
Curator – Four posts of Curators have been filled on DR basis and processing for 
filling up remaining posts is under process. 
Deputy Curator – Four posts of Deputy Curators have been filled on DR basis and 
process for filling up remaining posts is under process. 
Deputy Director (Programme) – The post is required to be filled on promotion basis. 
The process for filling up the post is already underway. 
Deputy Director (Admn. & Fin.)  – UPSC could not find a suitable candidate for the 
post in two attempts. Third attempt for filling up the post is being taken up. 
Assistant Director (Admn. & Fin.) – One post has been filled on Deputation. For 
filling up the other post on DR basis, a proposal has been submitted to UPSC.   
2.3 From the above, it is clear that the Ministry has made sincere efforts for filling up the 
posts in NGMA.  Hence, a committee for enquiring into the matter is not called for. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 

34 
 
2.4 The Committee reiterates its recommendation for constitution of an Inquiry 
Committee to look into this matter. The Committee would like to know the reasons 
which caused the finalization of RRs to take about 5 years and the steps which are being 
taken to address the pauc ity of suitable personnel for filling up the posts in National 
Gallery of Modern Art. 
 
CELLULAR JAIL IN PORT BLAIR 
 
3. The Committee is distressed to note that despite its repeated recommendations to 
include the Cellular Jail in Port Blair in the World Her itage List of UNESCO, nothing 
concrete has been done in this regard. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
furnish a status report on the issue at the earliest and keeping in view of the historical 
importance of the Cellular Jail, the Ministry of Culture should take proactive steps to include 
the Cellular Jail in Port Blair in the World Heritage List of UNESCO. 
(Para 45) 
 
4. The Committee has noted that proper data and documentation of history of Cellular 
Jail in Port Blair has not been maintain ed. The Committee therefore recommends that steps 
should be taken to maintain authentic data and avoid any misrepresentation of a place of 
historical importance. 
 (Para 46) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The Cellular Jail in Port Blair is under administrative control of the Andaman and 
Nicobar administration which is being requested to prepare the nomination dossier on 
Cellular Jail for submission to the World Heritage Centre for its inclusion in the World  
Heritage List of UNESCO. The Administration would be apprised about the views of the 
Committee with regard to maintain authentic data and proper documentation to avoid any 
misrepresentation  of a place of historical importance.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2 The Committee does not appreciate the lackadaisical approach on the part of the 
Ministry and the Andaman and Nicobar Administration in the matter. The Committee 
impressed upon the Ministry and the Andaman & Nicobar Administration to make all  
sincere efforts in this regard and initiate measures for completing procedural 
formalities. The Committee  also recommends that ASI should provide technical 
assistance and impress upon the Andaman and Nicobar administration  to expedite the  
preparation of the nomination dossier on Cellular Jail. 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON LIBRARIES 
 
5. The Committee also desires to have a status report on the progress of the work done 
under the NML Model Libraries scheme . The Committee recommends that the work under 
this Scheme should be expedited as libraries play a very crucial role in building the nation.  

35 
 
              (Para 60) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Setting up of NML Model Library is a matching scheme and requires participations of 
the State/Union Territories (UT) library Authorities.  The State /UT Authorities are required 
to submit proposals for consideration and sanction.   A National Seminar was also conducted 
calling proposals from Secretaries/Administrators of all the States/Uts and for expediting 
their proposals.  Af ter sanction, State/UT Authorities are required to deposit matching share.  
Project proposals in respect of 41 State/UT libraries received from 22 states have been 
sanctioned.   Project proposals for establishment of NML Model Libraries have not yet been 
received from 12 States/UTs in spite of repeated reminders and persuasion by RRRLF. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2 The Committee fails to understand the lack of response from the 12 States/UTs. 
NML Model Libraries aim at the upgradation of librarie s providing services to the 
public. As such the Committee advises the Ministry to pursue the matter with 
remaining states in all earnesty. Further, the Committee recommends RRRLF to make 
all efforts to resolve with the States/UTs any issues/problems they m ay be facing in this 
regard. 
 
ARTISTS PENSION SCHEME AND WELFARE FUND 
 
6. The Committee notes that out of the 1625 artistes selected for financial assistance, 
1122 are from three states viz. Odisha, Maharashtra and Telangana. The Committee notes 
that there  is no relation between the number of applications considered and total number 
finally selected for financial assistance. For instance in case of Odisha out of 464 application 
considered, 435 were selected for assistance whereas in case of Karnataka out of  the 726 
application considered only 122 were selected for financial assistance. In some cases all the 
applications considered were selected for financial assistance. There was not given any 
details for such variation or the criteria of selection for givin g financial assistance. The 
Committee therefore recommends that it may be provided with the criteria for selection of 
artistes for providing financial assistance. The Committee urges that the Ministry should take 
care while selecting the artists and it should represent the whole country uniformly. 
(Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 As per existing scheme guidelines, the following are the criteria for selection of 
artistes for financial assistance/pension under the scheme:- 
I. The artist‘s contribution to art and letters etc. must be of significance.  Traditional 
scholars who have made significant contribution in their fields would also be eligible 
notwithstanding the absence of any published works.  
II. Artist should be awardee (State Awardee or National Awardee) or 
categorized/recognized artist of Akashwani/ Doordarshan and who can substantially 
prove his/her source of earning from the art activity during his/her active age. 
III. Personal income of the applicant artist (including income of the spouse) must not 
exceed R s.4,000/- (Rupees four thousand only) per month or annual income of 

36 
 
Rs.48,000/- (Rupees forty eight thousand only) [This excludes artiste pension 
assistance amount already getting by a beneficiary from the Government (i.e. 
concerned State Govt./UT Administration and/or Ministry of Culture)]. 
IV. The applicant should not be less than 60 (sixty) years of age (This does not apply in 
the case of spouse). 
V. The applicant artist is getting pension of at least Rs.500/ - per month from the 
concerned State Government/UT Administration. 
VI. Applications should be submitted by the applicant artist in prescribed form through 
respective State Government/UT Administrations with their recommendations. 
6.2 In order to obtain representation of artistes under the Scheme from the whole  country 
uniformly, it is proposed to send letters to all the Chief Secretaries/Administrators of 
States/UTs whose representations are very less/negligible/not satisfactory, requesting them to 
circulate the Artistes Pension Scheme widely amongst artistes o f their States/UTs through 
local newspapers in their regional language.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.3 The Committee feels that the artists should not have to suffer because of the lack 
of interest shown by the State Governments. Low number of applications from some 
States should not lead to lopsided allotment of the grants to States with high number of 
applications. Instead, the Ministry should reach out to State Governments to sensitise 
them in order to ensure proper representation from all St ates since the importance of 
these grants reaching the deserving artistes cannot be overstated. 
 
NATIONAL MISSION FOR PRESERVATION OF MANUSCRIPTS 
 
7. The Committee notes that the National Mission for preservation of Manuscripts is not 
getting the attention  required from the Government. Though there was a fund allocation of 
Rs.12.00 crores at BE 2017 -18 it was reduced to Rs.5.50 crore during RE 2017 -18 and the 
actual utilization of the allocation is not known to the Committee. The Committee is informed 
about the reasons for reduction of allocation as non -filling of 16 of the 18 academic posts. 
The Committee feels the reason given by the Ministry is not justifiable. The Ministry is not 
showing any leadership qualities to implement the Mission. It should endeav our to appoint 
all the required staff to ensure the success of the programme. The Committee wants to be 
apprised of the steps taken to fill these vacancies. 
 (Para 78) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 At present, the staff working in National Mission for Manuscri pts (NMM) are on 
contractual basis. The extension of their services is given by NMM from time to time as per 
the extant rules. 
7.2 NMM is being advised to get the vacant posts filled up so that the work of the 
Mission does not suffer. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 

37 
 
7.3 The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for which the vacant posts in 
NMM have not been filled thus far.  The Committee also desires to know as to whether 
any time bound action plan has been prepared to fill the vacant posts. 
 
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS 
 
8. The Committee is distressed to note that till 31.01.2018 only Rs. 65.54 cr. against RE 
2017-18 of Rs. 131.63 crore in NER which was reduced from Rs.175.50 crore at BE stage 
2017-18 could be utilized. The Committee wants to be appris ed of the reasons for such gross 
underutilization of funds in NER. The Committee further notes that an allocation of 175.50 
crore again been made at BE 2018 -19. The Committee feels that the Ministry has no road 
map for the activities to be undertaken under  the NER head. The Committee observes that 
North East Areas demand a lot of activities to keep pace with the other parts of the country. 
However, the Government is not taking enough measures to execute the work allocated under 
various yojanas and schemes under the Ministry of Culture. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should endeavour to spend the allocation to a reasonable extent. 
(Para 80) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The reduction in allocation at RE stage due to less expenditure by the Ministry against 
the allocated sum of Rs. 175.50 crore at BE 2017 -18. This reduction was mainly due to 25% 
cut imposed on NE allocation by the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
(DoNER). However, Ministry has incurred an expenditure of Rs. 103.98 crore during the year 
against Rs. 131.63 crore at RE (2017 -18).  As per MoF‘s guidelines the NER allocation 
should be 10% of the scheme allocation of the Ministry which comes out to be Rs.67.60 
crore.  However, Ministry is maintaining budget allocation of Rs. 1 75.50 crore is being 
maintained under NER at the level of previous year. 
8.2 In its endeavour to spend the allocation in NER to an optimum level, Ministry has 
been taking activities through its organizations such as Buddhist Tibetan Institutes (BTI), 
Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs), Museums, Libraries, Akademies and also through various 
schemes clubbed under the Umbrella of ―Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana‖ scheme. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
8.3 The Committee feels that over 20% of the all ocated sum for the North Eastern 
region is going unutilized. The Ministry should take the required steps to ensure that 
the funds available to it are utilized in a proper manner  in keeping with the 
development of the unique tribal culture, customs, folk da nce and craft of the North 
Eastern States. 
 
9. The Committee recommends that Sangeet Natak Akademi should be given due 
importance as it is the repository of various art forms in the country. Workshops on 
Natyashashtras should be conducted with international collaboration. 

38 
 
 (Para 85) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Sangeet Natak Akademi (SNA), an autonomous body under Ministry of Culture is 
one of the premier organizations caters to the domain of music, dance and drama. The 
organization is given due importance by providing all support and cooperation towards the 
functioning of the Akademi from time to time. Out of the three premier academies which are 
SNA, Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA) and Sahitya Akademi (SA), the SNA has the highest 
budget allocation (for the financial year 2018 -19 it is 66.66 crores). In recent years th e SNA 
has enhanced its activities and is striving for covering all sections of the society in different 
parts of the country in its mandated domain of music, dance and drama.  
9.2 The observations of the committee for conducting workshops on Natyashashtra with 
international collaboration have been taken note of. Appropriate action will be taken in this 
regard in consultation with SNA keeping in view the availability of funds/budgetary 
provisions and other instructions issued by the Government from time to time. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.2 The Committee is unhappy with the reply submitted by the Ministry. The 
Ministry did not give information on any specific action taken to implement the 
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, r eiterates that 
workshops on Natyashastras should be conducted with international collaboration. 
 
10. The Committee was informed that Lalit Kala Akademi, Kolkata is almost non -
functional. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture, Government of India 
must take steps to revive it. 
 (Para 86) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The regional centre of Lalit Kala Akademi in Kolkata is active and has hosted 15 
events and programmes during the year 2017 -18. The regional centre in Kolkata covers all 
the states from the North East, Andaman Nicobar Islands and also West Bengal. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.2 The Committee feels that the number of events and programmes hosted by the 
regional centre of Lalit Kala Akademi in Kolkata is low keeping in mind t he number of 
States it cover. The Committee recommends that Lalit Kala Akademi, Kolkata should 
strive to be more active in hosting such events as it shoulders the responsibility of 
preserving and carrying forward the plethora of different cultures of the N orth East 
Region as well as West Bengal. 
 
 
 
 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF 
THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2017-18 
 
1. The Committee notes that there are very few Adarsh Smaraks selected from the States 
of Tamilnadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana though there exist a large 
number of culturally important heritage monuments. The list of monuments identified for 
upgradation as Adarsh Smarak should be inclusive so as to include monuments fro m every 
corner of the country. 
(Para 33 of the 258th Report) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The observations of the committee has been noted and inclusive efforts would be 
made to identify the monuments across the country for upgrading them as Adarsh 
Monuments. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.2 The Committee may be kept apprised of the various steps taken by the Ministry 
to ensure inclusiveness of monuments from all parts of the country. 
 
VANCANCIES EXISTING IN VARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS OF THE MINISTRY 
 
2. The Committee takes serious note of more than 2800 existing vacancies in ASI and 
desires to be apprised of the effect of such a gap in staff strength and its adverse impact to 
maintain the historical monuments in the country by ASI and the losses. When a larg e 
number of youths are unemployed in our country it is cruel on the part of the Ministry of 
Culture and ASI to keep thousands of posts vacant. Keeping in view the importance of ASI the 
Committee recommends that every possible effort should be made to fill the vacancies in an 
expeditious manner. 
(Para 50) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Substantial number of vacancies, i.e. 2253, are in the category of Multi -Tasking Staff 
(MTS) which is filled up by direct recruitment through Staff Selection Committee (SSC). The 
SSC is in the final stages of recommending candidates for filling up 1314 of these vacancies. 
Further, recently SSC has recommended candidates against 86 Group ‗B – Non Gazetted‘ and 
98 Group ‗C‘ vacancies. The candidates are in the process of joining ASI. In addition, SSC 
has also recommended the names of candidates for filling up  another 28 vacancies of Lower 
Division Clerk (LDC). The requisitions for filling up 114 Group C and 48 Group B (Non -
Gazetted) vacancies have also been submitted to SSC. ASI is taking all efforts to fill up the 
remaining vacancies under the Director recrui tment quota through the UPSC and SSC, 
besides taking timely action for holding meetings of the Departmental Promotion Committees 
for filling up vacancies falling under promotion quota.  

40 
 
2.2   Filling up of some posts have been pending due to non-availability of eligible candidates 
for promotion as well as direct recruitment. Further, the Recruitment Rules for some of the 
posts are under modification which is being pursued with DoPT /UPSC/M/o Law. Through 
constant efforts taken by the Department, amendment /  framing of recruitment rules in 
respect of 27 different categories of posts have been got notified in the official gazette. 
Necessary action for filling up the said posts has been initiated in accordance with the 
notified rules. 
2.3   ASI has taken up rev iew and amendment of the existing recruitment rules of another 22 
posts with a view to facilitate speedy filling up of vacancies. ASI has taken care to ensure that 
the conservation and protection of the centrally protected are not adversely affected due to the 
shortage of manpower by resorting to outsourcing of services wherever feasible in 
accordance with the rules. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.4 The Committee may be apprised of the steps being taken by the Ministry of 
Culture to tackle the paucity of required talent pool of eligible candidates in certain 
cases. 
 
3. The Committee notes there was a gross underutilization of fund allocated to Cultural 
Mapping programmes. The Committee feels the Government could not plan and structure the 
programmes effectively which resulted in underutilization of funds. The Committee may be 
apprised of the reasons for underutilization and steps may be taken to utilize the money fully 
in 2018-19. 
 (Para 57) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The scheme with a total outlay of Rs.469.40 crore up to 2019 -20 was launched on 
29.3.2017 with main objective of talent hunt as well as collection of data base of the artists, 
artisans and various art forms across the country.  The objective is also to nurture new talent 
and protect all ag e group of artistes by organizing activities under National Cultural 
Awareness programme from block level to national level.  Initially, the activities under the 
scheme have been undertaken in five blocks on pilot basis.  Due to certain Administrative 
reasons, Mission secretariat could not be setup during the year which resulted slow progress 
and underutilization of funds in the scheme.  Recently, Ministry has approved engagement of 
outsourced persons under Mission secretariat for taking up the activities u nder the scheme. 
Efforts are being made to achieve the objectives of the Mission and to ensure that the funds 
will be utilized during the FY 2018-19 up to the allocation/scale intended. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
3.2 The Committee would like to know the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that 
such administrative hurdles do not recur in the present financial year. 
 
KALA  SANSKRITI VIKAS  YOJANA 
 

41 
 
4. The Committee notes that under the head Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana o ut of Rs. 
310.48 crore at BE 2017 -18 there was a reduction of Rs. 60 cores at RE 2017 -18 which 
definitely points to bad planning and execution of projects under the Yojana. The Ministry 
has not given any reasons for less expenditure on various programme un der the Yojana. The 
Committee may be apprised of the reasons for reduction at RE stage and actual utilization of 
funds under the Yojana in 2017 -18. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will take all 
efforts towards full utilization of the allocation in 2018-19. 
 (Para 65) 
 
5. The Committee appreciates the activities undertaken in Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana 
and recommends that the Ministry should monitor each activity diligently and ensure 
optimum utilization of allocated funds. The Ministry should actively pursue for extra 
budgetary provision at RE 2018-19 as per requirement. 
   (Para 66) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana with an outlay of Rs. 310.00 crore in BE 2017 -18 is an 
Umbrella of various schemes/projects such as ‗Scheme o f  Financial Assistance for 
Promotion of Art and Culture‘, ‗National Mission on Cultural Mapping and Roadmap‘, 
‗Scholarship and Fellowship for promotion of Art and Culture‘, ‗Scheme for Pension and 
Medical Aid to Artistes‘, ‗Scheme on Intangible Cultural H eritage  (ICH)‘, ‗Domestic 
Festival & Fair‘, ‗National Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission &  Dandi related Projects‘, 
‗Scheme of Financial Assistance for Creation of Cultural Infrastructure‘ and ‗Setting up of  
Performing Arts Centre & International Cultural Cen tres‘ etc. of the Ministry which are 
clubbed together. The reduction at RE 2017 -18 is mainly due to less expenditure reported in 
certain schemes such as ‗National Mission on Cultural Mapping and Roadmap‘, ‗National 
Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission & Dandi rel ated Projects‘ and ‗Setting up of  Performing Arts 
Centre & International Cultural Centres‘.  The actual expenditure under the Yojana was 
Rs.176.10 crore (approx.).   
5.2 The provision for Rs. 310.00 crore in BE 2018 -19 is according to the ceiling 
prescribed by Ministry of Finance for Kala Sanskriti Vikas Yojana. Moreover, the pace of the 
work in the above schemes is likely to pick up during 2018 -19 and efforts would be made for 
full utilization of funds during 2018 -19.  It will be an endeavor of the Minist ry to monitor 
each activity scrupulously and ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds under each 
scheme component during 2018 -19. The activities in the various components of the scheme 
are likely to be taken up more vigorously as compared to previous year which may result in 
requirement of extra budgetary resources. The Ministry would definitely pursue for the same 
at RE stage (2018-19) if the need is felt. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.3 The Committee would like to know the reasons for less than planned expenditure 
in the schemes such as ‘National Mission on Cultural Mapping and Roadmap’, 
‘National Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission & Dandi related Projects’ and ‘Setting up of 
Performing Arts Centre & International Cultural Centres’  and the monitoring 

42 
 
mechanism put in place to ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds and proper 
execution of projects. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
6. The Committee has noted that the southern part of the country is totally neglected in 
selection of Adarsh Smara ks for development and preservation. The Ministry should avoid 
narrow and parochial view regarding promotion and preservation of culture. The list of 
monuments identified for upgradation as Adarsh Smarak should be inclusive so as to include 
monuments from every corner of the country. Further various lesser known monuments 
should also be given due protection. 
(Para 83) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The observations of the Committee has been noted and inclusive efforts would be 
made to identify the monuments across the country for upgrading them as Adarsh 
Monuments.   
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
6.2 The Committee may be kept apprised of the steps taken to implement the 
recommendation of the Committee. 
 
******  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
Chapter – I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
 
The Committee may be kept apprised of the progress made by ASI in this regard. 
(Para 2.2) 
 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the details of identified 
monuments. An action plan may also be prepared to preserve & upgrade the identified 
monuments in a time bound manner. 
(Para 4.2) 
 
Chapter – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
The Committee may be kept apprised of the reply received from the Ministry of 
Finance regarding enhancing the allocation at RE 2018-19 stage. 
(Para 1.2) 
 
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that necessary follow up action to implement 
the recommendation of the Committee should be taken up by the Ministry in right 
earnest. 
(Para 4.2) 
 
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee notes that more than a year has passed 
and the matter is still pending with PMO. The Committee recommends that the matter 
may be pursued with PMO. 
(Para 7.6) 
 
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will make periodic  
assessment to monitor the benefits of its assistance to State Akademies. 
(Para 8.5) 
 
The Committee notes  that there is substantial progress in filling up of vacancies of 
various institutions under the Ministry of Culture. 
(Para 10.2) 
 
The Committee notes  the reply and would like to be informed of the developments in 
the matter. 
(Para 11.3) 
 
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that with the change of service provider and 
other measures, the Ministry can expect to utilise the allocated funds to an optim um 
level. 

44 
 
(Para 14.4) 
 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know about the steps taken by the 
ZCCs to protect local art form. It also feels that events like Paryatan Parv, Bharat Parv, 
etc. are not a proper platform to provide recognition & prot ection to local art forms as 
these events turn into a picnic spot & sales counter for the tourists & local people. 
(Para 18.2) 
 
The Committee appreciates the different programmes and initiatives being 
implemented by the Ministry to spread awareness amongst  the younger generation of 
our country. The Committee is also keen to understand whether there are mechanisms 
in place for evaluating the impact of such initiatives on the basis of which the Ministry 
may strive in its endeavour to improve engagement. 
(Para 19.6) 
 
The Committee hopes that implementation of the Guide Policy will minimize the issue 
of false/factually incorrect information being provided by the guides in tourist 
monuments. 
(Para 21.3) 
 
Chapter – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee notes that the reasons provided by the Ministry for the non -utilization 
of funds are routine in nature, and desires that proactive steps are taken in order to 
make better ut ilization of funds in the future. The Committee may be apprised about 
the steps/efforts being taken to address the issue mentioned by the Ministry so as to 
avoid under utilization of funds in the future. 
(Para 1.3) 
 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation for constitution of an Inquiry Committee 
to look into this matter. The Committee would like to know the reasons which caused 
the finalization of RRs to take about 5 years and the steps which are being taken to 
address the paucity of suitable personnel for filling up the posts in National Gallery of 
Modern Art. 
(Para 2.4) 
 
The Committee does not appreciate the lackadaisical approach on the part of the 
Ministry and the Andaman and Nicobar Administration in the matter. The Committee 
impressed upon the Ministry and the Andaman & Nicobar Administration to make all 
sincere efforts in this regard and initiate measures for completing procedural 
formalities. The Committee also recommends that ASI should provide technical 
assistance and impress upon the Andama n and Nicobar administration to expedite the 
preparation of the nomination dossier on Cellular Jail. 
(Para 4.2) 
 
The Committee fails to understand the lack of response from the 12 States/UTs. NML 
Model Libraries aim at the upgradation of libraries providin g services to the public. As 

45 
 
such the Committee advises the Ministry to pursue the matter with remaining states in 
all earnesty. Further, the Committee recommends RRRLF to make all efforts to resolve 
with the States/UTs any issues/problems they may be facing in this regard. 
(Para 5.2) 
 
The Committee feels that the artists should not have to suffer because of the lack of 
interest shown by the State Governments. Low number of applications from some 
States should not lead to lopsided allotment of the grants to  States with high number of 
applications. Instead, the Ministry should reach out to State Governments to sensitise 
them in order to ensure proper representation from all States since the importance of 
these grants reaching the deserving artistes cannot be overstated. 
(Para 6.3) 
 
The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for which the vacant posts in NMM 
have not been filled thus far. The Committee also desires to know as to whether any 
time bound action plan has been prepared to fill the vacant posts. 
(Para 7.3) 
 
The Committee feels that over 20% of the allocated sum for the North Eastern region is 
going unutilized. The Ministry should take the required steps to ensure that the funds 
available to it are utilized in a proper manner in keeping with the de velopment of the 
unique tribal culture, customs, folk dance and craft of the North Eastern States. 
(Para 8.3) 
 
The Committee is unhappy with the reply submitted by the Ministry. The Ministry did 
not give information on any specific action taken to implemen t the recommendation of 
the Committee. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that workshops on Natyashastras 
should be conducted with international collaboration. 
(Para 9.2) 
 
The Committee feels that the number of events and programmes hosted by the regiona l 
centre of Lalit Kala Akademi in Kolkata is low keeping in mind the number of States it 
cover. The Committee recommends that Lalit Kala Akademi, Kolkata should strive to 
be more active in hosting such events as it shoulders the responsibility of preserving and 
carrying forward the plethora of different cultures of the North East Region as well as 
West Bengal. 
(Para 10.2) 
 
Chapter – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF 
THE MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
 
The Committee may be kept apprised  of the various steps taken by the Ministry to 
ensure inclusiveness of monuments from all parts of the country. 
(Para 1.2) 
 
The Committee may be apprised of the steps being taken by the Ministry of Culture to 
tackle the paucity of required talent pool of eligible candidates in certain cases. 
(Para 2.4) 

46 
 
 
The Committee would like to know the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that such 
administrative hurdles do not recur in the present financial year. 
(Para 3.2) 
 
The Committee would like to know the reasons for less than planned expenditure in the 
schemes such as ‘National Mission on Cultural Mapping and Roadmap’, ‘National 
Gandhi Heritage Sites Mission & Dandi related Projects’ and ‘Setting up of Performing 
Arts Centre & International Cultural Centres’  and the monitoring mechanism put in 
place to ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds and proper execution of projects. 
(Para 5.3) 
 
The Committee may be kept apprised of the steps taken to implement the 
recommendation of the Committee. 
(Para 6.2) 
 