PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations  of  the Committee contained in its
Two Hundred Sixty First Report on the
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the
Ministry of Tourism
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 14th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 14th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
267
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations  of  the Committee contained in its
Two Hundred Sixty First Report on the
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the
Ministry of Tourism
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 14th December , 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 14th December , 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-9
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which  have  been  accepted  by  the
Ministry ............................................................................................. 2-9
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does  not  desire
to pursue in view of the replies of the Ministry.................................. 10-12
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect  of  which  replies  of  the
Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee............................. 13-29
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of
the Ministry are still awaited............................................................... 30-33
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV A TIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................................... 34-39
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 41-44
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 45-71

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2018)
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Shri Praful Patel
7. Kumari Selja
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan
18. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, AVSM (Retd.)
19. Shri P . Kumar
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
21. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
22. Shri Rajesh Pandey
(i)

(ii)
23. Shri Rajesh Ranjan (Pappu Yadav)
24. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
25. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two
Hundred Sixty Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred Sixty First Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the
Ministry of Tourism.
2. The Two Hundred Sixty First Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 6th March, 2018 to the Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred
Sixty First Report was received from the Ministry of Tourism on 21st August, 2018.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 26th November,
2018.
   N EW D ELHI; DEREK O'BRIEN
26 November, 2018 Chairman,
Agrahayana 5, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
AAI : Airports Authority of India
ASI : Archaeological Survey of India
B E : Budget Estimates
CCTV : Closed Circuit Television
CFA : Central Financial Assistance
CPHEEO : Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization
CRZ : Coastal Regulation Zone
CSMC : Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee
DDG : Deputy Directorate General
DoNER : Development of North Eastern Region
DPPH : Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality
DPR : Detailed Project Report
DS : Deputy Secretary
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
FCI : Food Craft Institutes
FDI : Foreign Direct Investment
FY : Financial Year
GDP : Gross Domestic Production
GFR : General Financial Rules
GIS : Geographic Information System
HBF A : Handbook for Barrier Free and Accessibility
HRD : Human Resource Development
HRIDAY : Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojna
IHM : Institute of Hotel Management
IITTM : Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management
(iv)

(v)
IMCCTS : Inter -Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector
iOS : iPhone Operating System
ISI : Indian Standards Institute
KRCL : Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd.
LED : Light Emitting Diodes
Mbps : Megabytes per second
MD : Mission Directorate
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs
MoRTH : Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
MoT : Ministry of Tourism
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
MPSTDC : Madhya Pradesh S tate Tourism Development Corporation
NBC : National Building Code
NCHMCT : National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology
NEC : North East Council
NGO : Non-Government Organization
NHAI : National Highways Authority of India
NIWS : National Institute of Water Sports
OPMD : Overseas Promotional Marketing Development
P AP : Protected Area Permit
PIDDC : Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits
PMC : Project Management Consultant
PRASHAD : Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Heritage Augmentation Drive
RAP : Restricted area Permit
RCC : Reinforced Cement Concrete
RCS-UDAN : Regional Connectivity Scheme-Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik

(vi)
RE : Revised Estimates
SFC : State Financial Corporation
SG : State Government
TSAI : Tourism Satellite Account of India
USA : United States of America
UT : Union Territory
VGF : Viability Gap Funding

REPORT
The Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism on the Recommendations/Observations
as contained in its Two Hundred Sixty First Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry
of Tourism which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 6th March, 2018.
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Government on 21st August, 2018, in respect
of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 261st Report. The replies have been categorized
as follows:—
(i) Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:
Para Nos.: 32, 37, 40, 41, 62, 71, 86, 94, 104, 108, 109, 111.
T
OTAL: 12
(ii) Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the replies of the Ministry:-
Para Nos.: 21, 22, 43, 44, 52, 98.
T
OTAL: 6
(iii) Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos.: 7, 9, 30, 31, 42, 48, 56, 63, 64, 67, 68, 73, 75, 77, 81, 84, 88, 97.
TOTAL: 18
(iv) Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry
are still awaited.
Paragraph Nos.: 61, 100, 102, 110, 112.
T
OTAL: 5
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations which
have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished at the earliest.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
ANNUAL PLAN 2018-19
SW ADESH DARSHAN
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should monitor the progress of the
projects regularly so that the projects do not lag behind as the Committee fears that slow paces in progress
of the Swadesh Darshan Projects may result in cost over runs and result in demand for extra allocations
which would further delay the completion of projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry should ensure that the projects are completed within the stipulated time. (Para 32)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1 The implementations of projects sanctioned under the scheme are monitored rigorously by the
Ministry of Tourism. The Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) chaired by Secretary
(Tourism) and MD chaired by the Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Tourism reviews the progress of
its implementation on a periodic basis. The Ministry also holds regional workshops and Video Conference
meetings with the States and UTs to review the progress of the projects. At working level Swadesh
Darshan Division along with Project Management Consultant (PMC) and Domestic offices of Ministry
monitors the project for Cost, Quality and Schedule. States have been instructed to formulate State level
monitoring committees for monitoring of the projects and they also regularly submit the report. The State
Governments have been advised to submit monthly physical and financial progress report of the projects
to the Ministry. The Ministry has also developed an on line monitoring portal to monitor the real time
physical and financial progress of the projects.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.2 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires that it may be apprised of the
details of the online monitoring portal and the way it functions.
PRASHAD
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee notes the projects and funds sanctioned to various States. The Committee is very
much concerned about the possibility of delay in completion of the projects. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that projects received from the State Governments should be processed/ sanctioned in time
so as to avoid any delay and non-utilization of funds. The Committee further recommends that the
progress of these projects need to be monitored regularly to ensure that there is no delay and cost overrun
in the projects. (Para 37)
2

3
Reply of the Ministry
2.1 Under PRASHAD scheme the project proposal from State Governments/UTs are evaluated by the
Committees "Mission Directorate" (MD) and "Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee" (CSMC),
through presentation and meetings. After that the revised proposal, based on the points of discussion/
suggestion taken in the meeting is approved and fund is released subject to submission of D.P .R,
availability of funds, receipt of pending utilization certificate against the fund released earlier and adherence
to the scheme guidelines. All the project proposals received from State Govt. are processed in the
Ministry of Tourism.
2.2 Monitoring of projects sanctioned under the scheme is monitored vigorously by the Ministry of
Tourism. The CSMC chaired by Secretary (Tourism) and MD chaired by the Addl. Director General of
the Ministry of Tourism reviews periodically the progress of the projects. The Ministry also holds
regional workshops and Video Conference meetings with the States and UTs to review the progress of
the projects. At working level PRASHAD Division along with PMC and Domestic offices of Ministry
monitors the project for Cost, Quality and Schedule. States have been instructed to formulate State level
monitoring committees for monitoring of the projects and they also regularly submit the report. The State
Governments have been advised to submit monthly physical and financial progress report of the projects
to the Ministry.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure
effective monitoring and timely completion of the projects. The Ministry should also devise a
mechanism to reward timely completion of projects and penalise delayed projects.
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee is not happy with the progress made in the implementation of the PRASHAD projects
in the States. The percentage financial progress of the majority of projects in various States gives a
dismal picture. The Ministry shouldfollow the existing norms strictly to ensure the funds are utilized, as
far as possible, evenly throughout the year. Since Tourism projects are implemented by the States, there
is a need to sensitize them to ensure optimum utilization of funds and issuing user utilization certificates
on time. The Ministry should make concerted efforts in coordination with the States to complete the
projects in a time bound manner and without any further delay. (Para 40)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1 The implementations of projects sanctioned under the scheme are monitored vigorously by the
Ministry of Tourism. The Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) chaired by Secretary
(Tourism) and Mission Directorate (MD) chaired by the Addl. Director General of the Ministry of
Tourism reviews the progress of the projects implementation periodically. The Ministry also holds
regional workshops and Video Conference meetings with the States and UTs to review the progress of
the projects. At working level PRASHAD Division along with PMC and Domestic offices of Ministry
monitors the project for Cost, Quality and Schedule. States have been instructed to formulate State level
monitoring committees for monitoring of the projects and they also regularly submit the report. The State

4
Governments have been advised to submit monthly physical and financial progress report of the projects
to the Ministry.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee wants the Ministry of Tourism to furnish the Committee with the project wise details
on the progress of each project along with the stipulated time frame against the targets fixed for each
under the PRASHAD Scheme. (Para 41)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1 The details of project along with the target date fixed for each project under the PRASHAD Scheme
are at Annexure II. However, completion of the project within the time-frame largely depends on the
executing State Governments.
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.2 The Committee notes the reply.
BUDDHIST CIRCUIT
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India should consider to
include Gocharan as one of the places which can be developed under Buddhist Circuit. (Para 62)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1 The projects under the scheme are identified for development in consultation with the State
Government/UT and are sanctioned subject to availability of funds, submission of suitable Detailed
Project Reports, adherence to scheme guidelines and utilization of funds released earlier. As and when
a proposal is received from the State Government in this regard the Ministry will consider it favourably
based on above parameters.
Further Recommendation/Observation
5.2 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires that it may be apprised as to
whether the Ministry of Tourism has received any proposal from the Government of West Bengal
for inclusion of Gocharan in the Buddhist Circuit.
PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY
OVERSEAS PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKET DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee notes that the scheme has been allocated 
` 135.00 crore in BE 2018-19 against
` 90.00 crore in RE 2017 - 18. In view of the huge budget allocations for both overseas and domestic

5
promotion projects the Committee recommends that there should be a review on the spending on the
overseas and domestic promotion projects so as to ensure that funds do not go wasted. The Committee
is greatly concerned with the proper and fruitful utilization of funds. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the projects involving large amount of investment should be monitored carefully during the
implementation stage itself to ensure that work is completed in time and investment made therein do not
go waste. The Committee again emphasizes that there is a need to spend more money on infrastructure
and lesser on advertising. (Para 71)
Reply of the Ministry
6.1 The projects sanctioned are monitored on a regular basis by MoT and reports are submitted by the
implementing agencies to MoT informing the progress of the project. Further for ensuring that projects
undertaken under the scheme are completed within the stipulated time as per the new guidelines, the
Ministry will set up a Monitoring Committee for each project for review and monitoring of the progress
of the project on a quarterly basis headed by a Joint Secretary/or the Director/or DS/or DDG level officer
dealing with the project. The Committee will also review the 'Operation and Maintenance' Standards with
the help of the implementing agency of the project. The above monitoring will be done preferably on a
digital platform such as web portal, mobile app, etc.
Further Recommendation/Observation
6.2 The Committee notes the reply.
CENTRAL  FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee appreciates the activities/initiatives undertaken by the States/UTs and desires that
other States would also hold such activities/fairs/festivals in their regions. These activities are the
manifestation of the traditions and culture of the local people of the region which the Committee strongly
feels should be kept alive. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should encourage the
positive enthusiasm shown by the states and extend all financial assistance to them. Further, Government
should also ensure that the benefits of tourism growth reach the weaker sections of society . (Para 86)
Reply of the Ministry
7.1 The Ministry of Tourism Provide financial assistance to State Governments/ UT Administration for
organizing fairs/festivals and tourism related events such as seminars, conclaves, conventions, etc. for
the promotion of tourism. The fairs, festivals and events should be selected by the State Governments/
UTs based on this tourism potential with maximum of ` 50 lakh for each state and ` 30 lakhs for UTs
` 25 lakh maximum per fair. The assistance is applicable to all States UTs including the weaker sections
of society.
7.2 The Ministry also ensure that the benefits of tourism growth reaches all sections of the society
including the weaker sections of the society by giving financial assistance to all States/UTs all over the
country.

6
Further Recommendation/Observation
7.3 The Committee notes the reply.
FOREIGN TOURIST ARRIV ALS
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee notes that 2016-17 has been very good in terms of foreign tourist arrivals and
international tourist arrivals, but, when compared with other countries, India's performance leaves much
to be desired. India's foreign exchange earnings from tourism has followed a similar pattern. When they
are here, tourists are clearly willing to spend; but they are simply not coming here in adequate numbers.
Committee feels that this may be mainly due to India's many problems, such as cumbersome visa
regulations, bad travel infrastructure, poor sanitation, collapsing law enforcement systems and concerns
about women's safety. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should address these issues
and take them up urgently with the respective Departments/Ministries. (Para 94)
Reply of the Ministry
8.1 To improve tourist experience, the Ministry of Tourism has taken the following steps:-
• With efforts of MoT, Ministry of Home Affairs has already eased the Visa regime and at
present e-tourist visa/e-business visa/e-medical visa, e-conference visa and e-medical attendant
visa are being issued to the nationals of 165 countries.
• As a result, there has been a growth of 14% of Foreign Tourist Arrivals in the country in the
year 2017 as compared to year 2016.
• Ministry of Tourism from time to time issues advisory to various State Governments and UT
Administration to ensure safety and security of the tourists.
• With efforts of MoT, fourteen State Governments/UTs have already created Tourist Police in
one form or the other.
• The Ministry of Tourism has launched the 24x7 Toll Free Multi-Lingual Tourist Info-Helpline
on the toll free number 1800111363/short code 1363 in 12 Languages including Hindi and
English in February 2016, to facilitate and assist domestic and foreign tourists in terms of
information relating to Travel in India and to provide a sense of safety and security.
• Ministry is also focussing on infrastructure development through Swadesh Darshan and
PRASHAD Scheme. Steps to improve sanitation is also done through Swachhta Action Plan.
Further Recommendation/Observation
8.2 The Committee notes the reply.
CONVERGENCE
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee notes that tourism is a multi-disciplinary activity and cannot be developed on its
own. The Committee feels that there is a need to strengthen the system for effective functioning and close

7
coordination amongst various Department and Ministries of the Government i.e. Railways, Urban
Development, Civil Aviation, Shipping and Road Transport and Highways, Home, Finance etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be better linkages, interface and coordination amongst
various Departments and Ministries so as to increase awareness about tourism and its social and
economic impact in the society. (Para 104)
Reply of the Ministry
9.1 There is a well-defined mechanism of inter-ministerial consultation where all the matters which
require inter-ministerial consultation are taken up under the chairpersonship of Cabinet Secretary. The
forum ensures that the issues affecting Tourism in India are sorted out on priority and amicably. Some
of the issues resolved in pursuance to 7th Meeting (2017-18) of IMCCTS are given as under:-
(a) Completion of Terminal Building at Leh Airport - Ministry of Defence has agreed to allocate
land to Airport Authority of India (AAI)/.
(b) Complexities of e-visa implementation at sea ports-
(c) Review of Haulage charges for luxury trains-Ministry of Railways has agreed for reducing the
haulage charges by 50%.
(d) Relaxation in RAP/PAP for promotion of tourism in the North Eastern region (Manipur,
Mizoram and Nagaland upto 2022).
(e) The issue of co-opting of Ministry of Tourism as a member of Monitoring -cum-coordination
Committee for promotion of Regional connectivity issue has been agreed by M/o Civil Aviation.
(f) ASI Monuments - Tourism infrastructure Issue is being taken care of under Adopt a Heritage
Scheme, and
(g) Ministry of Shipping has agreed for development of River Cruise and Conversion of unused
mining and barge jetties into tourism jetties.
Further Recommendation/Observation
9.2 The Committee notes the reply.
MEDICAL TOURISM
Recommendation/Observation
10. I ndian system of medicine and nature cure has been adopted all over the world. The Health Care
Sector in our country has much strength to offer the world the best facilities. It is emerging as one of
the countries offering cost effective world-class medical facilities and has already started attracting
patients from all over the world. It is known to promote positive health, natural beauty and long life.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take all steps to tap quality and standardization
of medical services besides promoting India as a holistic health destination globally. There is huge
potential of Ayurveda related wellness care in Kerala which can be promoted through overseas market
promotion and publicity. (Para 108)

8
Reply of the Ministry
10.1 The recommendation is noted. The National Medical and Wellness Tourism Board under the
chairmanship of the Hon'ble Minister of Tourism, has been stressing on accreditation and standardisation
of all services in the field of Medical and Wellness Tourism. The Ministry of Tourism website provides
a link to the website of the National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers (NABH)
which has developed world class standards for accreditation of facilities and services in the Medical and
Wellness fields. The website also provides links to the list of accredited AYUSH facilities in the country.
The incentive of Marketing Development Assistance under the Guidelines for Promotion of Medical and
Wellness Tourism is provided to accredited facilities in order to promote standardisation and accreditation.
The Ministry promotes India as a holistic destination through its advertisement and promotional campaigns
in various media and inter-alia promotes Ayurveda and Yoga as one of the major tourism products of
India.
Further Recommendation/Observation
10.2 The Committee notes the reply.
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION
WAYSIDE AMENITIES
Recommendation/Observation
11. Wayside Amenities are very poor on majority of the roads connecting important tourist destinations
and at tourist destinations. The Ministry of Tourism should take initiatives to study the requirement of
wayside amenities at important tourist destinations and measures can be taken under Swatch Bharat
Mission. The Committee notes that some initiatives have been taken by authorities to construct toilets
etc. at various places. However, these remain unused mainly because tourists hardly stop at these isolated
places. The Committee, therefore, recommends that wayside amenities may be provided at places where
Dhabas and Restaurants are available for the tourists. The local bodies may also be roped in and
provided financial assistance to provide wayside amenities which will be a great help for the travelling
public and the tourists. (Para 109)
Reply of the Ministry
11.1 Tourism related infrastructure/services like toilets, wayside amenities are pre-requisites to enhance
tourist experience. Way Side Amenities/toilet facilities are being developed by Ministry of Tourism, in
connection to destination/circuit development under Swadesh Darshan Scheme. The Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) is also developing way side amenities at selected sites along the
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI). However, there is still huge gap between the demand and
facilities available. It is also necessary that toilet facilities must be developed with certain basic standards.
11.2 To deal with this issue, the Ministry of Tourism has introduced development of wayside Amenities
as a sub scheme under the Swadesh Darshan scheme in 2017. The Ministry has also signed an MoU
with the MoRTH and NHAI wherein they are providing land free of cost and Ministry is developing the
Wayside Amenity. Under the scheme, the Ministry has sanctioned a project Development of Wayside
Amenities in Buddhist Circuit and Ramayana Circuit: Varanasi-Gaya; Lucknow-Ayodhya- Lucknow;
Gorakhpur-Kushinagar; Kushinagar-Gaya- Kushinagar for ` 18.10 crore.

9
Further Recommendation/Observation
11.3 The Committee notes the reply.
SEA PLANE
Recommendation/Observation
12. The Committee notes that though the concept is not new there is great potential in sea plane tourism.
It is one of the creative ways to encourage tourism. Committee is aware that commercial sea planes have
been experimented in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and in Kerala. In Kerala in fact the Government
promoted sea plane activity, but it had to be abandoned due to opposition from the fisherman community.
The Committee recommends that Sea plane has great potential but it should take the help of local
communities and ensure that their livelihoods are not affected. (Para 111)
Reply of the Ministry
12.1 It is stated that private operators can operate sea plane services as per the policy and regulatory
framework for operation of sea planes. The operation of sea plane service on any route in the country
including Kerala and Andaman & Nicobar is decided by the operating company on commercial
considerations. However, Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance under various schemes
for development of tourism infrastructure including helipads, heliports, airstrips, passengers' terminals
etc. which would lead to the promotion of sea plane tourism in the country.
Further Recommendation/Observation
12.2 The Committee notes the reply.

10
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee notes the various steps taken by the Ministry of Tourism and hopes that all these
efforts would go a long way to develop a diverse tourism industry in the forthcoming years.
(Para 21)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1 No further action required.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee notes that the reduction at RE stage happens due to handling of projects and
schemes by the Ministry in an unprofessional manner. The Committee recommends that the reasons for
reduction at RE be identified and corrective measures be taken during 2018-19 while implementing the
schemes as projected by the Ministry while seeking allocation offunds from the Ministry of Finance.
(Para 22)
Reply of the Ministry
2.1 The Committee's recommendations have been noted for compliance. The schemes are subjected to
periodic review at the highest level with a view to identify loopholes, if any, and to plug the same. As
a result of such review and based on the experience of implementation of these schemes over a period
of time, the scheme guidelines of most of the schemes have been revised to make the implementation
more effective and hassle free. Special care has also been taken to ensure that funds do not get parked
with the implementing agencies.
2.2 The Ministry also got third party evaluation conducted on all the major schemes, and continuation
of the schemes has been recommended in the study report.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry of Tourism will take a more proactive approach
in handling of projects and schemes.
PRASHAD
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has taken action on its recommendation that there
should not be overlapping of same projects in those cases where the places were covered under PIDDC
10

11
and PRASHAD Schemes. The Committee notes that this is done while examining the proposal by Project
Management Consultants (PMC) applying its DPR toolkit and also while considering the proposal by
Mission Directorate (MD) and Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) that the works/
items covered under PIDDC are not included in the Project under PRASHAD Scheme. (Para 43)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1 No further action required.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.2 The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee also notes that Ujjain has been replaced with Omkareshwar as the pilgrimage
destination in Madhya Pradesh under the PRASAD Scheme on the request of the Government of Madhya
Pradesh. (Para 44)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1 No further action required.
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.2 The Committee notes the reply.
ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee suggests that the money allotted to various Central agencies by the Ministry of
Tourism should be utilized only to promote tourism rather than other activities of the agencies. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the projects undertaken under the scheme
should be completed within the stipulated time. The Committee also recommends that there should be
monitoring done at regular intervals to check the progress of the projects and that if there is any
bottlenecks at the administrative level for the scheme, it should be properly revisited and necessary
corrective measures should be taken at the earliest. (Para 52)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1 The CFA for Central Agencies Scheme is utilized for infrastructure development for promotion of
tourism. Some of the important infrastructures projects undertaken during the last three years are -
construction of Interpretation Centre at Humayun's Tomb, Cruise Passenger Facilitation Centre in the
existing passenger building at Chennai Port, Cruise Terminal Building at Mormugao Port, Development
of Kanoji Angre Light House as a tourist destination in Maharashtra, Up-gradation/modernization at
International Cruise Terminal at Indira Dock, Mumbai, Development of Walkway/Promenade on Willingdon
Island Cochin.
5.2 These projects are monitored on a regular basis by MoT and reports are submitted by the implementing
agencies to MoT informing the progress of the project. Further for ensuring that projects undertaken

12
under the scheme are completed within the stipulated time as per the new guidelines, the Ministry will
set up a Monitoring Committee for each project for review and monitoring of the progress of the project
on a quarterly basis headed by a Joint Secretary/or the Director/or DS/or DDG level officer dealing with
the project. The Committee will also review the 'Operation and Maintenance' Standards with the help of
the implementing agency of the project. The above monitoring will be done preferably on a digital
platform such as web portal, mobile app, etc.
Further Recommendation/Observation
5.3 The Committee notes the reply.
EXCLUSIVE ZONES IN PUBLIC PRIV ATE PARTNERSHIP (PPP) MODE
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should hold consultation with local
stakeholders such as dhaba owners, restaurants, travel agents, etc. so as to encourage and promote local
skills, local cuisine and local dance and art. (Para 98)
Reply of the Ministry
6.1 The recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance. Instructions are being issued
to all Implementing Agencies to tailor the Multi Cuisine Cook course under the Hunar Se Rozgar Tak
Programme to suit the local requirements so that a student does not have to relocate after acquiring skills.
The specific needs of the local industry should be ascertained by the training providers beforehand to
design their training programmes for the jobs and work areas available in hotels locally. In order to
eliminate ad-hocism/individual discretions, the Implementing Agencies can create their own standing
institutional advisory mechanisms with a strong local/regional industry presence to advise the Institutes'
placements cells.
Further Recommendation/Observation
6.2 The Committee notes the reply.

13
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry. The Committee is, however, dismayed to
note that there is no fund allocation to any of the above niche products; nor any concrete and specific
proposals on the part of the Ministry to promote any of the niche tourism initiatives. The Committee
reminds that the Ministry should formulate clear policies and programmes along with required fund
allocations to implement the projects. (Para 7)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. It is however mentioned that the Ministry of
Tourism has issued separate guidelines for the Promotion of Niche Tourism products like Medical and
Wellness Tourism, Golf Tourism and Polo Tourism. Task Forces have been formed to address issues
regarding Cruise Tourism and Adventure Tourism. The National Medical and Wellness Tourism Board has
been established to address issues pertaining to Medical and Wellness Tourism and to bring together the
various stakeholders related to the area. Funds for implementing various initiatives for developing and
promoting Niche Tourism products have been provided under the existing schemes. Expenditure on
activities relating to promotion of Niche products is met from funds earmarked for Domestic Promotion
and Publicity including Hospitality (DPPH) and Overseas Promotion and Marketing including Marketing
Development Assistance (OPMD). The schemes of Swadesh Darshan and Infrastructure Development
by Central Agencies provide funds for development of Niche products.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.2 The Committee feels that more needs to be done in terms of promotion using electronic and
print media. The Committee is of the opinion that the current trend of internet vloggers (video
blogs) recording their experiences is a good and effective avenue for promotion of niche products
like Medical and Wellness tourism. The Ministry can learn from South Korea where internet
vloggers have recorded their experiences with Plastic Surgery, putting it on the map for the go-
to place for plastic surgery. The Committee would like to know how much money out of the
Domestic and Overseas Promotions and Publicity has been spent for promoting Niche Tourism.
In this regard the Committee feels that new avenues of promotion and advertisement must be
explored by the Ministry. Moreover, placing it under the ambit of Swadesh Darshan and
Infrastructure Development by Central Agencies to provide funds for development of Niche
products is vague and the Committee feels that separate funds must be earmarked for Niche
products and its allocation must be made clear.
ANALYSIS OF TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee observes that the average utilization of funds by Ministry of Tourism during 12th
Five Year Plan is 
` 5297.14 Crore which is 90.44% of Revised Estimates (RE) and 68.17 % of Budget
13

14
Estimates (BE). The total allocation for the Twelfth Year Plan shows a reduction to Rs 5857.37 at RE
stage out of which Rs 5297.14 was utilized. The Committee further notes that during the Twelfth Five
Year Plan, the budget allocation was reduced every year except in 2016-17 when the budget allocation
was enhanced at the RE stage as shown in the Table. The Committee notes that reduction of budget at
RE happens due to various reasons such as lack of proper plans and projects to utilize the BE, inefficient
handling of ongoing projects, underutilization of BE during the first two quarters of the financial year
etc. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the Ministry should inquire into the reasons of reduction at
RE stages during the 12th Year Plan period and take remedial measures accordingly for better planning
in future. The Committee does not see any reason for reducing the allocations. Tourism is the largest
service industry with a fair share of contribution to GDP and the total employment in the country. The
Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry of Tourism should make all efforts to utilize the
allocated funds so that the future development plans of the Ministry of tourism may progress as proposed
by the Ministry and contribute to employment generation. (Para 9)
Reply of the Ministry
2.1 The Committee's recommendations have been noted for compliance. However, the Ministry has
made an in-depth analysis of the reasons for reduced allocation at RE Stage and also the spending pattern
of allocation. It has been observed that the flagship scheme of Swadesh Darshan and the scheme of
PRASAD were introduced during the year 2014-15 and accordingly, the implementation of these schemes
could not take place at full pace during the initial two years due to various reasons like delay in finalization
of proposals by the state government, procedural formalities like framing of guidelines, approval by SFC,
appointment of PMC etc. Hence, ever after the scheme has stabilized, the allocation for these schemes
has been steadily increasing and the entire allocation has been utilized during FY 2016-17 and 2017-18.
Further, the schemes are subjected to periodic review. The scheme guidelines have been revised based
on learning from the operation of the scheme.
2.2 It may also be worthwhile to mention that during the financial year 2016-17, the allocation funds
for the Ministry at RE stage was ` 1670.91 against the BE of ` 1590.32 Crore. In the year 2017-18,
the Ministry has been able to spent 99.42% of the RE allocation as a result of close monitoring and
effective implementation of various schemes. Further, during the current financial year 2018-19 the
Ministry has got an allocation of `2150 crore at BE stage which is the highest ever allocation.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.3 Upon closer scrutiny of the year-wise allocation, the Committee feels that the reply of the
Ministry is insufficient and does not explain the reduction in funding. The Committee notes that
procedural delays is a key factor for the slow pace of projects and recommends that the Ministry
must devise timelines at each stage to avoid such procedural delays and for smooth implementation
of the projects. Implementation of schemes is a major problem and the Ministry must take a
more proactive approach towards developing and maintaining tourist sites. There are a plethora
of schemes and integral Circuits which have received little or no funding, for example the
Buddhist Circuit. The Committee feels that circuits such as these must be given importance, and
highlighted and that all efforts must be made in order to ensure that the schemes are adequately
funded. Implementation must be incentivised, improved and novel methods must be introduced
in order to motivate and infuse enthusiasm in developing these projects.

15
ANNUAL PLAN 2018-19
SW ADESH DARSHAN
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee notes that a total of 67 projects were sanctioned under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme
during the last four years (i.e., 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18) with a total project cost of
` 5648.03 crores out of which an amount of ` 2148.17 crores has been released. The Committee is aware
that many of the projects may not be completed in a single financial year. Still the Committee feels that
the utilization of funds which is a direct indication of the physical achievements of the projects is very
poor and unsatisfactory. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may take initiatives to
ensure that the projects are implemented in a time bound manner. The Committee further recommends that
the timelines of each of the projects along with the physical and financial achievements may be furnished
to the Committee. (Para 30)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1 Following is the year wise status of 67 projects sanctioned under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme:
Sl. No. Year No. of Amount Amount Status
Projects sanctioned released
1. 2014-15 2 119.6 95.67 3rd instalment of funds has been released and
projects are almost at the completion
2. 2015-16 17 1503.09 953.02 3rd instalment of funds released / UC received
for 11 projects
2nd instalment of funds released for 5 projects
Work on all the projects is under
implementation and 11 of them are in the
advanced stages of completion
3. 2016-17 37 3192.19 1 198.38 3rd instalment of funds released for one project
2nd instalment of funds released/UC received
for 26 projects
Work on all projects is in progress
4. 2017-18 11 824.8 221.60 2nd instalment of funds has been released for
2 projects
All projects are at implementation stage
T
OTAL 67 5639.68 2468.67
3.2 The implementations of projects sanctioned under the scheme are monitored rigorously by the
Ministry of Tourism. The Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) chaired by Secretary
(Tourism) and Mission Directorate (MD) chaired by the Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Tourism
review the progress of the project's implementation on periodic basis. The Ministry also holds regional
workshops and Video Conference meetings with the States and UTs to review the progress of the
projects. At working level Swadesh Darshan Division along with PMC and Domestic offices of Ministry

16
monitors the project for Cost, Quality and Schedule. States have been instructed to formulate State level
monitoring committees for monitoring of the projects and they also regularly submit the report. The State
Governments have been advised to submit monthly physical and financial progress report of the projects
to the Ministry. The Ministry has also developed an on-line monitoring portal to monitor the real time
physical and financial progress of the projects.
3.3 The timelines of each of the projects along with the physical and financial progress is placed at
Annexure-I.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.4 The Committee observes that, the formulation of State level monitoring committees is only
in theory and is yet to be put into action. The Committee reiterates its emphasis on the
importance of a Centre- State body to monitor the timely completion of projects. Further it has
been observed that though the funds have been disbursed, a very small percentage of Utilisation
certificates have been submitted by the States. In this regard, the Committee recommends that
the State Level Monitoring Committee must be constituted at the earliest to ensure improved
Centre- State co-operation for the development of Tourism in the country. The Committee may
be informed about the formation of the State level Committees and the activities undertaken by
it.
Recommendation/Observation
4. The Committee notes that during the year 2018-19 the Ministry aims toutilize the funds on completion
of ongoing projects, sanctioning of new projects, development of Iconic Tourist sites as per Budget
Announcement of 2018-19 and Development of wayside amenities in popular tourist circuits. The Committee
finds that a majority of the projects undertaken for development under the Swadesh Darshan are not in
consistence with the State Tourism policy. Both State Tourism Policy and the Centre Tourism Policy
stands on its own and, there is no bridging. The Committee feels that there is a need of some sleeper
to connect the two parallel rails. The Committee notes that there is lack of effective coordination between
the Centre and States for the implementation of various tourism projects and policies. The Committee
desires that a regular and permanent mechanism is required between the Centre and the States for the
growth of tourism in the country. (Para 31)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1 Under the Scheme, the projects for development are identified in consultation with the State
Governments/UT Administrations and are sanctioned subject to availability of funds, liquidation of pending
utilization certificates, submission of suitable Detailed Project Report (DPR) and adherence to the scheme
guidelines. As per the procedure, the State Government presents the concept to the Ministry in a meeting
chaired by the Secretary (T). Based on discussion, State works on the DPR which is vetted by the
Programme Management Consultants appointed by the Ministry of Tourism. Later, the project is scrutinised
at two levels i.e., Mission Directorate chaired by the Joint Secretary and Central Sanctioning and
Monitoring Committee. State Government is part of both the committees. During implementation of
project also, the Ministry regularly liaise with State Government to monitor timely and right implementation
of project.

17
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.2 Despite the assurances provided by the Ministry, the Committee feels that the lacunae
between the State Tourism Policy and the Centre Tourism Policy is yet to be bridged. The low
rate of project completion/ implementation is evidence of this. This affects the development of
Tourism projects and results in reduced implementation of schemes. The Committee is of the
opinion that the multiple bureaucratic channels may be more of a hinderance than an effective
solution. The Committee, therefore, recommends that concrete solutions must be devised in
order to ensure a higher rate of project completion and implementation. Tourism boosts economic
activity and has resulted in the economic prosperity of many nations which have tourism as their
main source of revenue. A more efficient system and a higher rate of implementation will
contribute to greater profitability of the Tourism sector benefitting both the Centre and the State
Governments.
PRASHAD
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee notes that out of the 23 projects sanctioned under the PRASHAD Scheme, 10
projects are delayed. Even the projects sanctioned in the year 2015 could achieve only 2 to 25% except
one project in Punjab. Some of the projects could achieve the physical progress of just 2 or 3%. The
Committee observes that much needs to be done for timely implementation of PRASHAD Scheme which
is a flagship programme of the Ministry of Tourism. (Para 42)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1 The implementations of projects sanctioned under the scheme are monitored rigorously by the
Ministry of Tourism to ensure timely completion of the project. The CSMC chaired by Secretary
(Tourism) and MD chaired by the Addl. Director General of the Ministry of Tourism reviews the
progress of the projects implementation on periodic basis. The Ministry also holds regional workshops
and Video Conference meetings with the States and UTs to review the progress of the projects. At
working level PRASHAD Division along with PMC and Domestic offices of Ministry monitors the project
for Cost, Quality and Schedule. States have been instructed to formulate State level monitoring committees
for monitoring of the projects and they also regularly submit the report. The State Governments have
been advised to submit monthly physical and financial progress report of the projects to the Ministry.
5.2 Delay in the implementation of the project is because of the following problems faced by the State
Governments:-
Land availability
Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) clearance
Delay in tendering process.
Further Recommendation/Observation
5.3 The Committee understands that the road-blocks faced by the State Governments with
regards to completion of projects are largely policy related. In this regard, the Committee is of

18
the opinion that the Ministry, at the Centre, must work to constitute a body with the States in
order to devise a solution to the problems faced by the States in the implementation of the
pending projects. The Committee further desires that studies must be instituted with regards to
various policy-related subjects, so that necessary changes and steps can be taken to work through
or around them. In order to ensure its success, the co-operation of the State Governments is
imperative and the Ministry of Tourism must take the lead in resolving policy- related bottlenecks.
The Committee may be informed about the specific steps taken to speed up work under the
PRASHAD scheme.
ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES
Recommendation/Observation
6. The Committee recommends that these joint development projects should be implemented immediately
and more railway stations should be included for similar development. The Committee feels that Railways
can play a crucial role in promoting tourism in the country because of its wide reach. (Para 48)
Reply of the Ministry
6.1 Under the Scheme Assistance to Central Agencies, various projects with Ministry of Railways for
Tourism Infrastructure development are funded. The details are as under:
1. Joint Development of Tourist amenities at jointly identified Railway Stations: 26 Railway
Stations have been approved for joint development of tourist amenities under 50:50 cost
sharing basis. Total amount of ` 86.02 crore has been sanctioned since June 2018 for 17
Railway stations of which amount of ` 43.67 crore has been released and UC is pending for
an amount of Rs 15.78 crore for 07 stations.
2. Manufacture of Glass Top Coaches:  Manufacture of 3 Glass top coaches with full financial
assistance of `12.00 crore (Final instalment of `6.00 crore released on 29.06.2017) has been
undertaken as per the followings:
• Glass top Coach is running successfully in Vizag-Arakku Valley Vishakhapatnam, Andhra
Pradesh.
• Glass top Coach is running successfully on Scenic Konkan Railway Route Dadar-Madgaon
Mumbai, Maharashtra
• Coach is due to be rolled out on Badgam- Banihal and Baramulla- Srinagar
3. Development of 3 Railway Station under Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. (KRCL):
Development of tourism infrastructure at Madgaon, Thivim and Karmali Railway stations in
the state of Goa to Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. has been sanctioned at a cost of `24.00
Crore (fully funded by Ministry of Tourism), out of which `12.00 Crore has been released
as the first instalment.
6.2 As and when railways stations are identified the same will be added to the list.
Further Recommendation/Observation
6.3 The Committee is pleased to note the progress made in this regard. While applauding the
efforts of the Ministry with regard to increasing connectivity by rail, the Committee would like

19
to reiterate the importance of ensuring that the new and existing railway stations are developed
at par with global standards. Facilities and amenities must be ensured with clean and hygienic
cloak rooms, food courts and restrooms. The Committee would like to point out that over the
years a major complaint of tourists in the country, both domestic and international, have been
the lack of sanitation and hygiene in railway stations and the general stench that overwhelms
one upon entering train stations. The Committee feels that to align with the 'Swachh Bharat
Abhiyan' the Ministry of Tourism should work with the Ministry of Railways to achieve the goals.
The Committee further recommends that new railway stations must be developed in a scientific
manner in order to ensure cleanliness and sanitation. Old and pre-existing stations must be
maintained to ensure cleanliness and world-standard facilities.
MARKET RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
7. The Committee notes that the activities undertaken under the head —Market Research mainly
concentrate on activities other than market research to promote tourism. The Committee desires that the
Ministry should engage tourism professional to identify the potential bottlenecks and problems of various
tourism places and tourism related policies. Such researches should lead to innovations and improvements
in promotion of tourism. The Committee feels that we should spend more money on development of
infrastructure which should necessarily follow from such studies and surveys. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the Ministry may inform the Committee about the outcome of these market research and
how the Ministry had been benefited in the area of policy making for development of Tourism. The
Committee is of the view that the Government and industry need to work together towards tourism
development across the country. Hiring people from the industry who are professionals/ experts in their
field will greatly help in the proper implementation of the projects undertaken by the Ministry for tourism
development especially to implement the new initiatives undertaken by the Ministry. (Para 56)
Reply of the Ministry
7.1 The major objectives of the Market Research Professional Services Scheme of the Ministry of
Tourism are the following:
(i) Providing Study/survey based inputs for various policies of the Ministry of Tourism.
(ii) Providing CFA to different States/UTs for conducting surveys/studies for getting inputs for
their policies.
(iii) Promotion of research in the field of Tourism through Central Universities/etc.
(iv) Bringing out research and related Publications of the Ministry of Tourism
7.2 The first 2 components are the major components of the Scheme. Under the scheme, need - based
Surveys/studies are conducted through professional agencies, which are engaged as per GFR. The
findings of the surveys/studies are utilised to the extent possible as policy inputs.
7.3 For instance, in 2016 - 17, the Ministry of Tourism conducted a "Study in Overseas Markets of
Russia, Japan, South Korea, Germany, Turkey and South Africa", in which motivational factors of the
visitors were studied and used for designing international publicity campaigns.

20
7.4 A "Study on Functioning of Tourist Police in States/UTs and Documentation of Best Practices" was
also conducted. This report contained a model for Tourist Police in the form of a guideline. This report
has been shared with the Ministry of Home Affairs as well.
7.5 In 2015-16, the Ministry conducted a "Study of Taxes levied on Tourism sector vis-a-vis Export
Sector". Based on the findings of the Study the Ministry of Tourism moved a case for reduced tax slab
for tourism establishments with the Ministry of Finance. This Study was conducted in close coordination
with the industry.
Surveys are also conducted to assess the macro indicators of the tourism industry, for e.g. a Study
on Adventure Tourism Industry Statistics was conducted to assess the size of Adventure Tourism in
India. Tourism Satellite Account of India (TSAI) gives the contribution of tourism in the GDP of an
economy. Apart from these, Ministry of Tourism has approved Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to
Kerala for 3 year Continuous Tourist Survey. This survey gives centre-wise tourist visits.
7.6 In 2017-18, the Ministry of Tourism granted CFA to Madhya Pradesh for undertaking a Customer
Satisfaction Survey of Accommodation Units owned by the Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development
Corporation (MPSTDC) and Destination Survey. The major objectives of the 2-fold survey were the
following:
(i) Assessment of Quality of services available and level of delivery as perceived by the guests.
(ii) Overall available infrastructure.
(iii) V alue for money in terms of tariffs charged.
(iv) Satisfaction level of tourists w.r.t. their visit at the destination.
(v) Reason/source of information for visiting destination
7.7 The Ministry has also formulated a methodological guideline for Assessment of Infrastructure Gap
Assessment at tourist destinations. The Ministry has shared these guidelines with all the States / UTs with
a request to follow the same.
Further Recommendation/Observation
7.8 The Committee notes that the Ministry could not understand the thrust of the
recommendation. Thrust of the recommendation was that money should be spent for conducting
research on improving tourism and tourism facilities instead of concentrating on market research.
The reply of the Ministry shows that they are concentrating market research though some
initiatives are there to find out the infrastructure gap assessment. The Committee again reiterates
its recommendation that the market research should give more importance to development of
new tourism places and improvement of facilities at the existing tourism destinations.
BUDDHIST CIRCUIT
Recommendation/Observation
8. The Committee appreciates the steps being taken by the Ministry for development of Interstate
Buddhist Circuit in the country. Buddhist Circuits is one of most promising circuits with large potential

21
for development. Buddhist sites are rich in traditions and places of spiritual significance. As a result,
a large number of people from all over the world visit these places, and hence there is a need to develop
these places and provide facilities to visitors. The Committee, however, wonders whether the allocation
for Buddhist Circuits in BE 2018-19 is adequate for development of such massive project. (Para 63)
Reply of the Ministry
8.1 There is no circuit wise allocation of funds under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme. The BE under
the Swadesh Darshan Scheme during 2018-19 is ` 1100 crore. The Ministry has sanctioned five projects
for ` 361.97 crore under the scheme for development of Buddhist Circuit. The expenditure on these
projects and any new project will be met from the BE of 2018-19.
Further Recommendation/Observation
8.2 The Buddhist Circuit is a certain crowd-puller and more proactive steps should be taken to
ensure that this circuit which is revered the world over receives the respect it deserves. The
Committee feels that this is one of the oldest Circuits and its completion is long due. The
Committee, therefore, further recommends that separate allocations must be made towards the
development of this Circuit and it must be given its due importance.
Recommendation/Observation
9. The Committee feels that the full potential of temples and Buddhist sites in the East and North East
and famous temples in the south have not been explored to the fullest. Majority of the tourist spots in
the country are not accessible to the tourists, both domestic and foreign. This is because of high costs
of travelling, poor connectivity and a series of permissions required for various reasons. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry must address the issues of connectivity and better facilities for
the tourists at Buddhist sites. The Committee feels that we have to focus on those areas which possess
touristic/ historic/ religious importance, and are not connected by rail, road and air. The proper connectivity
will further help to increase foreign exchange earnings from foreign tourists which can further help in
development of that area. (Para 64)
Reply of the Ministry
9.1 The Ministry under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme is focusing on development of tourism infrastructure
under thematic tourist circuits with an objective to enhance the visiting experience of the tourists at the
sites. Since development and promotion of tourist sites is primarily the responsibility of respective State
Government/ UTs, the projects under the scheme are identified in consultation with the State Governments.
For better connectivity to the sites under the scheme the Ministry provides funds for development of
last mile connectivity, passenger terminals and Heliports.
9.2 Under RCS-UDAN Scheme, M/o Tourism has already taken up matter of providing connectivity
between the important routes including those of North Eastern Region and Buddhist circuits. Ministry
of Tourism has also suggested connectivity to destinations of Southern states with prominent locations
of rest of India.
9.3 Further, MoT had requested MHA for relaxation in Protected Area Permit (PAP) and Restricted Area
Permit (RAP) in North-Eastern States for five years at a stretch whereas the same has been allowed by

22
MHA for a period of 2 years till 31st December, 2017 for the entire area of Manipur, Mizoram and
Nagaland from the Protected Area regime notified under the foreigners (Protected Area Order 1958).
9.4 After detailed deliberation, Ministry of Home Affairs vide its circular no. 493 dated 14.09.2017 has
excluded the entry of the state Manipur, Nagaland and Mizoram from the protected area regime for a
period of 5 years i.e., till 31st December, 2022, subject to be withdrawn at any time in case of security
concern. As regards the high cost of travel, it is submitted that it is primarily determined by market
forces. It is expected that once, more service providers come to operate in this region, the cost would
go down.
9.5 Ministry of Tourism is continuously taking up the matters to ease the travel of inbound tourists in
a standing Committee headed by Cabinet Secretary. Most of the matters are therefore getting resolved
in time bound manner.
Further Recommendation/Observation
9.6 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry towards increasing connectivity in
the North-East and promoting tourism. It has come to the notice of the Committee that the
North-eastern States are abundant in Buddhist relics in terms of temples, architecture, monasteries
etc. Places like Sikkim and regions around Darjeeling have established monasteries and centres
of Buddhist studies. The Committee is disappointed to note that States like Sikkim which have
well developed Buddhist Circuits and Buddhist institutions which work to preserve, promote and
teach Buddhism, have done so independently. The Buddhist Circuit in Sikkim can serve as a
perfect example on how to develop the Buddhist Circuit in other parts of the nation. The
Committee desires that the Ministry should work to include North East in the Buddhist Circuit.
This also conforms with the 'Look East, Act East' policy of the Government.
9.7 A major cause of concern is the lack of connectivity in the Northeast. While UDAN schemes
may facilitate the provision of flight connectivity via planes and helicopters, the last mile connectivity
is missing as most villages in the Northeast still lack the basic facilities in terms of pucca roads,
electricity and internet/mobile connectivity. The Committee feels that the development of
infrastructure vis-a-vis tourism is the need of the hour. This will also serve to promote inclusiveness
among the people in the North east and remove the feeling of exclusion in the pan- Indian
narrative. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must
work in consonance with the Ministry of DoNER and its nodal agency viz. the Northeast Council
(NEC) in order to increase and promote tourism in the Northeast.
PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY
OVERSEAS PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKET DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE
Recommendations/Observations
10. The Committee notes that Overseas Promotion and Publicity including Market Development Assistance
has been allocated 
`454.24 crore in BE 2018-19 against `297.59 crore in RE 2017-18 whereas the actual
expenses under the head in 2016-17 was `194.44 crore. The Committee notes that the size of the
campaign is increased to have India's Presence in global market for longer duration. Tourism campaigns,

23
like Incredible India 2.0 Campaign, are not only economic tools designed to augment tourist revenues,
but they also provide a privileged platform for advancing geopolitical interests through affective and
symbolic means. We need to spend more money on infrastructure and lesser on advertising. It should not
be a case of raising high expectations with our campaigns but the experience not matching up.
(Para 67)
10.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that allocation made under this head should be utilized
scrupulously for continuing the overseas campaign so that more foreign tourists are attracted and in turn
help foreign exchange earnings. The Committee again recommends that the Government must have a re-
look into the necessity of various tourism promotion offices abroad and the efficacy of various officials
under Overseas Promotion and Publicity. The Committee also may be furnished with country-wise details
of the spending of the Budget Estimate of `454.24 crore which the Ministry of Tourism has proposed
under Overseas Promotion and Publicity. The Committee reminds that the Incredible India 2.0 Campaign
and the publicity and promotion activities should concentrate more on younger generations and the
generations next. (Para 68)
Reply of the Ministry for Para 67 & 68
10.2 In the Budget Estimate 2018-19 an amount of `1330.03 crore has been earmarked for infrastructure
development and only `589.24 crore has been allocated for promotion and publicity.
10.3 As far as utilizing the funds earmarked for overseas promotion, it is stated that the Incredible India
2.0 campaign promotes various tourism products and destinations of the country through Global Media
Campaign in the Television, Print, Online and Social Media. The medium of Television is being used for
the high reach offered by this medium, whereas in the print media publications only those publications
directly targeting potential travellers are being used. There is greater focus on the Digital Media and
enhanced presence on Social Media Platforms, which would effectively target the younger generations
and generation next. The budget for the Global Media Campaign has been significantly enhanced during
2018-19 which would help in reaching out to larger target audience and increase longevity of the
campaign period.
10.4 Also, Ministry of Tourism (MoT) has decided to re-organize its offices on the basis of an in-depth
analysis to identify main source markets contributing to foreign tourist arrivals by consolidating its 14
overseas India Tourism offices into 8 offices. These offices would be located at New York, Frankfurt,
Moscow, London, Dubai, Singapore, Tokyo and Beijing to function as global marketing hubs to cover
various important source markets.
10.5 Ministry of Tourism releases Global Media Campaign in the International Market. These campaigns
are released in Television, Print, Digital and Social media platforms Globally. Since the campaigns are
released Globally, it is not possible to furnish country wise details of spending of the budget.
Further Recommendation/Observation
10.6 The Committee observes that the Ministry has not promoted paid/ promotional video blogs
which are a trend world over. The Committee feels that this is an effective manner to promote
its tourist places to the consumers via an easily accessible platform, i.e. the internet. It is felt
that products under Niche tourism could especially do with this form of promotion. It is a

24
common practice in other countries to promote medical tourism and other similar platforms.
Their experience via video bloggers serves to educate others who might be interested in a similar
procedure. Thus, it serves to increase its popularity as a destination for Medical Tourism. The
Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry should also seek to identify new and interesting
avenues of promotion of tourism in the country. Promotions must not be limited to hoardings
or stalls but should include experience sharing also.
TRAINING AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT
ASSISTANCE TO IHMS/FCI/IITM
Recommendation/Observation
11. The Committee notes the cuts made in the allocation for assistance to IHMs/FCIs/IITTMs/NIWS.
The budgetary allocations shows that total allocations could not be utilized by the end of the Plan
period. This is disappointing mainly because Ministry of Tourism is underutilizing the fund meant for
skill development at a time when India is faced with huge shortage of trained and skilled people in the
tourism and hospitality industry. While the Committee is happy that the Ministry have taken steps to
ensure the utilization of the aforesaid funds the Committee strongly feels that we must have functional
linkages with need of the industry and academic institutions specially IHMS, IITM, CCI, NIWS, etc.
(Para 73)
Reply of the Ministry
11.1 During 2017-18 Budget allocation to HRD at BE stage was ` 95.00 crore ( ` 87.00 crore plus
` 8.00 crore for North Eastern Region), which was reduced to ` 90.00 crore at RE stage ( ` 82.00 crore
plus ` 8.00 crore for North Eastern Region). However, due to acute need for funds, a proposal was
moved to get more funds at 4th Supplementary Grant stage. Additional allocation to the tune of ` 20.00
crore was provided through re-appropriation bringing the total allocation during the year to `110 crore
out of this an amount of 110.38 crore was utilized. Further, the Ministry through IHMs, IITTM are
closely associated with industry to cater to the demand of skilled manpower.
Further Recommendation/Observation
11.2 The Committee impresses upon the fact that investment in the skill development in the
industries related to tourism is integral to the development of tourism in the country. The
requirements of the tourism sector in terms of hospitality, hospitality management, catering etc.
and its various branches are specialised in nature and therefore it is integral to provide training
for the same. At the same time, in order to be a renowned tourist destination, it is integral that
the industry must be fed with professionals who are of international repute and this can only be
so, when we are able to provide training that meets the global standards. These institutions apart
from being integral to the development of tourism in the country, also serve to act as facilitators
of employment generation via the various skills imparted. Hence, the Committee reiterates the
need to ensure that the funding to these institutions under the Ministry of Tourism should be
looked as capital investment and, therefore, must be adequately funded. Moreover, partnerships
must be promoted with other international nations/ institutions in order to learn from their best
practices.

25
Recommendation/Observation
12. The Committee is happy to note the focused approach and opening of more institutes for the
purpose. The Committee, however, recommends that the new training institutes proposed to be opened in
the coming years should be on the actual requirement of manpower in each stream. The Committee also
recommends that the States which have performed well in promotion of tourism should get priority while
selecting the places for opening such institutes. The Committee also recommends that private sector
participation wherever unavoidable, need to be regulated and controlled suitably if they fail to achieve
the requisite standard. (Para 75)
Reply of the Ministry
12.1 To establish hospitality management institutes financially assisted by Govt. of India, Ministry of
Tourism, a feasibility study on the proposal is done through NCHMCT in which priorities are given to
the States which have performed well in promotion of tourism and getting more and more tourists or
to increase the access to hospitality and tourism education. At the same time, the NCHMCT has also
opened its academic umbrella for more private institutes and the Govt. of India is also keen to bring more
private institutes under NCHMCT towards quality education in the field of hospitality and fill the gap of
required manpower in future days. Presently, under the academic umbrella of NCHMCT, total 72
institutes are running out of which 21 Institutes are under Central Government and another Institute is
under construction. 24 State IHMs created under the central funding are also under the academic
umbrella of NCHMCT and some more institutes are under construction. 14 private institutes are already
under the academic umbrella of NCHMCT and 7 more institutes will be added from 2018-19 academic
year and it is also expected that more private institutes will come under the umbrella of NCHMCT by
next academic year.
Further Recommendation/Observation
12.2 The Committee appreciates that NCHMCT is opening more and more institutes in the field
of hospitality. At the same time the Committee wants to draw attention to the fact that there
are a number of hospitality chains renowned world over for their hotels and its management
staff. These hotels have their own trainee/ internships programs. The Committee is of the
opinion that the Ministry of Tourism must devise a proposal such that the students in our
institutes may benefit from their expertise based on the highest industry standards. Furthermore,
the Committee recommends that the Ministry should use the experiences borne from States that
have performed well in the promotion of tourism towards encouraging and developing the States
that are lagging behind in this aspect.
TOURISM POLICE
Recommendation/Observation
13. The Committee feels that although tourist police has been officially deployed by several states, the
objective is likely to be achieved once it is strengthened further. In many of the tourist destinations, the
tourism police personnel are not visible. The safety of foreign as well as domestic travelers is a serious
concern that needs to be addressed promptly. The states that have not deployed tourist police need to
take this up on priority, and the ones that already have done so need to monitor and improve its
effectiveness. (Para 77)

26
Reply of the Ministry
13.1 In order to ensure Safety and Security of the tourists, both Inbound and domestic, Ministry of
Tourism has taken up the matter of deployment of Tourist Police with all the State Governments/UTs
and fourteen States/UTs viz. Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Delhi, Himachal
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana and Odisha
have already deployed Tourists Police in one form or the other.
13.2 Ministry of Tourism is also laying stress on training and sensitizing the tourism police about the
needs/specific requirements of tourists. It has also advised all the State Governments/UTs that tourist
police should be deployed at strategic locations relevant from tourist's point of view and they should be
easily visible and distinguishable for the tourists.
Further Recommendation/Observation
13.3 The safety of tourists, both domestic and international are integral to the success of the
country as a tourist destination, as safety is always the priority which serves to motivate or
demotivate tourists from arriving to our shores. However, the Committee is disappointed to note
the poor response from the States in deploying tourist police. The Committee therefore recommends
that the Ministry of Tourism must work in tandem with the Ministry of Home Affairs and the
State Governments in order to ensure that tourist police are instituted and deployed at strategic
locations from tourist's point of view and where deployed the same must be strengthened.
CAPACITY BUILDING FOR SERVICE PROVIDERS
Recommendation/Observation
14. The Committee notes that the allocation of 
`30.00 crore for capacity building for service providers
during BE 2018-19 has been reduced to almost half of the BE of 2017-18 i.e. `65.00 crore. Also, there
is a steep cut in the allocations from BE `65.00 crore to `46.95 crore at RE stage during 2017-18. The
Committee is not convinced with the justification put forth by the Ministry that for 2018-19 thrust has
been given to infrastructural Scheme of Swadesh Darshan, PRASHAD and Publicity & Promotion
resulting in less allocation for Scheme capacity Building for Service Providers. The Committee again
expresses its distress because Ministry of Tourism is underutilizing the fund meant for skill development
at a time when there is huge shortage of trained and skilled people in the tourism and hospitality
industry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take steps to provide allocation
adequate enough to meet the requirement of trained personnel to serve the increasing tourism potential
of the country. (Para 81)
Reply of the Ministry
14.1 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. For the year 2018-19, the Ministry of
Tourism has fixed an annual training target of 1,01,900 persons. Funding of the skill development
programme is done in a staggered manner in three instalments and requirement of additional funds, if
any, would be suitably addressed.
Further Recommendation/Observation
14.2 The Committee reiterates its view that education and skill development in hospitality and
tourism industry should be considered for enhanced infrastructural investment.

27
NORTH EAST
Recommendation/Observation
15. The Committee appreciates the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry of Tourism for development
of the North East Region. The Committee notes that the North Eastern States are getting adequate funds
and recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should seek active participation from the States to get more
projects implemented. The North East Region holds better opportunities to attract more number of tourists
both domestic and foreign. State infrastructure development is of utmost necessary for all sorts of
development and State Governments must be encouraged for sustainable tourism in the North Eastern
States. (Para 84)
Reply of the Ministry
15.1 Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance for development of tourism infrastructure
to State Governments/Union Territory Administrations including North Eastern States under the Swadesh
Darshan and PRASHAD Schemes subject to receipt of suitable Detailed Project Reports, availability of
funds, liquidation of pending utilization certificates against the funds released earlier and adherence to the
relevant scheme guidelines.
15.2 Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned 14 projects under different themes including Eco Tourism,
Wildlife and Tribal Circuit under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme for `1267.49 Crore covering all the 8
States in the North Eastern Region. The list of projects sanctioned under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme
is at Annexure III. A project for the "Development of Kamakhya Temple and Pilgrimage Destination in
and around Guwahati" has been sanctioned during the year 2015-16 for an amount of `33.98 Crore under
the PRASHAD Scheme.
15.3 The implementation of projects sanctioned under the above schemes is monitored rigorously by the
Ministry of Tourism. The Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) chaired by Secretary
(Tourism) and Mission Directorate chaired by the Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Tourism reviews
the progress of the projects implementation on periodic basis. The Ministry also holds regional workshops
and Video Conference meetings with the States and UTs to review the progress of the projects. At
working level Programme Divisions along with PMC and Domestic India tourism Offices monitors the
project for Cost, Quality and Schedule. States have been instructed to formulate State Level Monitoring
Committees for monitoring of the projects and they also regularly submit the report. The State Governments
have been advised to submit monthly physical and financial progress report of the projects to the
Ministry. The Ministry has also developed a portal to online monitor the implementation of the project
sanctioned under Swadesh Darshan Scheme.
15.4 The projects sanctioned in the North Eastern Region under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme are
progressing well. The two projects sanctioned to Arunachal Pradesh, one to Manipur and one to Sikkim
are 85% complete.
15.5 The project sanctioned in the North Eastern Region viz. Development of Kamakhya Temple and
Pilgrimage Destination in and around Guwahati under the PRASHAD Scheme is presently under
implementation.

28
Further Recommendation/Observation
15.6 The Committee notes that the Ministry is implementing various projects in North Eastern
region for promotion of Tourism. However , the Committee observes that, most parts of the North
East do not come under the purview of the PRSHAD Scheme. The Committee recommends that
the MoT should look into the development of tourism in the North East region of the country
in terms of categories under Niche Tourism. For e.g. the abundance of nature in its most pristine
ecology should be promoted under Eco Tourism, its varied culture can be promoted under Rural
Tourism etc. The Committee notes that the North East with its pleasant weather, scenic beauty
and its naturally bestowed pristine topography is a goldmine in terms of tourism, just waiting to
be unearthed. The Committee observes that various festivals like the Hornbill Festival in Nagaland,
Sangai Festival in Manipur, Ziro Festival in Arunachal Pradesh have become major tourist
attractions and attract tourists from both within the country and abroad. Tourists are willing to
undergo precarious road journeys and travel miles in order to be enthralled by the region and
its offerings. It is felt that the region's full potential is yet to be harnessed and is not lacking
in interest from the tourist community. The MoT must work to help develop infrastructure in
the region in terms of connectivity and developing its tertiary sector. The Committee further
recommends that the MoT must coordinate with the Ministry of DoNER and NEC in order to
promote and develop the North East as a tourist destination.
RURAL CIRCUIT
Recommendation/Observation
16. The Committee notes that the Government has sanctioned only one Rural Circuit Theme of Swadesh
Darshan Scheme since the inception of the Scheme in the year 2014-15. The Committee feels that the
Rural Tourism needs to be given impetus by identifying more Rural Circuit Theme of Swadesh Darshan
Scheme and by allocating funds for the Rural Tourism projects for States. Villages should be identified
for priority development involving the local bodies in the management. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Ministry to focus on development of rural tourism infrastructure involving local
communities in order to promote tourism in rural areas and percolate its socio-economic benefit there.
The Committee would like to reiterate that Government has to take concrete action to ensure that the
benefits of tourism growth under —pro-poor approach should reach the weaker sections of society.
(Para 88)
Reply of the Ministry
16.1 The projects under the scheme are identified in consultation with the State Governments based on
proposals received from them. The Swadesh Darshan schemes aims at integrated development of theme
based tourist circuits in the country. The places proposed to be developed under the scheme involves
special tribal zones, rural areas, eco sensitive zones etc. in the interior parts of the country. While
developing the circuits the interventions are planned with the aim of providing employment to the locals,
improving tourism infrastructure in the region which in turn will help in improving the quality of living
of the locals.

29
Further Recommendation/Observation
16.2 The Committee observes that another major reason for the lack of development in terms
of Rural Tourism is poor connectivity. Villages and the interior parts of States are poorly developed
with lack of pucca roads lacking basic infrastructure. The importance of Rural Tourism may be
impressed upon, as it serves to develop the economy in these regions. A number of examples can
be drawn from regions in the North East which have established themselves as tourist destination
and helped in creating an economy by promoting its tribal culture and community life.
16.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should focus on development
of rural tourism infrastructure involving local community. In this regard the Committee feels
that the Ministry of Tourism must work in coordination with the State Governments, Ministry
of Road transport & Highways and the Ministry of Home Affairs in order to develop infrastructure
and improve connectivity in the rural areas of the country.
EXCLUSIVE ZONES IN PUBLIC PRIV ATE PARTNERSHIP (PPP) MODE
Recommendation/Observation
17. The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Ministry of tourism for formulation of scheme
guidelines for development offive Special Tourism Zones. Tourism not only creates jobs in the tertiary
sector, it also encourages growth in primary and secondary sectors of industry. Hence, Government should
encourage the participation of the private sector in a big way for all round development of the tourism
sector that has the potential to act as the key driver of inclusive growth. The Committee, however,
recommends that private sector participation wherever unavoidable, needs to be regulated and controlled
suitably. The Committee, further, recommends that the five Special Tourism Zones should spread across
various parts of the country. The Committee desires that the Ministry should keep the Committee updated
on the progress of the scheme. (Para 97)
Reply of the Ministry
17.1 The Ministry submitted the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) note for development of Special
Tourism Zone to MoF seeking approval. The MoF vide letter dated 17th May 2018 has advised the
Ministry to conduct a Project Feasibility Report on the establishment of Special Tourism Zones through
a reputed project design consultant with international exposure covering dimensions such as likely
locations, Greenfield vs Brownfield options, reasons for suitability, manpower requirements, comparison
of various options on potential for employment generation, environmental impact, Models (VGF grants,
equity etc.) and quantum of government subsidy, areas of private sector participation, FDI potential etc.
before it can be considered for approval. The Ministry is in the process of appointment of Consultant
for the above study.
Further Recommendation/Observation
17.2 Five special Tourism Zones is an ambitious project of the Government of India. However,
the Committee notes that the Ministry of Finance refused permission on the ground that proper
studies are not conduct to assess various impacts of creation of Special Tourism Zones and the
Ministry of Tourism is in the process of appointment of consultant for the study. The Committee
notes with dismay that the Ministry has formulated the projects in a premature way without any
study. The Committee demanded the details of the five zones but that was also not provided to
the Committee. The Committee recommends that the details and current status of the special
Tourism Zones may be furnished to the Committee.

30
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED
BUDDHIST CIRCUIT
Recommendation/Observation
1. The Committee recommends that the Government should make every effort to provide the required
facilities to Kushinagar and other important places related to Buddha. (Para 61)
Reply of the Ministry
1.1 Development of Buddhist Circuit is an area of prime focus for the Ministry of Tourism. The
Ministry is working actively with the State Governments and other concerned Central Ministries for
development of infrastructure and improvement of connectivity to the Buddhist destinations.
Further Recommendation/Observation
1.2 Given that this is a very old project, the Committee recommends that concrete timelines
must be set for the completion of the projects and the Committee must be informed of the same.
Eco Tourism
Recommendation/Observation
2. The Committee feels that unregulated tourism activities at several tourist spots, including some
heritage sites in the country, are adversely affecting the ecological balance in those places. In Committee's
view if proper values regarding the indigenous people and environment are followed and road and rail
network is put in place the industry may grow in a healthy way. It is also necessary that things are not
done hazardously and these will not misbalance the nature in the name of tourism development.
(Para 100)
Reply of the Ministry
2.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted.
Further Recommendation/Observation
2.2 The Committee desires that it be updated on the steps taken to preserve the ecological
balance in the tourist sites.
CRUISE TOURISM
Recommendation/Observation
3. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Ministry may provide the Committee the details
of the Consultant appointed for the purpose. The Committee may be provided the details of the
recommendations made by the Consultant in his Report for making India a preferred destination both
30

31
for Sea and River Cruise. The Committee may be kept apprised of the progress of implementation and
any other developments in this regard. (Para 102)
Reply of the Ministry
3.1 A global consortium comprising of M/s BermelloAjamil and Partners USA, M/s Finance for Cruise
Destinations Netherlands and M/s Ernst and Young had been appointed as consultants to prepare 'An
Action Plan for the Development of Cruise Tourism in India'. The Consortium has submitted its final
report which has been accepted by the Ministries of Tourism and Shipping. The report inter-alia makes
recommendations on the following subjects:
(a) Socio Economic Profiles of Potential and Existing Cruise Passengers, Detailed Market Assessment
including an overview of Indian Cruise market both present and future and trends in the Global
and Indian Cruise Tourism markets.
(b) Regulatory and Institutional Analysis with recommendations for improvement and policy level
strategies in terms of procedures for facilitation of passengers and vessels, taxation policies
and rationalisation of charges; all against set world benchmarks.
(c) Infrastructural and Operations Gap Assessment and Concept Model Terminal Designs for
Cruise Terminals at the five major ports of Mumbai, Mangalore, Marmugao, Kochi and
Chennai.
(d) Action Plans and Strategies for Infrastructure Development, Marketing and Promotion and
Skill Development.
(e) Analysis of issues related to River Cruise and recommendations for developing River Cruise
markets and conditions for International River Cruise Companies to develop itineraries and
deploy ships in India.
(f) Detailed Roadmap and Action Plan.
3.2 The Ministries of Shipping and Tourism are studying the report in detail and the Committee would
be apprised of progress made and action taken in this regard.
Further Recommendation/Observation
3.3 The Committee may be apprised of the progress of implementation and the action taken in
this regard.
TRAINING CAB DRIVERS AND PREVENTING TOUTS
Recommendation/Observation
4. The hospitality and tourism sector is very sensitive to unruly behavior of service providers especially
the employees of hotels and restaurants, cab drivers etc. The behavior of the drivers at many of the
tourist places are unacceptable as they act as agents of various hotels and restaurants and coerce the
tourist to choose unwanted hotels and restaurants. In this process they are fleecing the tourists. This is
happening at all the railway Station and bus terminals of the tourist destinations especially in Jaipur.
In many areas touts and untrained tourist guides also misguide the tourists and cheat them. The Committee

32
recommends that the Government should take every initiative under the capacity building programmes
to train the cab drivers to be tourist friendly and prevent the touts at tourist destinations. The Committee
feels that we must all realize that one unpleasant trip to India can actually become a great disadvantage
for tourism. The Committee specially highlighted the often rude and annoying behavior of cab/ taxi
drivers. The Committee feels that Government and industry need to work together to create hospitality
and tourism development across the country. (Para 110)
Reply of the Ministry
4.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. This Ministry is committed
to conduct sensitization programmes for all segments of stakeholders including Taxi drivers during the
current financial year.
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.2 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be updated on the progress of the same.
ADOPT A HERITAGE
Recommendation/Observation
5. The Committee is aware that many of the key monuments even those under the control of ASI, are
without basic amenities like clean drinking water , toilet, interpretation centers, cleanliness etc. The
Committee was informed that to overcome those deficiencies the Govt. has taken an initiative called
adopt a Heritage. There is no expenditure outflow from the Budget for the initiative. Under adoption
of Heritage the Govt. is calling for expression of interest from all corporations, State Corporations,
NGOs etc. to adopt a particular tourist site, whether it is ASI's site or any other site, and asking them
to take the responsibility of not only creating basic amenities but also taking care of maintenance. The
Committee was further informed that the organization/corporate are making their detailed plans for
improvement of infrastructure and basic amenities at some of the key tourist sites which they have
adopted. The Committee notes that the initiative of Adopt a Heritage is a welcome step on the part of
the Ministry of Tourism. The Committee recommends that under the Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR) major corporates may be compelled to adopt heritage sites. The Committee also recommends that
the detailed plans for improvement of infrastructure and basic amenities have to be laid down by the
Ministry/Govt. agencies and it should not be left at the discretion of the organization which are adopting
the Heritage sites. Experience and experimentation in the initial two or three projects will make all the
difference in planning for other future projects that the Ministry will take up for development. The
Committee also feels that to make a project a world class experience, bench marking is a must.
(Para 112)
Reply of the Ministry
5.1 "Adopt a Heritage: Apni Dharohar, ApniPehchaan", is a collaborative effort between the Ministry of
Tourism, Ministry of Culture and Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), and State/UTs Governments. The
Project aims to develop synergy amongst all partners to effectively promote "responsible tourism".
5.2 It aims to involve public sector companies, private sector companies and corporate citizens/individuals
to take up the responsibility for making our heritage and tourism more sustainable through development,

33
operation and maintenance of world-class tourist infrastructure and amenities at ASI/ State heritage sites
and other important tourist sites in India. This scheme is voluntary in nature and the stakeholders cannot
be compelled to adopt the tourist/heritage sites. Ministry of Tourism, conducts various stakeholder
outreach programs/sensitization events/road shows to encourage public/private stakeholders to participate
in this program.
5.3 'Monument Mitras' are selected through the innovative concept of "Vision Bidding", where the
agency with best vision for the heritage site will be given an opportunity to associate pride with their
CSR activities. They would also get limited visibility in the premises and the Incredible India website.
The aim is to provide world class infrastructure at the heritage sites for enhancement of tourist experience
to bring them on tourism map.
5.4 The project primarily focuses on providing basic amenities that include cleanliness, public conveniences,
drinking water, ease of access for differently-abled and senior citizens, standardized signage, illumination
and advanced amenities such as surveillance system, night viewing facilities, tourism facilitation centre
and an enhanced tourism experience that will result in more tourist footfalls, both domestic and foreign.
5.5 As per the guidelines of the Scheme there is a Services Level Benchmarking for Assets which the
Monument Mitras are required to follow Design and Service Level Benchmarks (Annexure IV).
5.6 Monument Mitras interested in adopting monuments are required to carry out the need gap analysis
for all the selected monuments which is a joint exercise with the asset owners. The vision bids would
reflect the need of every individual monument.
5.7 After the submission of vision bid, a Detailed Project Report (DPR) is required to be submitted by
the successful Monument Mitra to the asset owner. The asset owner in turn does a detailed examination
of the DPR as per the extant guidelines and undertakes a review for the suitability of the professionals
proposed to be deployed for the job.
5.8 The response to the project has been very encouraging as the agencies who have come forward
for adoption include not only public and private industry or individuals but also schools and law firms.
Under the project a total of 31 agencies (referred as Monument Mitras) have been shortlisted so far to
adopt a total of 93 sites/monuments across India.
Further Recommendation/Observation
5.9 The Committee suggests that the list of shortlisted/ selected agencies and the corresponding
sites may be put in public knowledge by putting it up on the internet.

34
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV A TION — AT A GLANCE
Chapter-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE MINISTRY
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires that it may be apprised of the
details of the online monitoring portal and the way it functions. (Para 1.2)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure
effective monitoring and timely completion of the projects. The Ministry should also devise a
mechanism to reward timely completion of projects and penalise delayed projects. (Para 2.3)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires that it may be apprised as to
whether the Ministry of Tourism has received any proposal from the Government of West Bengal
for inclusion of Gocharan in the Buddhist Circuit. (Para 5.2)
Chapter-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY
The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry of Tourism will take a more proactive approach
in handling of projects and schemes. (Para 2.3)
Chapter-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
MINISTRY HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
The Committee feels that more needs to be done in terms of promotion using electronic and
print media. The Committee is of the opinion that the current trend of internet vloggers (video
blogs) recording their experiences is a good and effective avenue for promotion of niche products
like Medical and Wellness tourism. The Ministry can learn from South Korea where internet
vloggers have recorded their experiences with Plastic Surgery, putting it on the map for the go
-to place for plastic surgery. The Committee would like to know how much money out of the
Domestic and Overseas Promotions and Publicity has been spent for promoting Niche Tourism.
In this regard the Committee feels that new avenues of promotion and advertisement must be
explored by the Ministry. Moreover, placing it under the ambit of Swadesh Darshan and
Infrastructure Development by Central Agencies to provide funds for development of Niche
products is vague and the Committee feels that separate funds must be earmarked for Niche
products and its allocation must be made clear. (Para 1.2)
Upon closer scrutiny of the year-wise allocation, the Committee feels that the reply of the
Ministry is insufficient and does not explain the reduction in funding. The Committee notes that
procedural delays is a key factor for the slow pace of projects and recommends that the Ministry
must devise time lines at each stage to avoid such procedural delays and for smooth implementation
of the projects. Implementation of schemes is a major problem and the Ministry must take a
34

35
more proactive approach towards developing and maintaining tourist sites. There are a plethora
of schemes and integral Circuits which have received little or no funding, for example the
Buddhist Circuit. The Committee feels that circuits such as these must be given importance, and
highlighted and that all efforts must be made in order to ensure that the schemes are adequately
funded. Implementation must be incentivised, improved and novel methods must be introduced
in order to motivate and infuse enthusiasm in developing these projects. (Para 2.3)
The Committee observes that, the formulation of State level monitoring committees is only
in theory and is yet to be put into action. The Committee reiterates its emphasis on the
importance of a Centre- State body to monitor the timely completion of projects. Further it has
been observed that though the funds have been disbursed, a very small percentage of Utilisation
certificates have been submitted by the States. In this regard, the Committee recommends that
the State Level Monitoring Committee must be constituted at the earliest to ensure improved
Centre- State co-operation for the development of Tourism in the country. The Committee may
be informed about the formation of the State level Committees and the activities undertaken by
it. (Para 3.4)
Despite the assurances provided by the Ministry, the Committee feels that the lacunae
between the State Tourism Policy and the Centre Tourism Policy is yet to be bridged. The low
rate of project completion/ implementation is evidence of this. This affects the development of
Tourism projects and results in reduced implementation of schemes. The Committee is of the
opinion that the multiple bureaucratic channels may be more of a hinderance than an effective
solution. The Committee, therefore, recommends that concrete solutions must be devised in
order to ensure a higher rate of project completion and implementation. Tourism boosts economic
activity and has resulted in the economic prosperity of many nations which have tourism as their
main source of revenue. A more efficient system and a higher rate of implementation will
contribute to greater profitability of the Tourism sector benefitting both the Centre and the State
Governments. (Para 4.2)
The Committee understands that the road-blocks faced by the State Governments with
regards to completion of projects are largely policy related. In this regard, the Committee is of
the opinion that the Ministry, at the Centre, must work to constitute a body with the States in
order to devise a solution to the problems faced by the States in the implementation of the
pending projects. The Committee further desires that studies must be instituted with regards to
various policy-related subjects, so that necessary changes and steps can be taken to work through
or around them. In order to ensure its success, the co-operation of the State Governments is
imperative and the Ministry of Tourism must take the lead in resolving policy- related bottlenecks.
The Committee may be informed about the specific steps taken to speed up work under the
PRASHAD scheme. (Para 5.3)
The Committee is pleased to note the progress made in this regard. While applauding the
efforts of the Ministry with regard to increasing connectivity by rail, the Committee would like
to reiterate the importance of ensuring that the new and existing railway stations are developed
at par with global standards. Facilities and amenities must be ensured with clean and hygienic
cloak rooms, food courts and restrooms. The Committee would like to point out that over the
years a major complaint of tourists in the country, both domestic and international, have been

36
the lack of sanitation and hygiene in railway stations and the general stench that overwhelms
one upon entering train stations. The Committee feels that to align with the 'Swachh Bharat
Abhiyan' the Ministry of Tourism should work with the Ministry of Railways to achieve the goals.
The Committee further recommends that new railway stations must be developed in a scientific
manner in order to ensure cleanliness and sanitation. Old and pre-existing stations must be
maintained to ensure cleanliness and world-standard facilities. (Para 6.3)
The Committee notes that the Ministry could not understand the thrust of the
recommendation. The thrust of the recommendation was that money should be spent for conducting
research on improving tourism and tourism facilities instead of concentrating on market research.
The reply of the Ministry shows that they are concentrating market research though some
initiatives are there to find out the infrastructure gap assessment. The Committee again reiterates
its recommendation that the market research should give more importance to development of
new tourism places and improvement of facilities at the existing tourism destinations.
(Para 7.8)
The Buddhist Circuit is a certain crowd-puller and more proactive steps should be taken to
ensure that this circuit which is revered the world over receives the respect it deserves. The
Committee feels that this is one of the oldest Circuits and its completion is long due. The
Committee, therefore, further recommends that separate allocations must be made towards the
development of this Circuit and it must be given its due importance. (Para 8.2)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry towards increasing connectivity in
the North-East and promoting tourism. It has come to the notice of the Committee that the
North-eastern States are abundant in Buddhist relics in terms of temples, architecture, monasteries
etc. Places like Sikkim and regions around Darjeeling have established monasteries and centres
of Buddhist studies. The Committee is disappointed to note that States like Sikkim which have
well developed Buddhist Circuits and Buddhist institutions which work to preserve, promote and
teach Buddhism, have done so independently. The Buddhist Circuit in Sikkim can serve as a
perfect example on how to develop the Buddhist Circuit in other parts of the nation. The
Committee desires that the Ministry should work to include North East in the Buddhist Circuit.
This also conforms with the 'Look East, Act East' policy of the Government. (Para 9.6)
A major cause of concern is the lack of connectivity in the Northeast. While UDAN schemes
may facilitate the provision of flight connectivity via planes and helicopters, the last mile connectivity
is missing as most villages in the Northeast still lack the basic facilities in terms of pucca roads,
electricity and internet/ mobile connectivity. The Committee feels that the development of
infrastructure vis-a-vis tourism is the need of the hour. This will also serve to promote inclusiveness
among the people in the North east and remove the feeling of exclusion in the pan- Indian
narrative. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must
work in consonance with the Ministry of DoNER and its nodal agency viz. the Northeast Council
(NEC) in order to increase and promote tourism in the North East. (Para 9.7)
The Committee observes that the Ministry has not promoted paid/ promotional video blogs
which are a trend world over. The Committee feels that this is an effective manner to promote

37
its tourist places to the consumers via an easily accessible platform, i.e. the internet. It is felt
that products under Niche tourism could especially do with this form of promotion. It is a
common practice in other countries to promote medical tourism and other similar platforms.
Their experience via video bloggers serves to educate others who might be interested in a similar
procedure. Thus, it serves to increase its popularity as a destination for Medical Tourism. The
Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry should also seek to identify new and interesting
avenues of promotion of tourism in the country. Promotions must not be limited to hoardings
or stalls but should include experience sharing also. (Para 10.6)
The Committee impresses upon the fact that investment in the skill development in the
industries related to tourism is integral to the development of tourism in the country. The
requirements of the tourism sector in terms of hospitality, hospitality management, catering etc.
and its various branches are specialised in nature and therefore it is integral to provide training
for the same. At the same time, in order to be a renowned tourist destination, it is integral that
the industry must be fed with professionals who are of international repute and this can only be
so, when we are able to provide training that meets the global standards. These institutions apart
from being integral to the development of tourism in the country, also serve to act as facilitators
of employment generation via the various skills imparted. Hence, the Committee reiterates the
need to ensure that the funding to these institutions under the Ministry of Tourism should be
looked as capital investment and, therefore, must be adequately funded. Moreover, partnerships
must be promoted with other international nations/ institutions in order to learn from their best
practices. (Para 11.2)
The Committee appreciates that NCHMCT is opening more and more institutes in the field
of hospitality. At the same time the Committee wants to draw attention to the fact that there
are a number of hospitality chains renowned world over for their hotels and its management
staff. These hotels have their own trainee/ internships programs. The Committee is of the
opinion that the Ministry of Tourism must devise a proposal such that the students in our
institutes may benefit from their expertise based on the highest industry standards. Furthermore,
the Committee recommends that the Ministry should use the experiences borne from States that
have performed well in the promotion of tourism towards encouraging and developing the States
that are lagging behind in this aspect. (Para 12.2)
The safety of tourists, both domestic and international are integral to the success of the
country as a tourist destination, as safety is always the priority which serves to motivate or
demotivate tourists from arriving to our shores. However, the Committee is disappointed to note
the poor response from the States in deploying tourist police. The Committee therefore recommends
that the Ministry of Tourism must work in tandem with the Ministry of Home Affairs and the
State Governments in order to ensure that tourist police are instituted and deployed at strategic
locations from tourist's point of view and where deployed the same must be strengthened.
(Para 13.3)
The Committee reiterates its view that education and skill development in hospitality and
tourism industry should be considered for enhanced infrastructural investment. (Para 14.2)

38
The Committee notes that the Ministry is implementing various projects in North Eastern
region for promotion of Tourism. However , the Committee observes that, most parts of the North
East do not come under the purview of the PRSHAD Scheme. The Committee recommends that
the MoT should look into the development of tourism in the North East region of the country
in terms of categories under Niche Tourism. For e.g. the abundance of nature in its most pristine
ecology should be promoted under Eco Tourism, its varied culture can be promoted under Rural
Tourism etc. The Committee notes that the North East with its pleasant weather, scenic beauty
and its naturally bestowed pristine topography is a goldmine in terms of tourism, just waiting to
be unearthed. The Committee observes that various festivals like the Hornbill Festival in Nagaland,
Sangai Festival in Manipur, Ziro Festival in Arunachal Pradesh have become major tourist
attractions and attract tourists from both within the country and abroad. Tourists are willing to
undergo precarious road journeys and travel miles in order to be enthralled by the region and
its offerings. It is felt that the region's full potential is yet to be harnessed and is not lacking
in interest from the tourist community. The MoT must work to help develop infrastructure in
the region in terms of connectivity and developing its tertiary sector. The Committee further
recommends that the MoT must coordinate with the Ministry of DoNER and NEC in order to
promote and develop the North East as a tourist destination. (Para 15.6)
The Committee observes that another major reason for the lack of development in terms
of Rural Tourism is poor connectivity. Villages and the interior parts of States are poorly developed
with lack of pucca roads lacking basic infrastructure. The importance of Rural Tourism may be
impressed upon, as it serves to develop the economy in these regions. A number of examples can
be drawn from regions in the North East which have established themselves as tourist destination
and helped in creating an economy by promoting its tribal culture and community life.
(Para 16.2)
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should focus on development
of rural tourism infrastructure involving local community. In this regard the Committee feels
that the Ministry of Tourism must work in coordination with the State Governments, Ministry
of Road transport & Highways and the Ministry of Home Affairs in order to develop infrastructure
and improve connectivity in the rural areas of the country. (Para 16.3)
Five special Tourism Zones is an ambitious project of the Government of India. However,
the Committee notes that the Ministry of Finance refused permission on the ground that proper
studies are not conduct to assess various impacts of creation of Special Tourism Zones and the
Ministry of Tourism is in the process of appointment of consultant for the study. The Committee
notes with dismay that the Ministry has formulated the projects in a premature way without any
study. The Committee demanded the details of the five zones but that was also not provided to
the Committee. The Committee recommends that the details and current status of the special
Tourism Zones may be furnished to the Committee. (Para 17.2)
Chapter-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED
Given that this is a very old project, the Committee recommends that concrete timelines must
be set for the completion of the projects and the Committee must be informed of the same.
(Para 1.2)

39
The Committee desires that it be updated on the steps taken to preserve the ecological
balance in the tourist sites. (Para 2.2)
The Committee may be apprised of the progress of implementation and the action taken in
this regard. (Para 3.3)
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be updated on the progress of the same.
(Para 4.2)
The Committee suggests that the list of shortlisted/selected agencies and the corresponding
sites may be put in public knowledge by putting it up on the internet. (Para 5.9)

MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 26th November, 2018 in Committee Room D,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O'Brien — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Kumari Selja
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
10. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
11. Shri Rajesh Pandey
12. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
14. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, A VSM (Retd.)
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
** *
*** Relate to other matters.
43

44
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed that the
agenda of the meeting was to adopt six Reports of the Committee *              * *
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted six Reports viz.,
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
(iv) * * *
(v) * * *
(vi) draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of
the Committee contained in its Two Hundred Sixty First Report on the Demands for Grants
(2018-19) of the Ministry of Tourism.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The meeting was adjourned at 4:22 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

45
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
LIST/STATUS OF PROJECTS SANCTIONED UNDER SWADESH DARSHAN SCHEME
(` in crore)
Sl. Name of State/ Project Name Amt. Amt. Status
No. Sanction Y ear Sanctioned Released
12 3 4 5 6
1. Andaman & Development of Coastal Circuit 42.19 8.44 Project sanctioned on
Nicobar Islands (Long Island-Ross Smith Island- November 2016
(2016-17)  Neil Island-Havelock Island- Project timeline: 24
Baratang Island-Port Blair) in Months Work in
Andaman & Nicobar under progress for some
Coastal thematic circuit of components. Few
Swadesh Darshan Scheme. components   are  still
Major Components: Beach under tendering
safety measures, Tourist process.
amenities, Wayside Amenities,
Scuba Diving Centre,
Upgradation of park, Preparation
of Beach Management Plan by
NIWS
2. Andhra Pradesh Development of Kakinada Hope 69.83 55.86 Project was sanctioned
(2014-15) Island Konaseema as World Class in March 2015
Coastal & Eco Tourism Circuit Project timeline: 24
in Andhra Pradesh Months
Major Components: Tourist The project was initially
Information Centre, Floating delayed as SG changed
Jetty, Passenger Terminal, many sanctioned
Parking, Log Huts, Food courts, components. Later, the
Amphitheatre & Amenity Building, project picked up well
Illumination and Electrification, and is now
Solid waste Collection Bins, approximately 95%
Interpretation center, Parking, complete.
Beach Front Development, Seating 3rd instalment of funds
Benches/Beach Furniture/Sun released in July and
Lounges, Gazebos and Beach December 2017.
Beautification, Waiting Lounge,
Directional & Information
Signages, Solid waste Collection
Bins etc.
47

48
12 3 4 5 6
3. Andhra Pradesh Development of Coastal T ourism 59.70 44.30 Project was sanctioned
(2015-16) Circuit in Sri PottiSriramalu in December 2015
Nellore under Swadesh Darshan Project timeline: 17
Scheme in Andhra Pradesh. Months
Major Components:  Tourist SG changed many
Facilitation Centre, Jetty, Eco sanctioned components
Log Huts, Parking, Boats, which caused delay
Landscaping, signages, Solid initially. Later, the
waste Management, Interpretation project picked up well
Centre, Watch Tower, Pathways, and is now approxima-
Amphitheatre, Beach Front tely 65% complete.
Development, Seating Benches/ Part of 3rd instalment
Beach Furniture/Sun Lounges, of funds released in
etc. December 2017.
4. Andhra Pradesh Development of Buddhist Circuit: 52.34 10.47 Project was sanctioned
(2017-18) Shalihundam-Thotlakonda- in September 2017
Bavikonda-Bojjanakonda- Project timelines: 18
Amravati-Anupu in Andhra months
Pradesh under the theme of Work started only at
Buddhist Circuit of Swadesh one site.
Darshan Scheme progress at other
Major Components: Tourist Tendering is in
Information Centre, SEL Show, destinations and
Open Air Theatre, Interpretation approval is awaited
Centre, Illumination. Landscaping, from ASI.
Parking, CCTV , WiFi, Jetties etc.
5. Arunachal Development of North East 49.77 39.81 Project sanctioned on
Pradesh Circuit Bomdila-Bhalukpong- January 2016
(2015-16) T awang in Arunachal Pradesh Project timeline: 30
Major Components: Multipurpose Months  Project is
Hall, Cottage Accommodation, progressing well and is
Cafeteria, Approach Road, expected to be completed
Signages, Wayside Amenities, by August 2018.
Pathways, Toilets
6. Arunachal Integrated Development of New 97.14 77.71 Project sanctioned on
Pradesh Adventure T ourism in Arunachal December 2015
(2015-16) Pradesh under North East Circuit Project timeline: 30
of Swadesh Darshan Months Work on the
Major Components: Cafeteria, project is going as per
illumination, pathways, nature timelines.
trail, hawaghar, log hut.

49
12 3 4 5 6
6. Assam Manas - Pobitora - Nameri - 95.67 47.84 Project sanctioned in
(2015-16) Kaziranga - DibruSaikhowa as December 2015
Wild Life Circuit in Assam under Project timeline: 30
Swadesh Darshan Scheme Months
Major Components: Log huts, Project is delayed.
approach road, exhibition centre,
interpretation centre, nature trail,
platform for elephant safari,
wayside amenity
7. Assam Development of Tezpur -Majuli- 98.35 19.67 Project sanctioned in
(2016-17) Sibsagar under Heritage Circuit March 2017
Major Components: Signages, Project timeline: 36
Pathways, CCTV , Wifi, SWM, Months
parking, Cafeteria, Public Project is delayed.
convenience, drinking facility, Alternate proposal is
landscaping being prepared with
ASI for one site.
8. Bihar Development of Jain Circuit in 52.39 24.06 Project sanctioned in
(2016-17) Bihar: V aishali - Arrah - Masad- September 2016
Patna - Rajgir - Pawapuri - Project timeline: 24
Champapuri Months
Major components: Signages, 30% of work completed.
wayside amenities, parikrama Project is delayed as
path, sitting shelter, battery per original timeline.
operated vehicle, cafeteria. Land availability issues
still persist.
9. Bihar Integrated Development of 52.35 24.05 Project sanctioned in
(2016-17) Kanwaria route: Sultanganj September 2016
to Deoghar Project timeline: 24
Major Components: Rain Months
shelter, cafeteria, sitting shelter, 30% of  work  is
information kiosk, changing complete.
room, signages Project is delayed as
per originally specified
timeline.
10. Bihar Development of Buddhist circuit- 98.73 19.75 Project sanctioned
(2016-17) Construction of Cultural Centre in March 2017
at Bodhgaya, Bihar Project timeline: 18
Major Component: Civil Work, Months
Sanitary installation, water supply, Work has not started

50
firefighting, acoustics, auditorium due to delay in
chairs, rain water harvesting, tendering.
STP
11. Bihar Development of Gandhi Circuit: 44.65 8.93 Project sanctioned in
(2017-18) Bhitiharwa-Chandrahia-Turkaulia June 2017
Major Components: STP, Project timeline: 18
battery operated vehicles, sitting Months
shelter, tube well, natural cooling 15% of work
system, toilet blocks completed. Tendering in
process for majority of
sites.
12. Bihar Development of Mandar Hill and 53.49 10.70 Project sanctioned in
(2017-18) Ang Pradesh September 2017 Project
Major Components: Benches, timeline: 36 Months
solar lights, pavement, LED DPR & Tendering
street lights, kiosks, culverts, under process.
interpretation wall
13. Chhattisgarh Development of Tribal T ourism 99.94 49.97 Project sanctioned in
(2015-16) Circuit in Jashpur-Kunkuri- February 2016
Mainpat- Ambikapur-Maheshpur- Project timeline: 48
Ratanpur-Kurdar-Sarodadadar- Months Work on the
Gangrel-Kondagaon-Nathyanawa- project is going as per
gaon-Jagdalpur-Chitrakoot- timelines.
Tirthgarh in Chhattisgarh under
Swadesh Darshan Scheme
Major Components: Eco log
huts, craft haat, open
amphitheatre, pathway, chain
link fencing, walkways with
railings, steps at high gradients,
amenities centre, wayside
amenities.
14. Goa Development of Coastal Circuit 99.99 79.99 Project sanctioned in
(2016-17) (Sinquerim-Baga, Anjuna-Vagator, June 2016
Morjim-Keri, Aguada Fort and Project timeline: 36
Aguada Jail) in Goa. Months
Major Components: Amphitheatre, Implementation of
Tourist Interpretation Centre, project is going on
Upgradation of Helipad, Sound good pace at most
12 3 4 5 6

51
and Light Show, Watch Tower, sites, however, work is
Cycle Track, Landscaping, delayed for the major
Meditation Hall, Pargola, GIS component in Aguada
Mapping jail and fort due to ASI
permission which is
under process.
15. Goa Development of Coastal Circuit 99.35 19.87 Project sanctioned in
(2017-18) II: Rua De Orum Creek - Don June 2017
Paula - Colva - Benaulim in Goa Project timeline: 36
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme Months
Major Components: Convention Tendering is complete
Centre, Open Air Theatre, Light and mobilization is
& Sound show, Tourist being delayed due to
Information Centre, Parking CRZ permission.
development & Illumination,
Rescue Boats, GIS Mapping
16. Gujarat Development of Heritage Circuit 93.48 18.70 Project sanctioned in
(2016-17) in Ahmedabad-Rajkot-Porbandar- September 2016
Bardoli-Dandi in Gujarat under Project timeline: 36
Swadesh Darshan scheme. Months
Major Components: Sinages, Project is delayed.
illumination, cafeteria, landscaping, Change in components
exhibition hall, auditorium cum under consideration
community hall, audio visual with ASI.
show, cloak room.
17. Gujarat Development of Heritage circuit: 99.81 49.90 Project sanctioned in
(2016-17) Vadnagar - Modhera and Patan March 2017
Major Components: Signages, Project timeline: 36
Pathways, Parking, Toilet, Months Work on the
Benches, Landscaping, Street project is going as per
Pole, Water harvesting, timelines.
Interpretation centre, CCTV, Work is complete at
Dustbins two major locations in
Vadnagar.
18. Gujarat Development of Buddhist Circuit 35.99 7.20 Project sanctioned in
(2017-18) Major Components: Signages, June 2017
Landscaping, Street Lights, Project timeline: 24
Approach road, Toilets, Entrance Months
gate, Watch tower, dustbin, Project is delayed.
CCTVs, Wifi Work has not started at
major destinations due
12 3 4 5 6

52
to delay in tendering
and ASI clearance/
discussion.
19. Haryana Development of T ourism 97.35 44.24 Project sanctioned in
(2016-17) Infrastructure At Places Related September 2016
To Mahabharat In Kurukshetra - Project timeline: 24
Krishna Circuit Months
Major Components: RCC railing, 40% of the work is
lase show, flooring work, ladies complete.
bathing ghat, mural painting and Project is likely to be
Mahabharata artefact work, delayed beyond the
cafeteria, exhibition centre, o riginally specified
gazehbo, pathways and compound completion date.
wall
20. Himachal Development of Himalayan 99.76 19.95 Project sanctioned in
Pradesh Circuit in Himachal Pradesh March 2017
(2016-17) Major Components: Signages, Project timeline: 24
Landscaping, Cafeteria, Exhibition Months
room, Souvenir shops, STP, Project is not
Parking, Benches, Solar street progressing as per
lights, Retaining wall specified timeline.
21. Jammu and Integrated Development of 82.97 41.48 Project sanctioned in
Kashmir T ourism Infrastructure projects June 2016
(2016-17) in the State of Jammu and Project timeline: 36
Kashmir under Himalayan Circuit Months
of Swadesh Darshan Scheme. Work on the project is
Major Components: Amusement going as per timelines.
water park, restaurant, food
court, river protection works,
glass viewing gallery, light &
laser show, multipurpose hall,
restoration of railway platform,
museum and gallantry gallery,
toilet blocks, cruise boats, skating
ring, eco log structure
22. Jammu and Construction of Assets in lieu of 98.7 47.26 Project sanctioned in
Kashmir those Destroyed in Floods September 2016
(2016-17) Major Components: Cafeteria, Project timeline: 36
Tourist amenities, landscaping, Months
12 3 4 5 6

53
Pathways, Signages, Parking, Work on the project is
Landscaping & Beautification, going as per timelines.
Benches.
23. Jammu and Jammu-Rajouri-Shopian-Pulwama 96.38 44.78 Project sanctioned in
Kashmir Major Components: Store room, September 2016
(2016-17) Landscaping & Pathways, Project timeline: 36
Cafeteria, Signages, Benches, Months
Eco log huts, Gender based Work on the project is
toilets, Gazebos, Security Cabin, going as per timelines.
River protection wall.
24. Jammu and Gulmarg- Baramulla-Kupwara- 96.93 19.39 Project sanctioned in
Kashmir Leh September 2016
(2016-17) Major Components: Cafeteria, Project timeline: 36
Signages, Landscaping and Months
beautification, Security Cabin, Physical work has
Pathways, Get set, Admin block, started at few locations.
Tourist reception centre, Eco log
huts
25. Jammu and Mantalai-Sudhmahadev-Patnitop 97.82 19.56 Project sanctioned in
Kashmir Major Components: Signages, September 2016
(2016-17) Solid waste management, Project timeline: 36
Pathways, Convention centre, Months
parking, Toilets, Solar Lighting, Work has started at
CCTV , Guard rooms, Rain Water all  destinations.
Harvesting
26. Jammu and Anantnag- Kishtwar- Pahalgam - 96.39 44.52 Project sanctioned in
Kashmir Daksum - RanjitSagar September 2016
(2016-17) Major Components: Approach Project timeline: 36
Road, Signages, Landscaping, Months
Benches, Illumination, Log huts, Work on the project is
Parking, Light & Sound Show, going as per timelines.
Cafeteria, Battery Operated
vehicles, SWM
27. Karnataka Development of Coastal Circuit 95.67 19.13 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) in Dakshin Kannada Distt., Uttar August 2016
Kannada Distt. & Udupi Distt. in Project timeline: 24
Karnataka. Months
Major Components: Floating The project is
Restaurant, Jetty, Tourist significantly slow.
12 3 4 5 6

54
Facilitation Centre, Watch Tower,
Beach Cleaning Equipment, Water
Sport Equipment, Rescue Boats,
House Boats, GIS Mapping
28. Kerala Development of Pathanamthitta - 90.06 49.60 Project sanctioned in
(2015-16) Gavi - V agamon - Thekkady as December 2015
Eco Tourism Circuit in Idduki Project timeline: 24
and Pahanamthitta Districts in Months
Kerala under Swadesh Darshan Project is 85% complete.
Scheme
Major Components: Eco
log lodge, ticket counters, nature
trail, pathways, watch towers,
trampoline, shooting arena,
valley river crossing, bio toilets,
food plaza
29. Kerala Development of Sabarimala - 99.99 20.00 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Erumeli-Pampa-Sannidhanam as July 2016
a Spiritual Circuit in Kerala under Project timeline: 36
Swadesh Darshan Scheme. Months
Major Components: Information Project is delayed.
centre, toilet building, mandapam,
sewage treatment system, first
aid & health kiosk, ramp, stage
for cultural activity. Escape route
pathways
30. Kerala Development of Shri Padmanabha 92.44 44.76 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Aranmula Sabarimala as a September 2016
Spiritual Circuit in Kerala under Project timeline: 36
Swadesh Darshan Scheme. Months Project is not
Major Components: Bio toilets, progressing as per
information centre, heritage walk specified timeline.
pathway, last mile connectivity,
drinking water kiosks, electrical
work, storm water drainage,
CCTV, canopy for VIP gallery,
waiting hall, cloak rooms,
shower room, parking
12 3 4 5 6

55
31. Madhya Pradesh Development of Eco T ourism 99.62 49.81 Project was sanctioned
(2017-18) Circuit at Madhya Pradesh in September 2017
Major Components: Signages, Project timeline: 18
Approach Road, Dustbins, Months Work has
Pathway, Nature trail, started at all
Electrification, Toilets, Yoga destinations
park, STP, Gazebo,WiFi & CCTV,
Eco huts, Cafeteria, Information
centre
32. Madhya Pradesh Development of Wildlife Circuit 92.22 73.78 Project sanctioned on
(2015-16) at Panna-Mukundpur-Sanjay- December 2015 Project
Dubri-Bandhavgarh-Kanha-Mukki- timeline: 30 Months
Pench in Madhya Pradesh under Project shall be
Swadesh Darshan scheme complete by September
Major Components: Buffer zone 2018.
entry, Canopy walk, log huts,
information centre, solar lighting
system, development of machaans,
Forest walking trails
33. Madhya Pradesh Development of Buddhist Circuit 74.94 37.47 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) in Sanchi-Satna-Rewa-Mandsaur- July 2016
Dhar in Madhya Pradesh under Project timeline: 24
Swadesh Darshan scheme. Months
Major Components:  Development Project is delayed.
of Marshal House, Foot hill,
approach road, Buddhist Theme
Park, Meditation hall, Tourist
reception centre, premises
development, wayside amenities
34. Madhya Pradesh Development of Heritage Circuit 99.77 49.89 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) (Gwalior - Orchha-Khajuraho- September 2016
Chanderi-Bhimbetka-Mandu) Project timeline: 30
Major Components: Tourist Months
facilitation centre, pathways, Work on the project is
cafeteria, sandstone railing, going as per timelines.
huts, gazebo, STP.
35. Maharashtra Development of Sindhudurg 82.17 12.79 Project was sanctioned
(2015-16) Coastal Circuit in Maharashtra in March 2016.
12 3 4 5 6

56
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme. Project timeline: 36
Major Components: Tourist Months
Facilities, Toilet Blocks, Seating Project is not
Area, Beautification, Illumination, progressing as per
cafeteria, wayside amenities specified timeline.
36. Maharashtra Development of Waki- Adasa- 54.01 0.00 Project was sanctioned
(2017-18) Dhapewada- Paradsingha-Chota in May 2018.
Taj Bagh- Telankhandi-Girad Project timeline: 36
under Spiritual Circuit Months
Tendering in process
37. Manipur Development of Tourist Circuit 89.66 61.31 Project sanctioned on
(2015-16) in: Imphal-Moirang-Khongjom- June 2015
Moreh. Project timeline: 24
Major Components: Light & Months Project is nearly
Sound shows, Pathways, com plete.
Exhibition huts, Dance Few locations are being
performance platform, Signages, dropped due to non-
Eco friendly conveyance, rescue availability of land.
boats, tourist facilitation centre
38. Manipur Development of Spiritual Circuit
(2016-17) In Manipur- Shri Govindajee
Temple - Shri Bijoy Govindajee
Temple- Shri Gopinath Temple-
Shri Bungshibodon Temple -
Shri Kaina Temple.
Major Components: Multipurpose 53.8 24.24 Project sanctionedon
hall, reception cum coak room, July 2016
interpretation gallery, landscaping, Project timeline: 24
CCTV & WiFi, beautification of Months Project is
pond, parking lot delayed.
39. Meghalaya Development of Umiam (Lake 99.13 49.57 Project sanctionedon
(2016-17) View) - U LumSohpetbneng - July 2016
Mawdiangdiang - Orchid Lake Project timeline: 30
Resort, Meghalaya Months
Major Components: Traditional Work on the project is
healing centre, information centre, going as per timelines.
sales emporium, cafeteria, Work is nearly
mountain biking, traditional arch, complete at two
12 3 4 5 6

57
twin log hut, gazebo, pathways, destinations.
adventure activities, provision of
shooting range
40. Mizoram Integrated Development of New 94.91 75.92 Project sanctioned on
(2015-16) Eco Tourism under Swadesh December 2015
Darshan- North East Circuit at Project timeline: 24
Thenzawl & South Zote, Months 70% of the
District Serchhip and Reiek, work is completed and
Mizoram the rest of the work is
Major Components: Golf likely to be completed
Course, Eco log huts, adventure by September 2018.
activities, nature trail, cafeteria
41. Mizoram Development of Eco-Adventure 99.07 44.63 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Circuit Aizawl -Rawpuichhip - March 2017
Khawhphawp -Lengpui-Durtlang- Project timeline: 30
Sakawrhmuituaitlang -Muthee - Months
Chitelui -Beratlawng -Tuirial Tendering is done and
Airfield - Hmuifang. work allotted. Work has
Major Components: Signages, started on ground.
Ropeways, Cafeteria, Adventure
activities, Signages, Pathways,
SWM, Parking, Benches, Tourist
information centre, Nature trail
42. Nagaland Development of Tribal Circuit 97.36 72.05 Project sanctioned on
(2015-16) Peren -Kohima-Wokha, Nagaland November 2015
Major Components: Information Project timeline: 30
centre, Nature trail, cafeteria, Months
wayside amenity, public Project is not
conveniences, stone pathway, progressing as per
haats/morung, trekking path specified timeline.
43. Nagaland Dvelopment of Tribal Circuit: 99.67 49.83 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Mokokchung - Tuensang -Mon September 2016
Major Components: Pathways, Project timeline: 30
Bird watching tower, Cafeteria, Months
Gazebo, Public convenience, Work is under progress
Changing rooms at all destinations.
44. Odisha Development of Gopalpur, Barkul, 76.49 15.30 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Satapada and Tampara as Coastal June 2016
12 3 4 5 6

58
circuit in Odisha. Project timeline: 24
Major Components: Tourist Months
Reception Centre, Marine The project is
Museum, Floating Jetty, Public significantly slow.
Convenience, Solid Waste
Management, Sewage Treatment
Plant, Water Sport Enhancement
45. Puducherry Development of Union Territory 85.28 38.43 Project was sanctioned
(2015-16) of Puducherry as Tourist Circuit in December 2015
under Swadesh Darshan Scheme Project timeline: 36
Major Components: Cafeteria/ Months Based on the
Food Courts, Interpretation part UC of 1st
Centre, Boat Jetty, Viewing Point, installment, part of 2nd
Cycle Track, Log Huts, Beauty instalment was released.
Safety Equipment, Gabian Wall,
Huts for Yoga and Wellness
facility, Illumination, restoration
of facade of selected heritage
buildings, Watch Tower,
Illumination
46. Puducherry Development of Heritage Circuit 66.35 13.27 Project was sanctioned
(2017-18) in Puducherry under Swadesh in June 2017
Darshan Scheme Project timeline: 28
Major Components:  Signages, Months
Landscaping, Jetty, Beautification, Work has started at
Electrification, Open Air Theatre, few locations.
Auditorium, Granite benches.
47. Puducherry Development of Spiritual Circuit 40.68 8.14 Project was sanctioned
(2017-18) in Puducherry under Swadesh in June 2017
Darshan Scheme Project timeline: 28
Major Components:  Signages, Months
Beautification, Pathways, Ghat Work has started at
along sacred river, Landscaping, majority of destinations.
Tourist facility Centre,
Performance stage, Drinking
water facility, multipurpose hall,
Information kiosk, pathways
48. Rajasthan Development of Sambhar Lake 63.96 46.98 Project sanctioned on
(2015-16) Town and Other Destinations in September 2015
12 3 4 5 6

59
Jaipur District, Rajasthan under Project timeline: 24
Desert Circuit in Swadesh Months Project is
Darshan Scheme complete at all
Major Components: Cafeteria, destinations except one
Site development, hill trail, component.
facade lighting, booking kiosks,
procurement of rail coaches,
upgradation of rail track, parking,
craft haat,
49. Rajasthan Integrated Development of 91.45 41.78 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Govind Dev ji temple (Jaipur), September 2016 Project
Khatu Shyam Ji (Sikar) and timeline: 24 Months
Nathdwara (Rajsamand) in Project is delayed.
Rajasthan under Krishna Circuit Work has not started at
theme of Swadesh Darshan one location due to land
Scheme dispute.
Major Components: Solar lamp
posts, pathways, CCTV , benches
and dustbins, facade improvement,
pathways, O.A.T, landscaping,
artist direction & content
generation, sound system
50. Rajasthan Development of Spiritual Circuit 93.9 43.69 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) (Jaipur-Alwar-Chittorgarh-Churu- March 2017
Bharatpur-Viratnagar) Project timeline: 18
Major Components:  Signages, Months
CCTV , Solar Lights, Amphitheatre, Project is delayed.
WiFi, Tourist Facility Centre,
Pilgrim Rest areas, Benches,
Basic amenities, Yatri Sheds,
Parking, Light & Sound Show
51. Rajasthan Development of Heritage Circuit 99.60 49.80 Project sanctioned on
(2017-18) (Jaipur-Alwar-Udaipur-Nagaur- June 2017
Jaisalmer-Jalore-Sawai Madhopur- Project timeline: 18
Rajasmand) Months
Major Components: Signages, Project is delayed.
Illumination, Pathways, Cafeteria,
Laser water show, Landscaping,
parking, drinking water facility
12 3 4 5 6

60
52. Sikkim Development of Tourist Circuit 98.05 78.44 Project sanctioned on
(2015-16) linking - Rangpo (entry) - June 2015
Rorathang-Aritar-Phadamchen- Project timeline: 24
Nathang -Sherathang-T songmo- Months
Gangtok - Phodong - Mangan - Project shall be
Lachung - Yumthang - Lachen - complete by December
Thangu -Gurudongmer-Mangan- 2018.
Gangtok -TuminLingee-Singtam
(exit) in Sikkim.
Major Components:
Interpretation centre, approach
road, wayside amenities,
adventure tourism, eco log huts,
souvenir shops, walkways,
meditation centre, craft haats,
toilet blocks
53. Sikkim Development of Tourist Circuit 95.32 43.59 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Linking - Singtam-Makha-Temi- September 2016
Bermoik Tokal- Phongla-Namchi- Project timeline: 36
Jorethang-Okharey-Sombaria- Months
Daramdin-Jorethang - Melli Project is delayed.
(Exit) In Sikkim Under North
East Circuit
Major Components:
Development of Paragliding,
Archery infrastructure, ethnic
reception gate, walkways,
Cultural & Heritage centre,
ethnic log huts, open air theatre,
cafeteria, tea tourism, gazehbo
54. Tamil Nadu Development of Coastal Circuit 99.92 19.98 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) (Chennai-Mamamallapuram - November 2016
Rameshwaram - Manpadu - Project timeline: 24
Kanyakumari) in Tamil Nadu Months
under Swadesh Darshan Work has started at
Scheme majority of destinations.
Major Components: Jogging
Track, Watch Tower,
Interpretation Centre, Rescue
Boats, Beach Cleaning
12 3 4 5 6

61
Equipment, Sea View Seating
plaza, Last Mile
55. Telangana Integrated Development of Eco 91.61 67.09 Project sanctioned on
(2015-16) Tourism Circuit in Mahaboob- December 2015
nagar district, Telangana under Project timeline: 18
Swadesh Darshan Scheme. Months
Major Components: Approach Work is complete at
road, pathways, parking, four destinations and in
landscaping, watch tower, view progress at remaining
point, water sports, trekking sites.
path.
56. Telangana Integrated Development of 84.4 42.20 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Mulugu-Laknavaram-Medavaram- June 2016
Tadvai- Damaravi -Mallur- Project timeline: 18
Bogatha Waterfalls as Tribal Months
Circuit in Telangana under Work is complete at
Swadesh Darshan Scheme one destination and in
Major Components: Gazebo, progress at remaining
seating benches, tourist amenities sites.
centre, tribal multi product
display centre, log huts, jetties,
tribal interpretation centre,
landscaping and illumination
57. Telangana Development of Heritage Circuit 99.42 19.88 Project sanctioned on
(2017-18) Qutubshahi Heritage Park-Paigarh March 2017
Tombs-Raymonds Tomb- Begum Project timeline: 36
Hayat Bakshi Tomb Months
Major Components: Pathway, Tendering is in
Signages, Landscaping, Toilets, progress.
CCTV , Illumination, Amphitheatre,
Parking, public amenities
58. Tripura Development of North East 99.59 49.79 Project sanctioned on
(2015-16) Circuit : Agartala - Sipahijala - December 2015
Melaghar - Udaipur - Amarpur- Project timeline: 30
Tirthamukh-Mandirghat-Dumboor- Months Work on the
Narikel Kunja-Gandachara-Ambassa project is going as per
under the theme of North East timelines.
Circuit in Tripura
12 3 4 5 6

62
Major Components: Sound &
Light show, conference block,
wayside amenities, tourist shed,
paddle boats, RC retaining walls,
log huts, nature trail, canopy
walk, construction of jetty,
open air stage
59. Uttar Pradesh Development of Chitrakoot and 69.45 13.89 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Shringverpur under Ramayana September 2016
Circuit Project timeline: 36
Major Components:  Development Months
of Sandhya Ghats, Parikrama Work has started at
Marg, Tourist Facilitation Centre, few locations.
Food Plaza, Digital Intervention
at Ramayana Gallery, Signages,
Modern Toilet Facility
60. Uttar Pradesh Development of Buddhist Circuit- 99.97 19.99 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Srawasti, Kushinagar, & September 2016
Kapilvastu Project timeline: 24
Major Components: SEL show, Months
Signages, Theme Park, Tourist Work has started at
Facilitation Centre, Waste few locations.
Management, CCTV &WiFi,
Beautification
61. Uttar Pradesh Development of Spiritual Circuit 76.00 15.20 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) (Shahjahanpur-Basti-Ahar- September 2016
Aligharh-Kasgunj -Sarosi- Project timeline: 30
Pratapgarh-Unnao-Kaushambi- Months
Mirzapur-Gorakhpur-Kairana- W ork is in progress at
Doamriyagunj -Bagpat-Barabanki- majority of destinations.
Azamgarh)
62. Uttar Pradesh Development of Spiritual 63.77 31.89 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Circuit-II (Bijnor-Meerut-Kanpur- December 2016
Kanpur Dehat-Banda-Ghazipur- Project timeline: 36
Salempur-Ghosi- Balia-Ambedkar Months
Nagar-Aligarh- Fatehpur-Deoria- Work is in progress at
Mahoba-Sonbhadra-Chandauli- majority of destinations.
Bhadohi) in Uttar Pradesh under
Mishrikh-Swadesh Darshan
Scheme
12 3 4 5 6

63
Major Components: Public
toilets, Landscaping, Pathways,
Signages, benches, Toilet block,
access road
63. Uttar Pradesh Development of Spiritual Circuit-II 41.51 8.30 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) (Bijnor- Meerut-Kanpur- Kanpur December 2016
Dehat-Banda-Ghazipur-Salempur- Project timeline: 36
Ghosi- Balia- Ambedkar Nagar- Months
Aligarh-Fatehpur-Deoria-Mahoba- W ork is in progress at
Sonbhadra-Chandauli-Mishrikh- majority of destinations.
Bhadohi)
64. Uttar Pradesh Development of Ayodhya under 133.30 23.53 Project sanctioned on
(2017-18) Ramayana Circuit Theme September 2017
Major Components:  Signages, Project timeline: 24
Pathways, Approach road, Months
Parking, Cafeteria, DG set, STP, Work has started at
Tourist amenities few locations.
65. Uttarakhand Integrated Development of Eco- 80.37 64.29 Project sanctioned on
(2015-16) Tourism, Adventure Sports, September 2015
Associated Tourism related Project timeline: 36
Infrastructure for Development Months
of Tehri Lake & Surroundings Work is nearly
as New Destination-District complete at all
Tehri, Uttarakhand destinations.
Major Components: Eco log
huts, house boats, floating tourist
lodges, floating jetty, service
boats, floating gangway, multi-
level parking, interpretation centre,
trek route, toilet blocks
66. Uttarakhand Development of Heritage Circuit: 81.94 37.34 Project sanctioned on
(2016-17) Katarmal -Jogeshwar-Baijnath- September 2016
Devidhura Project timeline: 24
Major Components: Months
Interpretation  Centre,  Benches, Project is delayed
Septic Tank, Trek trail, Landscape,
Parking, Bridge
12 3 4 5 6

64
67. West Bengal Development of Beach Circuit - 85.39 42.69 Project was sanctioned
(2015-16) Udaipur-Digha-Shankarpur - in December 2015
Tajpur-Mandarmani-Fraserganj- Project timeline: 24
Bakkhlai-Henry Island in West Months
Bengal Project is not
Major Components: Tourist progressing as per
Amenity centre, Houseboats, specified timeline.
Floating Jetties, Water Sports
Equipment, Parking, Battery
Operated Vehicles, Wayside
Amenities, Watch Tower,
Illumination
Development of Wayside 18.10 0.00 Project sanctioned
Amenities by Ministry of in June 2018.
Tourism in Buddhist Circuit Project timeline: 12
and Ramayana Circuit: Varanasi- Months
Gaya; Lucknow-Ayodhya- Preparation of tendering
Lucknow; Gorakhpur-Kushinagar; by implementing
Kushinagar-Gaya- Kushinaga agency.
12 3 4 5 6

65
ANNEXURE-II
Details of projects under PRASHAD scheme with timeline of completion
(` in Crore)
Sl. No. State Name of the project Year of Amt. Amt. Likely date of
sanction sanctioned released completion of
the project
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Andhra Pradesh Development of Amaravati 2015-16 28.36 22.69 November, 2018
Town, Guntur District as a
Tourist Destination
2. Andhra Pradesh Development of Srisailam 2017-18 47.45 22.75 February, 2019
Temple
3. Assam Development of Kam akhya 2015-16 33.98 16.99 December, 2018
Temple and Pilgrimage
Destination in and around
Guwahati
4. Bihar Development of basic 2014-15 4.27 2.14 August, 2018
facilities at Vishnupad
temple, Gaya, Bihar
5. Bihar Development at Patna Sahib 2015-16 41.54 33.23 August 2018
6. Gujarat Development of Dwarka 2016-17 26.23 5.25 March, 2019
7. Gujarat Pilgrimage amenities at 2016-17 37.44 7.49 March, 2019
Somnath
8. Jammu and Development at Hazratbal, 2016-17 42.02 19.93 December, 2019
Kashmir
9. Kerala Development at Guruvayur 2016-17 46.14 13.06 February, 2019
Temple
10. Madhya Pradesh Development of 2017-18 40.67 8.13 June, 2019
Omkareshwar
11. Odisha Infrastructure Development 2014-15 50.00 10.00 March, 2019
at Puri, Shree Jagannath
Dham-Ramachandi-Prachi
River front at Deuli under
Mega Circuit
65

66
12 3 4 5 6 7
12. Punjab Development of Karuna 2015-16 6.45 6.41 Completed
Sagar Valmiki Sthal at
Amritsar
13. Rajasthan Integrated Development of 2015-16 40.44 19.41 October, 2018
Pushkar/Ajmer
14. Tamil Nadu Development of 2016-17 16.48 3.30 November, 2018
Kanchipuram
15. Tamil Nadu Development of Vellankani 2016-17 5.60 1.12 December, 2018
16. Uttarakhand Integrated Development of 2015-16 34.78 22.39 March, 2019
Kedarnath
17. Uttar Pradesh Development of Mathura- 2014-15 14.93 6.77 November, 2018
Vrindavan as Mega Tourist
Circuit (Ph-II)
18. Uttar Pradesh Construction of Tourist 2014-15 9.36 7.36 October, 2018
Facilitation Centre at
Vrindavan, Distt. Mathura
19. Uttar Pradesh Development of Varanasi 2015-16 20.40 16.32 September, 2018
20. West Bengal Development of Belur 2016-17 30.03 23.39 December, 2018
21 Uttar Pradesh Cruse Tourism in River 2017-18 10.72 2.14 January, 2018
Ganga, Varanasi
22. Maharashtra Development of 2017-18 37.81 Adminis- December, 2019
Trimbakeshwar trative
Approval
only
30.01.2018
23 Uttar Pradesh Development of Varanasi 2017-18 62.82 Adminis- December, 2019
Under Prashad Scheme-II trative
Approval
only
08.02.2018
TOTAL 587.29 270.26

67
ANNEXURE-III
Swadesh Darshan Scheme
(` in Crore)
Sl. No. State/UT Name of the Name of the Project Amt.
Circuit Sanctioned
12 3 4 5
Year 2014-15
1. Arunachal Pradesh North-East Development of Mega Circuit at Bhalukpong- 49.77
India Circuit Bomdila and Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh.
Year 2015-16
2. Manipur North-East Development of Tourist Circuit in Manipur: 89.66
India Circuit Imphal- Moirang-Khongjom- Moreh.
3. Sikkim North-East Development of Tourist Circuit linking 98.05
India Circuit Rangpo   (entry)-Rorathang-Aritar-
Phadamchen-Nathang-Sherathang-Tsongmo-
Gangtok-Phodong-Mangan-Lachung-
Yumthang-Lachen-Thangu-Gurudongmer-
Mangan-Gangtok-TuminLingee-Singtam
(exit) in Sikkim.
4. Nagaland Tribal Circuit Development of Tribal Circuit Peren- 97.36
Kohima-Wokha, Nagaland.
5. Mizoram North East Integrated Development of New Eco 94.91
India Circuit Tourism under Swadesh Darshan-North
East Circuit at Thenzawl and South Zote,
District Serchhip and Reiek, Mizoram.
6. Assam W ildlife Circuit Development of Manas- Probitora-Nameri- 95.67
Kaziranga-Dibru-Saikhowa  as  Wildlife
Circuit in Assam.
7. Arunachal Pradesh North East Integrated Development of New Adventure 97.14
India Circuit Tourism in Arunachal Pradesh.
8. Tripura North East Development of North East Circuit : 99.59
India Circuit Agartala - Sipahijala-Melaghar-Udaipur-
Amarpur-Tirthamukh-Mandirghat-
Dumboor-Narikel Kunja-Gandachara-
Ambassa in Tripura.
67

68
12 3 4 5
Year 2016-17
9. Meghalaya North East Development of Umium (Lake View), 99.13
Circuit U Lum Sohpetbneng Mawdiangdiang-Orchid
Lake Resort, Meghalaya.
10. Manipur Spiritual Circuit Development of Spiritual Circuit-Shri 53.80
Govindajee Temple, Shri Bijoy Govindajee
Temple-Shri Gopinath Temple-Shri
Bungshibodon Temple-Shri Kaina Temple,
Manipur.
11. Sikkim North East Development of T ourist Circuit Linking 95.32
India circuit Singtam-Maka-Temi-Bermoik Tokel-Phongia-
Namchi-Jorthang-Okharey-Sombaria-
Daramdin-Jorethang-Melli (Exit) in Sikkim.
12. Nagaland Tribal circuit Development of Tribal circuit (Mokokchung- 99.67
Tuensang-Mon) in Nagaland
13. Assam Heritage Circuit Development of Tezpur-Majuli-Sibsagar as 98.35
Heritage Circuit in Assam under Swadesh
Darshan scheme
14. Mizoram Eco Circuit Development of Eco-Adventure Circuit 99.07
Aizawl-Rawpuichhip-Khawhphawp-Lengpui-
Durtlang-Chatlang-Sakawrhmuituaitlang-
Muthee-Beratlawng-Tuirial Airfield-Hmuifang
under Eco circuit theme of Swadesh
Darshan Scheme
T
OTAL 1267.49

69
ANNEXURE-IV
Design and Service Level Benchmarks
The primary objective of the 'Adopt a Heritage' project is to operate and maintain public amenities
and develop new basic infrastructure where necessary in collaboration of the private agencies.
Adopt a Heritage plans to provide these services/facilities at par with the global standards to attract
higher tourist footfall and serve the purpose of conservation of the rich heritage at the same time. The
following design and service level benchmarks were developed with reference to various relevant standards
and manuals:
Amenities/facilities Benchmarks
Access for All Access for all should be ensured in all amenities proposed by the Monument
Mitra in compliance to the specifications prescribed in the Handbook for Barrier
Free and Accessibility 1 (HBFA).
Service Level Consideration s
• 100% coverage should be ensured per standards prescribed in HBFA.
Audio Guides Mobile based audio guide apps developed by the Monument Mitra, should
support both Android and iOS platform to ensure maximum compatibility and
mandatorily in Hindi and English and other regional languages.
Service Level Considerations
• Audio guides should be developed for 100 percent coverage of the important
features at monument/heritage and other tourist sites.
• All the technical support pertaining to the operations and maintenance of the
mobile apps, websites and any digital content shall be provided regularly by the
Monument Mitra.
Drinking Water All drinking water stations/fountains must at least carry the ISI
2 mark and shall
comply with the specifications prescribed in the Central Public Health and
Environmental Engineering Organization 3 (CPHEEO) and World Health
Organization-Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality 4.
Service Level Considerations
• 100% coverage of the monument/heritage site and 24 hours' availability of
drinking water should be ensured.
• Monument Mitra should ensure cleanliness and regular maintenance to ensure
the drinking water provided at the site.
1 CPWD, 2014, Handbook for Barrier Free and Accessibility (HBFA)
2 ISI mark issued by Bureau of Indian Standards
3 CPHEEO, 2015, Manual on Water Supply and Treatment
4 WHO, 2000, Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality
69

70
Amenities/facilities Benchmarks
Lighting/Illumination All general lighting design proposed by the Monument Mitra shall be in
compliance to the NBC 5 and feature energy efficiency design features like LED
lamps, solar powered lights etc. wherever feasible.
Service Level Considerations
• Regular inspections, repair and maintenance schedules should be carried out
by the Monument Mitra to ensure there is no breakdown/failure in illumination
at the monument/heritage site.
• Energy utility bills for all services/areas which have been included in the
Monument Mitra's scope of engagement shall be borne and paid by the
Monument Mitra in time.
Signage 100% coverage of the tourist sites should be ensured with standardized
multilingual and tactile signage with designs adhering to the specifications per
the HBFA. Warning signs including fire exit signs, safety signs, etc. should
comply with the conditions specified by International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) conventions in terms of colour, size and graphic.
Service Level Considerations
• All signage should be maintained for legibility and barrier free visual access
of the content.
• Monument Mitras are required to provide an appropriate signage maintenance
schedule to ensure that the functionality of each sign is maintained, remains
relevant and is clean of dirt, bird droppings or free from natural wear and tear.
Toilets facilities and For the design of general toilet facilities, specifications prescribed in National
cleanliness Building Code (NBC) shall be followed, while for toilets with universal
accessibility, specifications prescribed in the HBFA shall be followed. The
monument/heritage site should be a 100% polythene free zone.
Service Level Considerations
• Indicative cleaning schedules and activities provided below may be adopted
or referred to as benchmarks for maintaining the desired standard of cleanliness
at toilet facilities.
Sl. No. Activities Frequency
1. Cleaning of urinals and water closets At least once every 2 hrs
2. Cleaning of common area facilities At least once every 2 hrs
3. Cleaning of wash basins and mirror At least once every 2 hrs
4. Cleaning of plumbing fixtures At least once per day
5. Cleaning of electrical fixtures At least once every 15 days
6. Cleaning of walls At least once every 15 days
5 National Building Code

71
Amenities/facilities Benchmarks
WiFi facilities Monument Mitra shall provide a strong and seamless WiFi network at the
premises of the monument/heritage and other tourist site with OTP 6 based user
registration for security. WiFi access should be provided from at least two
service providers to ensure uninterrupted coverage and seamless access to
provide a unified experience of connectivity with a minimum download speed
of 1 Mbps 7.
Service Level Considerations
• WiFi access should be provided free of charge to the visitors during the entire
operational hours of the site/heritage monument with a maximum download
volume of 200 Mb/day
8.
• The user's session for free access shall be no less than 2 one-hour sessions/
day from any access point within the monument premises.
• Offered services shall allow wireless access through various kinds of devices
such as smart phones, laptops, tablets etc.
6 One Time Password generated for user authentication
7 Megabytes per second
8 Megabytes per day