 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
‘Issue of Fixing of Airfares 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
August , 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT  
Issue of Fixing of Airfares ’ 
 
esented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
353 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT  
‘Issue of Fixing of Airfares’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 th  August, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-v 
 4. REPORT                                1-48 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   49-63  
6. ANNEXURES         64-96 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
97-122

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. (vacant )* 
 
Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Shrey Kansal, Secretariat Assistant  
 
*Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar w.e.f. 28.07.2023 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifty-Third Report on 'Issue of Fixing of Airfares’.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the representat ives of various Private Airlines and 
the Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) , on the subject, on 5 
th  April, 2023. The 
Committee also heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, in its 
meeting held on 8 th  May, 2023. Further, the Committee once again heard  the views of the 
representatives of various Private Airlines and the  APAO, on the subject, on 29 th  May, 2023. 
The Committee also took up the issue during its Study Visit to Goa on 8 th  July, 2023 and held 
discussions with the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation; various Private Airlines viz., Air Asia, Air India, GoFirst, Indigo, SpiceJet & 
Vistara; and the Association of Private Airport Ope rators, for placing before the Committee, 
the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the 
points raised by the Members.    
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 9
th  
August, 2023.  
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
August 9, 2023                                                         Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Sravana 18, 1945 (Saka)                                    Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
AAI  Airports Authority of India 
ACI  Airports Council International 
ADF  Airport Development Fee  
AERA  Airports Economic Regulatory Authority  
AI  Air India 
AIX  Air India Express 
ANS  Air Navigation Services 
AOG  Aircraft-on-the-Ground  
APAO  Association of Private Airport Operators  
ASF  Aviation Security Fee  
ATF  Aviation Turbine Fuel  
ATR  Avions de transport régional  (Regional Transport Airplanes) 
AVSEC  Aviation Security  
BIAL  Bengaluru International Airport Limited 
BRS  Baggage Reconciliation System  
CAPEX  Capital Expenditure 
CAR  Civil Aviation Requirements  
CASK  Cost Available Seat Kilometre  
CCI  Competition Commission of India  
CGF  Cargo, Ground handling and supply of Fuel  
CGST  Central Goods and Services Tax 
CIAL  Cochin International Airport Limited 
COVID  Coronavirus Disease 
CP  Consultation Paper  
CPGRAMS  Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CPI-IW  Consumer Price Index-Industrial Workers 
CRS  Central Reservation System  
CSMIA  Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport  
CUSS  Common Use Self Service  
CUTE  Common Use Terminal Equipment  
DARPG  Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
DF  Development Fee 
DGCA  Directorate General of Civil Aviation  
DIAL  Delhi International Airport Limited 
EBITDA  Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and 
Amortization 
FEGP  Fixed Electricity Ground Power  
FSC  Full-Service Carrier  
FY  Financial Year 
GA  General Aviation 
GHIAL  GMR Hyderabad International Airport Limited  

iv 
 
GMR  Grandhi Mallikarjuna Rao 
GSR  General Statutory Rules 
GST  Goods and Services Tax 
IATA  International Air Transportation Association 
ICAO  International Civil Aviation Organization  
ID  Identity 
INR  Indian Rupee 
IRCTC  Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation 
IT  Information Technology 
KIAB  Kempegowda International Airport, Bengaluru  
KL  Kilo Litre 
KV  Kilo Volt 
LCC  Low-Cost Carrier  
MoCA  Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoD  Ministry of Defence 
MoF  Ministry of Finance 
MoT  Ministry of Tourism 
MIAL  Mumbai International Airport Limited 
MOPAG  Mean of Platts Arab Gulf 
MRO  Maintenance, Repair and Operations 
MT  Metric Tonne 
MTOW  Maximum Take Off Weight 
MYTP  Multi Year Tariff Proposal 
NA  Not Applicable 
NASFT  National Aviation Security Fee Trust  
OEM  Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OPEX  Operational Expenditure 
PAX  Passenger  
PHF  Passenger Handling Fee 
PNR  Passenger Name Record 
PSF  Passenger Service Fee  
RBD  Reservation Booking Designator  
RCS  Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RMS  Revenue Management System  
RP  Recommended Practice  
SEBI  Securities and Exchange Board of India  
SGST  State Goods and Services Tax 
SOP  Standard Operating Procedure 
SVPIA  Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International Airport  
TDSAT  Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal 
TMU  Tariff Monitoring Unit 
TRF  Total Regulated Flight 
UDAN  Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik 
UDF  User Development Fee  
US  United States 

v 
 
USD  United States Dollar 
UT  Union Territory 
VAT  Value Added Tax 
VGF  Viability Gap Funding 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
 
Introduction 
 
The Indian Civil Aviation sector has witnessed an e xponential growth in passenger traffic over 
the past few years and a corresponding increase in the numbers of Airports, Aircrafts and flight 
routes. The Civil Aviation sector is set to grow at  a fast pace in the next few years, since it is an 
area of focus for the Government. New domestic airp orts have been operationalised and air 
travel routes have also been initiated, with the la unch of Regional Connectivity Scheme-‘Ude 
Desh ka Aam Nagrik’ (RCS-UDAN), which envisages to make air travel affordable for the 
common man. The growth in the Civil Aviation sector  is contingent on the affordability of 
airfares, besides other factors. The fixing of airf ares is an issue of cardinal importance for all 
major stakeholders - the Government, the airline industry as well as the common man.  
 
2. In view of the significance of the subject, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided  to take up the subject ‘Issue of Fixing of 
Airfares’ for examination and Report. To deliberate  upon the various issues related to 
rationalisation of airfares, it was imperative to t ake into consideration the views of the various 
stakeholders viz., Ministry of Civil Aviation, vari ous private airlines and Association of Private 
Airport Operators (APAO). The Committee, therefore,  heard the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
8
th  May, 2023. The Committee also held discussions wit h various private airlines viz., Air Asia, 
Air India, GoFirst, Indigo, SpiceJet & Vistara and APAO, in its meeting held on 5 th  April, 2023. 
The Committee once again heard the views of various  private airlines viz., Air Asia, Air India, 
Indigo, SpiceJet & Vistara and APAO, to seek clarifications on certain issues, in its meeting held 
on 29 th  May, 2023. During its Study Visit to Mumbai and Go a during 5 th  to 8 th  July, 2023, the 
Committee also discussed the issue of surge in airfares with the representatives of the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation in Goa on 8 th  July, 2023.     
 

2 
 
I 
REGULATORY PROVISIONS  
 
Airfare Regulations in the Past 
3. The Ministry in its background note, informed th e Committee of the following 
regulations on Airfares, that existed in the past:- 
 
• The Air Corporations Act, 1953 contained the provis ion that the Corporations, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, will d etermine and levy fares and freight 
rates and other charges for or in respect of the ca rriage of passengers and goods on air 
transport services operated by it.  
 
• In August, 1975, Rule 135B of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 on changes in tariff of fares, rates 
and charges and production of records was introduce d vide  GSR 2386. It contained the 
provisions that no change shall be made in fares, r ates and charges or in classifications, 
rules, regulations, practices or services affecting  such fares, rates and charges or value of 
the services including any change in the terms or conditions of the commission payable to 
the passenger or cargo sales agents except after pr evious approval by the Director 
General. The application for such changes was requi red to be made to the Director 
General at least thirty days in advance for approval.  
 
• On 24 
th  March, 1994, with the repeal of Air Corporations A ct, 1953, the above provision 
was dispensed with by the Government. The Indian do mestic aviation was totally 
deregulated. Airlines were allowed to freely induct  capacity with any aircraft type, select 
whatever markets and network they wish to service a nd operate and also fix any fares. 
However, Indian Airlines continued to approach the Government and obtain prior 
permission from the Ministry of Civil Aviation befo re affecting any fare increase in 
accordance with the Ministry’s directive dated 31 st  August, 1998. Indian Airlines and 
Alliance Air were not required to comply with this requirement by the Ministry on 3 rd  
May, 2001 and permitted to decide the fares based o n dynamic and market-oriented 
pricing policy. 
 
• In September, 2004, Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules,  1937 was amended vide  GSR 636 
(E) and the above provision contained in Rule 135B was omitted. The provisions of the 
Rule 135 were then limited to having determination of fares for international air 
transportation having regard to all relevant factor s, including the cost of operation, 
reasonable profit and the general prevailing tariff and upkeep of tariff records. 
 
4. The Committee notes the Airfare regulations that  existed in the past and observes 
that the Air Corporations Act, 1953 required the va rious airline corporations to seek 
approval of Central Government for fixing airfares.  Thereafter, on 21 
st  March, 1994, the 

3 
 
said Act was repealed and the Indian Domestic Aviation Sector was totally deregulated and 
the airlines had the freedom to fix airfares.  
 
5. The Committee notes that as per the airfare regu lations existing earlier, the airfares 
were fully regulated by the Government which had pu t in place a mechanism to keep 
airfares under check. Thereafter, deregulation of a irfares effectively came into effect from 
21 
st  March, 1994 with the repeal of the Air Corporation  Act, 1953 and the various airlines 
were free to fix airfares.  
  
Existing Legal Provisions  
6. On 16 
th  April, 2009, vide  GSR 254(E), Rule 135 was again amended to cover as pects for 
domestic air transport also and display of fare com ponents. The Ministry also informed that at 
present, airfares are not controlled by the Governm ent. Airlines offer fares at various levels 
which are demand driven based on market dynamics an d as the demand goes up the seats on 
lower fare levels get filled. This is a global prac tice in the civil aviation sector and dynamic 
pricing defines the strategic framework. Day-to-day  tactical changes in pricing are made to 
respond to demand/supply and market dynamics throug h the Inventory Management process of 
various airlines. 
 
Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937  
7. The aforesaid Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 19 37, as amended on 16 
th  April, 2009, as 
regards fixing of air tariff is as follows:- 
 
135. Tariff – (1) Every air transport undertaking o perating in accordance with sub-rule (1) 
and (2) of rule 134, shall establish tariff having regard to all relevant factors, including the 
cost of operation, characteristics of service, reas onable profit and the generally prevailing 
tariff.  
 
(2) Every air transport undertaking shall cause to be published the tariff established by him 
under sub-rule (1) in his website or two daily news papers, and shall display such tariff in a 
conspicuous part of his office and in the office of his agent, if any.  
 
(2A) The tariff to be published under sub-rule (2) or advertised in any other way shall 
show the following particulars, namely:–  
 
(a) the total amount payable by a passenger; and  
(b) a complete break-up of the total amount, indica ting the fare, tax, fees or any other 
charge, if any, separately.  
 
 Explanation. – For the purposes of this sub-rule, –  
 
(a) tax means the amount payable to the Government; and  

4 
 
(b) fees means the amount payable to the service pr oviders for provision of any 
service or facility to the passengers.  
(2B) The particulars mentioned in sub-rule (2A) sha ll also be mentioned in the passenger 
ticket.  
 
(3) Every air transport undertaking shall maintain all records relating to tariff established 
by him under sub-rule (1) in such manner and in suc h form as may be specified by the 
Director General, and on demand by the Director Gen eral shall produce such records 
before the Director-General for inspection.  
(4) Where the Director-General is satisfied that an y air transport undertaking has 
established excessive or predatory tariff under sub -rule (1) or has indulged in oligopolistic 
practice, he may, by order, issue directions to such air transport undertaking.  
(5) Every direction issued under sub-rule (4) shall  be complied with by such air transport 
undertaking. 
 
8. The Committee notes the amendment in Rule 135 of  the Aircraft Rules, 1937 on 16 
th  
April, 2009, which presently forms the basis of the legislation for airfare regulations. It also 
notes that as per the Rule 135(1), the airlines sha ll establish tariff, keeping in mind factors 
such as reasonable profit besides cost of operation , characteristics of service and generally 
prevailing tariff, to rationalise airfares despite its deregulation, consequent upon repeal of 
Air Corporations Act, 1953. 
 
9. The Committee also observes that Rule 135(2) req uires the publication of the tariff 
by the airlines on its website/ daily newspapers or  displaying it conspicuously in their 
office/ or the agent’s office. Further, Section 135 (2A) requires the airlines to show the total 
amount payable by the passenger including the break up such as taxes, fees for services/ 
facilities or other charges, which should be mentio ned in the passenger ticket vide Rule 135 
(2B).  
 
10. The Committee notes another significant require ment in Rule 135(3), wherein every 
airline is required to maintain all records relatin g to tariff and the requirement to produce 
such records to Directorate General of Civil Aviati on (DGCA) for inspection. The 
Committee observes that the aforesaid Rule provides  for supervision and inspection of 
DGCA (Ministry of Civil Aviation) on air tariffs being fixed by the airlines. 
 
11. Rule 135 (4) also empowers the DGCA to issue di rections to airlines, if it is satisfied 
that the airlines have charged excessive/ predatory  airfares or indulged in oligopolistic 
practice. Further, as per Rule 135 (5), the aforesa id directions of DGCA have to be 
compiled with by the airline concerned. 
 
12. The Committee, therefore, observes that ever si nce the amendment made in Rule 
135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 in April, 2009, suf ficient legislative safeguards have been 

5 
 
made in the Aircraft Rules, 1937, to ensure that ai rfares are affordable and in case of any 
violation by the airlines, the Government can take action against the said airline regardless 
of the deregulation of the airfares, due to repeal of Air Corporation Act, 1953. The 
Committee calls upon the DGCA, Ministry of Civil Av iation to safeguard the interests of 
the air commuters by invoking the overriding powers vested on it in the Rules. 
 
Power of DGCA to Regulate Tariffs 
13. During its deliberations, the Committee enquire d into the mechanism adopted by the 
Ministry to regulate tariffs, based on the Rule 135  of Aircraft Rules, 1937. The Ministry replied 
that Tariff Monitoring Unit (TMU), as set up by DGC A, monitors airfares on selected 50 routes 
on a random basis by using airlines websites on mon thly basis to ensure that the airlines do not 
charge airfares outside the range declared by them.  During unforeseen circumstances like floods, 
natural calamities, civil unrest, etc., the fares o n the affected sectors are monitored to ensure 
compliance of prevailing regulations on airfare. Th e monitoring of airfares has revealed that all 
scheduled domestic airlines are displaying route-wise and category-wise fares on their respective 
websites in compliance to the applicable regulation . Airfares are monitored using airlines 
websites. The analysis has shown that the airfares remained well within the fare bucket uploaded 
by the airlines on their respective websites.  
 
14. The Ministry further informed that an analysis of the monitoring of airfares showed that 
the percentage of tickets sold in the highest fare bucket on majority sectors is minuscule, barring 
a very few sectors which may be on account of seasonality and capacity constraints, etc. 
 
15. The Ministry also apprised that while the Gover nment no longer regulates the fares that 
are charged, it is ensured that considerable inform ation is provided to the public in a transparent 
manner with respect to airline fares and DGCA Air T ransport Circulars have been issued from 
time to time in this regard. Air Transport Circular s 05 of 2009; 02 of 2010; and 03 of 2013 are 
placed at Annexure-I.   
 
16. During its deliberations, the Committee also en quired the reasons for not empowering 
DGCA to regulate tariffs based on the data generate d by the Tariff Monitoring Unit and whether 
the Ministry proposes to empower DGCA to take neces sary action (including regulating tariffs) 
in response to the data generated by it. The Minist ry explained that as per Section 4 A of the 
Aircraft Act 1934, DGCA is primarily responsible fo r carrying out the safety oversight and 
regulatory functions in respect of matters specifie d in this Act or in the rules made thereunder. 
Further, with the repeal of Air Corporation Act, 19 53 in March 1994, the process of airfare 
approval by Government has been dispensed with. As per the prevailing regulations, airfares are 
not regulated by the Government. Under the provisio n of Sub Rule (1) of Rule 135 of the 
Aircraft Rules, 1937, every air transport undertaki ng engaged in scheduled air services requires 
to establish tariff having regard to all relevant f actors, including cost of operation, characteristic  
of services, reasonable profit and the generally prevailing tariff.  
 

6 
 
17. The Committee observes that DGCA has a Tariff M onitoring Unit that monitors 
airfares on certain routes at regular intervals to ensure that the airlines do not charge 
airfares outside a range declared by them. However, the DGCA does not have any power to 
regulate tariffs based on the data generated by the  Tariff Monitoring Unit as the process of 
airfare regulation has been dispensed with, consequ ent upon the repeal of the Air 
Corporation Act, 1953.  
 
18. The Committee notes that Section 135(3) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 empowers the 
DGCA to inspect the records of tariff as produced b y the airline operators and also 
empowers it to issue directions in case it has esta blished excessive tariff [Section 135(4)]. 
The Committee observes that though Tariff Monitorin g Unit of DGCA has been setup to 
maintain oversight, yet the airlines are charging e xcessively, leading to surge in airfares. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should e volve a mechanism to reconcile 
between ‘tariff monitoring’ by DGCA and ‘deregulati on of airfare’ to tilt the balance in 
favour of empowering the DGCA to regulate air tariff as per Rule 135(3) and expanding its 
responsibility beyond monitoring tariff only. The C ommittee desires to know whether a 
Unit or Agency like Tariff Monitoring Unit (TMU) ex ists in other countries as well and 
mechanism adopted by them to regulate fares. 
 
19. The Committee is also aware that the Securities  and Exchange Board of India 
(SEBI), an autonomous body, has been setup for regu lating the securities market and to 
protect the interest of investors. The Committee op ines that on similar lines, the feasibility 
of setting up of a monitoring and controlling body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
may be examined, to monitor and keep a check on the  surge in airfares to protect the 
interests of the commuting public. The Committee, t herefore, recommends the Ministry to 
constitute a separate monitoring body like the SEBI , with quasi-judicial powers to enforce 
the collection of reasonable airfares from the passengers. 
 
20. The Ministry also informed the Committee that t he aviation sector is a capital intensive 
business and the airlines operate in an extremely c ompetitive environment. The airline industry 
has to face unforeseen challenges to remain in busi ness and it has been observed that many 
airline operators went out of business or had to cl ose down their operations on account of 
continuous and unsustainable losses. A tabular stat ement giving operating profit/ loss of major 
scheduled Indian carriers during FY 2019-20 to FY 2020-22 is as follows:-  
Airline FY 2019-20 FY 2020-21 FY 2021-22 
Air India -46,603.0 -47,009.6 -36,937.1 
AI Express 7,516.8 1,497.6 2,714.7 
Alliance Air 654.6 -2,249.2 -1,354.3 
Go Air -4,816.7 -3,434.2 -8,364.9 
Spice Jet -5,079.3 -13,836.7 -22,167.4 
Indigo 16,260.6 -51,931.0 -35,813.4 

7 
 
Air Asia -8,130.9 -13,960.3 -18,102.9 
Vistara -15,632.8 -16,750.9 -12,544.5 
Total -55,830.70 -147,674.30 -132,569.80 
Source: Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
 
21. The Ministry, therefore, opined in its depositi on before the Committee in its meeting held 
on 8 
th  May, 2023 and also in written replies that the reg ulation of airfare is not desirable for the 
growth of aviation industry as a majority of Indian  carriers have registered an operating loss 
during the last three years. 
 
22. The Committee took exception to the Ministry’s concluding remarks during the 
presentation and during their deposition in the mee ting of the Committee held on 8 th  May, 
2023, and their written replies that regulation of airfare is not desirable for the overall 
growth of the aviation sector. The Committee reiter ates its view that passengers should 
receive a fair deal at all times and recommends that the Ministry should have a relook in its 
policy regarding regulation of airfare tariff in vi ew of the sudden surge in airfares in 
normal times as also during disasters and calamitie s and take appropriate actions in 
consonance with the powers delegated to it under Rule 135 of the Aircraft Act, 1937. 
 
23. The Ministry also apprised the Committee that u nder the provision of Sub Rule (1) of 
Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, every air tra nsport undertaking engaged in scheduled air 
services are free to charge reasonable airfares as per their operational viability, subject to 
compliance to aforesaid rule. The airline pricing s ystem runs in multiple levels (buckets or 
Reservation Booking Designators) which are in line with practice being followed globally. The 
prices are fixed by airlines keeping in mind the ma rket, demand, seasonality and other market 
forces. The airfare increases with increases in dem and of seat as the lower fare buckets which 
would entail travelling even during peak seasons on  low fares. The fare structures are displayed 
by airlines on their websites. The airlines remain compliant to the prevailing regulations as long 
as fares charged by them are in line with fare displayed on their website. 
 
24. The Ministry also informed that currently, ther e is no provision under which Government 
is required to monitor the seat booking fees of air lines. The airlines sell tickets as per their 
respective distribution system, which is in line with the practice followed world-wide. 
 
25. The Committee notes that presently airlines are  free to charge reasonable airfares 
as per their operational viability subject to compliance of Rule 135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 
1937. Besides, currently, there is no provision und er which Government is required to 
monitor the seat booking fees of airlines and the a irlines sell tickets as per their respective 
distribution system, which is as per the global practice.  
 
26. The Committee also observes that most of the ai rlines except AI Express had 
accumulated losses from FY 2019-20 to 2021-22.The C ommittee is aware that the Civil 

8 
 
Aviation Industry had suffered a major setback on a ccount of Covid-19 pandemic and 
needs to recover its losses and regain its pre-pandemic level and then grow at an even faster 
rate to realise its set targets. As such, the Commi ttee is of the opinion that a fine balance 
needs to be maintained so that the interests of the airlines as well as the passengers are kept 
in mind. 
 
27. The Ministry also informed that, as per Section  13(1) (a) of Airports Economic 
Regulatory Authority (AERA) Act, 2008, AERA has a m andate to determine tariff for 
Aeronautical services provided by the Airport Opera tors at the ‘Major Airports’ only. AERA 
determines aeronautical charges of ‘major airports’  such as Landing, Parking, Housing, User 
Development Fees (UDF), etc. by considering the following factors: 
(i) Return on investment 
(ii) Operating Expenditure 
(iii) Depreciation 
(iv) Tax 
 
28. The Committee notes that the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) has 
a mandate to determine tariff for aeronautical services of Major Airports only, vide Section 
13(1) (a) of the AERA Act, 2008. Since the tariff f or aeronautical services is one of the 
components for airfares, the Committee desires to k now how airfare is determined across 
Airports even though aeronautical service charges are applicable only to Major airports.  
 
Reasonable Profit, Generally Prevailing Tariff and Mechanism followed for Fixing 
Airfares 
29. The Committee enquired whether the Ministry of Civil Aviation has laid down any rules 
to ensure that airlines calculate ‘reasonable profi t’ and ‘generally prevailing tariff’ in a fair and 
transparent manner. The Ministry clarified that wit h the repeal of Air Corporation Act in March 
1994, the process of airfare approval by Government  has been dispensed with. As per prevailing 
regulation, airfares are not regulated by the Gover nment. Under the provision of Sub Rule (1) of 
Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, every air tra nsport undertaking engaged in scheduled air 
services require to establish tariff having regard to all relevant factors, including cost of 
operation, characteristic of services, reasonable profit and the generally prevailing tariff. Airlines 
are free to charge airfares as per their operationa l viability. Government does not interfere either 
in commercial aspects of airline or fixing of airfa re by them. Airlines remain compliant to the 
regulatory provisions of Sub-Rule 2 of Rule 135 as long as the fare charged by them does not 
exceed the fare bucket established and displayed on their website.  
 
30. The Ministry explained that the term ‘reasonabl e profit’ is embedded under the provision 
of Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, under the “Tariff”. There is no separate 
rule or any other guideline defining ‘reasonable pr ofit’ and ‘generally prevailing tariff’. These 
words are understood as per the common understanding. 
 

9 
 
31. The Committee also enquired from the Ministry w hether there is any mechanism to 
impose penalties on airlines in cases of overchargi ng. The Ministry explained that airfares are 
not regulated by the Government. The airfares are c ompetitive in nature and are subjected to 
rules framed under the Competition Act, 2002 under the purview of the Competition 
Commission of India (CCI). 
 
32. The Committee notes that though the term ‘reaso nable profit’ is given under Rule 
135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, yet there is no  specific definition or Rule or any other 
guidelines to define it and these expressions are l iable to be misunderstood, besides 
encouraging arbitrary actions. The Committee is of the opinion that the term ‘reasonable 
profit’ should be clearly defined in the Rules, tak ing into account various financial and 
operational factors, as it is the most significant aspect for controlling surge in airfares, 
which affects the common man.  
 
33. The Committee also enquired from the various ai rlines during its meetings held on 5 th  
April and 29 th  May, 2023 as to the methodology used by airlines t o calculate the quantum of 
‘reasonable profit’ and ‘generally prevailing tarif f, the minimum number of tickets needed to be 
sold on a particular route for airlines to break-ev en and beyond this break-even point, the 
mechanism for pricing tickets to maintain ‘reasonab le profit’. The Committee also sought 
information on the Capital Investment; Working Capi tal; Revenue Expenditure; Fixed Cost; 
Operating Expenditure; Net Income; and Profit/Loss,  in respect of the airlines. The replies of the 
individual airlines are at Annexure-II . 
 
34. The representative of Air Asia stated that prof itability of any route is moderated by the 
natural demand – supply dynamics of that route. Mos t airlines in India have struggled to make 
any profits as a result of high competition between  airlines resulting in low fares in the Indian 
market. Generally prevailing airfare tariff on a pa rticular route is a result of the demand-supply 
balance. As regards, the minimum number of tickets needed to be sold on a particular route for 
airlines to break-even, the representative stated that the number of tickets to be sold on any route 
to achieve break-even (“Break-even Seat Factor”) de pends on the fares being charged and the 
cost of operations on that route. Therefore Break-e ven Seat Factor varies by route, seasonality 
and total demand-supply in the market and hence is difficult to ascertain a fixed number of seats 
for the break-even. Since most airlines in India ha ve been unprofitable for most parts of their 
existence, the airlines are clearly not even able t o achieve the break-even point. If one looks at 
the average fares realised in the market and compar e them with the cost of the operations, the 
‘break-even seat factor’ comes out to be an infeasible figure of greater than100%.  
 
35. The representative of Air India informed the Co mmittee that airlines globally work on a 
Cost Recovery Model rather than on a set target to achieve reasonable profit. The airline pricing 
is highly elastic. Pricing of air tickets by Air In dia is pegged against key competitors on the 
given route, keeping in view relative product stren gths. Reasonable market fares have been 
formulated by Air India taking into consideration the underlying factors:   

10 
 
• Fares offered by competitors in a highly dynamic market. 
• Product offerings, 
• Seasonality (as per practice adopted by all airlines worldwide),  
• Flight frequency, timings, direct / indirect operat ions, Product, Competitors’ activities, 
Traffic Flows.  
• Market demand 
 
36. Further, the minimum number of tickets to be so ld depends on cost of operation based on 
type of equipment and also price of ticket. The num ber of tickets required to be sold can, 
therefore, vary by market demand, seasonality, prev alent fares and product offerings. Air India 
operates many routes which are for building future demand and in this case, they generally incur 
losses irrespective of number of tickets sold. Hence, currently no such system exists in Air India.  
 
37. The representative of GoFirst stated that ‘reas onable profit’, is to recover all cost related 
to running the flight operations both variable and fixed nature. “Generally prevailing tariff /uni201F are 
the fares at market driven demand at which the tick ets are sold in advance through the 365 days 
window. They added that each different route has di fferent break-even, however, to break-even 
at contribution level average required tickets to b e sold at more than 85%. Therefore, beyond 
break-even point, fares for balance seats are priced to recover all cost. 
 
38. The representative of Indigo informed the Commi ttee that they do not set a target 
“reasonable profit”. Demand for air travel is highl y price sensitive and varies due to multiple 
factors, including the price of the air ticket. The y endeavour to set prices in line with estimation 
of demand and calibrate the same on basis of off-ta ke of seats, changes in cost, estimated cost 
recovery, need to stimulate demand, network feeds /  flows, etc. They also stated that Indigo, like 
most airlines across the world, follows the practic e of ‘revenue management’ which involves 
varying prices according to changes in demand and a vailable capacity. They also informed that 
other industries such as hotels, both in India and abroad, also practice revenue management 
techniques. Further, revenue management takes into account demand & supply and also 
variations in demand. An airline seat is perishable  inventory, which means that once a flight has 
departed, the unsold seat inventory has no value.  
 
39. The representative of SpiceJet stated that pric ing aspects are dependent on the market 
situation and the prevailing conditions. These amou nts cannot be quantified into a specific 
figure/ range as the same varies basis type of airc raft, market situation, the number of seats sold 
on different fare bucket basis market dynamics and offers etc. 
 
40. The representative of Vistara informed the Comm ittee that reasonable profit and 
generally prevailing tariff is based on the operati onal costs as well as the ongoing fares in the 
Indian and foreign aviation environment. They added that number of tickets needed to be sold on 
a particular route for them to break-even, depends on the market demand and the available 

11 
 
supply based on which Revenue Management System (RM S) system allocates the inventory on 
every price points. In many routes, airlines may no t break even due to low demand and over 
capacity. The pricing of tickets are based on inven tory allocation. RMS does the allocation of 
seat in RBD allocated in each cabin basis the Bid P rice/Competition fare/Historicity/ Booking 
curve/demand/supply etc. 
 
41. The Committee notes the replies of the represen tatives of various airlines as regards 
its query on the mechanism adopted by them to calcu late the quantum of ‘reasonable 
profit’. The airlines had commented that the prevai ling air tariff on a particular route is a 
result of demand-supply balance. Besides, airlines work on a ‘Cost Recovery Model’, so as 
to recover all costs related to flight operations, rather than on a set target to achieve 
‘reasonable profit’. One of the airlines had also s tated that they do not set a target 
‘reasonable profit’ and the practice of ‘Revenue Ma nagement’ is followed which takes into 
account demand and supply. Representatives of an ai rline had also stated that pricing 
aspects depend on market situation and the ticket fares cannot be quantified in advance. 
 
42. As regards, the Committee’s query regarding the  minimum number of tickets 
needed to be sold on a particular route for airline s to break-even, the airlines were of the 
opinion that since most of the airlines have been u nprofitable for most parts of their 
existence, the airlines were not able to achieve br eak-even point. Hence, currently, no such 
system exists in India. Airline representatives opi ned that the number of tickets sold for 
break-even depends on demand-supply dynamics based on which Revenue Management 
System does the pricing.  
 
43. The Committee observes that though the concept of establishing tariffs on basis of 
‘reasonable profit’ is ingrained in the Rule 135(1)  of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, yet none of 
the airlines has adopted a mechanism to calculate t he quantum of ‘reasonable profit’. All 
the airlines are instead following the demand-suppl y dynamics through the ‘Revenue 
Management System’ and hence, airfares are fixed accordingly.  
 
44. The Committee understands that the fixing of ai rfares depends on various 
conditions which are subject to variation of the de mand-supply dynamics of the market 
and the airlines have to account for these factors for maintaining economy of operations. 
The Committee is, however, of the opinion that a ba lance has to be maintained between the 
commercial interests of the airlines as well as the  interests of the passengers. It is of the 
opinion that to fix airfares at reasonable and affordable rates, the airlines need to adopt the 
concept of ‘reasonable profit’ drawing from the bes t international practices. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry in consultation with the airlines 
should devise a mechanism or a formula, so that the  concept of ‘reasonable profit’ as 
provided explicitly in Rule 135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 is adhered to.  
 

12 
 
45. The Committee also analysed the financial infor mation in respect of Capital 
Investment; Working Capital; Revenue Expenditure; F ixed Cost; Operating Expenditure; 
Net Income; and Profit/Loss, as received from vario us airlines viz., Air Asia, Air India and 
Indigo. The Committee notes that over the last thre e financial years (2020-21, 2021-22 and 
2022-23), the Operating Expenditure of Air India ha s increased every year, however, the 
Net Income has reduced from -7,084 crore to -11,381  crore over this period. Air Asia has 
also reported a steady increase in the Operating Ex penditure and an increase in the Net 
Income as well, over the last three financial years . In respect of Indigo, the total expenses 
incurred by the airline have increased from 2020-21  to 2022-23, whereas the losses have 
drastically reduced from a staggering Rs. 5,818.1 c rore in 2020-21 and Rs. 6,153.7 crore in 
2021-22 to a meagre Rs. 304.4 crore in 2022-23. For  SpiceJet, the Operating Expenditure 
has increased by around 45% from 2020-21 to 2021-22 , while, the Net Income has reduced 
from Rs. 1,107.8 crore to Rs. 60.2 crore in this pe riod. As regards Vistara, the Operating 
Expenditure has increased approximately three times  from Rs. 4,312 crore in 2020-21 to 
Rs. 12,753 crore in 2022-23, whereas the airline ha s reported losses amounting to Rs. 1,612 
crore in 2020-21 which reduced to Rs. 1,393 crore in 2022-23.  
 
46. As per the information provided by the various airlines, the Committee notes that in 
most of the cases, the Operating Expenditure has in creased substantially, while the income 
has reduced, leading to net losses for most of the airlines. It also notes that Air Asia has 
incurred a net income despite incurring an increase  in Operating Expenditure. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons, why Air A sia has been an exception and could 
post increase in net income despite incurring incre ase in Operating Expenditure, like other 
airlines. The Committee opines that it is crucial t o scrutinise the audited financial data 
furnished by the airlines on a regular basis and DG CA should take cognisance of any 
discrepancies reported by the airlines and take corrective actions. 
 
Global Data Analysis 
47.  The Committee during the course of its analysi s on comparison of airfares in 
international markets vis-à-vis  Indian markets found that a leading international organisation in 
the Civil Aviation sector viz., Airports Council In ternational (ACI), had conducted a study and 
observed as follows: 
• Unexpectedly, in the first quarter of 2023, despite  a progressive increase in traffic, 
domestic airfares have continued to increase in sev eral of these markets, including India, 
Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, South Korea and Japan, onl y decreasing marginally on 
international routes.  
• Airlines are capitalising on low competition and pe nt-up demand to increase profits and 
recover losses incurred during the pandemic, while airports continue to provide enhanced 
services to passengers despite incurring heavy operational and capital expenditures. 
• Expressing concerns about the high-pricing practice , the organization noted that these 
excessive airfares threaten the industry's long-ter m recovery and may have a far-reaching 

 
influence on the associated industry by reducing de mand for air travel and increasing the 
financial burden on the 
supports recovery and safeguards consumers’ interes ts. A supply 
should not be exploited by airlines at the expense of customers by restricting the capacity, 
especially in ternational 
major source of revenues for the airport sector. 
 
48. The 
comprehensive study, undertaken by 
the top 10 aviation markets in Asia 
by up to 50%, while domestic routes went up by 
International airfare increase are India 
Singapore (30%) and Australia 
at International and Domestic segments 
2019) is as follows: 
49. 
The Committee notes the 
increase in airfares both in domestic and i 
other i nternational markets. The Committee also notes the concerns of the ACI on 
excessive airfares which in the long term would red uce the demand for air travel a 
a detrimental effect on its future 
 
13 
influence on the associated industry by reducing de mand for air travel and increasing the 
financial burden on the  already stressed sector. Airlines should exercise f air pricing that 
supports recovery and safeguards consumers’ interes ts. A supply 
should not be exploited by airlines at the expense of customers by restricting the capacity, 
ternational ly, which is a key driver of social and economic growth  and a 
major source of revenues for the airport sector.   
comprehensive study, undertaken by ACI, which examined around 36,000 routes in 
the top 10 aviation markets in Asia -Pacific, reveals an alarming increase in international airfa res 
domestic routes went up by about 10%. The markets that saw the highest 
International airfare increase are India  (41%), United Arab Emirates 
and Australia  (23%). A graphical representation showing the Airf 
at International and Domestic segments (percentage change in Quarter- 4, 
 
The Committee notes the analysis of the ACI, which highlights the progressive 
airfares both in domestic and i nternational routes both in Indian as wel 
nternational markets. The Committee also notes the concerns of the ACI on 
excessive airfares which in the long term would red uce the demand for air travel a 
future growth.  
influence on the associated industry by reducing de mand for air travel and increasing the 
already stressed sector. Airlines should exercise f air pricing that 
supports recovery and safeguards consumers’ interes ts. A supply -demand imbalance 
should not be exploited by airlines at the expense of customers by restricting the capacity, 
which is a key driver of social and economic growth  and a 
which examined around 36,000 routes in 
reveals an alarming increase in international airfa res 
10%. The markets that saw the highest 
(41%), United Arab Emirates  (34%), 
showing the Airf are Increase 
4,  2022 vs. Quarter-4, 
 
of the ACI, which highlights the progressive  
nternational routes both in Indian as wel l as in 
nternational markets. The Committee also notes the concerns of the ACI on 
excessive airfares which in the long term would red uce the demand for air travel a nd have 


14 
 
50. The Committee also notes ACI’s advice to the Ai rlines to exercise fair pricing that 
supports recovery and safeguards consumers’ interes ts. ACI also advises the airlines 
against exploiting the supply-demand imbalance at t he expense of customers by restricting 
capacity. 
 
51. The Committee notes the observations of the ACI  and is of the opinion that the 
airlines need to take a relook at the high pricing of the airfares keeping in view the long-
term aspects. It also recommends that the Ministry may formulate policies to encourage the 
airlines to increase capacity and induct more aircr afts, which will rectify the supply-
demand imbalance, and further benefit the passenger s besides aiding the recovery of the 
Civil Aviation sector in India.  
 
Publication of Information on Website 
52. The Committee noted that incorrect information is often published by the airlines on their 
websites regarding the number of seats left on the flight and the prices of the tickets. For 
instance, even after the last seats have been sold (at a typically high price), the same number of 
seats is shown on the website as indicated before t he sale. The Committee noted that airlines are 
misleading the public with incorrect information by  tricking them into paying more under the 
guise of selling “last seats”. It enquired from the  various airlines the reasons for publishing 
misleading information on websites; the mechanism t he airlines adopt for monitoring the 
publication of information regarding fares/seats; a nd other safeguards taken to ensure that such 
misleading information is not published on the webs ites. The details of the replies of the Airlines 
are given in Annexure-III .  
 
53. The representatives of all the airlines stated that they do not indulge in such malpractices 
of publishing misleading information regarding seats in their websites. An airline also stated that 
their ticket reservation system regularly updates t heir websites, which shows the airfares to the 
customers.  
 
54. The representative of one of the airlines, howe ver, noted that in some cases, the flight 
booking portals or travel agent’s website may not be publishing the airfare that is supplied by the 
airlines. The airline noted that it does seem unusu al that such a high price is being charged for a 
sector, as pointed out by the Committee and there w as a difference between the most extreme 
price charged and the average price charged. The ai rline also stated that they would request the 
concerned portal to take a holistic view of the air fares sold on that particular flight to take a 
balanced perspective of interest of portal and the passengers.  
 
55. The Committee enquired from Ministry of Civil A viation as to whether the Ministry has 
taken cognizance of the issue of airlines publishin g misleading information and if so, the steps 
taken for curbing the publication of such misleadin g information. The Ministry replied that 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) had no t received any such complaints 
substantiating that airlines are misleading the pub lic with incorrect information by tricking them 

15 
 
into paying more under the guise of selling “last s eats”. The airlines are selling tickets as per 
their respective distribution system, which is in line with the practice followed worldwide. 
 
56. The Committee further enquired from the Ministr y of Civil Aviation about the applicable 
laws, rules and regulations pertaining to airfares offered by online flight booking portals/ 
aggregators such as MakeMyTrip, ClearTrip, etc. and  whether online flight booking portals/ 
aggregators are permitted to charge commission on t he airfares and if so, whether there is any 
limit to such commission. The Committee also desire d to know the safeguards which have been 
enforced to ensure that online flight booking porta ls/ aggregators do not indulge in fraudulent, 
unscrupulous or dishonest practices and whether the re is any mechanism in place for the 
aggrieved customers to seek redressal of their grie vances against online flight booking portals/ 
aggregators. 
 
57. In reply, the Ministry apprised that the guidel ines for recognition/ renewal or extension as 
an approved travel agent/ agency are issued by the Ministry of Tourism, which has laid down the 
conditions and procedures to be followed between a travel agent and an airline. The Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is not empowered t o approve or disapprove the tariff charged 
by booking portals, as the tariff established by ai rlines is not required to be submitted to DGCA 
for approval, as Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 is related to airfare only. 
 
58. As per clarification of the Ministry of Civil A viation, the term “Commission”, 
“Transaction Fees”, “Convenience Fees” or any other terms used for the purpose means the same 
i.e. payment of remuneration to the intermediaries for the services rendered by them. Therefore, 
all these terms are treated as “Commission”, mentioned in the existing rule 135 of Aircraft Rules, 
1937 as a part of tariff and are to be determined b y the airlines. The aforesaid order further states 
that DGCA cannot lay down quantum of commission pay able by airlines to agents. It is upto the 
airlines to take a decision in this regard in consu ltation with intermediaries taking into account 
various commercial factors such as the market condi tions, the cost of the intermediary’s 
establishments, etc. and statutory definition of tariff.  
 
59. The Committee notes the replies received from v arious airlines wherein they have 
informed that none of these airlines are displaying  misleading information on their 
websites and they are selling tickets as per the pr actice being followed worldwide. The 
Committee also notes the reply of the Ministry stat ing that DGCA has not received any 
such complaints substantiating that airlines are mi sleading the public with incorrect 
information. It, however, notes the reply of an air line stating that sometimes the online 
flight booking portals may show fares which are more than the fares fixed by the airlines.  
 
60. The Committee recommends that a mechanism shoul d be put in place by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation in coordination with Min istry of Tourism and airline companies 
to  regularly monitor the flight booking portals/ a ggregators so that they do not indulge in 
unscrupulous practices by publishing incorrect info rmation under the guise of selling “last 

16 
 
seats”. In such cases, the Committee recommends tha t the Ministry should consider issuing 
necessary guidelines to Airlines to direct these po rtals/apps to not publish such incorrect 
information and create an avoidable panic situation  amongst the public. The Committee 
also recommends setting up of a grievance redressal  mechanism to deal with such 
complaints.  
   

 
 
Global Practices, IATA Resolution and Reservation Booking Designators (RBDs) 
61. The Ministry stated that: 
• The airline pricing in India runs in multiple level s 
(RBDs) or ‘fare buckets’ 
fare in the fare bucket is available for advance bo oking much earlier. As time lapses and 
date of journey approaches closer, the fare 
available as per the respective airline policy. 
• In order to identify the fare and conditions of tra vel on passenger tickets, airlines 
world over, follow IATA Resolution 728 or customize their Reser vation Booking 
Designator (RBD)-to -
classes referred to as RBD as per the diagram shown  below. The RBD is the code used in 
reservation transactio ns to identify the booking class. 
• In India, the Reservation Booking Designators (RBDs) 
following categories:  
/head2right First Class (four levels with one discounted) 
/head2right Business Class (five levels with three discounted) 
/head2right Economy Class (13 l 
/head2right Seasonal code (to cater for tourist/festive season)
/head2right Part of week code (weekend/weekday) 
/head2right Part of day code (day/night) 
/head2right Fare and passenger type code (advance purchase/ fre quent flyer/senior citizen/extra 
seat for passenger comfor 
17 
II 
FIXATION OF AIRFARES  
Global Practices, IATA Resolution and Reservation Booking Designators (RBDs) 
The Ministry stated that:  
The airline pricing in India runs in multiple level s i.e., Reservation Booking Designators 
(RBDs) or ‘fare buckets’ , which is in line with the p ractice followed globally. 
fare in the fare bucket is available for advance bo oking much earlier. As time lapses and 
date of journey approaches closer, the fare  in the higher side of the 
available as per the respective airline policy.  
In order to identify the fare and conditions of tra vel on passenger tickets, airlines 
follow IATA Resolution 728 or customize their Reser vation Booking 
-cabin mapping which contains information on various  booking 
classes referred to as RBD as per the diagram shown  below. The RBD is the code used in 
ns to identify the booking class.  
Reservation Booking Designators (RBDs) are customized as per the 
 
First Class (four levels with one discounted)   
Business Class (five levels with three discounted)   
Economy Class (13 l evels with 10 discounted)  
Seasonal code (to cater for tourist/festive season)  
Part of week code (weekend/weekday)   
Part of day code (day/night)   
Fare and passenger type code (advance purchase/ fre quent flyer/senior citizen/extra 
seat for passenger comfor t/ discounted/child/return fare/connecting flight fare/ etc. 
Global Practices, IATA Resolution and Reservation Booking Designators (RBDs)  
Reservation Booking Designators 
ractice followed globally. The lower 
fare in the fare bucket is available for advance bo oking much earlier. As time lapses and 
the fare bucket is made 
In order to identify the fare and conditions of tra vel on passenger tickets, airlines the 
follow IATA Resolution 728 or customize their Reser vation Booking 
cabin mapping which contains information on various  booking 
classes referred to as RBD as per the diagram shown  below. The RBD is the code used in 
 
are customized as per the 
Fare and passenger type code (advance purchase/ fre quent flyer/senior citizen/extra 
t/ discounted/child/return fare/connecting flight fare/ etc.   

18 
 
•  Accordingly, fare categories prevalent with scheduled domestic airlines are as follows:  
/head2right Apex (Advance Purchase Excursion)  
/head2right Immediate Purchase Fares  
/head2right Full Fare (Economy)  
/head2right Full Fare (Business)   
 
62. The Committee enquired from various airlines ab out the details of the existing system of 
airline ticket price ‘Buckets’ or ‘Reservation Booking Designator’ (RBDs) used by the airlines to 
determine fares for each flight and how the system is being used in determining fares of different 
classes of flights i.e. premium, business and economy. 
 
63. In reply, the representatives of various airlin es stated that RBDs allow airlines to have 
multiple fare levels as indicated below, for a single flight which is the practice followed globally. 
(i) Each RBD (fare level) is assigned a specific nu mber of seats (inventory).  
(ii) At any point of time, one RBD is open for sale  based on the number of seats still 
 left in that RBD.  
(iii) As seats assigned to an RBD is exhausted, tha t fare level is closed and the higher 
 RBD is opened.  
(iv) Thus, the current selling price of tickets mov es to the next RBD level. RBDs are 
 based on the internal practices of each airline, w hich are always aligned to the 
 market structure and its dynamics. 
 
64. Airlines use RBDs to manage the demand 
vis-à-vis  the limited supply of seats to create 
value for the passengers. As the service and capaci ty offerings in the different classes differ, the 
pricing is done accordingly. Airlines offer differe ntial fares under different brands by taking into 
consideration the service attributes attached to th e brands to offer more choice and freedom to 
the passengers to choose and decide which product to consume. 
 
65. As demand for air travel is highly price sensit ive and varies due to multiple factors, 
including the price of the air ticket, airlines end eavour to set prices in line with an estimation of 
demand and calibrate the same on the basis of off-t ake of seats, changes in cost (including fuel), 
estimated cost recovery, need to stimulate demand a nd network feeds/flows. These prices are 
stated in “fare levels / buckets” with number of se ats being varied in each bucket in line with 
revenue management practices. 
 
66. The primary factors based on which specific buc kets or price points are open for sale are 
market conditions - reference to competition landsc ape, frequency, time of the flights, 
seasonality, etc. Seat allocation per pricing point is dynamic in nature and there are countless sell 
and cancel transactions taking place every second f rom multiple sources over the entire network. 
Most of the airlines being commercial organisations, the inventory team endeavours to maximise 
the revenue by judiciously monitoring demand and supply. 
 

19 
 
Analysis of Global Practice for Ticket Pricing  
67. The Committee, after analysis of International Journals on the subject, found that 
International Air Transportation Association (IATA) ’s Recommended Practices (RPs) are only a 
suggested framework to harmonize industry practices  in the air-transport sector. While IATA is 
not a governmental organization and has, therefore,  no competence for legislation, their 
Recommended Practices are internationally recognize d references and generally have a non-
binding character.  
 
68. Some airlines have adopted these RPs or general  conditions as minimum requirements in 
their Conditions of Carriage or have modified them to suit their own commercial practices. 
Hence, different terms and conditions exist in the aviation sector for various airlines. However, 
the non-binding IATA rules or RPs as international standards are not prioritized in favour of 
national law, but, on the contrary, have to comply with the national law. 
1 
 
69. The Committee also understands that the USA der egulated its airline industry in 1978, 
and thereafter airline deregulation has been implem ented in many countries around the world 
including Germany, France, Australia, Great Britain, Japan and India. 
2 Ticket pricing globally, is 
a well-developed, constantly evolving process, most ly controlled these days by algorithms. 
Pricing is, in most cases, automated, based on airl ine experience and set parameters and is not 
fixed or controlled, and airlines seek to maximize profits made through ticket sales.  
 
70. Pricing and availability of fares are determine d these days using a system of ‘booking 
classes’. Each airline uses its algorithms and Arti ficial Intelligence (AI) to set and change prices. 
Price setting is backed by extensive data analysis,  and with the improvement of data analysis 
technologies, data can be analyzed and used much mo re precisely. Airline price algorithms are 
not made public and are a closely guarded secret. H owever, there are many things that influence 
prices, though they vary between airlines.  
 
71. The Committee observes that the IATA Rules are only a suggested framework to 
harmonize industry practices in the air-transport s ector. While IATA is not a 
governmental organization and has therefore, no com petence for legislation, their RPs are 
internationally recognized references and generally  have a non-binding character. Airlines 
across the world have adopted these RPs and also mo dified them to suit their own 
commercial practices.  
 
                                                           
1 Bischoff, Gregor, Sven Maertens, and Wolfgang Grimm e. 2011. “Airline Pricing Strategies Versus Consume r 
Rights.” Transportation Journal , Vol. 50, No. 3 (Summer 2011), pp. 232-
250. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/transportationj.50.3.0232  
 
2  Gourdin, Kent N. 1998. “U.S. International Aviation  Policy into the New Millennium: Meeting the Global  
Challenge.” Transportation Journal,  1998, Vol. 37, No. 4, pp. 13-19 https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/20713360.pdf  
 

20 
 
72. The Committee further notes that globally, tick et pricing is a well-developed, 
evolving process, controlled by algorithms. Present ly, ticket pricing is based on airline 
experience and set parameters, and airlines legitim ately seek to maximize profits made 
through ticket sales. Airline price algorithms are not made public and are a closely 
guarded secret.  
 
73. It is evident that as per the international pra ctices, though IATA Recommended 
Practices (RPs) are non-binding, yet these are ackn owledged by the various international 
airlines as a guiding factor. However, each airline  modifies it to suit their own commercial 
practices, subject to National laws which get prior ity over the IATA RPs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may ensure the proper implementation of the 
existing Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 which  is the National Law in India for fixing 
of reasonable airfares by the airlines, for the benefit of the passengers.  
 
Components and Drivers of Airfare 
74. The Ministry informed that the various componen ts of Airfare are as under: 
a)
 Airline Components 
• Basic Fare  
• Airline Fuel Charge  
• Common User Terminal Equipment (CUTE) Fees 
• Convenience Fee (on booking through websites) 
b) Other Agencies Components 
• Airport Operators 
/head2right Airport development fees  
/head2right User Development Fees  
/head2right Passenger Service Fees 
/head2right Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) Fee 
• Government Levies 
/head2right CGST 
/head2right SGST 
 
75. The Ministry also informed that due to the supp ly-side constraints, air ticket prices 
generally vary depending upon the market forces inc luding difference in demand and supply 
arising due to various drivers which follow the laws of demand. The various drivers of airfare are 
as under: 
• Season 
• Holidays 
• Festivals 
• Long weekends 
• Events (sports, fairs, contests, etc.) 
• Market forces viz. competition, value of INR against US dollar, fuel prices, etc. 

21 
 
• Competition on route 
• Distance of route 
• Seat demand 
 
76. The Committee enquired from the various airline s the different components within the 
total airfare charged to the passengers; the compon ents that are retained by the airlines; and 
components which are to be paid to other entities a nd the frequency (daily, weekly, monthly, 
etc.) of such payments. The details of the components of airfare of various airlines being charged 
to passengers and their breakup are given at Annexure-IV.  
 
77. The Committee notes the various components of a irfares being charged to 
passengers and observes that the components of airf ares are the same across various 
airlines. The Committee would like to be apprised o f the percentage of various components 
of airfares which are retained by the airlines themselves.   
 
Effect of Seasonality/Holidays on Airfares  
78. The Ministry highlighted that India has a highl y seasonal market. Traffic is usually high 
in the months of May and June. Through mid-July the  international traffic flows are high, thus 
contributing to the domestic feed as well. From Jul y to September is traditionally leaner period 
as travel is restricted due to monsoon and other re ligious reasons. In October, with the festive 
season starting from Dussera, traffic picks up agai n and by the middle of January the demand 
diminishes. Till about the last week of April, this  trend of softening of demand continues and 
again, due to summer holidays, the demand increases.  
 
79. The Committee was further informed that Air tra vellers are extremely price-sensitive. 
Price is the primary driver to pick an airline espe cially for leisure travellers. All airlines compete  
on price with other carriers in the respective mark ets. Airlines adopt dynamic pricing by 
changing prices often depending on the day of the w eek, time of day, and number of days before 
the flight factoring in different components such a s, how many seats a flight has, departure time, 
and average cancellations on similar flights. Dynam ic pricing is crucial in determining how 
airlines improve their revenue per flight. 
 
80. The Committee, during its deliberations, highli ghted the concerns expressed by 
passengers at the surge of airfares during festive seasons, summer vacations, when a large 
number of people travel across the Country for reli gious/ leisure purposes or other reasons 
and thus promoting domestic tourism and boosting the economy. The Committee notes that 
affordable air transport is a must for the growth o f tourism in India, which is presently 
reviving after facing a steep decline due to Covid pandemic. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may devise suitable monitoring mechanism to keep a check on the sudden 
surge in prices during the festive season or holida ys or natural calamities, as it has a 
negative impact on tourism.  

22 
 
 
 
 
Impact of Airport Tariff on Airfares 
81. Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) , in its written reply stated that the 
aeronautical tariff determination process for all m ajor airports in India is governed under the 
AERA Act, 2003. Insofar as fees being charged to th e Airlines and Passengers, such fees and 
charges are determined based on the regulatory prin ciples laid down by the Airport Economic 
Regulatory Authority (AERA), the regulator for the Airports sector, every five years for the 
following control period in consultation with all s takeholders and considering the Capital 
Expenditure (CAPEX), Operational Expenditure (OPEX) and other financial requirements of the 
airport. Further, airports are mandated to charge o nly those fees and charges that are determined 
and published by the AERA. The AERA determines aero nautical charges that an airport can 
charge on the airlines and passengers by balancing the interests of various stakeholders, 
including that of Airport operator.  
 
82. The tariff determination process involves the r elevant airport operators submitting a 
multi-year tariff proposal detailing each building block of the revenue requirement for the 
previous control period and the projection for the subsequent control period together with a 
financial model. The submission is then reviewed by  the AERA for accuracy, compliance and 
reasonableness. The AERA then publishes its views i n a consultation paper for stakeholders to 
comment and subsequently issues a final tariff order reflecting views received in the consultation 
exercise. 
 
 
83. The Committee also enquired about the amount of  User Development Fee charged by the 
private airlines operating in the country and the d etails of the fee charged at the airports, these 
private airlines are currently operating (for the F .Y. 2022-2023). The information furnished by 
the Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) is placed at Annexure-V.   
 
84. The Committee observes that there is a lot of v ariation in User Development Fees 
(UDF), for domestic passengers, ranging from Nil to  Rs. 480 and for International 
passengers, from Rs. 52.56 to Rs. 1200. The Committ ee desires to know the reasons for the 
wide variation in UDF rates both for domestic and i nternational passengers which is one of 
the components of airfares, leading to rise in airfares.  
 
85. The Committee notes  that fees mandated by the AERA being charged to the  
Airlines and Passengers, are determined based on th e Regulatory principles laid down by 
the Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) an d airports are bound to charge 
only those fees and charges that are determined and  published by the AERA. It is, 
therefore, evident that the AERA exercises control of various components of airfares 
charged to airlines or passengers. The Committee ob serves that the AERA, being the 
statutory regulator for the airports sector should endeavour to strike a balance between the 

23 
 
interests of the airlines and the passengers. The Committee is of the opinion that the AERA 
in consultation with the various stakeholders may l ook into the feasibility of reducing the 
various components of airfare, which may result in decrease in airfares.  
 
86. The Committee further enquired about the detail s of Passenger Service Fees, Air 
Navigation Services (ANS), etc., charged by the private airlines and whether these charges are as 
per acceptable rules and in conformity with interna tional norms. The APAO replied that with 
effect from 1 
st  July 2019, the MoCA has discontinued the levy of P assenger Service Fees by 
Airport Operators and has replaced the same with Av iation Security Fee (ASF). This ASF is not 
levied by the Airport operators and is levied by th e National Aviation Security Fee Trust 
(NASFT) – a Trust formed under the MoCA. Air Naviga tion Service Charges are determined by 
the Airports Authority of India and charged directl y to airlines without any involvement of the 
APAO or private airport operators. 
 
87. The Committee is aware of the fact that a signi ficant component of airfare comprises 
various fees/ charges being charged by the airport operators 
viz., Landing Charges; Parking 
Charges; Housing Charges; User Development Fee (UDF ); Fuel Infrastructure Charges; Airport 
Development Fee (ADF); Passenger Service Fee (PSF);  X-ray Screening Charges; Fixed 
Electricity Ground Power (FEGP) Charges; and Common  Use Terminal Equipment (CUTE)/ 
Common Use Self Service (CUSS)/ Baggage Reconciliat ion System (BRS) Fee. In this regard, 
the Committee enquired about the details of various  charges/fees being charged by the private 
airports from the APAO. Details furnished in respec t of the following 12 Member Airports, 
which are placed at Annexure-VI:- 
 
i) Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International Airport (SVPIA), Ahmedabad;  
ii) Kempegowda International Airport, Bengaluru;  
iii) Cochin International Airport, Kochi;  
iv) Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi; 
v) MoPA International Airport, Goa; 
vi) Rajiv Gandhi International Airport, Hyderabad; 
vii) Lucknow International Airport; 
viii) Thiruvananthapuram International Airport; 
ix) Jaipur International Airport;  
x) Guwahati International Airport; 
xi) Mangaluru International Airport, Mangalore; and  
xii) Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport, Mumbai. 
 
88. The Committee notes wide variation in terms of varied fees being charged by the 
airport operators. For instance, the Fuel Infrastru cture Charges are being levied by only 
four airports out of the aforementioned 12 airports , with the price range between Rs. 
670/KL to Rs. 1,830/KL. The Committee also observes  a considerable variation in the 
Parking Charges being levied by different operators  wherein the minimum charge is a 

24 
 
meagre Rs. 3/MT per hour, whereas the maximum being Rs. 98.60/MT per hour. Similarly, 
there is a major difference in the Landing Charges being levied for aircrafts wherein one 
airport charges Rs. 113/MT and the maximum charge f or landing an aircraft at one of the 
airports is Rs. 1,450/MT. The Committee desires to know the reasons for the wide 
variations. 
 
89. The Committee also notes that as regards the ot her charges 
viz., X-ray Screening, 
PSF, FEGP, CUTE/CUSS/BRS etc., are being levied at only certain airports at varied rates. 
The Committee is also aware that all such charges levied by airport operators are governed 
by the orders issued by the Airports Economic Regul atory Authority (AERA). The 
Committee recommends that as far as possible, there  should be broader uniformity in 
terms of various fees being charged across all the airports in the Country. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to look into the matter and  issue necessary guidelines to all the 
airport operators to rationalise the fee/charges at different airports.  
 
Low-Cost Carriers vs. Full-Service Carriers  
90. The Committee also enquired into the reasons an d justification for the higher fares 
charged by low-cost airlines on the same routes 
vis-à-vis  their full-service counterparts despite 
offering fewer services to the passengers. The repr esentative of Air Asia stated that airfares for 
any flight are driven by demand-supply dynamics, co mpetitive positioning, and are based on 
factors such as –  
1. Schedule advantage / disadvantage – Flights with  better timings see higher customer 
demand.  
2. Available Seats – In case a few seats are available on a flight, the fares may be higher.  
 
91. The representative apprised that it is possible  that at times the flight of a Low-Cost 
Carrier (LCC) is in higher demand than a Full-Servi ce Carrier (FSC) and hence may see a higher 
fare being offered at a particular booking period. It is also possible that an FSC may be offering a 
tactical discount in the market. 
 
92. The representative also contended that there ar e two main propositions on which budget 
or Low-Cost-Carrier (LCC), differ from the Full Service Carrier (FSC):  
• In LCC, there is only economy class in the cabin. N ot having a business class helps LCC 
with more seats per flight thereby reducing the cos t per seat and hence offering lower 
fares; and  
• LCCs offer unbundled product, i.e., meals and any o ther auxiliary services like lounge 
facility, which are not offered as part of the fare  but can be bought separately. This again 
helps offer lower fares and only the customers who value auxiliary services like meals 
have to pay for such services.  
 

25 
 
93. The Committee was also apprised that LCCs somet imes also offer additional fare 
products which bundle ancillary services like meals.  
 
94. Representative of the Indigo stated that it cha rges airfares in line with prevailing market 
dynamics. It is quite possible that in certain case s, a full-service carrier’s flights on certain 
route(s) have lesser seats sold than desired/ estim ated, and the carrier concerned may choose to 
sell their seats at a lower rate than LCCs, which u ltimately benefits the consumer. It is also 
possible that a certain full-service carrier may ch oose to sell at lower fares, to stimulate the 
market or to generate flows from certain flights on to its overall network. These are outcomes of 
the deregulated nature of the Indian air travel market and work to benefit consumers. 
 
95. The representative also averred that globally, there is no definition of budget and regular 
airlines. Budget airlines in mature markets typical ly follow a model of having only one aircraft 
type (economies of scale), distributing their inven tory through their website (no travel agency 
fees / commissions), charging for all ancillaries i ncluding checked-in baggage, operating from 
secondary airports, etc. Indigo, on the other hand,  has three aircraft types in its fleet – A320, 
A321 and ATR-72 and have distributed inventory thro ugh agents as well as their own website 
and also offer free check-in baggage allowance to all passengers.  
 
96. Indigo also operates from mainline airports in India and provides the same facilities as 
“regular” airlines in India, maybe with the exception of free meals (Indigo charges for the same). 
The airfares are available on their website, as req uired 
vide  Air Transport Circular 02 of 2010, 
wherein they are required to display the tariff she et route-wise across their network in various 
fare categories/buckets on their website. 
 
97. The SpiceJet representative stated that multipl e factors drive the dynamics of the fare 
pricing and airlines strategy depends on business perspective. This aspect is solely determined by 
the market structure and market forces and an airline does not have any control over the same.  
 
98. The Vistara representative stated that the diff erence primarily lies in services and 
deliverables offered, 
i.e., free meals on board, different cabin, seat comfort, loyalty benefits, etc.  
 
99. The Committee notes that the reason for the hig her fares charged by low-cost 
airlines on the same routes 
vis-à-vis  their full-service counterparts despite offering f ewer 
services to the passengers is mainly due to the fac t that airfares are fixed according to 
market dynamics. The difference primarily lies in services and deliverables offered i.e., free 
meals on board, different cabins, seat comfort, loy alty benefits, etc. The Committee notes 
that there is no fixed criterion for fixing airfare s for Low-Cost Carriers as compared to the 
Full-Service Carriers and the airfares are determin ed on the basis of market forces and 
airlines do not have any control over them. The exp ression ‘market dynamics’ being vast 
and uncertain, the Committee recommends that the Mi nistry should monitor such 
instances of high fares of LCCs and take remedial action.  

26 
 
 
 
 
Dynamic Pricing and Global Standards  
100. The Committee asked the Ministry whether it ha s laid down any guidelines to ensure that 
the dynamic fare pricing model is being employed in  a reasonable manner. The Ministry 
apprised that with the repeal of Air Corporation Ac t, 1953, in March 1994, airfares have been 
deregulated.  Dynamic pricing is a pricing strategy  which entails flexible prices for products or 
services based on current market demands. Businesse s are able to stay competitive by changing 
prices based on algorithms that take into account c ompetitor pricing, supply and demand, and 
other external factors. 
 
101. The Ministry further stated that airline prici ng system runs in multiple levels (buckets or 
RBDs) which are in line with the practice being fol lowed globally. The prices are fixed by 
airlines keeping in mind the market, demand, season ality and other market forces. The airfare 
increases with increases in demand of seats as the lower fare buckets get sold out when bookings 
are offered by airlines. 
 
102. Some of the airlines offer schemes, in additio n to existing advance purchase schemes of 
60 days, 30 days, 14 days etc., in which highly discounted fares being offered which would entail 
travelling even during peak seasons on low fares. T he fare structures are displayed by airlines on 
their websites. The airlines are compliant to the R ule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 as long as 
fares charged by them are in line with the fare displayed on their website. 
 
103. Most airlines opined that the dynamic fares al low airlines to offer different fares at 
different periods of booking horizon to different c ustomer segments. It is based on forecasting 
demand from customer segments at different price le vels and then allocating seat inventory 
accordingly at these different price levels to matc h the forecasted demand. Therefore, the family 
travellers, students, senior citizens etc., who are more price sensitive and tend to book in advance 
get access to seat inventory allocated to low fares . They also stated that every flight operated by 
an airline involves a high amount of fixed cost, wi th a very small component of the cost being 
variable with the number of passengers onboard. The refore, a vacant seat is a perishable 
inventory and hence it makes sense for airlines to fill the seats even if such fares are lower than 
the average cost per seat. This shows that the dyna mic pricing approach adopted by airlines 
works in the interest of consumers, as many consume rs with lower affordability are able to get 
access to seat inventory which would have otherwise  gone unsold. The details of the replies 
received from various airlines in this regard, are placed at Annexure-VII.  
 
104. The Committee notes that depending on the mark et demands, a significant portion 
of the seats in a particular flight is sold even be low the average cost per seat to be able to 
attract customers who may have low affordability.  It also notes that dynamic fare pricing 
models are derived from the Standard Revenue Manage ment System and practised 

27 
 
globally. These models are based on forecasting and  optimization tools. It also observes 
that there are many Revenue Management Systems available in the market and the airlines 
may choose any of these or may develop its own methods to forecast and allocate inventory.  
 
105. The Committee further notes that no fixed mode l or formula is being followed by 
the airlines for airfare fixation. However, a vacan t seat being a perishable inventory, 
airlines may offer seats at discounted rates, if th e ticket is purchased sufficiently in 
advance. Thus, it benefits the passengers who have lower affordability.  
 
106. The Committee is of the opinion that in absenc e of a credible formula for the pricing 
of airfares, there remains a wide variation in the pricing of seats. Though sometimes, it 
may benefit the customers, however, at times, it ma y lead to very high fares. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that feasibility o f devising a formula may be examined 
to regulate excessive surge in fares as per the extant rules.  
 
Differential Pricing  
107. The Committee observes that currently, airline s offer passengers the option to select their 
seats on an aircraft which could cost anywhere betw een Rs.150 to Rs.1,000, depending on the 
location of the seat. Accordingly, the Committee en quired from the airlines the reasons for 
having differential pricing for seat selection with in the same flight and the basis on which 
airlines decide the pricing for different seats. Th e replies of the various airlines are placed at 
Annexure-VIII.  
 
108. The Committee notes the replies, wherein most airlines have stated that differential seat 
pricing is a global practice. They further stated t hat the seat selection pricing is rooted in the 
product ‘unbundling’ philosophy of low-cost-carrier  business model whereby airlines offer the 
basic product at the lowest possible fare and charg e separately for various amenities only to 
those passengers who see a utility in such amenitie s. The differential pricing for seat selection is, 
therefore, based on the value ascribed by the passengers to different types of seats.  
 
109. Further, pricing for seats are decided based o n the benefits offered by different types of 
seats to consumers. Similar to the ticket fares, if  the seat-assignment pricing is too high the 
customers would not be willing to pay for it and th e airline would end up assigning such a seat 
for free. Therefore, it is not in the interest of t he airline to price the seat higher than the value 
ascribed by the customer for such a preferred seat.  Airlines monitor the take-up rate of such 
preferred seats on different routes and adjust pric ing accordingly so that they are able to 
maximise the take-up rate of such paid seat selection.  
 
110. The Committee notes that the reason for variat ion in prices of seats on the same 
flight is due to the system of ‘unbundling’, which is a global practice whereby the airlines 
charge the lowest possible fare for the basic produ ct and charges for various other 
amenities as per the choice of the passenger. The C ommittee, however, feels that the issue 

28 
 
needs a relook as variable costs for the seats in t he same flight, goes against the very 
principle of equity.  
 
Challenges in the Rationalisation of Airfares 
111. The Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that fol lowing are the challenges in rationalization 
of airfares: 
• The aviation sector is a capital intensive business  and the airlines operate in an extremely 
competitive environment. 
• The airline industry has to face unforeseen challenges to remain in business such as: 
/head2right Volatility in the input cost of operation,  
/head2right Fluctuation in Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) prices/exchange rates, 
/head2right Changes in geo political situation, 
/head2right Covid Pandemic and 
/head2right Global supply chain issues. 
• Worldwide, many airline operators had to close down  their operations on account of 
continuous unsustainable losses. 
• A majority of Indian airline carriers have register ed an operating loss during last three 
years.  
 
112. The various airlines also mentioned that the e xceptional rise in fuel prices witnessed 
during Mar-Apr’22 due to the Ukraine war issue increased operational costs for airlines. The fuel 
prices in April 2022 increased by 55% over January 2022. This forced the airlines to pass on 
some of the increase in fuel prices in the airfares  starting April 2022 onwards, however only 
~65% of the increase of fuel prices was passed on t o customers due to competitive pressure on 
airfares. The Ministry has also provided a Sector-w ise comparison of Airfares from January, 
2019 to January, 2023, which is as follows: 
 

29 
 
 
 
113. The Committee notes various challenges being f aced for rationalisation of airfares 
as aviation sector is a capital intensive business and faces unforeseen challenges such as 
continuous unsustainable operating losses. It notes  that most of the challenges are beyond 
the control of the airlines. However, the issue of the steep increase in ATF prices as 
compared to global prices and GST levied by the Gov ernment depends on factors which 
are under the ambit of the Central Government. The Committee recommends that 
immediate steps may be taken to lower the taxes lev ied on ATF in consultation with 
Ministry of Finance. 
 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and Taxes on ATF  
114. The Ministry of Civil Aviation specifically hi ghlighted that ATF generally accounts for 
approximately 40% of total cost of operation depend ing on the aircraft type. There has been 
unprecedented hike in ATF prices over the last few years. For example, the average duty paid 
ATF price at Delhi which was Rs. 53,515 /kL in Marc h, 2020 (pre-Covid) increased to Rs. 
1,31,354 /kL (145% hike) during June, 2022 and its still pegged at Rs. 95,935 /kL (80% hike 
vis-
à-vis March, 2020). The volatility in the ATF prices is s ignificant factor which leads to 
fluctuations in operational cost resulting in surge  in airfare. The trend of average ATF duty paid 
price in Delhi for the period February, 2020 to May, 2023 is as follows:  
0
2000 
4000 
6000 
8000 
10000 
12000 
14000 
AVERAGE FARES (JAN-2019/JAN-2023) 
Jan-19 Jan-23 

30 
 
 
115. The Ministry informed that the decision to bri ng ATF under the ambit of GST pertains to 
Ministry of Finance (MoF)/ Goods and Services Tax ( GST) Council. Ministry of Civil Aviation 
has taken up the issue of inclusion of ATF under th e ambit of GST with Ministry of Finance at 
various levels. Ministry of Finance has informed th at Article 279 A (5) of the Constitution 
prescribes that the GST Council shall recommend the  date with effect from which the GST 
would be levied on petroleum crude, high speed dies el, motor spirit (petrol), natural gas and 
ATF. As per the section 9(2) of the CGST Act, 2017,  inclusion of these products in GST will 
require recommendation of the GST Council. So far, the GST Council, in which the States are 
also represented, has not made any recommendation for inclusion of these goods under GST. 
 
116. It has also been informed that the Ministry ha s made efforts to rationalize ATF pricing by 
adopting the ‘Mean of Platts Arab Gulf’ (MOPAG) pri cing mechanism. MOPAG pricing refers 
to paying the same price for ATF in India, that is paid in Dubai. The new price mechanism which 
replaces the Import Parity Price based system, will  be benchmarked on the MOPAG and could 
bring in more parity between global crude price and  jet fuel price in India. Also, the new pricing 
mechanism will be “more transparent” and will cushi on airlines from ATF price fluctuations. 
The Committee also analysed the expenditure on ATF by National Carriers and Private 
0 
20000 
40000 
60000 
80000 
100000 
120000 
140000 
160000 
ATF PRICES (DELHI) FROM FEB-20 TILL MAY-23 

 
Scheduled Domestic Airlines from 2016 
is given below: 
*Upto 31.01.2023. After the disinvestment of Air India, the figure of Rs 48,016.5 
expenditure incurred by Air India and its subsidiaries. 
 
117. The Committee 
note 
with the exception of years 2020 
to pandemic induced slowdown in aviation sector 
increased again, surpassi ng the expenditure on ATF during the previous years . 
Committee opines that lowered rates of VAT on ATF may result in redu ced price of a 
tickets and enhanced air connectivity. Also, the resultant incr ease in revenue from sale of 
aviation fuel may aid in the growth of tourism, better employment opportu nities in the 
States/UTs. 
 
118. The Committee 
further 
primarily influenced by the international product prices, dep reciating value of Rupee and 
other market conditions. The Committee 
the country, is further aggravated by high taxes such as customs  duty, excise duty, 
sale/ State tax, Value Added Tax (VAT) levied thereon. 
 
119. 
The Committee has been given to understand that the  cost of ATF nearly accounts 
for approximately 40% of the total operating cost o f airlines and impacts the financial 
31 
Scheduled Domestic Airlines from 2016 -17 to 2022-23. The graphical representation of the data 
*Upto 31.01.2023. After the disinvestment of Air India, the figure of Rs 48,016.5 0 crore is inclusive of the 
expenditure incurred by Air India and its subsidiaries.  
note s the increase in expenditure on ATF from 2016 
with the exception of years 2020 -21 and 2021-22, when the demand for ATF decreased due 
slowdown in aviation sector . In the year 2022 
ng the expenditure on ATF during the previous years . 
that lowered rates of VAT on ATF may result in redu ced price of a 
enhanced air connectivity. Also, the resultant incr ease in revenue from sale of 
in the growth of tourism, better employment opportu nities in the 
further notes that the pricing of ‘ Aviation Turbine Fuel 
influenced by the international product prices, dep reciating value of Rupee and 
other market conditions. The Committee also observes the high ATF prices prevailing in 
is further aggravated by high taxes such as customs  duty, excise duty, 
State tax, Value Added Tax (VAT) levied thereon.  
The Committee has been given to understand that the  cost of ATF nearly accounts 
for approximately 40% of the total operating cost o f airlines and impacts the financial 
23. The graphical representation of the data 
 
0 crore is inclusive of the 
s the increase in expenditure on ATF from 2016 -17 onwards, 
22, when the demand for ATF decreased due 
In the year 2022 -23, it has sharply 
ng the expenditure on ATF during the previous years . The 
that lowered rates of VAT on ATF may result in redu ced price of a ir 
enhanced air connectivity. Also, the resultant incr ease in revenue from sale of 
in the growth of tourism, better employment opportu nities in the 
Aviation Turbine Fuel ’ is 
influenced by the international product prices, dep reciating value of Rupee and 
observes the high ATF prices prevailing in 
is further aggravated by high taxes such as customs  duty, excise duty, 
The Committee has been given to understand that the  cost of ATF nearly accounts 
for approximately 40% of the total operating cost o f airlines and impacts the financial 


32 
 
viability of their operations and affects their com petitiveness because Indian carriers are 
unable to compete against their global counterparts  on account of the exorbitantly higher 
prices of ATF. The Committee recommends that all-out efforts should be made to lower the 
taxes being levied on the ATF. Rationalization of VAT rates will be very crucial in reducing 
the operating cost which will further improve the e conomic and operational viability of the 
airlines. 
 
120. The Committee also commends the Ministry for a dopting initiatives such as 
MOPAG mechanism of pricing to rationalise prices an d bring in more parity between 
prices of global crude oil and ATF in India. The Co mmittee opines that it will decrease the 
cost of ATF and hence, decrease airfares in the cou ntry. The Committee also desires to 
know the details of ATF prices being charged in oth er countries across the world and the 
countries with low ATF prices.  
 
121. The Committee notes the wide variation of ATF prices across the various States of 
the country, which has led to airlines fuelling the ir aircrafts from States with low taxes, 
which reduces the passenger load and also results i n increase in airfares. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the possibility of enacting a law to ensure uniform rate of taxes 
on ATF across the country, may be examined.   
 
Pratt & Whitney Engines 
122. The Committee during its deliberation were inf ormed by some airlines that many of the 
aircrafts were grounded, because Pratt & Whitney, t he manufacturer for the engines for these 
aircraft is not being able to supply these engines.  Due to grounding of aircrafts, the airfares 
increased in some Sectors. The Committee also took up the issue with the representatives of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation during its Study Visit to Goa. 
 
123. The Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Co mmittee that due to grounding of 
aircrafts, there has been a direct impact on the ca pacity available for passengers. In this regard, 
efforts were made and issues taken up with Pratt & Whitney (P&W) to assist Indian carriers 
(GoFirst and Indigo). A communication to P&W was ma de wherein the concerns of MoCA and 
DGCA were expressed over the grounding of A-320 fle et of Indian carriers because of non-
availability of P&W engines. P&W replied that they are facing a global issue due to supply chain 
constraints and the availability of parts at MRO, impacting all of their customers. The matter was 
again taken up with P&W and they were also apprised of the frequent flight cancellations leading 
to inconvenience to the travelling public due to th ese aircraft groundings. DGCA is continuously 
following up the matter with the Original Equipment  Manufacturer (OEM) for an early 
resolution. 
 
124. The representatives of Indigo which has faced the said problem also stated that currently 
they have certain number of A320 family aircraft gr ounded due to the global supply chain 
problems. The number varies in line with the Aircra ft-on-the-Ground (AOG) situation and also 

 
improvements to the supply chain and maintenance re quirements ari 
operations and the airline is trying to resolve the issue in consultation with the manufacturer. 
 
125. 
The Committee notes that aircrafts with 
and Whitney engines were grounded due to lack of sp are parts 
losses. The Committee would like to know whether th ere are any provisions to seek 
damages from the said engine manufacture 
ai rlines as well as the Ministry in this regard to av oid the recurrence of such a problem in 
future.  
 
Action taken by the Government 
126. The Committee was apprised 
encourage the overall growth of aviation ecosystem in India to enhance connectivity 
competition to ensure affordable air travel. The fo llowing initiative taken by the Government 
directly or indirectly have helped 
i) Government’s effort has led to reduction in VAT on ATF significantly in several states 
providing relief to the airlines. 19 States/ UTs have reduced VAT significantly and efforts 
are being made to convince 
graphical representation of VAT rates across all States/ UTs is 
 
ii) Tax concessions to MROs etc. 
iii) Rationalization of ATF pricing by adopting MOPAG pricing mechanism. 
iv) Flagship program of the 
to the airlines for connecting tier 
required to commit around 50% of seats as RCS seats  (limited to 40 seats) on RCS 
flights. While launch ing UDAN Scheme in the country in 2016, the Governm ent had 
33 
improvements to the supply chain and maintenance re quirements ari 
operations and the airline is trying to resolve the issue in consultation with the manufacturer. 
The Committee notes that aircrafts with an Indian airline operator 
and Whitney engines were grounded due to lack of sp are parts leading to incurring of 
losses. The Committee would like to know whether th ere are any provisions to seek 
damages from the said engine manufacture r, and if so, the details of action taken by the 
rlines as well as the Ministry in this regard to av oid the recurrence of such a problem in 
Action taken by the Government  for Affordable Air Travel 
apprised that Government has taken several proactive measures to 
encourage the overall growth of aviation ecosystem in India to enhance connectivity 
competition to ensure affordable air travel. The fo llowing initiative taken by the Government 
directly or indirectly have helped in bringing down/ containing the hike in airfare: 
Government’s effort has led to reduction in VAT on ATF significantly in several states 
providing relief to the airlines. 19 States/ UTs have reduced VAT significantly and efforts 
are being made to convince the remaining 5 States/ UTs to reduce the VAT rates . A 
graphical representation of VAT rates across all States/ UTs is as follows: 
Tax concessions to MROs etc.  
Rationalization of ATF pricing by adopting MOPAG pricing mechanism. 
Flagship program of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, UDAN was launched provi ding VGF 
to the airlines for connecting tier -II and tier- III cities at affordable prices. Airlines are 
required to commit around 50% of seats as RCS seats  (limited to 40 seats) on RCS 
ing UDAN Scheme in the country in 2016, the Governm ent had 
improvements to the supply chain and maintenance re quirements ari sing during ongoing 
operations and the airline is trying to resolve the issue in consultation with the manufacturer.  
operator  having Pratt 
leading to incurring of 
losses. The Committee would like to know whether th ere are any provisions to seek 
details of action taken by the 
rlines as well as the Ministry in this regard to av oid the recurrence of such a problem in 
several proactive measures to 
encourage the overall growth of aviation ecosystem in India to enhance connectivity  and bring in 
competition to ensure affordable air travel. The fo llowing initiative taken by the Government 
in bringing down/ containing the hike in airfare:  
Government’s effort has led to reduction in VAT on ATF significantly in several states 
providing relief to the airlines. 19 States/ UTs have reduced VAT significantly and efforts 
the remaining 5 States/ UTs to reduce the VAT rates . A 
as follows: - 
 
Rationalization of ATF pricing by adopting MOPAG pricing mechanism.  
Ministry of Civil Aviation, UDAN was launched provi ding VGF 
III cities at affordable prices. Airlines are 
required to commit around 50% of seats as RCS seats  (limited to 40 seats) on RCS 
ing UDAN Scheme in the country in 2016, the Governm ent had 


34 
 
capped the Airfare at Rs. 2500 for one-hour flight under UDAN. However, the capping is 
subject to indexation as per the formula specified in the Scheme. 
v) Ministry of Civil Aviation has sought intervention of the Ministry of Finance to help the 
Civil Aviation sector by bringing ATF under the ambit of GST.  
vi) Efforts are being made for reduction in Excise Duty on ATF. 
vii) Capacity enhancement by Indian carriers over next few years.  
viii) The airlines in the Civil Aviation Advisory Group m eeting chaired by the Hon’ble 
Minister for Civil Aviation were sensitized regardi ng instances of aberration in airfares 
charged by airlines particularly on certain sectors during high demand situations and were 
urged to build some level of sensitivity in their RBDs and take corrective action to deploy 
additional capacity, etc. so that the airfare do not go haywire. 
 
127. The Committee commends the steps taken by the Government to rationalise the 
airfares. The Committee recommends that monitoring at the ground level may be carried 
out to ensure the proper implementation of all the initiatives taken by the Government. 
The Committee desires to know the status of Ministr y’s efforts to bring ATF under the 
ambit of GST and reduction in excise duty on ATF.  
 
128. The Committee also commends that the Civil Avi ation Advisory Group has advised 
the airlines to bring in sensitivity while framing their RBDs and deploy additional aircrafts 
to meet the increased demand of the passengers. The Committee desires to know the details 
of the steps taken by the Ministry and the airlines, in this regard. 
 
Role of Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA)  
129. Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) is the main regulatory agency for 
regulating tariffs and other expenditures and fees for airports, many of which are collected from 
passengers through airfare. In this regard, the Air ports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
Act, 2008 mandates AERA to hold due consultations w ith all stakeholders. In this context, the 
Committee desired to know how often AERA holds cons ultations with the stakeholders, the 
stakeholders who are consulted in the process and w hether there is any mechanism in place for 
the stakeholders to address their concerns with AERA. 
 
130. The Ministry informed that in consonance with the global principles laid for regulating 
tariffs down by International Civil Aviation Organi zation (ICAO), AERA adheres to the 
following key principles on charges for airports, w hile exercising the function of Tariff 
Determination: 
i.
 Non-discrimination, 
ii. Cost-relatedness; 
iii. Transparency; and 
iv. Consultation with users. 
 

35 
 
131. Section 13 sub-section (4) of the AERA Act 200 8 mandates ensuring transparency by 
holding due consultations with the stakeholders and  allowing them to make their submissions to 
the Authority. AERA Guidelines 2011 also outline th e User Consultation Process in detail to be 
followed during the entire process of tariff determ ination. In the above backdrop, AERA follows 
transparent and robust consultation process.  
 
132. Ministry also informed that each airport has d ifferent capital expenditure profile, return 
on capital employed, operational expenditure, traff ic inflows, under/over-recovery in previous 
control period and non-aeronautical well as Cargo, Ground handling and supply of Fuel (CGF) 
revenue collections. These factors translate to dif ferent entitled revenue and resultant landing/ 
parking and UDF for different airports. Entitled re venue for the airport operator is recovered 
through levy of are mentioned below: 
i.
 Landing and parking charges 
ii. User Development Fee (UDF). 
 
133. Proportion of recovery between Landing/Parking  and UDF depends on past ratio, views 
of the stakeholders including the airport operator during consultation process. The mechanism 
followed by AERA for arriving at airport tariffs, is given at Annexure-IX.   
 
134. During its deliberations the Committee enquire d about the mechanism available to airport 
operators to voice their concerns with AERA. In reply APAO stated as follows:  
• Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India ( AERA) determines the Aeronautical 
tariff for major airports in India.  
• AERA’s tariff determination process consists of the following steps:  
o Submission of Multi Year Tariff Proposal (MYTP) by Airport operator  
o Analysis of MYTP by AERA  
o Issuance of Consultation Paper by AERA regarding its views on the MYTP and its own 
proposal for the applicable control period  
o Stakeholder consultations regarding the MYTP subm itted by Airport operator and 
AERA’s proposal  
• The APAO also informed that based on the above pr ocess, airport operators have limited 
opportunity to be heard by AERA for expressing thei r opinions / concerns/ replies 
regarding AERA’s proposal in the consultation paper  and comments received from 
various stakeholders.  
• Further, airport operators can appeal against the  orders of AERA in Telecom Disputes 
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) which is the appellate tribunal for the 
airport sector. In case matters are not sorted at T DSAT then Airport Operators have to 
approach Supreme Court. 
 
135. The Committee notes the contradictory replies received from the Ministry and the 
APAO. While the AERA claims that extensive consulta tion is being done with stakeholders 
for tariff determination, the APAO have stated that  airport operators have limited 

36 
 
opportunity to be heard by the AERA during the consultation process. The Committee is of 
the opinion that the consultation process of the AE RA should be fully transparent and all 
the concerns of the stakeholders should be heard an d after due examination, their 
suggestions should be effected in the tariff determination process.  
 
136. The Committee also notes the long drawn out pr ocess for approaching TDSAT or 
the Supreme Court for appeal against orders of the AERA. The Committee recommends 
that a mechanism may be devised by the Ministry in consultation with all the airport 
operators/ stakeholders to hear the genuine concern s/ suggestions of the airport operators 
in the first instance itself, so that the need for appealing against the orders of the AERA in 
TDSAT or Supreme Court can be avoided.  
 
137. The APAO in its written reply to the Committee  informed that the AERA is currently 
determining tariffs based on guidelines / direction s which lack the legal sanctity of Regulations. 
Even though the AERA Act, 2008 has provisions regar ding the need to formulate Regulations, 
the AERA is yet to do the same. The representative of the APAO stated that this is one of the 
critical changes that needs to be brought in so tha t there is parliamentary sanction to the way that 
airports are to be regulated in India. 
 
138. The Committee takes note of the observation of  the APAO that though the AERA 
Act has provisions regarding the need to formulate regulations, yet the regulations are yet 
to be formulated. The Committee notes the delay in formulation of regulations by the 
AERA and desires to know the reasons thereof. The C ommittee recommends that the 
regulations may be formulated at the earliest. The details of the measures that are sought 
to be introduced through the said regulation to regulate airports may also be explained. 
  
  

37 
 
III 
SUGGESTIONS/ POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS FOR AFFORDABLE AIRFARES  
 
Price Lock Option  
139. The Committee is aware that many airlines acro ss the world are offering a ‘price lock’ 
option whereby customers can book air tickets by re serving their seats without paying for the 
actual price of the ticket upfront. By paying a nom inal non-refundable fee for ‘price lock’, 
customers are secured against any price hike as the y can purchase the ticket later at the locked-in 
price. In India, some airlines have also recently r olled out the price lock option. Accordingly, the 
Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviat ion and the private airlines, the advantages 
and disadvantages of the price lock option and the feasibility of implementing the price lock 
feature in India. 
 
140. The Ministry, in its written reply, stated tha t currently, there are provisions for governing 
airlines offering such price lock features; however , it is purely an airline’s commercial decision. 
However, some airlines like SpiceJet, Go Air, Indig o and a few travel agents provide ‘price lock 
option’ on certain sectors wherein passengers have the option to lock the price of ticket with a 
minimal fee (non-refundable).  
 
141. The various airlines 
viz., Air Asia, Air India, GoFirst, Indigo and SpiceJet, mentioned the 
advantages and disadvantages of price lock option, which are indicated below:- 
 
Advantages- 
• Offers a customer a fixed price for a short duratio n by giving them enough time to 
confirm their travel plans; 
• Enables a customer to lock a fare against a specifi ed fee for specific period within which 
the customer can purchase the ticket with protection against price fluctuation; and 
• Offers peace of mind that the seats would be available for the protected time period. 
 
Disadvantages- 
• Generally, the fee is not adjusted against the tick et price and if the customer chooses not 
to travel, then the price lock fee will be wasted; 
• The scheme is available only on advance purchase an d not offered for flights close to 
departure; 
• If the customer locks-in a seat but later does not confirm it, there is a possibility that the 
airline would have lost demand from some other cust omer who was willing to travel but 
could not find the seat at the time of the booking as the seat was ‘locked-in’ by the first 
customer; and 
• It may result in many seats remaining vacant on a f light, which would impact the 
commercial viability of the flight, leading to a sc enario where airlines either revoke the 
‘lock-in’ product or raise the fares for the rest of the travelling customers. 

38 
 
142. Air Asia also added that the fare lock product  has been experimented by few airlines in 
the past but the demand for such a product from Ind ian consumers has not been significant. 
Further, Air India and Indigo stated that as per DGCA mandate, airlines already allow a 24 hours 
free look-in period for all tickets purchased beyon d 7 days to departure. Air India also stated that 
it is feasible to implement fare lock in India and they are already working towards building the 
necessary infrastructure to implement fare lock as an option for customers.  
 
143. It has been ascertained from the replies of Go First and SpiceJet that the price lock feature 
is already available on their respective websites. Whereas, Indigo is already allowing consumers 
to lock-in a fare until 15 days prior to departure from the time of booking at a charge, which gets 
adjusted when they pay for the seat(s) held under such an option.  
 
144. Vistara, in its written reply, informed the Co mmittee that while a price can be secured in 
advance by the passenger, considering the dynamic n ature of the fares, they may lose out on 
availing any cheaper fare which may be rolled out l ater. Further, they added that it requires the 
capability of the system to handle the price lock feature. 
 
145. The Committee notes the replies furnished by t he Ministry and various airlines on 
the price lock option. The Committee also notes tha t airlines across the world are offering 
lock-in option and even in India, airlines such as Air India is already working towards 
building the necessary infrastructure to implement fare lock as an option for customers. 
The Committee desires to know the details about the  ‘free look-in’ option exercised by the 
airlines as per the DGCA mandate. 
 
146. Further, the Committee opines that exploring t he feasibility of implementing the 
option of ‘price lock’ would be a favourable step f or customers, which, in turn, can spike 
the demand for air travel. The feature would help t he customers make better travel 
decisions by allowing them to book tickets by reser ving seats without paying for the actual 
price of the ticket upfront. Keeping in mind the hi gh fee charged for cancelling or 
rescheduling a flight and built-in uncertainties in  the market driven dynamic nature of 
fare, the Committee opines that the option of ‘pric e lock’ would provide the customers 
some time to confirm the ticket depending on finali sation of their travel plans, besides 
protecting them against any fare hike. The Committe e, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should devise a mechanism to encourage all  the airlines to implement the ‘price 
lock’ option wherein customers can reserve their booking with or without paying a nominal 
fee.  
 
Capping of Airfares – Upper and Lower 
147. During the course of one of the Committee meet ings on the subject, the Committee 
enquired about the capping of fares which was imple mented during the Covid pandemic. The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation responded that the regul ation of fares was imposed by the Ministry to 
take care of an emergency situation. Further, the C ommittee enquired from various airlines 

39 
 
whether the system of lower and upper price caps fo r domestic airlines has been considered by 
the private airlines and challenges/difficulties faced thereof.  
 
148. Air Asia in its written reply stated that airf are caps go against the principles of a market-
based system and distort the free market dynamics a nd may change the demand supply 
dynamics. Since the marginal cost of an additional passenger onboard is negligible and the seat 
inventory is perishable, it is in the interest of airlines to lower the fares to fill any empty seat on a 
flight. Implementing any kind of lower fare cap wou ld mean such travellers who cannot afford 
higher fares would not be able to access air transp ortation at a fare which is comparable to 
surface transport. On the other hand, airlines cros s-subsidize these low fare seats by charging 
high fares to customers with higher affordability (e.g. corporate customers). Capping fares would 
lead to flight operations becoming unviable which, in turn, would lead to airlines reducing 
capacity. This, in turn, would lead to increase in average fares thereby defeating the very intent 
with which the fare regulation is formulated. Reduction in capacity would also hurt the economic 
and tourism activity. In the long term, ensuring fr ee and fair competition works in the interest of 
consumers. 
 
149. Air India opined that most airlines always des ire to operate under an open market 
condition without any restriction. Indigo informed that they adhere to Air Transport Circular 02 
of 2010, wherein they are required to display the t ariff sheet route-wise across their network in 
various fare categories/buckets and the manner in w hich it is offered in the market, on their 
website. Further, they do not charge airfares outsi de the price ranges declared. Indigo also added 
that they do not intend to place lower price floors or upper price caps on their airfares as doing so 
would be detrimental to market growth as well as th eir ability to offer affordable fares to 
stimulate the market. The outcome of placing such floors and caps will only be to result in higher 
prices overall. 
 
150. SpiceJet responded to the queries of the Commi ttee and stated that as and when advised 
by the regulatory authorities, SpiceJet Limited has  always adhered to such practices. In the 
absence of any regulatory advisory on the same, the se factors are solely driven by the market 
conditions.
 
 
151. The representatives of Vistara also informed t he Committee that the fares are dynamic in 
nature and are governed by the demand and supply relationship. The offered seats are limited and 
perishable in nature. The market demand varies leading to an increase or reduction of the airfares 
and hence globally airlines have free flow to manag e the seasonality and perfect competition to 
optimize the demand and supply. 
 
152. The Committee notes that the Ministry introduc ed price caps as a temporary 
measure during COVID pandemic and these caps were r emoved 
w.e.f.  31 st  August, 2022, 
after reviewing the situation. The implementation o f price caps indicates that the Ministry/ 
DGCA is empowered to keep a check on the airfares, if deemed necessary. The Committee 

40 
 
also analysed the replies received from various air lines and notes that all the airlines have 
opined against implementing upper and lower fare ca ps. They have added that most 
airlines prefer to function, without any restrictio ns, in an open market condition. The 
Committee also notes that due to the absence of any  capping on airfares, the prices of 
tickets increase manifolds, especially during the h olidays and festival season, so much so 
that at times the domestic sector fares are more than the fares on the international routes. 
 
153. The Committee is of the view that certain fact ors, including the capacity constraints, 
demand-supply situation and fuel prices, should be taken into consideration for 
determining prices. The Committee also understands that it is necessary to give an open 
opportunity to the airlines to operate in the marke t; however, interests of common man 
should also be considered. The Committee, therefore , recommends that to promote the 
accessibility of air transport to the common man, t he Ministry should introduce reasonable 
upper fare caps on all the airlines, taking into account all relevant factors including the cost 
of operation, characteristics of service, reasonabl e profit and the generally prevailing tariff 
as envisaged in Rule 135 (1) of the Aircraft Rules,  1937. The Committee feels that it is 
essential to maintain a pricing discipline to prote ct the interests of both the airline 
operators and the commuting public. 
 
Display of Seat-wise Fares on website  
154. The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Ci vil Aviation and various airlines, the 
method adopted to display the cost of each seat of the aircraft for selection by the passenger 
while booking tickets, the feasibility of displayin g airfare of each of the seats offered to the 
customers at the time of booking. In this regard, t he Committee asked for comments from the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and various private airlines.  
 
155. The Ministry, in its written reply, stated tha t currently, there is no provision which 
requires airlines to publish airfare for each seat offered to the customer at the time of booking on 
their website. The airlines sell tickets as per the ir respective distribution system, which is in line  
with the practice followed worldwide. 
 
156. In response to the query of the Committee, Air  Asia stated that airfares for a particular 
flight vary depending on the Reservation Booking De signator (fare level), which is open for sale 
at the time of booking. Seat selection is an indepe ndent activity not related to the purchase of the 
ticket. A customer may choose not to pay additionally for a seat, in which case they will be auto-
assigned a seat during check-in. Details of the var ious fare levels filed by the airline on a 
particular sector are published on the airline website and hence are accessible to the customer. 
 
157. Air India also informed the Committee that as airfare is dynamic, at a given point of time, 
all seats in the same cabin will be priced at par a nd which is why the same is not displayed. The 
Air India Group (Air India and Air India Express Co nnect) informed the Committee that pricing 
in any industry is an important competitive lever. Publishing the quantity of seats that the airline 

41 
 
intends to sell at each fare would mean giving away  this important competitive advantage. The 
revenue management system continuously adjusts the seats to be sold in different RBDs (fare 
classes) based on the demand forecast. If the deman d realisation is lower than projected, the 
Revenue Management System may push more seats to lo wer fare classes. If the airline makes its 
seat inventory allocation plan public, then in a lo w-demand scenario the competitors can price 
their inventory lower than the airline and walk awa y with all the demand. On the other hand, in 
the high-demand scenario the competitors will let t he airline sell out its inventory at lower fare 
and then offer higher fare. It is, therefore, neith er in the interest of the consumers nor in the 
interest of developing a healthy competitive indust ry to get airlines to display their inventory 
allocation plan. 
 
158. The representatives of Indigo added that this practice is anti-competitive as well as anti-
consumer, as competition will be able to price high er if they realize that other airlines have less 
seats available at lower prices. SpiceJet also adde d that they always publish the tariffs which are 
being charged to the customer under the different h ead at the time of booking in order to keep 
passengers well informed. However, display of fare for each seat at the time of booking is not 
feasible. Also, it would simultaneously lead to con fusion in the context of different airlines 
having different pricing due to the dynamic nature of the industry. 
 
159. SpiceJet informed the Committee that the uncer tainty of the market plays a critical role in 
healthy competition. Displaying the fares of respec tive seats does not, at all times, result into a 
competitive price as it might also result in an adv erse scenario given the players in the market 
and their risk appetite. SpiceJet also opined that such scenarios would be anti-competitive and in 
longer run, would also be detrimental to the interest of the ultimate consumer. 
 
160. Vistara, in its written submission, stated tha t it gives choice and freedom to the passenger 
to choose a product of their choice and derive a va lue out of the purchase. Displaying multiple 
price points to customer requires a complete change  at distribution and IT system, which is now 
working on lowest fare display.  
 
161. The Committee notes the comments furnished by the Ministry and the private 
airlines as regards displaying of seat-wise fares o n the airline website. The Committee 
desires to know whether any study has been carried out to examine the feasibility of 
displaying of airfare of each of the seats offered to the customers at the time of booking. 
The Committee is of the opinion that the display of  seat-wise fares will provide utmost 
transparency to the customers, making the airfare s ystem being followed, more credible 
and trust-worthy.  
 
162. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may 
explore the possibility of implementing the practic e of displaying details of the available 
number of seats in various categories in an aircraf t, alongwith the prices, as is being 
displayed by Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Co rporation (IRCTC) on their website 

42 
 
for railway bookings. By doing so, the airlines can  also take into account the dynamic 
pricing mechanism as prescribed by their respective  Revenue Management System, while 
establishing reasonable fares. The price of tickets  on a certain flight may increase closer to 
the departure date as in the case of railway seats.    
 
Passenger Grievance Redressal 
163. The Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Co mmittee that the aggrieved passengers 
can lodge their grievances through the Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring 
System (CPGRAMS), an online portal administered by the Department of Administrative 
Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG) and AirSewa P ortal managed by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. These grievances are taken up with the co ncerned airlines for redressal. If the 
petitioner is not satisfied with the resolution of grievance by airline, he/she has the option to file  
an appeal. Disposal of the grievances is monitored at various levels. Every airline appoints a 
nodal officer and an appellate authority and displa ys their contact details on their respective 
websites.  
 
164. Moreover, the passenger may complain directly to the airline in the event of airfare-
related complaints. If the passenger is not satisfi ed with the resolution of grievance by the airline 
and/ or AirSewa Portal, the passenger has the liber ty to complain to any statutory body/ court set 
up under relevant applicable laws. 
 
165. In response to a query of the Committee regard ing the penalties being imposed on airlines 
in case they do not provide appropriate relief to t he passengers, the Ministry replied that the 
DGCA has issued following Civil Aviation Requiremen ts (CAR) in order to ensure appropriate 
relief to affected passengers: 
i.
 CAR Section-3, Series M, Part IV “Facilities to be provided to passengers by airlines due 
to denied boarding, cancellation of flights and delays in flights.” 
ii. CAR Section 3 – Air Transport Series ‘M’ Part I tit led “Carriage by Air - Persons with 
Disability (Divyangjan) and/or Persons with Reduced Mobility”. 
 
166. Further, as part of the monthly submission of data by airlines, the DGCA captures the 
data pertaining to total number of passengers affec ted by denied boarding, cancellation of flights 
and delays in flights and the compensation given by  airlines. This data is published in the Traffic 
Report on DGCA website as part of compliance of the  CAR. DGCA for non-compliance of 
applicable CARs, imposes financial penalty under Ai rcraft Rules, 1937. For instance, the 
penalties imposed by DGCA for non-compliance of abo ve mentioned passenger-centric CARs is 
as follows: 
i.
 Rs. 5,00,000/- was imposed on Indigo in May, 2022 f or violation of provisions of CAR 
Section 3-Air Transport, Series M, Part I titled Ca rriage by Air - Persons with Disability 
(Divyangjan) and/or Persons with Reduced Mobility. 

43 
 
ii. Rs. 10,00,000/- was imposed on Air India in June, 2 022 for violation of provisions of 
CAR Section-3, Series M, Part IV “Facilities to be provided to passengers by airlines due 
to denied boarding, cancellation of flights and delays in flights.” 
 
167. The Committee also queried from airlines regar ding steps which have been taken to 
enforce a proper grievance redressal mechanism for passengers for airfare-related complaints and 
average time taken for redressing passenger complai nts. In response, the Air India Group (Air 
India Limited and Air India Express Connect Limited ) informed the Committee that for any 
service related complaints, the customers are able to either reach the airline support channels 
(contact center, chat-bot, email, social-media hand les) directly or are able to register their 
grievance on DGCA AirSewa portal or on the Consumer  Helpline and the prescribed timelines 
for grievance redressal varies between 3-15 days. S piceJet stated that their customer support is 
accessible and works on a 24x7 basis and they atten d to all of the customer’s concern as soon as 
possible. 
 
168. The Committee notes and appreciates the steps being taken by the Ministry to 
address and resolve passenger grievances. The Commi ttee would like to be apprised 
whether the existing Civil Aviation Requirements (C ARs) include a separate clause of 
redressal of complaints arising due to exorbitant airfares. If not, the Ministry may examine 
the feasibility of incorporating such a provision.  
 
169. The Committee feels that to protect passengers  against unreasonably high airfares, 
there is a need to ensure that a proper and effecti ve mechanism is in place to redress their 
grievances in a time-bound manner. The Committee re commends that the Ministry should 
strengthen the mechanism to monitor the instances of non-compliance of applicable CARs. 
 
170. The Committee also feels that there is a need to popularise the existence of grievance 
redressal mechanism such as CPGRAMS or AirSewa Port al as most of the passengers are 
not aware of it. The Committee recommends that thes e portals should be advertised 
through social media and other available modes.  
 
171. The Committee also opines that airlines need t o create awareness and educate the 
passengers who do not travel frequently, about the working of the airline system in general 
viz., ticketing procedure, fares, luggage handling and ot her issues which may emerge 
during travelling. The Committee recommends that th e Ministry may direct the airlines to 
create awareness and educate passengers about the v aried aspects of the travelling 
procedures.     

44 
 
IV 
MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES  
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik)  
172. The Committee is aware of the fact that under Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – 
Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik (UDAN), Viability Gap Fundin g (VGF) is being provided to the 
airlines for connecting tier 2 and 3 cities. Airlin es are required to commit around 50% of seats as 
RCS seats (upto 40 seats) on RCS flights. Further, while the Government had initially capped the 
Airfare at Rs. 2,500 for a 1-hour flight when the s cheme was launched in the year 2016 and this 
capping is subject to indexation as per the formula  in the Scheme. Accordingly, the Committee 
enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation whethe r there is any proposal to increase the upper 
limit of 40 seats given the surge in demand for air  travel in tier 2 and 3 cities. Also, the 
Committee desired to know the details of how the in dexation formula operates for RCS fare 
pricing.  
 
173. The Ministry in its written reply submitted th at as of now, there is no proposal to increase 
the upper limit of 40 RCS seats as increasing the n umber of RCS seats would consequently 
require a greater VGF outflow which may not be fina ncially viable at this stage. Further, Airfare 
Cap Indexation is done with reference to the core u nderlying cost drivers for an airline, namely, 
Consumer Price Index-Industrial Workers (CPI-IW), A viation Turbine Fuel prices and the 
exchange rate between Indian Rupees and United Stat es Dollar (USD). It is calculated as 
follows: 
 
Airfare cap (Quarter 2) = Airfare cap (Quarter 1) * [1+ (change in Consumer 
Price Index) * 50% + (change in Aviation Turbine Fuel prices) * 25% + (change 
in exchange rate b/w INR and USD) *25%] 
 
174. The Ministry also stated that the capped amoun t of Rs. 2,500/- for a 1-hour flight has 
increased in the last 07 years as a result of the c hanges in the underlying factors pertaining to the 
indexation process. 
 
175. The Committee notes that there is a capping as  regards the number of seats on RCS 
flights, which stands at 40 at present. Besides, th e initial capped airfare of Rs. 2,500/- has 
also increased. The Committee recommends that the M inistry may look into the possibility 
of increasing the number of RCS seats and also lowe ring the capped airfare, so as to cater 
to the increasing demand for air travel in Tier 2 a nd Tier 3 cities, as the cardinal objective 
of this Scheme is to connect the unserved and under-served airports and make it affordable 
for the common man. The Committee would like to kno w the details of the present capping 
amount for RCS flights, for different duration of f lights. The Committee also recommends 
that the Ministry should publish such airfare caps applicable for RCS, for ensuring 
transparency of fares. 
 

45 
 
176. The Committee also enquired from the private a irlines, the details regarding their 
participation in the Regional Connectivity Scheme a nd the difficulties being faced by them in 
participating in the Scheme. The responses of vario us airlines are given in Annexure-X.  In its 
written reply, the representatives of SpiceJet high lighted certain difficulties being faced by them 
in participating in the RCS Scheme. At times, the A irlines are not able to generate good revenue 
due to very poor demand, which results in losses to  the Airline. Further, it takes more than 3 
years to establish such flights/routes which are ei ther unserved or underserved. Hence, they 
recommended that the Government should increase the  exclusivity period of an RCS route from 
3 years to 5 years. They also suggested that the Go vernment should look into revision in VGF 
value only for those particular routes where the st age length is much higher and the passenger 
demand is very low. 
 
177. The Committee observes that only GoFirst, Indi go and SpiceJet have participated in 
RCS-UDAN Scheme, till date. However, post the recen t bankruptcy of GoFirst, only two 
airlines 
viz., Indigo and SpiceJet will remain in RCS. The Committ ee also notes that Air 
India Express Connect is planning to participate in  the RCS Scheme. The Committee 
would like to know the reasons as to why the other major airlines are not participating or 
plan to participate in future. The Committee recomm ends that the Ministry should rollout 
new bids for the Scheme in future, after due consid eration of the suggestions of the 
stakeholders and ensure maximum participation from airlines to ensure improved air 
connectivity in the country. The Committee also rec ommends that for the future success of 
the Scheme, the difficulties being faced by certain airlines under RCS and their suggestions 
thereof, may be looked into.  
 
178. The Committee is also aware that airport opera tors are required to provide certain 
concessions to airlines to reduce cost of operation s on selected routes under the RCS-UDAN 
Scheme. In this regard, the Committee enquired from  the Association of Private Airport 
Operators (APAO) about the various concessions bein g provided currently by airport operators 
under RCS-UDAN. The APAO, in its written reply stat ed that concessions offered by the airport 
operators are as follows:  
• Airport operators (whether under the ownership of t he AAI, State Governments, private 
entities or the Ministry of Defence, Government of India) shall not levy Landing Charges 
and Parking Charges or any other charge subsuming a  charge for such aspects in future 
on RCS Flights.  
• Selected Airline Operators shall be allowed to unde rtake ground handling for their RCS 
Flights at all airports.  
 
179. The Committee also notes the concessions being  extended by the airport operators 
to the airlines operating under the RCS-UDAN Scheme . The Committee appreciates the 
steps being taken for reducing the cost of operatio ns by not levying Landing and Parking 

46 
 
Charges on RCS flights and desires to know the quan tum of concession that has been 
provided to the airlines in this regard, since the inception of the Scheme, year-wise.  
 
Access to Reserved Lounges at Airports 
180. The Committee is aware that airports are opera ting reserved lounges to offer services to 
Government officials, Members of Parliament, and ot her constitutional/public functionaries and 
dignitaries. For non-AAI airports being operated by  private operators, it has been observed that 
access to reserved lounges is being offered to inel igible persons by charging a high admission 
fee. Accordingly, the Committee enquired from the A ssociation of Private Airport Operators 
(APAO), the reasons as to why airports are allowing  ineligible persons to access reserved 
lounges on a chargeable basis.  
 
181. In its written reply, the APAO stated that it is not allowing ineligible persons to access 
Reserved Lounges at any of its airports and only en titled dignitaries are given this facility. 
Separate lounge facilities are available for other passengers. The detailed reply of the APAO is 
placed at Annexure-XI. 
 
182. The Committee recommends the Ministry to issue  guidelines, directing all the 
airport operators to ensure that only the entitled Dignitaries/ Government Officials can 
access the reserved lounges at airports. The Commit tee further recommends that the said 
guidelines should also include the provision of com fortable seating; quieter environment; 
and better access to customer service representativ es at these reserved lounges for entitled 
persons.
 
 
Bankruptcy of GoFirst 
183. The Committee is aware of the Reports on recen t bankruptcy conditions faced by 
GoFirst. The Committee notes that the sudden withdr awal of around 200 flights per day by 
GoFirst has led to a rush for ticket cancellations by flyers, leading to increase in bookings of 
other airlines. This sudden spike in demand has subsequently resulted in a sharp surge in airfares. 
Further, even Directorate General of Civil Aviation  (DGCA) was not made aware by GoFirst 
about its plan to suspend services, which amounts t o a violation of applicable rules. In light of 
the above, the Committee enquired from the Ministry  the steps taken to address this situation of 
airfare surge on routes where GoFirst operations we re significant and how the Ministry proposes 
to safeguard against such situations from arising i n the future. The Committee also took up the 
issue with the representatives of the Ministry of C ivil Aviation during its Study Visit to Goa on 
8
th  July, 2023. 
 
184. The Ministry, in its written reply informed th e Committee that the Tariff Monitoring Unit 
in DGCA monitors airfares on certain routes on mont hly basis to ensure that the airlines do not 
charge airfares outside their established fares and ensure compliance of prevailing regulations on 

47 
 
airfare (Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937). Con sequent to the suspension of operations by 
GoFirst, the fares on sectors, where GoFirst had significant operations, are being monitored.  
 
185. In light of GoFirst’s bankruptcy, the Committe e also took into account the factor that as 
the demand side has gone up and supply side has fal len, the Ministry of Civil Aviation has 
reportedly asked airlines to prevent exorbitant tic ket rates on Go First's dominant routes. In this 
regard, the Committee enquired from the airlines as to what steps are being taken by them.  
 
186. Air India Group (including Air India and Air I ndia Express Connect) informed the 
Committee that they have not adjusted its pricing l adder on routes exited by GoFirst. They have 
also actively intervened in its Revenue Management System to artificially moderate demand 
expectations and thereby depress prices versus what  they would otherwise have been. 
Additionally, Air India Group has mounted additiona l flights to replace GoFirst’s capacity to the 
maximum extent possible given finite aircraft and c rew, and is engaging with aircraft 
manufacturers to accelerate new aircraft deliveries. 
 
187. SpiceJet informed that they have attempted to comply with and cater to the instructions of 
Ministry including the initiative of adding more fl ight to such routes. They are making constant 
efforts to provide for an alternative, so that a co mpetitive and fair market can always be 
maintained. Vistara stated that airline pricing in a competitive and growing market like India, 
will always depend upon competition. While in some Sectors, fares have surged due to demand 
and supply side considerations, a sustained high fa re environment is not beneficial for airlines as 
well, since this will hamper demand and ultimately lead to lower prices.  
 
188. The Committee notes the replies provided by th e Ministry and airlines in respect of 
bankruptcy of GoFirst and notes that the situation has resulted in the surge in airfares on 
certain routes, leading to increase in monopolistic  practices. As per the recent Media 
Reports, the prices of tickets on sectors being ear lier operated by GoFirst 
viz., Delhi-Leh, 
Delhi-Srinagar, Delhi-Bagdogra and others have incr eased exorbitantly in a mere span of 
two months.  
 
189. The Committee is also aware that due to the su spension of operations of GoFirst, 
their lessor would now want to recover aircrafts fr om the operator. Due to this, the 
Committee opines that this may lead to lowered worl d ranking of India, on leasing aircraft 
index, by the world rating agencies. This may subse quently lead to increased cost of lease 
rentals impacting the air tariff adversely.  
 
190. The Committee notes that even Directorate Gene ral of Civil Aviation was not made 
aware by GoFirst about its plan to suspend services , which amounts to a violation of 
applicable rules. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and DGCA should intervene, take cognizance  of this grave situation and issue 

48 
 
necessary guidelines to the other airlines to keep a tab on the affected operations and 
airfares. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should look into the possibility 
of developing a contingency plans to deal with such  situations, arising due to the sudden 
exit of any airline in the future.   
 
Grant of ‘Point of Call’ Status to Airports 
 
191. The Committee feels that the decision of the M inistry to not grant ‘Point of Call’ 
status to international airports is preventing the international airlines to operate in the 
country, leading to a situation of monopolistic/oli gopolistic market by the domestic airline 
operators wherein they are charging high airfares. The Committee opines that a broad 
parity should be maintained between the internation al and domestic carriers for aviation 
operations in the country.  
 
192. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should identify a balanced 
approach to liberalize the guidelines for granting of ‘Point of Call’ status to the airports to 
enhance air connectivity. The Committee is of the v iew that better connectivity to 
international airports in the country will provide more options to passengers, to choose 
from and aid in rationalising airfares. 
 
Improper Behaviour of Airline Staff and other Passenger Grievances 
 
193. On many occasions, the Committee has deliberat ed upon and taken cognisance of 
the instances of unruly behaviour of airline staff and manhandling of passengers. The 
Committee takes note of such cases as highlighted i n the recent Media Reports. The 
Committee is also aware that the airline buses used  to ferry passengers from the airport 
terminal to the aircraft and 
vice-versa , are often crowded due to lack of sufficient bus 
services provided by the airlines. The Committee is  of the view that concrete steps should 
be taken to address such issues. The Committee, the refore, recommends the 
Ministry/DGCA to take note and examine such complai nts and take corrective actions 
against the concerned airline.   
 
*** 

49 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE  
Airfare Regulations in the Past 
The Committee notes the Airfare regulations that ex isted in the past and observes that the 
Air Corporations Act, 1953 required the various air line corporations to seek approval of 
Central Government for fixing airfares. Thereafter,  on 21 
st  March, 1994, the said Act was 
repealed and the Indian Domestic Aviation Sector wa s totally deregulated and the airlines 
had the freedom to fix airfares.  
(Para 4) 
The Committee notes that as per the airfare regulat ions existing earlier, the airfares were 
fully regulated by the Government which had put in place a mechanism to keep airfares 
under check. Thereafter, deregulation of airfares e ffectively came into effect from 21 st  
March, 1994 with the repeal of the Air Corporation Act, 1953 and the various airlines were 
free to fix airfares.  
 (Para 5) 
 
Existing Legal Provisions  
Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937  
The Committee notes the amendment in Rule 135 of th e Aircraft Rules, 1937 on 16 
th  April, 
2009, which presently forms the basis of the legisl ation for airfare regulations. It also notes 
that as per the Rule 135(1), the airlines shall est ablish tariff, keeping in mind factors such 
as reasonable profit besides cost of operation, cha racteristics of service and generally 
prevailing tariff, to rationalise airfares despite its deregulation, consequent upon repeal of 
Air Corporations Act, 1953. 
(Para 8) 
The Committee also observes that Rule 135(2) requir es the publication of the tariff by the 
airlines on its website/ daily newspapers or displaying it conspicuously in their office/ or the 
agent’s office. Further, Section 135(2A) requires t he airlines to show the total amount 
payable by the passenger including the breakup such  as taxes, fees for services/ facilities or 
other charges, which should be mentioned in the passenger ticket vide Rule 135 (2B).  
(Para 9) 
The Committee notes another significant requirement in Rule 135(3), wherein every airline 
is required to maintain all records relating to tar iff and the requirement to produce such 
records to Directorate General of Civil Aviation (D GCA) for inspection. The Committee 
observes that the aforesaid Rule provides for super vision and inspection of DGCA 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation) on air tariffs being fixed by the airlines. 
(Para 10) 
Rule 135 (4) also empowers the DGCA to issue directions to airlines, if it is satisfied that the 
airlines have charged excessive/ predatory airfares  or indulged in oligopolistic practice. 
Further, as per Rule 135 (5), the aforesaid directions of DGCA have to be compiled with by 
the airline concerned. 
(Para 11) 

50 
 
The Committee, therefore, observes that ever since the amendment made in Rule 135 of the 
Aircraft Rules, 1937 in April, 2009, sufficient leg islative safeguards have been made in the 
Aircraft Rules, 1937, to ensure that airfares are a ffordable and in case of any violation by 
the airlines, the Government can take action agains t the said airline regardless of the 
deregulation of the airfares, due to repeal of Air Corporation Act, 1953. The Committee 
calls upon the DGCA, Ministry of Civil Aviation to safeguard the interests of the air 
commuters by invoking the overriding powers vested on it in the Rules. 
(Para 12) 
 
Power of DGCA to Regulate Tariffs 
The Committee observes that DGCA has a Tariff Monit oring Unit that monitors airfares 
on certain routes at regular intervals to ensure th at the airlines do not charge airfares 
outside a range declared by them. However, the DGCA  does not have any power to 
regulate tariffs based on the data generated by the  Tariff Monitoring Unit as the process of 
airfare regulation has been dispensed with, consequ ent upon the repeal of the Air 
Corporation Act, 1953.  
(Para 17) 
The Committee notes that Section 135(3) of the Airc raft Rules, 1937 empowers the DGCA 
to inspect the records of tariff as produced by the  airline operators and also empowers it to 
issue directions in case it has established excessi ve tariff [Section 135(4)]. The Committee 
observes that though Tariff Monitoring Unit of DGCA  has been setup to maintain 
oversight, yet the airlines are charging excessivel y, leading to surge in airfares. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should evolv e a mechanism to reconcile between 
‘tariff monitoring’ by DGCA and ‘deregulation of ai rfare’ to tilt the balance in favour of 
empowering the DGCA to regulate air tariff as per R ule 135(3) and expanding its 
responsibility beyond monitoring tariff only. The C ommittee desires to know whether a 
Unit or Agency like Tariff Monitoring Unit (TMU) ex ists in other countries as well and 
mechanism adopted by them to regulate fares. 
(Para 18) 
The Committee is also aware that the Securities and  Exchange Board of India (SEBI), an 
autonomous body, has been setup for regulating the securities market and to protect the 
interest of investors. The Committee opines that on similar lines, the feasibility of setting up 
of a monitoring and controlling body under the Mini stry of Civil Aviation may be 
examined, to monitor and keep a check on the surge in airfares to protect the interests of 
the commuting public. The Committee, therefore, rec ommends the Ministry to constitute a 
separate monitoring body like the SEBI, with quasi- judicial powers to enforce the 
collection of reasonable airfares from the passengers. 
(Para 19) 
The Committee took exception to the Ministry’s conc luding remarks during the 
presentation and during their deposition in the mee ting of the Committee held on 8 
th  May, 
2023, and their written replies that regulation of airfare is not desirable for the overall 
growth of the aviation sector. The Committee reiter ates its view that passengers should 

51 
 
receive a fair deal at all times and recommends that the Ministry should have a relook in its 
policy regarding regulation of airfare tariff in vi ew of the sudden surge in airfares in 
normal times as also during disasters and calamitie s and take appropriate actions in 
consonance with the powers delegated to it under Rule 135 of the Aircraft Act, 1937. 
(Para 22) 
The Committee notes that presently airlines are fre e to charge reasonable airfares as per 
their operational viability subject to compliance o f Rule 135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937. 
Besides, currently, there is no provision under whi ch Government is required to monitor 
the seat booking fees of airlines and the airlines sell tickets as per their respective 
distribution system, which is as per the global practice.  
(Para 25) 
The Committee also observes that most of the airlin es except AI Express had accumulated 
losses from FY 2019-20 to 2021-22.The Committee is aware that the Civil Aviation Industry 
had suffered a major setback on account of Covid-19  pandemic and needs to recover its 
losses and regain its pre-pandemic level and then g row at an even faster rate to realise its 
set targets. As such, the Committee is of the opini on that a fine balance needs to be 
maintained so that the interests of the airlines as well as the passengers are kept in mind. 
(Para 26) 
The Committee notes that the Airports Economic Regu latory Authority (AERA) has a 
mandate to determine tariff for aeronautical servic es of Major Airports only, vide Section 
13(1) (a) of the AERA Act, 2008. Since the tariff f or aeronautical services is one of the 
components for airfares, the Committee desires to k now how airfare is determined across 
Airports even though aeronautical service charges are applicable only to Major airports.  
(Para 28) 
 
Reasonable Profit, Generally Prevailing Tariff and Mechanism followed for Fixing 
Airfares 
The Committee notes that though the term ‘reasonable profit’ is given under Rule 135(1) of 
the Aircraft Rules, 1937, yet there is no specific definition or Rule or any other guidelines 
to define it and these expressions are liable to be  misunderstood, besides encouraging 
arbitrary actions. The Committee is of the opinion that the term ‘reasonable profit’ should 
be clearly defined in the Rules, taking into accoun t various financial and operational 
factors, as it is the most significant aspect for controlling surge in airfares, which affects the 
common man.  
(Para 32) 
The Committee notes the replies of the representati ves of various airlines as regards its 
query on the mechanism adopted by them to calculate  the quantum of ‘reasonable profit’. 
The airlines had commented that the prevailing air tariff on a particular route is a result of 
demand-supply balance. Besides, airlines work on a ‘Cost Recovery Model’, so as to 
recover all costs related to flight operations, rat her than on a set target to achieve 
‘reasonable profit’. One of the airlines had also s tated that they do not set a target 
‘reasonable profit’ and the practice of ‘Revenue Ma nagement’ is followed which takes into 

52 
 
account demand and supply. Representatives of an ai rline had also stated that pricing 
aspects depend on market situation and the ticket fares cannot be quantified in advance. 
(Para 41) 
As regards, the Committee’s query regarding the min imum number of tickets needed to be 
sold on a particular route for airlines to break-ev en, the airlines were of the opinion that 
since most of the airlines have been unprofitable f or most parts of their existence, the 
airlines were not able to achieve break-even point.  Hence, currently, no such system exists 
in India. Airline representatives opined that the n umber of tickets sold for break-even 
depends on demand-supply dynamics based on which Re venue Management System does 
the pricing.  
(Para 42) 
The Committee observes that though the concept of e stablishing tariffs on basis of 
‘reasonable profit’ is ingrained in the Rule 135(1)  of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, yet none of 
the airlines has adopted a mechanism to calculate t he quantum of ‘reasonable profit’. All 
the airlines are instead following the demand-suppl y dynamics through the ‘Revenue 
Management System’ and hence, airfares are fixed accordingly.  
(Para 43) 
The Committee understands that the fixing of airfar es depends on various conditions 
which are subject to variation of the demand-supply  dynamics of the market and the 
airlines have to account for these factors for main taining economy of operations. The 
Committee is, however, of the opinion that a balanc e has to be maintained between the 
commercial interests of the airlines as well as the  interests of the passengers. It is of the 
opinion that to fix airfares at reasonable and affordable rates, the airlines need to adopt the 
concept of ‘reasonable profit’ drawing from the bes t international practices. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry in consultation with the airlines 
should devise a mechanism or a formula, so that the  concept of ‘reasonable profit’ as 
provided explicitly in Rule 135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 is adhered to.  
(Para 44) 
The Committee also analysed the financial informati on in respect of Capital Investment; 
Working Capital; Revenue Expenditure; Fixed Cost; O perating Expenditure; Net Income; 
and Profit/Loss, as received from various airlines viz., Air Asia, Air India and Indigo. The 
Committee notes that over the last three financial years (2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23), the 
Operating Expenditure of Air India has increased every year, however, the Net Income has 
reduced from -7,084 crore to -11,381 crore over thi s period. Air Asia has also reported a 
steady increase in the Operating Expenditure and an  increase in the Net Income as well, 
over the last three financial years. In respect of Indigo, the total expenses incurred by the 
airline have increased from 2020-21 to 2022-23, whereas the losses have drastically reduced 
from a staggering Rs. 5,818.1 crore in 2020-21 and Rs. 6,153.7 crore in 2021-22 to a meagre 
Rs. 304.4 crore in 2022-23. For SpiceJet, the Opera ting Expenditure has increased by 
around 45% from 2020-21 to 2021-22, while, the Net Income has reduced from Rs. 1,107.8 
crore to Rs. 60.2 crore in this period. As regards Vistara, the Operating Expenditure has 
increased approximately three times from Rs. 4,312 crore in 2020-21 to Rs. 12,753 crore in 

53 
 
2022-23, whereas the airline has reported losses am ounting to Rs. 1,612 crore in 2020-21 
which reduced to Rs. 1,393 crore in 2022-23.  
(Para 45) 
As per the information provided by the various airl ines, the Committee notes that in most 
of the cases, the Operating Expenditure has increas ed substantially, while the income has 
reduced, leading to net losses for most of the airl ines. It also notes that Air Asia has 
incurred a net income despite incurring an increase  in Operating Expenditure. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons, why Air A sia has been an exception and could 
post increase in net income despite incurring incre ase in Operating Expenditure, like other 
airlines. The Committee opines that it is crucial t o scrutinise the audited financial data 
furnished by the airlines on a regular basis and DG CA should take cognisance of any 
discrepancies reported by the airlines and take corrective actions. 
(Para 46) 
 
Global Data Analysis 
The Committee notes the analysis of the ACI, which highlights the progressive increase in 
airfares both in domestic and international routes both in Indian as well as in other 
international markets. The Committee also notes the  concerns of the ACI on excessive 
airfares which in the long term would reduce the de mand for air travel and have a 
detrimental effect on its future growth.  
(Para 49) 
The Committee also notes ACI’s advice to the Airlines to exercise fair pricing that supports 
recovery and safeguards consumers’ interests. ACI a lso advises the airlines against 
exploiting the supply-demand imbalance at the expen se of customers by restricting 
capacity. 
(Para 50) 
The Committee notes the observations of the ACI and  is of the opinion that the airlines 
need to take a relook at the high pricing of the ai rfares keeping in view the long-term 
aspects. It also recommends that the Ministry may f ormulate policies to encourage the 
airlines to increase capacity and induct more aircr afts, which will rectify the supply-
demand imbalance, and further benefit the passenger s besides aiding the recovery of the 
Civil Aviation sector in India.  
(Para 51) 
 
Publication of Information on Website 
The Committee notes the replies received from various airlines wherein they have informed 
that none of these airlines are displaying misleading information on their websites and they 
are selling tickets as per the practice being follo wed worldwide. The Committee also notes 
the reply of the Ministry stating that DGCA has not  received any such complaints 
substantiating that airlines are misleading the pub lic with incorrect information. It, 
however, notes the reply of an airline stating that  sometimes the online flight booking 
portals may show fares which are more than the fares fixed by the airlines.  

54 
 
(Para 59) 
 
The Committee recommends that a mechanism should be  put in place by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation in coordination with Ministry of Tou rism and airline companies to  
regularly monitor the flight booking portals/ aggre gators so that they do not indulge in 
unscrupulous practices by publishing incorrect info rmation under the guise of selling “last 
seats”. In such cases, the Committee recommends tha t the Ministry should consider issuing 
necessary guidelines to Airlines to direct these po rtals/apps to not publish such incorrect 
information and create an avoidable panic situation  amongst the public. The Committee 
also recommends setting up of a grievance redressal  mechanism to deal with such 
complaints.  
(Para 60) 
   
Global Practices, IATA Resolution and Reservation Booking Designators (RBDs) 
Analysis of Global Practice for Ticket Pricing  
The Committee observes that the IATA Rules are only  a suggested framework to 
harmonize industry practices in the air-transport s ector. While IATA is not a 
governmental organization and has therefore, no com petence for legislation, their RPs are 
internationally recognized references and generally  have a non-binding character. Airlines 
across the world have adopted these RPs and also mo dified them to suit their own 
commercial practices.  
(Para 71) 
The Committee further notes that globally, ticket p ricing is a well-developed, evolving 
process, controlled by algorithms. Presently, ticke t pricing is based on airline experience 
and set parameters, and airlines legitimately seek to maximize profits made through ticket 
sales. Airline price algorithms are not made public and are a closely guarded secret.  
(Para 72) 
It is evident that as per the international practic es, though IATA Recommended Practices 
(RPs) are non-binding, yet these are acknowledged b y the various international airlines as 
a guiding factor. However, each airline modifies it  to suit their own commercial practices, 
subject to National laws which get priority over th e IATA RPs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may ensure the proper implementation of the existing Rule 
135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 which is the Nation al Law in India for fixing of reasonable 
airfares by the airlines, for the benefit of the passengers.  
(Para 73) 
 
Components and Drivers of Airfare 
The Committee notes the various components of airfa res being charged to passengers and 
observes that the components of airfares are the sa me across various airlines. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the percenta ge of various components of airfares 
which are retained by the airlines themselves.   
(Para 77) 

55 
 
 
Effect of Seasonality/Holidays on Airfares  
The Committee, during its deliberations, highlighte d the concerns expressed by passengers 
at the surge of airfares during festive seasons, su mmer vacations, when a large number of 
people travel across the Country for religious/ lei sure purposes or other reasons and thus 
promoting domestic tourism and boosting the economy . The Committee notes that 
affordable air transport is a must for the growth o f tourism in India, which is presently 
reviving after facing a steep decline due to Covid pandemic. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may devise suitable monitoring mechanism to keep a check on the sudden 
surge in prices during the festive season or holida ys or natural calamities, as it has a 
negative impact on tourism.  
(Para 80) 
Impact of Airport Tariff on Airfares 
The Committee observes that there is a lot of varia tion in User Development Fees (UDF), 
for domestic passengers, ranging from Nil to Rs. 48 0 and for International passengers, 
from Rs. 52.56 to Rs. 1200. The Committee desires t o know the reasons for the wide 
variation in UDF rates both for domestic and intern ational passengers which is one of the 
components of airfares, leading to rise in airfares.  
(Para 84) 
The Committee notes 
 that fees mandated by the AERA being charged to the  Airlines and 
Passengers, are determined based on the Regulatory principles laid down by the Airport 
Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) and airports a re bound to charge only those fees 
and charges that are determined and published by th e AERA. It is, therefore, evident that 
the AERA exercises control of various components of  airfares charged to airlines or 
passengers. The Committee observes that the AERA, b eing the statutory regulator for the 
airports sector should endeavour to strike a balanc e between the interests of the airlines 
and the passengers. The Committee is of the opinion  that the AERA in consultation with 
the various stakeholders may look into the feasibil ity of reducing the various components 
of airfare, which may result in decrease in airfares.  
(Para 85) 
The Committee notes wide variation in terms of vari ed fees being charged by the airport 
operators. For instance, the Fuel Infrastructure Ch arges are being levied by only four 
airports out of the aforementioned 12 airports, wit h the price range between Rs. 670/KL to 
Rs. 1,830/KL. The Committee also observes a conside rable variation in the Parking 
Charges being levied by different operators wherein  the minimum charge is a meagre Rs. 
3/MT per hour, whereas the maximum being Rs. 98.60/ MT per hour. Similarly, there is a 
major difference in the Landing Charges being levie d for aircrafts wherein one airport 
charges Rs. 113/MT and the maximum charge for landi ng an aircraft at one of the airports 
is Rs. 1,450/MT. The Committee desires to know the reasons for the wide variations. 
(Para 88) 
The Committee also notes that as regards the other charges viz., X-ray Screening, PSF, 
FEGP, CUTE/CUSS/BRS etc., are being levied at only certain airports at varied rates. The 

56 
 
Committee is also aware that all such charges levie d by airport operators are governed by 
the orders issued by the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA). The Committee 
recommends that as far as possible, there should be  broader uniformity in terms of various 
fees being charged across all the airports in the C ountry. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to look into the matter and issue necessar y guidelines to all the airport operators 
to rationalise the fee/charges at different airports.  
(Para 89) 
 
Low-Cost Carriers vs. Full-Service Carriers  
The Committee notes that the reason for the higher fares charged by low-cost airlines on 
the same routes 
vis-à-vis  their full-service counterparts despite offering f ewer services to 
the passengers is mainly due to the fact that airfa res are fixed according to market 
dynamics. The difference primarily lies in services  and deliverables offered i.e., free meals 
on board, different cabins, seat comfort, loyalty b enefits, etc. The Committee notes that 
there is no fixed criterion for fixing airfares for  Low-Cost Carriers as compared to the 
Full-Service Carriers and the airfares are determin ed on the basis of market forces and 
airlines do not have any control over them. The exp ression ‘market dynamics’ being vast 
and uncertain, the Committee recommends that the Mi nistry should monitor such 
instances of high fares of LCCs and take remedial action.  
(Para 99) 
 
Dynamic Pricing and Global Standards  
The Committee notes that depending on the market de mands, a significant portion of the 
seats in a particular flight is sold even below the  average cost per seat to be able to attract 
customers who may have low affordability.  It also notes that dynamic fare pricing models 
are derived from the Standard Revenue Management System and practised globally. These 
models are based on forecasting and optimization to ols. It also observes that there are 
many Revenue Management Systems available in the ma rket and the airlines may choose 
any of these or may develop its own methods to forecast and allocate inventory.  
(Para 104) 
The Committee further notes that no fixed model or formula is being followed by the 
airlines for airfare fixation. However, a vacant se at being a perishable inventory, airlines 
may offer seats at discounted rates, if the ticket is purchased sufficiently in advance. Thus, 
it benefits the passengers who have lower affordability.  
(Para 105) 
The Committee is of the opinion that in absence of a credible formula for the pricing of 
airfares, there remains a wide variation in the pri cing of seats. Though sometimes, it may 
benefit the customers, however, at times, it may le ad to very high fares. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that feasibility of devising a formula may be examined to regulate 
excessive surge in fares as per the extant rules.  
(Para 106) 
 

57 
 
Differential Pricing  
The Committee notes that the reason for variation i n prices of seats on the same flight is 
due to the system of ‘unbundling’, which is a globa l practice whereby the airlines charge 
the lowest possible fare for the basic product and charges for various other amenities as 
per the choice of the passenger. The Committee, however, feels that the issue needs a relook 
as variable costs for the seats in the same flight, goes against the very principle of equity.  
(Para 110) 
 
Challenges in the Rationalisation of Airfares 
The Committee notes various challenges being faced for rationalisation of airfares as 
aviation sector is a capital intensive business and  faces unforeseen challenges such as 
continuous unsustainable operating losses. It notes  that most of the challenges are beyond 
the control of the airlines. However, the issue of the steep increase in ATF prices as 
compared to global prices and GST levied by the Gov ernment depends on factors which 
are under the ambit of the Central Government. The Committee recommends that 
immediate steps may be taken to lower the taxes lev ied on ATF in consultation with 
Ministry of Finance. 
(Para 113) 
 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and Taxes on ATF  
The Committee notes the increase in expenditure on ATF from 2016-17 onwards, with the 
exception of years 2020-21 and 2021-22, when the de mand for ATF decreased due to 
pandemic induced slowdown in aviation sector. In th e year 2022-23, it has sharply 
increased again, surpassing the expenditure on ATF during the previous years. The 
Committee opines that lowered rates of VAT on ATF m ay result in reduced price of air 
tickets and enhanced air connectivity. Also, the re sultant increase in revenue from sale of 
aviation fuel may aid in the growth of tourism, bet ter employment opportunities in the 
States/UTs. 
(Para 117) 
The Committee further notes that the pricing of ‘Av iation Turbine Fuel’ is primarily 
influenced by the international product prices, dep reciating value of Rupee and other 
market conditions. The Committee also observes the high ATF prices prevailing in the 
country, is further aggravated by high taxes such a s customs duty, excise duty, sale/State 
tax, Value Added Tax (VAT) levied thereon.  
(Para 118) 
The Committee has been given to understand that the  cost of ATF nearly accounts for 
approximately 40% of the total operating cost of airlines and impacts the financial viability 
of their operations and affects their competitivene ss because Indian carriers are unable to 
compete against their global counterparts on accoun t of the exorbitantly higher prices of 
ATF. The Committee recommends that all-out efforts should be made to lower the taxes 
being levied on the ATF. Rationalization of VAT rat es will be very crucial in reducing the 

58 
 
operating cost which will further improve the econo mic and operational viability of the 
airlines. 
(Para 119) 
The Committee also commends the Ministry for adopti ng initiatives such as MOPAG 
mechanism of pricing to rationalise prices and brin g in more parity between prices of 
global crude oil and ATF in India. The Committee op ines that it will decrease the cost of 
ATF and hence, decrease airfares in the country. Th e Committee also desires to know the 
details of ATF prices being charged in other countr ies across the world and the countries 
with low ATF prices.  
(Para 120) 
The Committee notes the wide variation of ATF price s across the various States of the 
country, which has led to airlines fuelling their a ircrafts from States with low taxes, which 
reduces the passenger load and also results in incr ease in airfares. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the possibility of enacting a law to ensure uniform rate of taxes 
on ATF across the country, may be examined.   
(Para 121) 
 
Pratt & Whitney Engines 
The Committee notes that aircrafts with an Indian a irline operator having Pratt and 
Whitney engines were grounded due to lack of spare parts leading to incurring of losses. 
The Committee would like to know whether there are any provisions to seek damages from 
the said engine manufacturer, and if so, the detail s of action taken by the airlines as well as 
the Ministry in this regard to avoid the recurrence of such a problem in future.  
(Para 125) 
 
Action taken by the Government for Affordable Air Travel 
The Committee commends the steps taken by the Gover nment to rationalise the airfares. 
The Committee recommends that monitoring at the gro und level may be carried out to 
ensure the proper implementation of all the initiat ives taken by the Government. The 
Committee desires to know the status of Ministry’s efforts to bring ATF under the ambit of 
GST and reduction in excise duty on ATF.  
(Para 127) 
The Committee also commends that the Civil Aviation  Advisory Group has advised the 
airlines to bring in sensitivity while framing thei r RBDs and deploy additional aircrafts to 
meet the increased demand of the passengers. The Committee desires to know the details of 
the steps taken by the Ministry and the airlines, in this regard. 
(Para 128) 
 
Role of Airport Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA)  
The Committee notes the contradictory replies recei ved from the Ministry and the APAO. 
While the AERA claims that extensive consultation i s being done with stakeholders for 
tariff determination, the APAO have stated that airport operators have limited opportunity 

59 
 
to be heard by the AERA during the consultation pro cess. The Committee is of the opinion 
that the consultation process of the AERA should be  fully transparent and all the concerns 
of the stakeholders should be heard and after due e xamination, their suggestions should be 
effected in the tariff determination process.  
(Para 135) 
The Committee also notes the long drawn out process  for approaching TDSAT or the 
Supreme Court for appeal against orders of the AERA. The Committee recommends that a 
mechanism may be devised by the Ministry in consult ation with all the airport operators/ 
stakeholders to hear the genuine concerns/ suggesti ons of the airport operators in the first 
instance itself, so that the need for appealing aga inst the orders of the AERA in TDSAT or 
Supreme Court can be avoided.  
(Para 136) 
The Committee takes note of the observation of the APAO that though the AERA Act has 
provisions regarding the need to formulate regulati ons, yet the regulations are yet to be 
formulated. The Committee notes the delay in formulation of regulations by the AERA and 
desires to know the reasons thereof. The Committee recommends that the regulations may 
be formulated at the earliest. The details of the m easures that are sought to be introduced 
through the said regulation to regulate airports may also be explained.   
(Para 138)  
 
Price Lock Option  
The Committee notes the replies furnished by the Ministry and various airlines on the price 
lock option. The Committee also notes that airlines  across the world are offering lock-in 
option and even in India, airlines such as Air India is already working towards building the 
necessary infrastructure to implement fare lock as an option for customers. The Committee 
desires to know the details about the ‘free look-in ’ option exercised by the airlines as per 
the DGCA mandate. 
(Para 145) 
Further, the Committee opines that exploring the fe asibility of implementing the option of 
‘price lock’ would be a favourable step for customers, which, in turn, can spike the demand 
for air travel. The feature would help the customer s make better travel decisions by 
allowing them to book tickets by reserving seats wi thout paying for the actual price of the 
ticket upfront. Keeping in mind the high fee charge d for cancelling or rescheduling a flight 
and built-in uncertainties in the market driven dyn amic nature of fare, the Committee 
opines that the option of ‘price lock’ would provide the customers some time to confirm the 
ticket depending on finalisation of their travel pl ans, besides protecting them against any 
fare hike. The Committee, therefore, recommends tha t the Ministry should devise a 
mechanism to encourage all the airlines to implemen t the ‘price lock’ option wherein 
customers can reserve their booking with or without paying a nominal fee.  
(Para 146) 
 
 

60 
 
Capping of Airfares – Upper and Lower 
The Committee notes that the Ministry introduced pr ice caps as a temporary measure 
during COVID pandemic and these caps were removed 
w.e.f.  31 st  August, 2022, after 
reviewing the situation. The implementation of pric e caps indicates that the Ministry/ 
DGCA is empowered to keep a check on the airfares, if deemed necessary. The Committee 
also analysed the replies received from various air lines and notes that all the airlines have 
opined against implementing upper and lower fare ca ps. They have added that most 
airlines prefer to function, without any restrictio ns, in an open market condition. The 
Committee also notes that due to the absence of any  capping on airfares, the prices of 
tickets increase manifolds, especially during the h olidays and festival season, so much so 
that at times the domestic sector fares are more than the fares on the international routes. 
(Para 152) 
The Committee is of the view that certain factors, including the capacity constraints, 
demand-supply situation and fuel prices, should be taken into consideration for 
determining prices. The Committee also understands that it is necessary to give an open 
opportunity to the airlines to operate in the marke t; however, interests of common man 
should also be considered. The Committee, therefore , recommends that to promote the 
accessibility of air transport to the common man, t he Ministry should introduce reasonable 
upper fare caps on all the airlines, taking into account all relevant factors including the cost 
of operation, characteristics of service, reasonabl e profit and the generally prevailing tariff 
as envisaged in Rule 135 (1) of the Aircraft Rules,  1937. The Committee feels that it is 
essential to maintain a pricing discipline to prote ct the interests of both the airline 
operators and the commuting public. 
(Para 153) 
 
Display of Seat-wise Fares on website  
The Committee notes the comments furnished by the M inistry and the private airlines as 
regards displaying of seat-wise fares on the airlin e website. The Committee desires to know 
whether any study has been carried out to examine t he feasibility of displaying of airfare of 
each of the seats offered to the customers at the t ime of booking. The Committee is of the 
opinion that the display of seat-wise fares will pr ovide utmost transparency to the 
customers, making the airfare system being followed, more credible and trust-worthy.  
(Para 161) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may explore the 
possibility of implementing the practice of display ing details of the available number of 
seats in various categories in an aircraft, alongwi th the prices, as is being displayed by 
Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IR CTC) on their website for railway 
bookings. By doing so, the airlines can also take i nto account the dynamic pricing 
mechanism as prescribed by their respective Revenue  Management System, while 
establishing reasonable fares. The price of tickets  on a certain flight may increase closer to 
the departure date as in the case of railway seats.    
(Para 162) 

61 
 
 
Passenger Grievance Redressal 
The Committee notes and appreciates the steps being  taken by the Ministry to address and 
resolve passenger grievances. The Committee would l ike to be apprised whether the 
existing Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs) include  a separate clause of redressal of 
complaints arising due to exorbitant airfares. If n ot, the Ministry may examine the 
feasibility of incorporating such a provision.  
(Para 168) 
The Committee feels that to protect passengers agai nst unreasonably high airfares, there is 
a need to ensure that a proper and effective mechan ism is in place to redress their 
grievances in a time-bound manner. The Committee re commends that the Ministry should 
strengthen the mechanism to monitor the instances of non-compliance of applicable CARs. 
(Para 169) 
The Committee also feels that there is a need to po pularise the existence of grievance 
redressal mechanism such as CPGRAMS or AirSewa Port al as most of the passengers are 
not aware of it. The Committee recommends that thes e portals should be advertised 
through social media and other available modes.  
(Para 170) 
The Committee also opines that airlines need to cre ate awareness and educate the 
passengers who do not travel frequently, about the working of the airline system in general 
viz., ticketing procedure, fares, luggage handling and ot her issues which may emerge 
during travelling. The Committee recommends that th e Ministry may direct the airlines to 
create awareness and educate passengers about the v aried aspects of the travelling 
procedures.    
(Para 171) 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik)  
The Committee notes that there is a capping as regards the number of seats on RCS flights, 
which stands at 40 at present. Besides, the initial  capped airfare of Rs. 2,500/- has also 
increased. The Committee recommends that the Minist ry may look into the possibility of 
increasing the number of RCS seats and also lowerin g the capped airfare, so as to cater to 
the increasing demand for air travel in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities, as the cardinal objective of 
this Scheme is to connect the unserved and under-se rved airports and make it affordable 
for the common man. The Committee would like to kno w the details of the present capping 
amount for RCS flights, for different duration of f lights. The Committee also recommends 
that the Ministry should publish such airfare caps applicable for RCS, for ensuring 
transparency of fares. 
(Para 175) 
The Committee observes that only GoFirst, Indigo an d SpiceJet have participated in RCS-
UDAN Scheme, till date. However, post the recent ba nkruptcy of GoFirst, only two airlines 
viz., Indigo and SpiceJet will remain in RCS. The Committ ee also notes that Air India 
Express Connect is planning to participate in the R CS Scheme. The Committee would like 

62 
 
to know the reasons as to why the other major airli nes are not participating or plan to 
participate in future. The Committee recommends tha t the Ministry should rollout new 
bids for the Scheme in future, after due consideration of the suggestions of the stakeholders 
and ensure maximum participation from airlines to ensure improved air connectivity in the 
country. The Committee also recommends that for the  future success of the Scheme, the 
difficulties being faced by certain airlines under RCS and their suggestions thereof, may be 
looked into.  
(Para 177) 
The Committee also notes the concessions being exte nded by the airport operators to the 
airlines operating under the RCS-UDAN Scheme. The C ommittee appreciates the steps 
being taken for reducing the cost of operations by not levying Landing and Parking 
Charges on RCS flights and desires to know the quan tum of concession that has been 
provided to the airlines in this regard, since the inception of the Scheme, year-wise.  
(Para 179) 
 
Access to Reserved Lounges at Airports 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to issue guid elines, directing all the airport 
operators to ensure that only the entitled Dignitar ies/ Government Officials can access the 
reserved lounges at airports. The Committee further  recommends that the said guidelines 
should also include the provision of comfortable se ating; quieter environment; and better 
access to customer service representatives at these reserved lounges for entitled persons.
 
(Para 182) 
 
Bankruptcy of GoFirst 
The Committee notes the replies provided by the Min istry and airlines in respect of 
bankruptcy of GoFirst and notes that the situation has resulted in the surge in airfares on 
certain routes, leading to increase in monopolistic  practices. As per the recent Media 
Reports, the prices of tickets on sectors being ear lier operated by GoFirst 
viz., Delhi-Leh, 
Delhi-Srinagar, Delhi-Bagdogra and others have incr eased exorbitantly in a mere span of 
two months.  
(Para 188) 
189. The Committee is also aware that due to the su spension of operations of GoFirst, 
their lessor would now want to recover aircrafts fr om the operator. Due to this, the 
Committee opines that this may lead to lowered worl d ranking of India, on leasing aircraft 
index, by the world rating agencies. This may subse quently lead to increased cost of lease 
rentals impacting the air tariff adversely.  
(Para 189) 
190. The Committee notes that even Directorate Gene ral of Civil Aviation was not made 
aware by GoFirst about its plan to suspend services , which amounts to a violation of 
applicable rules. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and DGCA should intervene, take cognizance  of this grave situation and issue 
necessary guidelines to the other airlines to keep a tab on the affected operations and 

63 
 
airfares. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should look into the possibility 
of developing a contingency plans to deal with such  situations, arising due to the sudden 
exit of any airline in the future.   
(Para 190) 
 
Grant of ‘Point of Call’ Status to Airports 
The Committee feels that the decision of the Minist ry to not grant ‘Point of Call’ status to 
international airports is preventing the internatio nal airlines to operate in the country, 
leading to a situation of monopolistic/oligopolisti c market by the domestic airline operators 
wherein they are charging high airfares. The Commit tee opines that a broad parity should 
be maintained between the international and domesti c carriers for aviation operations in 
the country.  
(Para 191) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Minis try should identify a balanced 
approach to liberalize the guidelines for granting of ‘Point of Call’ status to the airports to 
enhance air connectivity. The Committee is of the v iew that better connectivity to 
international airports in the country will provide more options to passengers, to choose 
from and aid in rationalising airfares. 
(Para 192) 
 
Improper Behaviour of Airline Staff and other Passenger Grievances 
On many occasions, the Committee has deliberated up on and taken cognisance of the 
instances of unruly behaviour of airline staff and manhandling of passengers. The 
Committee takes note of such cases as highlighted i n the recent Media Reports. The 
Committee is also aware that the airline buses used  to ferry passengers from the airport 
terminal to the aircraft and 
vice-versa , are often crowded due to lack of sufficient bus 
services provided by the airlines. The Committee is  of the view that concrete steps should 
be taken to address such issues. The Committee, the refore, recommends the 
Ministry/DGCA to take note and examine such complai nts and take corrective actions 
against the concerned airline.   
(Para 193) 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
Annexure-I 
 
Air Transport Circulars issued by DGCA regarding Display of Airfares 
 
• Air Transport Circular 05 of 2009  was issued for scheduled domestic airlines to disp lay 
the airfare as per the template given in the circul ar, compliant to Rule 135 of the Aircraft 
Rules, 1937. For both domestic and international ma rkets, carriers must provide 
disclosure of the full price to be paid, including government taxes/fees carrier charges, as 
well as fees payable to airport operators in their advertising, on their websites and on the 
passenger’s e-ticket confirmation. 
• To ensure transparency and aid the traveler to make  an informed choice, DGCA vide  Air 
Transport circular 02 of 2010  has directed the airlines to upload fare sheet dis playing fare 
offered across their network. The fare sheet contai ns information on various levels of 
fares starting from the lowest (discounted fares) t o full fare offered on all sectors. This is 
done on a monthly basis and updated whenever there is any revision of fares. DGCA also 
ensures the fare sheet is updated and tracks any de viation between fares offered and 
uploaded on the website on a regular basis.  
• Air Transport Circular 03 of 2013  requires carriers to disclose all fees for optiona l 
services on ‘opt-in’ basis through a prominent link on their homepage.  
 
 
 
  

66 
 
Annexure-II  
 
The replies of various private airlines to the queries of the Committee as regards 
mechanism being followed for fixing Airfares  
 
Air Asia 
 informed that Airfares are determined taking into consideration several factors, 
including:  
1. Cost of operating the aircraft - operational expense and fixed expenses  
2. Generally prevailing tariff offered by competition  
3. Demand-supply situation for the departure date  
 
The revenue management system everyday forecasts th e demand for each flight based on 
historical trends and booking velocity for the futu re departure dates. Based on the forecasting 
model output, seat inventory is allocated to differ ent fare levels and accordingly the fare offered 
at any point in time is determined by the number of seats in the lower fare buckets that have been 
already sold out. There is a dedicated Revenue Mana gement team which is responsible for 
monitoring the output of the revenue management sys tem and can give inputs to the system or 
override the system if it feels that the revenue ma nagement system is not able to accurately 
capture the realities of the market.  
 
The representatives of the airlines also informed t hat airfares are fixed taking into account the 
three aspects, 
i.e.  Operational Expenditure, Fixed Expenditure, and th e Return on Investment. 
The Air Asia representative informed   
1. Cost of Operations –  
a. Input costs including Fixed expenses and Operati onal expenses help airlines arrive at a 
break even fare and break even load factor  
b. Cost of operations also varies monthly. In parti cular, the cost of fuel (accounting for 40-
50% of the total operating cost) is determined only  in the departure month, whereas 
tickets are offered for sale much in advance.  
 
2. Demand Supply Dynamics –  
a. Based on demand - supply dynamics on any route, airlines benchmark their fares with 
fares offered by competition  
b. If fares offered by an airline are much higher t han competition, then passengers will 
naturally choose competitor airlines.  
c. Hence at different points of time, the airfare m ay be lower than cost per seat or be higher 
than the cost per seat based.  
 
3. Advanced Booking:  
a. Passengers can buy tickets for any departure dat e typically 9-12 months in advance of the 
departure.  

67 
 
b. During these 9-12 months when tickets are availa ble for sale, the fare varies based on – a) 
fares offered by competitors, b) seasonality and c)  total demand and supply of seats on 
that route for that departure date.  
 
4. Perishable Inventory - Since seats on a flight a re perishable inventory, if the prices are high, 
then airlines will lose the demand and lose potenti al revenue from seats flown vacant. All these 
considerations are taken into account when fixing airfares.  
 
Air India 
 representatives stated that Airlines globally work  on a cost recovery model rather than 
on a set target to achieve ‘reasonable profit’. The  airline pricing is highly elastic. Pricing of air 
tickets by Air India is pegged against key competit ors on the given route, keeping in view 
relative product strengths. Reasonable market fares  have been formulated by Air India taking 
into consonance the underlying factors:  
o Fares offered by competitors in a highly dynamic market.  
o Product offerings,  
o Seasonality (as per practice adopted by all airlines worldwide),  
o Flight frequency, timings, direct / indirect oper ations, Product, Competitors’ activities, 
Traffic Flows.  
o Market demand  
 
Airfare is determined based on the above factors by  Pricing Section under Revenue 
Management, Department for Air India.  
 
Indigo 
 informed that Indigo, like most airlines across th e world, follows the practice of ‘revenue 
management’ which involves varying prices according  to changes in demand and available 
capacity. The reasonableness of tariff is a functio n of demand and supply, variations in demand 
by season, during the day of the week, time of day,  directionality, number of days before the 
flight, etc.  
 
It is relevant to mention that the India is a high cost and volatile environment for airline 
operational costs. A very large proportion of airline costs in India are denominated in dollars and 
airlines are severely impacted by the continuing de valuation of the Rupee vs. the USD. Further, 
ATF prices in India are amongst the highest in the world and are also US Dollar denominated. 
Despite these challenges, India remains one of the most reasonable markets globally for air 
travel, as compared to most countries.  
 
SpiceJet 
 informed that there are multiple factors that driv es the fare pricing mechanism in an 
airline list includes but is not limited to the inv entory available, timing of flight and duration, 
type of aircraft deployed, seasonality etc. coupled  with the business philosophy that an airline 
might choose to adhere to. Considering all of these factors into picture in tandem with the market 
demand the relevant team ascertains the final figur e of Cost Available Seat Kilometre (CASK). 
Different components within the total airfare are Base Fare, ASF, PSF, Travel fees/ Convenience 

68 
 
fee. In addition to this the airline also charges R CS fee, TRF (Cute Fee), UDF/ DF and GST as 
may be applicable on particular sectors. 
 
Vistara 
 informed that Pricing is done to attach a value to a seat to be used by a passenger. Market 
demand, customer segmentation, product & services o ffered, frequency, seasonality, 
competition, cost of operations, distance, state of  the economy along with the Revenue 
Management system forecasts are some of the factors  being considered. By taking into 
consideration all the government mandates, usually the Revenue Management team (Pricing, 
Demand & Inventory) decides the fare to be offered.  Along with cost aspects as mentioned, 
market demand, customer segmentation, product & ser vices offered, frequency, seasonality, 
competition, distance, state of the economy and rev enue Management system forecasts etc are 
the primary factors being considered. 
 
Base Fare, YQ/YR, Q surcharge, Taxes, charges, and surcharges levied by the airport operators 
and the government entities. The components like th e Base Fare, YQ/YR, Q may change based 
on the demand and supply along with inflation, oper ating conditions, and cost parameters. The 
total fare may change due to changes in the applica ble taxes, charges, and surcharges by the 
airport operators and government/regulatory entities. 
 
Information on the Capital Investment; Working Capital; Revenue Expenditure; Fixed 
Cost; Operating Expenditure; Net Income; and Profit/Loss, received from Airlines 
 
 Air India Limited   
 (Rs. in Crores)  
S. No. Particulars 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
1.  Capital Investment  68,893  46,478  58,474  
2.  Working Capital  (26,600)  (2,118)  3,147  
3.  Revenue Expenditure  19,083  26,347  37,112  
4.  Capital Expenditure  92  13,402  4,695  
5.  Fixed Cost  8,517  8,984  7,704  
6.  Operating Expenditure  15,247  22,475  36,003  
7.  Net Income  (7,084)  (9,592)  (11,381)  
8.  Profit/ Loss  (6,979)  (6,828)  (4,778)  
 
 Air India Express (AIX) Connect Private Limited (Air Asia) 
(Rs. in Crores)  
S. No. Particulars 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
1.  Capital Investment  21  19  27  
2.  Working Capital  -2109  -2642  -4220  
3.  Revenue Expenditure  1759  2656  5244  
4.  Capital Expenditure  21  19  27  
5.  Fixed Cost  1256  1436  1867  
6.  Operating Expenditure  3015  4092  7112  
7.  Net Income  1483  1914  4361  
8.  Profit/ Loss  -1531  -2179  -2748  
 

69 
 
 Indigo  
(Rs. in Millions) 
S. No. Particulars 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
1.  Capital Investment  4,369  3,469  5,698  
2.  Working Capital  18,902  (21,883)  22,976  
3.  Total Expenses  2,14,957  3,28,102  5,61,858  
4. Profit/ (Loss ) Before Tax  (58,181)  (61,537)  (3,044)  
 
 SpiceJet 
                             Amount (in Millions)  
S. No.  Particulars  2020-21  2021-22  2022-23**  
1 Capital Investment  0.61  21.07  --  
2 Working Capital  (51,858)  (64,087)  --  
3 Revenue Expenditure  51,828  72,222  --  
4 Capital Expenditure*  611  364  --  
5 Fixed Cost#  18,062  18,817  --  
6 Operating Expenditure  39,810  57,944  --  
7 Net Income/EBITDA  11,078  602  --  
8 Profit/ Loss  (9,983)  (16,480)  --  
Note: Being a pubic listed entity the figures for t he FY 2022-23 has still not been published. We shal l be 
able to share the same once the results for the previous FY has been declared as per the applicable laws. 
 
 Vistara  
                             Amount (in Crores)  
S. No.  Particulars  2020-21  2021-22  2022-23  
1 Capital Investment  -1255 -987 -2458 
2 Working Capital  -287 256 680 
3 Revenue Expenditure  4312 7097 12753 
4 Capital Expenditure  -1255 -987 -2458 
5 Fixed Cost  2567 3015 3609 
6 Operating Expenditure  4312 7097 12753 
7 Net Income  -1612 -2031 -1393 
8 Profit/ Loss  -1612 -2031 -1393 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
Annexure-III 
The replies of various private airlines to the queries of the Committee as regards  
Publication of Information on Website 
 
Air Asia 
 informed the Committee that Air India Express (AIX ) Connect neither publishes the 
information regarding the number of seats left on a ny flight on its website nor does it explicitly 
share such information with third-party travel agen ts. Further, AIX Connect updates fare 
information on its website, as well as submits the same to the DGCA at regular intervals. AIX 
Connect also continuously monitors the fares being published by travel agents on their portals to 
ensure that the airfare shown on the travel agency portal is not misleading in any way for the 
customers.  
 
Air India  stated that they do not indulge in such practices of publishing misleading information 
on their website. Further, Air India’s (AI’s) e-Com merce platform is directly integrated with Air 
India’s reservations system (Passenger Service Syst em) from where availability is picked up, 
hence, there is no room for any error/misleading information. They also added that the concerned 
teams responsible for distribution of inventory doe s periodic checks, although, as mentioned 
above the probability for occurrence of such error is almost negligible as this is system driven 
and automated.  
 
GoFirst 
 also stated that they do not indulge in such pract ices of publishing misleading 
information on their website. A Central Reservation  System (CRS), serves as storage for flight-
related information like schedules, fares and rules  for each booking class, passenger name 
records (PNRs), e-tickets, etc. It is also involved  in managing booking requests and ticket 
issuing.   
 
Indigo 
 stated that they only display its fares on its web site and does not display number of seats 
left on the flight as part of the fare/booking display. 
 
SpiceJet 
, in its written submission stated that as an airli ne, they never support practices of 
publishing misleading information on their website and believe that this runs by the market 
forces. They publish the entire fare structure on their website when a booking is being made. 
 
Vistara 
 informed the Committee that they do not publish the availability on their website. Further 
due to global distribution of limited inventory (la st minute inventory), the confirmation of seat 
follows first come first basis policy, i.e.  seat availability continues to reflect until the f inal ticket 
creation (System behaviour as they stored cache dat a). Any change in fares, are automatically 
getting reflected on all channels. On regular basis , system clears the cache after every single seat 
sold on our website.  System is designed to update the fare on prevailing RBD at regular interval 
(after every seat sold). SOP/Rule is in place to en sure that our published fares follow the fare as 
submitted to DGCA. 
 

71 
 
Annexure-IV  
 
The details of the components of airfare being char ged to passengers and their breakup is 
as informed by various airlines is indicated below:- 
 
1. Air Asia 
 
S. No. Fare Component Beneficiary Frequency of 
Payment 
1. Base Fare Airline - 
2. Common User Terminal 
Equipment Fee (CUTE Fee) 
Retained by Airline but used 
to offset the cost of CUTE 
Service Provider 
- 
3. User Development Fee 
(UDF) 
Airport (Pass-through fare 
component) Fortnightly 
4. Aviation Security Fee 
(ASF) 
National Aviation Security 
Fee Trust (NASFT) (Pass-
through fare component) 
Fortnightly 
5. Passenger Service Fee 
(PSF) 
Airport (Pass-through fare 
component) Fortnightly 
6. GST (SGST + CGST) Government of India (Pass-
through fare component) Monthly 
 
(i) Base fare - This is decided by the airline and varies on a day to day basis based on 
competition pricing and overall demand supply dynamics of a particular route.  
(ii) CUTE charges - These are based on the fees cha rged by the Airport operator for common 
user technology services (Ex. check-in counter terminals). These are revised from time to 
time by the airport operators. .  
(iii) ASF, PSF and other airport charges are determ ined by DGCA / AERA or other 
competent authorities as applicable.  
(iv) GST applicable is determined by the Government of India. 
 
2. Air India   
Name Code Agency Brief Description 
Passenger Service 
Fees WO Accrued to Airports  To cover facilitation at all AAI 
airports and Private airports 
User Development 
Fees IN/YM Accrued to Airports  To fund passenger facilitation at 
select airports, levied by airports 
Fuel Surcharge YQ Accrued to Airline Airline fuel s urcharge 
Carrier Imposed 
Miscellaneous Fees YR Accrued to Airline 
Collected against different costs 
such as CUTE, RCS Levy and 
other airline variable pax related 

72 
 
3rd  party payouts 
Aviation Security 
Fee P2 Accrued to Airports  Collection of airport security fee 
GST K3 Accrued to 
Government 
Good and Services tax as 
applicable 
For international journeys, in addition to above, t axes and charges applicable at international 
destinations will be applicable. The representative  of Air India also added that Base Fare, Fuel 
Surcharge (YQ) and Carrier Imposed Misc Fee (YR) ar e retained by airlines. Apart from the 
above two levies viz. YQ and YR, all other taxes an d charges are remitted to concerned 
authorities. GST is remitted on ticket sale by the 10 th  of the following month. UDF/PSF etc are 
paid on flown coupons on a fortnightly basis.  
 
3. Go First 
 
GoFirst replied that different components within th e total airfare charged are Base fare, Fuel 
Surcharge (YQ), Passenger Service Fee (PSF), User D evelopment Fee (UDF), Cute Charges 
(PHF), RCS fees (RCS), Aviation Security Fee (ASF) and applicable GST. Components retained 
by Airline is Base fare and Fuel Surcharge (YQ). Further, components to be paid to other entities 
are PSF, ASF, UDF, Cute charges & RCS. All the abov e components are paid as per billing 
cycle. 
 
4. Indigo 
 
The representative of Indigo informed the Committee  that the total airfare is essentially 
composed of the following elements:  
• Airfare and airline-imposed surcharges that are retained by airlines.  
• Pass-through components mandated by authorities (UDF, PSF, etc.), that are remitted to the 
agency/ entity on whose behalf these components are being collected by the airlines  
• GST, which is remitted to the concerned authorities.  
 
Further, frequency of payments is in line with the billing and credit cycle mandated by the 
agency concerned, and as prevailing, from time to t ime, typically ranging from fortnightly to 
monthly. 
 
5. SpiceJet 
 
SpiceJet deposed before the Committee that differen t components within the total airfare are 
Base Fare, Aviation Security Fee (ASF), Passenger S ervice Fee (PSF) and Travel Fee/ 
Conveyance Fee. In addition to this, the airlines a lso charges RCS Fees, TRF (Cute Fees), UDF/ 
DF and GST as may be applicable on a particular sec tor. Amid the above specified components 
within an airfare, the airline tends to retain the Base Fare, RCS, TRF (Cute Fees), Travel Fees 
(Conveyance Fees) and the component pertaining to t he Airport Taxes & GST are paid to other 
entities as per the understanding with different billing agency. 
 

73 
 
6. Vistara   
The representative of Vistara stated that Base Fare , Fuel Surcharge (YQ)/ Carrier Imposed 
Miscellaneous Fee (YR), Q surcharge, taxes, charges  & surcharges levied by the airport 
operators and government entities. Base Fare, YQ/YR  and Q surcharge. However, if a charge 
like RCS is levied on per departure and not as an a pplicable tax, airlines may file it as YQ/YR 
and remit it later to the government entities. Furt her, everything except the components retained 
by airlines are to be paid to other entities. The a mount and the frequency depends upon the 
application of those taxes, charges and surcharges levied by the airport operators and the 
government entities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 
Annexure-V 
 
The details of User Development Fee charged by the private airlines operating in the 
country and the details of the fee charged at the a irports currently operated (for the F.Y. 
2022-2023) by APAO:- 
 
Bengaluru International Airport Limited (BIAL): 
 Vide Order No. 11/2021-22 dated 28th August 
2021, AERA has determined User Development Fee (UDF ) of Rs 350 per embarking domestic 
passenger and Rs 1200 per embarking international p assenger as the applicable UDF for KIAB, 
for the financial year 2022- 23. This UDF will be c harged uniformly by all airlines (private or 
government owned) operating out of KIAB. 
 
Cochin International Airport Limited (CIAL): 
 
UDF charged by CIAL as approved by AERA FY 2022-23 
Per Embarking International Passenger Rs. 400 
Per Embarking Domestic Passenger Rs. 180 
 
 
 
Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL): 
 
UDF charged by DIAL per departing passenger as 
approved by AERA 
FY 2022-23 
International Passengers Rs. 52.56 
Domestic Passengers Rs. 52.56 
 
GMR Hyderabad International Airport Limited (GHIAL): 
 
UDF charged by GHIAL as approved by AERA FY 2022-23  
International Passengers Rs. 700 
Domestic Passengers Rs. 480 
 
Mumbai International Airport Limited (MIAL): 
 Vide Order No. 64/2020-21 dated 27th February 
2021, AERA has determined UDF of Rs NIL per embarki ng domestic passenger and Rs 179 per 
embarking international passenger as the applicable  UDF for CSMIA, for the financial year 
2022-23. This UDF will be charged uniformly by all airlines (private or government owned) 
operating out of CSMIA. 
 
 
 
  

75 
 
Annexure-VI  
Various Charges being charged by APAO member airports  
 
1. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International Airport (SVPIA), Ahmedabad  
 
Landing Charges – 
(Rate in INR per MT)  
Flight Weight of 
aircraft 
1
st  February 2023 
to 31 st  March 
2024 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025  
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  March 2026 
Domestic Upto 100 MT 400 420 441 
Above 100 MT 
International Upto 100 MT 600 630 662 
Above 100 MT 700 735 772 
 
Parking Charges – 
(Rate in INR per MT)  
  Weight of 
aircraft 
Domestic International 
1st  February 
2023 to 
31 
st  March 2024 
Parking charges (First 
two hours after free 
parking period) 
Upto 100 MT 18.22 18.55 
Above 100 MT 17.50 
Parking charges 
(beyond four hours) 
Upto 100 MT 36.44 37.10 
Above 100 MT 35.00 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025 
Parking charges (First 
two hours after free 
parking period) 
Upto 100 MT 19.13 19.48 
Above 100 MT 18.37 
Parking charges 
(beyond four hours) 
Upto 100 MT 38.26 38.96 
Above 100 MT 36.74 
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  March 2026 
Parking charges (First 
two hours after free 
parking period) 
Upto 100 MT 20.09 20.45 
Above 100 MT 19.29 
Parking charges 
(beyond four hours) 
Upto 100 MT 40.18 40.90 
Above 100 MT 38.58 
 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) –  
(Rate in INR per PAX)  
1
st  February 2023 to 31 st  March 
2024 
Dom. embarking pax - Rs 
250 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 
550 
1st  April 2024 to 31 st  March 2025 Dom. embarking pax - Rs 
450 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 
880 
1st  April 2025 to 31 st  March 2026 Dom. embarking pax - Rs 
600 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 
1190 
 

76 
 
Fuel Infrastructure Charges –Applicable from 1 st  February 2023 to 31 st  March 2026 
 
Fuel Infrastructure Cost 
(Incl. Aircraft Refueling) 
Aircraft Defueling Re-fueling of defueled product 
Within 24 hrs Beyond 24 hrs 
Rs 1,600 per KL Rs 280 per KL Rs 330 per KL Rs 380 per KL 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation– NA 
 
 
2. Kempegowda International Airport, Bengaluru  
 
Landing Charges – 
 Weight of 
Aircraft 
International Flight Other than International 
Flight 
Applicable rates from 
1st  April 2023 – 
31 st  March 2024 
Up to 100 
MT 
INR 660.00 per MT INR 365.00 per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 66,000 + INR 
790.00 per MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
INR 36,500 + INR 490.00 
per MT in excess of 100 
MT 
Applicable rates from 
1st  April 2024 – 
31 st  March 2025 
Up to 100 
MT 
INR 685.00 per MT INR 510.00 per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 68,500 + INR 
820.00 per MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
INR 51,000 + INR 685.00 
per MT in excess of 100 
MT 
Applicable rates from 
1st  April 2025 – 
31 st  December 2025 
Up to 100 
MT 
INR 715.00 per MT INR 510.00 per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 71,500 + INR 
855.00 per MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
INR 51,000 + INR 685.00 
per MT in excess of 100 
MT 
Applicable rates from 
1st  January 2026 – 
31 st  March 2026 
Up to 100 
MT 
INR 500.00 per MT INR 355.00 per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 50,000 + INR 
600.00 per MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
INR 35,500 + INR 480.00 
per MT in excess of 100 
MT 
  
Parking Charges for all Aircrafts (Domestic & International)  – 
 Weight of 
Aircraft 
First 2 hrs after free 
parking period 
Beyond 4 hrs 
Applicable rates 
from 1 st  April 2023 
– 31 st  March 2024  
Up to 100 
MT 
INR 8.00 per hour per MT INR 14.00 per hour per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 800+ INR 11.00 per 
MT per hour in excess of 
100 MT 
INR 1400+ INR 18.00 per 
MT per hour in excess 
of100 MT 
Applicable rates 
from 1 st  April 2024 
Up to 100 
MT 
INR 12.00 per hour per MT  INR 20.00 per hour per MT 

77 
 
– 31 st  March 2025  Above 100 
MT 
INR 1200+ INR 15.00 per 
MT per hour in excess of 
100 MT 
INR 2000+ INR 25.00 per 
MT per hour in excess of 
100 MT 
Applicable rates 
from 1 st  April 2025 
– 31 st  December 
2025 
Up to 100 
MT 
INR 17.00 per hour per MT  INR 28.00 per hour per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 1700+ INR 21.00 per 
MT per hour in excess of 
100 MT 
INR 2800+ INR 35.00 per 
MT per hour in excess of 
100 MT 
Applicable rates 
from 1 st  January 
2026 – 31 st  March 
2026 
Up to 100 
MT 
INR 12.00 per hour per MT  INR 20.00 per hour per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 1200+ INR 15.00 per 
MT per hour in excess of 
100 MT 
INR 2000+ INR 25.00 per 
MT per hour in excess of 
100 MT 
  
 User Development Fee (UDF) –  
 
1st April 2023 to 31 st March 2024 Dom. embarking pax - Rs 450 per pax 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,400 per pax 
1st April 2024 to 31 st March 2025 & 
1st April 2025 to 31 st December 2025 
Dom. embarking pax - Rs 550 per pax 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,500 per pax 
1st January 2026 to 31 st March 2026 Dom. embarking pax - Rs 385 per pax 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,050 per pax 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation– NA 
 
 
3. Cochin International Airport, Kochi  
 
Landing Charges – 
(Rate in INR per MT)  
Flight Weight of 
aircraft 
1st  April 2023 to 
31 st  March 2024 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025 
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  December 
2025 
1st  January 2026 
to 31 st  March 
2026 
International  Upto 100 MT 605 650 705 580 
Above 100 
MT 
60500 + 815 per 
MT in excess of 
100 MT 
65000 + 870 per 
MT in excess of 
100 MT 
70500 + 950 per 
MT in excess of 
100 MT 
58000 + 770 per 
MT in excess of 
100 MT 
Other than 
International 
 
Upto 100 MT 415 445 480 405 
Above 100 
MT 
41500 + 560 per 
MT in excess of 
100 MT 
44500 + 595 per 
MT in excess of 
100 MT 
48000 + 640 per 
MT in excess of 
100 MT 
40500 + 545 per 
MT in excess of 
100 MT 
 
Parking Charges – 
  1
st  April 2023 to 
31 st  March 2024 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025 
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  December 
1st  January 2026 
to 31 st  March 

78 
 
2025 2026 
Upto 100 
MT 
INR per hour 
per MT 
8 9 10 9 
Above 100 
MT 
800 +11 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
900 + 12 per MT 
in excess of 100 
MT 
1000 + 13 per MT 
in excess of 100 
MT 
900 + 11 per MT 
in excess of 100 
MT 
 
Night Parking Charges – 
  1
st  April 2023 to 
31 st  March 2024 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025 
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  December 
2025 
1st  January 2026 
to 31 st  March 
2026 
Upto 100 
MT 
INR per hour 
per MT 
4.5 5 5.5 4.5 
Above 100 
MT 
450 +5.5 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
500 + 6 per MT 
in excess of 100 
MT 
550 + 6.5 per MT 
in excess of 100 
MT 
450 + 5.5 per MT 
in excess of 100 
MT 
 
Inline X ray screening Charges – 
 Aircraft 
Capacity 
 1
st  April 
2023 to 
31 st  March 
2024 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025 
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  December 
2025 
1st  January 2026 
to 31 st  March 
2026 
International  1-100 USD  161 169 178 151 
101-150 194 204 214 182 
151-180 237 249 261 222 
181-300 269 282 297 252 
Above 300 323 339 356 303 
Domestic 1-100 INR 5385 5650 5935 5045 
101-150 7535 7915 8310 7065 
151-180 9690 10175 10685 9080 
181-300 11845 12435 13060 11100 
Above 300 13995 14695 15435 13120 
 
CUTE/CUSS/BRS Charges – 
 
  1
st  April 2023 to 
31 st  March 2024 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025 
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  December 
2025 
1st  January 2026 
to 31 st  March 
2026 
Domestic INR per dep 
pax 
86 86 86 86 
International 
(for tickets 
issued against 
INR tariff) 
INR per dep 
pax 
94 94 94 94 
International 
(for tickets 
issued against 
USD per dep 
pax 
1.25 1.25 1.25 1.25 

79 
 
foreign 
currency 
tariff) 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) –  
  1
st  April 2023 to 
31 st  March 2024 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025 
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  December 
2025 
1st  January 
2026 to 
31 st  March 2026 
Dom. embarking pax INR  230 270 270 230 
International 
embarking passenger 
for tickets issued 
against INR tariff 
500 570 570 480 
International 
embarking passenger 
for tickets issued 
against foreign 
currency tariff 
USD 6.70 7.60 7.60 6.40 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation– NA 
 
 
4. Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi  
 
Landing Charges – 
Rate per landing – 
International Flight 
Weight of the 
Aircraft 
Rate Per Landing (In INR) 
<= 21MT Not Applicable 
<= 100 MT INR 250.47 MT 
>= 100 MT INR 25047 + INR 336.60/MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
Rate per landing – Domestic 
Flight 
<= 21MT INR 113.30 MT 
<= 100 MT INR 187.88 MT 
>= 100 MT INR 18788 + INR 252.45/MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
 
Housing Charges – 
Weight of the Aircraft Housing Charges Rates Per Ho ur 
<= 100 MT INR 8.14 MT 
>= 100 MT INR 814 + INR 10.78/MT in excess of 100 M T 
 
X-Ray Baggage Charges – 
Domestic Flights International Flights 
Registered Baggage Registered Baggage 
For turnaround flights 

80 
 
<= 25 seats: INR 110 USD 209.55 for all wide body  aircrafts 
(Code D, Code E and Code F) 
 
USD 149.33 for all narrow  body 
turnaround flights (Code C) and all transit 
flights 
26 – 50 seats: INR 220 
51 – 100 seats: INR 495 
101 – 200 seats: INR 770 
>= 201 seats: INR 880 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) –- 
 
1
st  April 2023 to 31 st  March 2024 Per embarking pax. - Rs 51.97 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation 
 
Rate Per embarking passenger 
Rs 77 for tickets issued against 
INR tariff 
US $ 1.93 for tickets issued against 
foreign currency tariff 
 
 
5. Goa International Airport, MoPA  
 
Landing Charges for FY 23 – 
 Time Interval Weight of Aircraft 
(MTOW) 
Amount 
(Rs/MT) 
Domestic Morning Hrs 0700-1259 </= 100 MT  256 
>100 MT 288 
Evening Hrs 1300-2359 </= 100 MT  197 
>100 MT 222 
Night Hrs 0000-0659 </= 100 MT  98 
>100 MT 109 
International Winter 1st  Oct-30 th  
Apr 
</= 100 MT  327 
>100 MT 429 
Summer 1st  May- 30 th  
Sep 
</= 100 MT  164 
>100 MT 215 
 
Parking Charges for FY 23 – 
Weight of Aircraft (MTOW) Charges (Rs/Hr/MT) 
</= 100 MT  12 
>100 MT 15 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) for FY 23 –  
Passenger Time Interval 
 Amount (in Rs./Pax)  
Domestic Per Embarking pax 450 
International 1100 
 
 

81 
 
Fixed Electricity Ground Power (“FEGP”) Charges –Applicable from 24 th April 2023 to 30 th  
September 2023 
 
Flight Aircraft Code  Rate per hour in INR 
Domestic Code B & C  2,261.60 
Code D  2,713.92 
Code E  3,166.24 
International Code C Single Cable 5,205.79 
Code D Single Cable 5,205.79 
Code E Double Cable 6,291.36 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation– NA 
 
 
6. Rajiv Gandhi International Airport, Hyderabad  
 
Landing Charges – 
 Weight of 
Aircraft 
International Flight Domestic Flight 
Applicable rates from 
1st  April 2023 – 
31 st  March 2024 
Up to 100 MT  INR 360.00 per MT INR 305.00 per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 36,000 + INR 
480.00 per MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
INR 30,500 + INR 
410.00 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
Applicable rates from 
1st  April 2024 – 
31 st  March 2025 
Up to 100 MT  INR 430.00 per MT INR 365.00 per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 43,000 + INR 
575.00 per MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
INR 36,500 + INR 
490.00 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
Applicable rates from 
1st  April 2025 – 
31 st  December 2025 
Up to 100 MT  INR 470.00 per MT INR 440.00 per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 47,000 + INR 
635.00 per MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
INR 44,000 + INR 
590.00 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
Applicable rates from 
1st  January 2026 – 
31 st  March 2026 
Up to 100 MT  INR 330.00 per MT INR 310.00 per MT 
Above 100 
MT 
INR 33,000 + INR 
445.00 per MT in excess 
of 100 MT 
INR 31,000 + INR 
415.00 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
 
Parking Charges – 
 Weight of 
Aircraft 
First 2 hrs after free parking period 
Applicable rates from 1 st  April 
2023 – 31 st  March 2024 
Up to 100 MT INR 8.30 per hour per MT 
Above 100 MT INR 830/- + INR 10.20 per hour in excess 
of 100 MT 
Applicable rates from 1 st  April 
2024 – 31 st  March 2025 
Up to 100 MT INR 10 per hour per MT 
Above 100 MT INR 1000/- + INR 12.20 per hour in 
excess of 100 MT 

82 
 
Applicable rates from 1 st  April 
2025 – 31 st  December 2025 
Up to 100 MT INR 14.10 per hour per MT 
Above 100 MT INR 1410/- + INR 17.10 per hour in 
excess of 100 MT 
Applicable rates from 
1st  January 2026 – 31 st  March 
2026 
Up to 100 MT INR 9.90 per hour per MT 
Above 100 MT INR 990/- + INR 12.00 per hour in excess 
of 100 MT 
  
Parking hrs 0-02 hrs 02-04 hrs Above 04 hrs 
Rate Free Normal parking rates as 
listed above 
Double the normal parking 
rates 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) –  
1
st  April 2023 to 31 st  March 2024  Dom. embarking pax - Rs 700 per pax 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,360 per pax 
1st  April 2024 to 31 st  March 2025 & 
1st  April 2025 to 31 st  December 2025  
Dom. embarking pax - Rs 750 per pax 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,500 per pax 
1st  January 2026 to 31 st  March 2026  Dom. embarking pax - Rs 500 per pax 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,000 per pax 
 
ICT (CUTE/CUSS/BRS) Charges – Applicable rates from 1 
st  April 2023 to 31 st  March 2026 
Per Embarking Passenger  USD 1.25 
 
Fuel Infrastructure Charges – Applicable rates from 1 
st  April 2023 to 31 st  March 2026 
 
Charges per KL of Fuel Amount in Rs. /KL 
Infrastructure Charges Rs 1500/- 
 
Fixed Electricity Ground Power (“FEGP”) Charges – Applicable rates from 1 
st  April 2023 to 
31 st  March 2026  
 
Time slot  1 plug (90 KV) 2 Plugs (180 KV) 
First 30 minutes Rs 500 Rs 875 
Every additional 15 minutes Additional Rs 250 Addit ional Rs 437.4 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation– NA 
 
7. Lucknow International Airport  
 
Landing Charges – Current Charges 
Weight of the Aircraft Domestic Aircraft Internatio nal Aircraft 
Upto 25 MT INR 294 per MT INR 294 per MT 
Above 25 MT upto 50 INR 7,350 + INR 392 per INR 7,350 + INR 601 per MT in 

83 
 
MT MT in excess of 25 MT excess of 25 MT 
Above 50 MT upto 100 
MT 
INR 17,150 + INR 454 per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
INR 22,375 + INR 699 per MT in 
excess of 50 MT 
Above 100 MT upto 200 
MT 
INR 39,850 + INR 515 per 
MT in excess of 100 MT 
INR 57,325 + INR 797 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
Above 200 MT INR 91,350 + INR 576 per 
MT in excess of 200 MT 
INR 1,37,025 + INR 920 per MT in 
excess of 200 MT 
 
Parking and Housing Charges –Current Charges 
Weight of the Aircraft Parking Charges Rates per 
Hour 
Parking Charges Rates per Hour 
Upto 25 MT INR 3.3 per Hour per MT INR 6.7 per Hour per MT 
Above 25 MT upto 50 
MT 
INR 82.5 + INR 4.6 per Hour 
per MT in excess of 25 MT 
INR 167.5 + INR 8.9 per Hour per 
MT in excess of 25 MT 
Above 50 MT upto 100 
MT 
INR 197.5 + INR 8.9 per Hour 
per MT in excess of 50 MT 
INR 390.0 + INR 18 per Hour per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
Above 100 MT upto 200 
MT 
INR 642.5 + INR 11.2 per 
Hour per MT in excess of 100 
MT 
INR 1,290 + INR 22.5 per Hour 
per MT in excess of 100 MT 
Above 200 MT INR 1,762.5 + INR 12.4 per 
Hour per MT in excess of 200 
MT 
INR 3,540 + INR 24.8 per Hour 
per MT in excess of 200 MT 
 
No parking charges shall be levied for first two hours. 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) – Current Charges 
Current Charges 
 Dom. embarking pax - Rs 163 Intl. embarking pax - R s 475  
 
Fuel Infrastructure Charges – Current charges  
Fuel 
Infrastructure 
Charges (Incl. 
Aircraft 
Refueling) 
Aircraft defueling  Aircraft Re-fueling of defueled  
product 
Within 6hrs  Beyond 6hrs  Within 6hrs Beyond 6hrs 
Rs 670 per KL Rs 200 per KL Rs 300 per KL Rs 250 pe r KL Rs 300 per KL 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation– NA  
 
 
8. Thiruvananthapuram International Airport  
 
Landing Charges – Till September 2023  
Weight of the Aircraft Domestic Aircraft Internatio nal Aircraft 
Upto 25 MT INR 191 per MT INR 357 per MT 
Above 25 MT upto 50 INR 4,769 + INR 334 per MT INR 8,942 + INR 418 per MT in 

84 
 
MT in excess of 25 MT excess of 25 MT 
Above 50 MT upto 100 
MT 
INR 13,116 + INR 382 per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
INR 19,376 + INR 477 per MT in 
excess of 50 MT 
Above 100 MT upto 
200 MT 
INR 32,913 + INR 465 per 
MT in excess of 100 MT 
INR 43,223 + INR 548 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
Above 200 MT INR 78,695 + INR 525 per 
MT in excess of 200 MT 
INR 98,071 + INR 620 per MT in 
excess of 200 MT 
 
Parking and Housing Charges –Till September 2023  
Weight of the Aircraft Parking Charges Rates per 
Hour 
Parking Charges Rates per 
Hour 
Upto 25 MT INR 3 per Hour per MT INR 6 per Hour per MT 
Above 25 MT upto 50 
MT 
INR 75 + INR 4 per Hour per 
MT in excess of 25 MT 
INR 150 + INR 8 per Hour per 
MT in excess of 25 MT 
Above 50 MT upto 100 
MT 
INR 175 + INR 8 per Hour per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
INR 350.0 + INR 16 per Hour per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
Above 100 MT upto 200 
MT 
INR 575 + INR 10 per Hour 
per MT in excess of 100 MT 
INR 1,150 + INR 20 per Hour per 
MT in excess of 100 MT 
Above 200 MT INR 1,575 + INR 11 per Hour 
per MT in excess of 200 MT 
INR 3,150 + INR 22 per Hour per 
MT in excess of 200 MT 
No parking charges shall be levied for first two hours. 
 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) – Till September 2023  
Till September 2023 
 Dom. embarking pax - Rs 506 
(USD 12.69) 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,069 
(USD 26.78) 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation– NA 
 
9. Jaipur International Airport  
 
Landing Charges – Till September 2023  
Weight of the Aircraft Domestic Aircraft Internatio nal Aircraft 
Upto 25 MT INR 187 per MT INR 281 per MT 
Above 25 MT upto 50 
MT 
INR 4,680 + INR 328 per MT 
in excess of 25 MT 
INR 7,020 + INR 516 per MT in 
excess of 25 MT 
Above 50 MT upto 100 
MT 
INR 12,870 + INR 374 per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
INR 20,176 + INR 609 per MT in 
excess of 50 MT 
Above 100 MT upto 
200 MT 
INR 31,590 + INR 457 per 
MT in excess of 100 MT 
INR 50,648 + INR 702 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
Above 200 MT INR 77,246 + INR 515 per 
MT in excess of 200 MT 
INR 120,848 + INR 842 per MT in 
excess of 200 MT 
 
Parking and Housing Charges – Till September 2023  
Weight of the Aircraft Parking Charges Rates per Pa rking Charges Rates per Hour 

85 
 
Hour 
Upto 25 MT INR 3per Hour per MT INR 6per Hour per MT 
Above 25 MT upto 50 
MT 
INR 75 + INR 4per Hour per 
MT in excess of 25 MT 
INR 150 + INR 8per Hour per MT 
in excess of 25 MT 
Above 50 MT upto 100 
MT 
INR 175 + INR 8per Hour per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
INR 350.0 + INR 16per Hour per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
Above 100 MT upto 200 
MT 
INR 575 + INR 10per Hour 
per MT in excess of 100 MT 
INR 1,150 + INR 20per Hour per 
MT in excess of 100 MT 
Above 200 MT INR 1,575 + INR 11per Hour 
per MT in excess of 200 MT 
INR 3,150 + INR 22per Hour per 
MT in excess of 200 MT 
No parking charges shall be levied for first two hours. 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) – Till September 2023  
Till September 2023  Dom. embarking pax - Rs 394 
(USD 9.85) 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,237 
(USD 30.93) 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation – NA 
 
10. Guwahati International Airport  
 
Landing Charges – Till September 2023  
Weight of the Aircraft Domestic Aircraft Internatio nal Aircraft 
Upto 25 MT INR 191 per MT INR 263 per MT 
Above 25 MT upto 50 
MT 
INR 4,770 + INR 310 per MT 
in excess of 25 MT 
INR 6,575 + INR 393 per MT in 
excess of 25 MT 
Above 50 MT upto 100 
MT 
INR 12,508 + INR 347 per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
INR 16,404 + INR 441 per MT in 
excess of 50 MT 
Above 100 MT upto 
200 MT 
INR 29,839 + INR 429 per 
MT in excess of 100 MT 
INR 38,452 + INR 548 per MT in 
excess of 100 MT 
Above 200 MT INR 72,769 + INR 489 per 
MT in excess of 200 MT 
INR 93,254 + INR 584 per MT in 
excess of 200 MT 
 
Parking and Housing Charges – Till September 2023  
Weight of the Aircraft Parking Charges Rates per 
Hour 
Parking Charges Rates per Hour 
Upto 25 MT INR 3per Hour per MT INR 6per Hour per MT 
Above 25 MT upto 50 
MT 
INR 75 + INR 4per Hour per 
MT in excess of 25 MT 
INR 150 + INR 8per Hour per MT 
in excess of 25 MT 
Above 50 MT upto 100 
MT 
INR 175 + INR 8per Hour per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
INR 350.0 + INR 16per Hour per 
MT in excess of 50 MT 
Above 100 MT upto 200 
MT 
INR 575 + INR 10per Hour 
per MT in excess of 100 MT 
INR 1,150 + INR 20per Hour per 
MT in excess of 100 MT 
Above 200 MT INR 1,575 + INR 11per Hour 
per MT in excess of 200 MT 
INR 3,150 + INR 22per Hour per 
MT in excess of 200 MT 
No parking charges shall be levied for first two hours. 

86 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) – Till September 2023  
Till September 2023  Dom. embarking pax - Rs 426 Intl. embarking pax - R s 561 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation – NA 
 
11. MangaluruInternational Airport, Mangalore  
Landing Charges – 
(Rate in INR per MT)  
Flight Weight of 
aircraft 
1st  April 2023 to 
31 st  March 2024 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025  
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  March 2026 
Domestic Upto 100 MT 700 900 950 
International 950 1,200 1,450 
 
Parking Charges – 
(Rate in INR per MT)  
  Weight of 
aircraft 
Domestic 
Flight 
International 
Flight 
1st  April 2023 to 
31 st  March 2024 
Parking charges (First two 
hours after free parking 
period) 
Upto 100 MT 28.00 8.00 
Parking charges (beyond 
four hours) 
56.00 16.00 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2025 
Parking charges (First two 
hours after free parking 
period) 
49.30 28.00 
Parking charges (beyond 
four hours) 
98.60 56.00 
1st  April 2025 to 
31 st  March 2026 
Parking charges (First two 
hours after free parking 
period) 
49.30 89.60 
Parking charges (beyond 
four hours) 
98.60 179.20 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) –  
1
st  April 2023 to 31 st  March 
2024  
Dom. embarking pax - Rs 560 
Dom. disembarking pax - Rs 
240 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,015  
Intl. disembarking pax - Rs 435 
1st  April 2024 to 31 st  March 
2025 
Dom. embarking pax - Rs 700 
Dom. disembarking pax - Rs 
300 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,050 
Intl. disembarking pax - Rs 450 
1st  April 2025 to 31 st  March 
2026  
Dom. embarking pax - Rs 735 
Dom. disembarking pax - Rs 
315 
Intl. embarking pax - Rs 1,120 
Intl. disembarking pax - Rs 480 
Fuel Infrastructure Charges –Applicable rates from1 st  April 2023 to 31 st  March 2026  
Fuel Infrastructure Aircraft Defueling Aircraft Re- fueling of defueled 

87 
 
Charges (Incl. Aircraft 
Refueling) 
product 
Within 24 hrs Beyond 24 hrs 
Rs 1,830 per KL Rs 300 per KL Rs 350 per KL Rs 400 per KL 
 
X-Ray screening Charges –                                                                                                                             
                                   
(Rate in INR)  
 Type of flight Applicable Charge  
(per departure flight) 
1st  February 2023 to 
31 st  March 2024  
Domestic flights with seats up to 100 Nos Rs 5,000 
Domestic flights with seats more than 100 Nos Rs 9, 000 
International flight (all flights) Rs 16,000 
1st  April 2024 to 
31 st  March 2026 
Domestic flights with seats up to 100 Nos Rs 7,000 
Domestic flights with seats more than 100 Nos Rs 12 ,000 
International flight (all flights) Rs 16,000 
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – NA 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation– NA 
 
12. Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport, Mumbai  
 
Landing Charges – Applicable Rate for 1 
st April 2023 to 31 st  March 2024 
 Particulars Rate per Landing (Rs.) 
Domestic Landing Charges Upto 100 MT Rs 655.94 per MT 
More than 100 MT Rs 65594 + Rs 879.33 per MT 
 
 Particulars Rate per Landing (Rs.) 
International Landing 
Charges 
Minimum charges on GA aircrafts 37,160 
Code C 95,070 
Code D 1,04,580 
Code E 1,90,120 
Code F 3,04,210 
 
Parking Charges – Applicable Rate for 1 
st April 2023 to 31 st  March 2024 
Remote Parking 
Weight of the Aircraft Parking Charges (Rate per MT  per hour) 
 For 2.5 - 3.5 hours >3.5 hours 
Upto 100 MT Rs. 12.27 per MT  Rs. 18.41 per MT  
Above 100 MT Rs. 1227.17 + Rs. 16.25 per MT  Rs. 1840.75 + Rs. 24.37 per MT  
 
In Contact Stand Parking 
Weight of the Aircraft Parking Charges (Rate per MT  per hour) 
 For 2.5 - 3.5 hours >3.5 hours 
Upto 100 MT Rs. 12.27 per MT  Rs. 36.82 per MT  
Above 100 MT Rs. 1227.17 + Rs. 16.25 per MT  Rs. 3681.5 + Rs. 48.75 per MT  
 

88 
 
User Development Fee (UDF) –  
Per departing intl. pax.  I" April 2023 to 31 st  March 2024 
 
For tickets issued against INR tariff - Rs 187 
For tickets issued against foreign currency tariff - US $ 2.70 
No UDF for domestic passengers  
 
Airport Development Fee (ADF/ DF) – DF @ Rs 100/- per domestic embarking pax and @ Rs 
600/- per international embarkingpax till June 30, 2023. 
 
Passenger Service Fee (PSF) – Facilitation– NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

89 
 
Annexure-VII 
 
The replies of various private airlines to the queries of the Committee as regards Dynamic 
Pricing of Airfares 
 
Air Asia 
 stated that dynamic airfare is a globally accepted  phenomenon where airfares tend to 
adjust in line with supply-demand balance. It has b een proven by decades of existence of airlines 
that this dynamic pricing principle makes consumers  better off than the fixed pricing. The 
dynamic fares allow airlines to offer different far es at different periods of booking horizon to 
different customer segment. It is based on forecast ing demand from customer segments at 
different price levels and then allocating seat inv entory accordingly at these different price levels 
to match the forecasted demand. Therefore the famil y travellers, students, senior citizens etc. 
who are more price sensitive and tend to book in ad vance get access to seat inventory allocated 
to low fares. As the low fare seat inventory gets exhausted, the fares offered move up in line with 
the demand of higher affordability customers. There fore, the corporate travellers who have 
higher affordability and book last minute see highe r fares than the price sensitive travellers 
booking in advance.  
 
Air Asia 
 added that a significant portion of the seat inven tory is often sold even below the 
average cost per seat to be able to attract customers who may have low affordability. Every flight 
operated by an airline involves a high amount of fi xed cost with a very small component of cost 
being variable with the number of passengers onboar d. Therefore, a vacant seat is a perishable 
inventory and hence it makes sense for airlines to fill the seats even if such fares are lower than 
the average cost per seat. This shows that the dyna mic pricing approach adopted by airlines 
works in the interest of consumers as many consumer s with lower affordability are able to get 
access to seat inventory which would have otherwise gone unsold.  
Therefore, if the demand for a particular departure  date is low we may see that the inventory of 
the low fare buckets continues to remain available for a long booking horizon. On the other hand, 
for high demand departure dates the seat inventory in different fare buckets tends to get 
exhausted quickly and one may witness a rapid movement of fares.  
 
Air India  informed the Committee that they offer multiple Fa re levels/ Bucket fares on its flight. 
Pricing for any flight changes based on demand, sea sonality, and competition fare. Generally 
lower fare buckets are available when tickets are p urchased in advance and the fares 
progressively increases closer to the departure dat e. The airline pricing is highly elastic and is 
driven by market conditions. Most airlines follow a  similar concept of pricing based on demand, 
seasonality, competition, etc. Pricing for an airli ne depends on business model and respective 
optimisation strategies. All fares offered by Air India are transparent, published fares, multi-level 
with given validity and are not changed arbitrarily . Full list of all Air India Domestic fares are 
also sent to DGCA on a regular basis maintaining full transparency.  
 

90 
 
GoFirst  also informed the Committee that as per the global practices, dynamic fare pricing model 
works on the methodology of seats available, demand  and supply of the product, days gap 
between booking date and date of travel. Dynamic fa re pricing are specific marked driven and 
globally accepted. An airline creates its own fare structure using limited number of price point 
based on the reservation booking designator (RBD) a nd they publish them. Airline passengers 
deserve to know the full, true cost of their flight s before they buy a ticket. The airlines has 365 
days open window booking policy to its customers wh ere customers can access the fares in 
advance to decide. 
 
Indigo 
 stated that like most airlines across the world, t hey also follow the practice of ‘revenue 
management’ which involves varying prices according  to changes in demand and available 
capacity. Revenue management takes into account dem and & supply and also variations in 
demand – by season, during the day of the week, tim e of day, directionality, number of days 
before the flight, etc. An airline seat is perishab le inventory, which means that once a flight has 
departed, the unsold seat inventory has no value. A s regards transparency in airfares, they adhere 
to Air Transport Circular 02 of 2010 wherein airlin es are required to display on their respective 
websites the tariff sheet route-wise across their n etwork in various fare categories and the 
manner it is offered in the market. Airlines do not  charge airfares outside the ranges declared by 
us. 
 
SpiceJet 
 added that the dynamic pricing model is based on the principles of revenue management 
parameters of which are universal to all airline li ke price elasticity to demand, perishable 
inventory, targeted customer base, market dynamics etc. As an airline, their fares are updated on 
their website and hence is clearly visible in public domain. 
 
Vistara 
 stated that the market demand and supply of seats,  competition, Fixed and variable cost, 
Inflation, etc are followed in the dynamic fare pri cing model. The logic for a dynamic pricing 
structure is same for both Domestic and Internation al carriers.  All the fares being charged for 
domestic operation are displayed in their website. In addition, the airlines also shares the list of 
the all the fares with DGCA on a daily basis. 
 
  

91 
 
Annexure-VIII 
 
The replies of various private airlines to the queries of the Committee as regards 
Differential Pricing  
 
Air Asia 
 replied to the queries of the Committee and stated  that the seat selection pricing is 
rooted in the product ‘unbundling’ philosophy of lo w-cost-carrier business model whereby the 
airlines is able to offer the basic product at the lowest possible fare and charge separately for 
various amenities only to those passengers who see a utility in such amenities. The differential 
pricing for seat selection is therefore based on th e value ascribed by the passengers to different 
types of seats. Different seats in an aircraft offer different benefits to customers:  
1. Seat Pitch – First row and Emergency row seats generally have a larger leg room  
2. Boarding and De-boarding preference – First few rows on an aircraft offer a faster 
boarding and de-boarding experience to customers and hence preferred by customers who 
may be time sensitive.  
3. Window / Aisle – Windows offer views outside an aircraft which are preferred by some 
customers and Aisle seats offer quick access to cus tomers who may wish to stretch their 
legs or access washrooms.  
In case a passenger does not want to pay for a pref erred seat, then he or she gets assigned a seat 
based on availability for free.  
 
Further, pricing for seats are decided based on the  benefits offered by different types of seats to 
consumers. Just like the ticket fare if the seat-assignment pricing is too high the customers would 
not be willing to pay for it and anyways the airlin e would end up assigning such a seat for free. 
Therefore it is not in the interest of the airline to price the seat higher than the value ascribed by  
the customer for such a preferred seat. We monitor the take-up rate of such preferred seats on 
different routes and adjust pricing accordingly such that we are able to maximise the take-up rate 
of such paid seat selection.  
 
As regards the reasons for not following the princi ple of equity in fixing prices for seats in the 
aircraft, Air Asia responded that Customers who do not want to pay for a seat need not pay and 
are assigned seats automatically. Also, if customer s want to select a specific seat based on their 
preference, the seat price is declared in advance in a transparent manner. 
 
Air India  informed the Committee that as a global practice, the charges associated with a seat are 
primarily based on the seat type, the space that it offers and its position in the cabin and customer 
choice. For this purpose, pricing seats are primari ly categorised as bulkhead, emergency exit, 
window, aisle and middle. The bulkhead and emergenc y seats are offered at a specific price as 
they have greater legroom and offer passengers more  comfort, while all other seats are 
categorised as window and aisle. Further, pricing is generally based on type of seat, features such 
as space, comfort and position in cabin.  
 

92 
 
Air India’s  focus is to offer the customer the choice and let them select what best addresses their 
needs. Air India offers a seat to all passengers fr ee of cost with random seat allocation through 
the system. Passenger is only asked to pay in case of selection of preferred seat different from the 
allocated seat. Even then for Air India, on an aver age over 45% - 55% of seats are offered to the 
customers free of charge which they are free to sel ect based on availability. All available seats 
are free of charge, 4 hours prior to departure and at the airport. In addition to the above, Air India 
does not charge any fees for Bassinet seats (Passen gers travelling with infants) and for seat 
selection in Business and First class. 
 
GoFirst  stated that the reason for having differential pri cing for seat selection within the same 
flight is because of individual specific preference / feasibility/ availability/ ease of access and 
convenience. They also have free auto assign of sea ts within 6 hrs prior departure flight. Airline 
may offer different types of seats at different pri ce to cater different market.  Further, they added 
that the reasons for not following the principle of  equity in fixing prices for seats in the aircraft,  
are that a low-cost carrier (LCC) is an airline tha t minimizes ticket prices and offer different 
types of seats at different price to cater different market. 
 
Indigo  informed the Committee that differential seat pric ing is a global practice. Seat selection 
pricing is an element of the practice of unbundling  of fares that is followed by all airlines and is 
done to reduce the cost of travel for consumers who  desire only the basic product, viz., air travel 
without any frills. Offering such airfares not only  makes air travel more affordable, but also 
reduces the cost of air travel, thereby stimulating  the demand for air travel – a factor that has 
contributed significantly to the high growth rate a nd continued prospects for air travel in India. 
Indigo fixes prices for seats in line with overall market dynamics, type of seat (e.g. extra leg-
room), etc, and the price so fixed is unique to eac h airline in line with each airline’s own cost 
base. 
 
SpiceJet 
 stated that differential seat pricing is a global norm in the aviation sector both for low 
cost and full service carriers which is based on th e comfort that customer’s associate with it and 
at same time willing to pay slightly higher in orde r to avail such comfort. Airline decides on the 
pricing of different seats on the basis of the benefits of such seats. 
 
Vistara  submitted that the reason for having differential pricing for seat selection within the same 
flight is to give the opportunity to all the passen gers to select a seat of their choice in advance. 
This is decided based on the convenience, demand an d supply and competition benchmarking. 
By charging with unbundling of seat, airlines are g iving opportunity to the passengers to select a 
seat of their choice in advance. Further, Vistara h as Business and Premium economy as free seat 
selection and on Economy cabin, they have only 60% chargeable seat. 
 

93 
 
Annexure-IX  
 
Mechanism followed by AERA for arriving at Airport Tariffs 
 
Step 1:  The Airport Operator/Service Provider submits Mult i Year Tariff Proposal in respect of 
determination of tariff for aeronautical service at the Major Airport. 
 
Step 2:  AERA floats a Consultation Paper (CP) putting forw ard its proposals (duly supported by 
reasons, assumptions, and, analysis for each propos al) which is placed on the website along with 
the Airport Operator's tariff proposal (MYTP) invit ing comments from stakeholders. AERA 
gives a stipulated timeline of one month to the stakeholders for the comments. 
 
Step 3:  During this period, AERA also holds an interactive  session (physical or virtual) of 
consultation with all the stakeholders giving them equal opportunity to provide verbal/written 
comments on the Consultation paper within the stipulated timeline. 
 
Step 4:  Minutes of the stakeholders meeting are issued and uploaded on the AERA's website. 
 
Step 5:  The stakeholders give verbal/written comments to t he Authority within the stipulated 
time. Stakeholder's comments including that of the Airport Operator and counter comments on 
other stakeholder comments are also placed in the public domain. 
 
Step 6:  AERA follows a robust and transparent Consultation  process while determines tariff for 
the Aeronautical services by ensuring the following : Holding due consultations with all the 
Stakeholders. Allowing all the Stakeholders to make  their submissions to the Authority in a 
stipulated timeline. Making all the decisions of th e Authority fully documented and explained in 
the final Tariff Order. 
 
Step 7:  In the tariff order itself the comments of the sta keholders, Airport Operator and the 
counter comments by the Airport Operator are analyz ed vis-à-vis  the Authority's proposals. 
Thus, the interest of all the consumers /stakeholde rs are addressed through this extensive and 
transparent consultation process. 
 
Step 8:  AERA Act, 2008, also provides an opportunity to th e Stakeholders to appeal before the 
Appellate Tribunal against any Orders issued by AERA. 
  

94 
 
Annexure-X 
 
The replies of various private airlines to the queries of the Committee as regards Regional 
Connectivity Scheme (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) 
 
Air Asia 
 informed the Committee that Air India Express (AIX ) Connect does not operate any 
RCS UDAN routes currently as it could not participa te in earlier rounds of bidding due to non-
availability of aircrafts and other resources in th e past. AIX Connect looks forward to 
participating in the recently announced RCS 5.0 bid  and improving air connectivity in the 
unserved / underserved regions of India. 
 
Indigo 
 stated that they follow in full, the norms prescri bed in the RCS with regard to number of 
RCS seats to be offered and the RCS airfares to be offered for such seats. Indigo has 
operationalised all RCS routes awarded to it in pre vious RCS rounds. Further, for RCS routes / 
flights also, Indigo applies revenue management. 
 
SpiceJet 
 apprised that they have been actively participatin g in the RCS, since inception of the 
Scheme and they are well known for connecting unserved and underserved markets. In the recent 
past, they have developed many RCS stations and also added several non-RCS flights from these 
Airports. Kandla, Jaisalmer and Bhavnagar are the r eal time examples. Majority of their RCS 
routes are operational. However, when the Airlines see a significant drop in the loads due to 
seasonality and poor passenger demand, these flight s are stopped to minimize their losses for a 
certain period of time. 
 
SpiceJet also highlighted certain difficulties bein g faced by them in participating in the RCS 
Scheme. At times, the Airlines are not able to gene rate good revenue due to very poor demand, 
which results in losses to the Airline. Further, it  takes more than 3 years to establish such 
flights/routes which are either unserved or underse rved. Hence, they recommended that the 
Government should increase the exclusivity period o f an RCS route from 3 years to 5 years. 
They also suggested that the Government should look  into revision in VGF value only for those 
particular routes where the stage length is much hi gher and the passenger demand is very low. 
VGF tenure shall be increased from 3 years to 5 yea rs. Also, should look into revision in VGF 
value only for those particular routes where the st age length is much higher and the passenger 
demand is very low. Government should offer more be nefits like exclusivity on the routes, 
relaxation in statutory taxes, rebate on fuel & oth er airport charges. Also make these Tier 2 & 3 
airports available for 24 hours’ operation as in th e current scenario most of the these airports 
doesn’t have the night operation facility which is big constraint for an airline to plan the flights 
from such airports. The infrastructure development will definitely play a vital role to make these 
airports operational. 
 
 

95 
 
Annexure-XI 
 
The replies of APAO to the queries of the Committee as regards Access to Reserved 
Lounges at Airports  
 
APAO in their written reply, stated the following:  
• Bengaluru International Airport Limited (BIAL) is n ot allowing ineligible persons to 
access reserved lounge at Kempegowda International Airport, Bengaluru (KIAB). The 
reserve lounge at KIAB is not used for commercial p urpose on chargeable basis. The use 
of reserved lounge at KIAB is strictly done as per the list of entitled persons captured in 
Annexure-B of Aviation Security (AVSEC) circular: A V 20036/22/2003-AAI. dated 5 
th  
May, 2010.  
• Mumbai International Airport Limited (MIAL) is not allowing ineligible persons to 
access the reserved lounges at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport 
(CSMIA). The reserved lounges at CSMIA are not used  for commercial purpose or on a 
chargeable basis. The use of reserved lounge at CSM IA is strictly done as per the list of 
entitled persons captured in Annexure-B of AVSEC ci rcular: AV 20036/22/2003-AAI 
dated 5 th  May, 2010.  
• GMR Hyderabad International Airport Limited (GHIAL)  Reserve lounges doesn’t have 
any provision of ineligible persons to access on a chargeable basis. GHIAL Reserve 
lounges offer services only for designated dignitar ies and officials who are entitled. 
Ineligible guests are diverted to the commercial lounge. 
• The reserved lounges at Delhi International Airport  Limited (DIAL) are offering services 
to only entitled dignitaries and officials. DIAL do  not provide service in the reserved 
lounge to anyone who is not authorized or ineligible and in case of any query, the same is 
diverted to commercial lounges in the terminal. The re is no provision of charging any 
sort of admission fee in the reserved lounges.  
 
APAO also informed the Committee of the following s teps that are being taken to ensure that 
access to the reserved lounge is restricted to elig ible persons only and that separate lounge 
facilities are available for other persons:  
• BIAL has provided separate commercial lounges that are available on chargeable basis to 
passengers and other users. 
• MIAL has personnel manning the Reserved Lounges to ensure that only entitled 
dignitaries access the lounges. MIAL has separate c ommercial lounges for use by other 
passengers.  
• GMR Hyderabad International Airport Limited (GHIAL):  
/head2right Entitled guest list is displayed at all the Reserved lounges.  
/head2right Access to the Reserved lounge will be provided only  upon presenting ID card and 
boarding pass.  

96 
 
/head2right All the boarding passes are scanned to eliminate th e entry of any ineligible Person & 
the same is recorded on daily basis.  
/head2right Commercial lounge is available for ineligible perso ns who want to access lounge 
services at the airport.  
• DIAL: 
/head2right The list of entitled guest is always available at t he reception of reserved lounges and 
accordingly entry is allowed.  
/head2right All the boarding passes are scanned, to eliminate the entry of any ineligible Person.  
/head2right Apart from this, if any ineligible person reaches t he reserved lounge, they are politely 
diverted to commercial lounges at the airport. 
 
***** 

97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

98 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
  
The    Committee    met    at    3:00 P.M.    on    Wednesday,   the    5th April, 2023 in 
Committee Room – ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
  
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
  
5. Shri Tapir Gao  
6. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
7. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
12. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
13. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav ‘Nirahua’ 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) 

99 
 
Shri Satyan Nayar, Secretary-General 
Indigo 
Shri Wolfgang Prock-Schauer, President & Chief Operating Officer 
Air Vistara 
Shri Deepak Rajawat, Chief Commercial Officer 
Air Asia 
Shri Aloke Singh, Chief Executive Officer 
Air India 
Dr. Amit Kumar Pandey, Head-Government and Regulatory Affairs  
SpiceJet 
Shri Ajay Singh, Chairman and Managing Director 
GoFirst 
Shri Kaushik Khona, Chief Executive Officer 
  
     (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure)  
  
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
  
2.         The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses who were 
present. The Chairman informed that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the representatives of 
various Private Airlines and the Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) on the issue of 
fixing airfares. The Chairman asked the representatives of various Private Airlines and the 
APAO to brief the Committee on the following points: 
i. The basis and ratio nale for fixing the prices by the private airlines and reasons for 
charging exorbitant airfares from passengers, which are sometimes even higher than the 
international airfares; 
ii. Reasons for charging exorbitant prices for seat-booking in flights having vacant seats; 
iii. Remedial measures that may be taken by the Government, private airlines and airport 
operators to ensure that air connectivity is within reach of the common people; 
iv. Challenges being faced by private airlines in offering affordable flights to passe ngers 
while managing reasonable profitability; 
v. Views of the private airlines regarding possibly prescribing a reasonable upper cap on 
airfares, depending on the flight duration to make air connectivity accessible to the 
common man and whether the absence o f a lower cap on airfares is causing any 
difficulties for nascent and small airline operators in the country; 

100 
 
vi. the potential solutions to ensure that connectivity to RCS airports does not 
overwhelmingly depend on the operations of a specific airline; 
vii. Whether the private airlines are off -loading the losses incurred by them on RCS routes, 
on the economically viable routes; 
viii. The impact of progressive increase in ATF on the airfares; and 
ix. The amount of losses incurred by the private airlines to operate the flights  under UDAN 
scheme. 
3. The representative of Indigo informed the Committee that private airlines went through a 
difficult phase during two years of COVID pandemic. It operates on 71 domestic destinations 
and follows a dynamic pricing system/strategy, adopted by all airlines across the world, 
depending on various factors such as days of weeks, seasons, daytime and non -stop flight 
conveniences etc. and reasonable airfares are being charged. 
4. The Chairman queried whether the same lease amount is paid for a particular aircraft 
configuration by various private airlines and whether the airline pays for wet/dry lease at times 
when an aircraft is grounded on account of engine repair. The representatives of GoAir informed 
the Committee that  as per the contract cla uses, they pay for the lease rent which is initially 
contracted for a longer period of eight or ten years. The Committee was further informed that the 
airline has grounded 25 aircraft due to the Pratt & Whitney engine issue. The cost of lease also 
varies from country to country, airlines and other factors. 
5. The representatives of Air Asia informed the Committee that a robust ‘competition law’ 
and ‘consumer protection’ regime exists in the country which effectively controls airfares. The 
airline also operates a large number of narrow -body aircraft acquired/bought under the low -cost 
model. 
6. The representatives of Vistara informed the Committee that it is a 51:49 joint venture 
between Tata Sons and Singapore Airlines. The airline has been operating in 32 domestic  
destinations within India since the last eight years and has a high cost structure which makes it 
difficult for it to survive in the aviation market, which results in high fares. 
7. The Chairman asked the APAO to place before the Committee, its views on the issue of 
exorbitant airfares and the possible measures to tackle the same, feasibility of charging lower 
User Development Fees (UDF), Passenger Service Fees and Air Navigation Service (ANS) 
charges on regional routes. The representatives of APAO informed t he Committee that APAO 
has no role to play in the fixing of air fares as these are determined by the Airports Economic 

101 
 
Regulatory Authority (AERA). In case of smaller airports having a throughput of less than 3.5 
million, such as Delhi and Mumbai airports,  airfares are determined by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation (MoCA) and there is no UDF. 
8. Some Members highlighted the unruly/rude behavior of a particular private airline staff 
and manhandling of passengers. In response to the query, the representative infor med the 
Committee that the airline conducts a ‘Net Promoter Score’ on its crew to assess their behaviour 
and currently it is the highest as far as cabin crew is concerned, amongst all airlines. 
9. The representatives of SpiceJet informed the Committee that it  was SpiceJet that 
participated in the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS -UDAN) when no other airline was 
willing to do so. Cities with zero connectivity like Darbhanga, Jharsuguda, Kishangarh, and 
Pakyong have been provided air connectivity by SpiceJet. Fo r years, the aviation sector has been 
incurring huge losses and COVID came as a massive blow to private airlines. Soaring oil prices 
due to Russia -Ukraine conflict and supply -chain issues have led to aircraft being grounded. An 
attempt is being made to ove rcome some of the deficit. The Committee also desired to hear the 
views of representatives of all the private airlines and APAO, again, at a later date. 
10. Members also raised various queries pertaining to the following issues:-  
 slabs and categories of airfares, 
 need for similar fares across airlines, 
 breakup of the cost of airfares, 
 high ticket and seat booking charges,  
 parking charges etc. levied by the private airlines,  
 day-to-day fluctuation of airfares,  
 dynamic pricing system/strategy followed by the private airlines to charge airfares from 
passengers,  
 low-cost airlines charging higher prices as compared to their full -service counterparts on 
the same routes,  
 unruly/improper behavior of airline staff,  
 crowded airline buses and lack of bus service at airports,  
 establishing price regulation mechanism for seat booking,  
 provision of more direct regular flights from Dimapur to Delhi,  
 basket mechanism for airfares etc.  

102 
 
11. The representatives of various Private Airlines and the APAO responded to some of the  
queries raised by the Members and took note of the suggestions made by the Members. The 
Chairman directed that written replies to the points which had not been answered may be sent 
within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13. The meeting adjourned at 5:14 PM. 
 
New Delhi,              Swarabji B. 
5th April, 2023                                                                                             Director 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

103 
 
Annexure 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
3:00 P.M. 
Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Satyan Nayar Secretary General 
  
Air India 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Dr. Amit Kumar Pandey Head, Government & Regulatory Affairs 
  
Indigo 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Wolfgang Prock-
Schauer President & Chief Operating Officer 
2. Shri Vikram Chona Vice President, Corporate Affairs 
3. Shri Rajan Malhotra Vice President, Aeropolitical Affairs & Partnerships 
4. Shri Praveen Gupta Director 
  
Air Vistara 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Deepak Rajawat Chief Commercial Officer 
2. Shri Moinuddin Wasil AVP- Regulatory Affairs 
  
Air Asia 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Aloke Singh Chief Executive Officer 
2. Shri Ankur Garg Chief Commercial Officer 
3. Shri Pratik Majumdar DGM, Commercial/ Head, Revenue Management 
  
SpiceJet 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Ajay Singh Chairman and Managing Director 
2. Shri C. S. Palani Vice President, Corporate Affairs & Flight Operations 
3. Shri Navneet Kumar Vice President, Sales 
 
GoFirst 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Kaushik Khona Chief Executive Officer 
2. Shri Mohit Dwivedi Head, Corporate Affairs 
* * * * 

104 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 8th May, 2023 in Committee Room ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan  
9. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Civil Aviation  
 Shri Rajiv Bansal, Secretary 
 Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Director General, Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
 Shri Zulfiqar Hasan, Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 

105 
 
 Ms. Puja Singh Mandol, Director General, Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau  
 Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Chairman, Airports Authority of India 
 Shri B. S. Bhullar, Chairperson, Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India  
     (Complete list of witnesses who attended the meeting is attached as Annexure)  
  
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members the Chairman and informed that as 
per the Study -visit guidelines issued by Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, either the Joint 
Secretary/ Director/ Additional Director can accompany the Committee on tour however the 
Director is not eligible to accompany as he had already been on tours earlier. One of the 
Members asked for the verbatim record of the earlier meeting of the Committee as well as a copy 
of the guidelines issued by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard. The Committee 
decided to discuss the matter after hea ring the witnesses on the subject, as per the agenda for the 
day.   
3.         The Chairman then informed that the first agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the two draft Reports on the subjects: (i) 'Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities 
and the Challenges of Retrieving and Safeguarding Our Tangible Cultural Heritage'; and (ii) 
‘Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in 
Defence Airports’. The Committee, thereafter, considered  and adopted the draft Report on 
'Heritage Theft – The Illegal Trade in Indian Antiquities and the Challenges of Retrieving and 
Safeguarding Our Tangible Cultural Heritage'. For the other Report, upon the request of some 
Members, it was decided by the Comm ittee that the Report on ‘Development of Greenfield and 
Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports’ will be 
considered and adopted at a later date.   
4.         The Committee then proceeded with the second agenda of the  meeting i.e. to hear the 
views of the Secretary, of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the ‘Issue of Fixing of Airfares’. 
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
5.      The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and Senior Officers of the Ministry of C ivil 
Aviation. The Chairman informed that the Ministry has been called to share their views and 
valuable suggestions on the existing rules/regulations and policies pertaining to the fixing of 
airfares and the challenges faced thereto.  He remarked that pos t the deregulation of the  Indian 
domestic aviation market, it is up to the airlines to provide air services to/from any airport in the 
country depending on their operational and commercial viabilities. Further, the fare caps 
imposed on domestic airlines du ring the Coronavirus pandemic have been removed w.e.f. 31st 
August, 2022. He also highlighted that airline pricing runs in multiple levels i.e., buckets or 

106 
 
Reservation Booking Designator (RBDs) which is in consonance with the practice being 
followed globally and airlines are free to fix reasonable tariffs under the provisions of sub -rule 
(1) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937, having regard to all relevant factors. He further 
desired that the Secretary may brief the Committee on the following points: 
i. Remedial measures to be taken up to ensure that air connectivity is within the reach of the 
common people; 
ii. Safeguards built to ensure that misleading information related to seat/ fare is not 
published on the website of private airlines;  
iii. Steps taken by the Ministry in respect of the recommendation given by the Committee in 
its 339 th Report regarding the  formulation of a pricing mechanism for airfares to keep a 
check on exorbitant prices and to empower the Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
(DGCA) to regulate the tariffs;    
iv. Details of regulatory mechanisms, rules and instruments being used by DGCA to check 
the exploitation of market position or any distortion in the market by private airlines; 
v. Steps taken to exercise capping of upper and lower prices; and  
vi. Role of AERA in determining tariffs.  
6.         The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation made a brief presentation on the subject 
and apprised the Committee of the present regulatory provisions for fixing of airfares is governed 
by sub -rule (1) of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 w hich permits the airlines to fix the 
reasonable tariff based on various factors viz., cost of operations, characteristics of services, 
reasonable profit and generally prevailing tariff. He also added that the airlines have to remain 
compliant to the provis ions of the said Rule by ensuring that the fare charged by them does not 
exceed the established fare as displayed on their website and by maintaining all records relating 
to established tariffs. Further, he highlighted the specifics of the various DGCA cir culars issued 
to scheduled domestic airlines directing them to upload fare sheets displaying fares offered 
across their network and to disclose all fees for optional services on an ‘opt -in’ basis through a 
prominent link on their website.   
7.         The Committee was informed about the different components of the airfare including the 
airline component, other agency components and Government levies. The Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that worldwide, the fare structure is governed by Re servation 
Booking Designators (RBDs), based on the IATA Resolution 728, which identifies the code for 
various booking classes. He also added that as per these buckets, the lower fare is available for 
the advance booking and as the time lapse, the fare on t he higher side of the fare bucket is made 

107 
 
available by the airlines. Further, he underlined that the airlines are free to customize their RBD -
to-cabin mapping for different classes viz., First (4 levels), Business (5 levels) and Economy (13 
levels) and codes viz., season (tourist/festive), part of the week, part of the day and others, while 
deciding the fare structure.  
8.         The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that being a 
capital-intensive business, the airlines ope rate in an extremely competitive environment and 
worldwide, various airline operators have discontinued their operations on account of continuous 
unsustainable losses. He also stressed upon the financial performance of major Indian scheduled 
carriers in th e last three years wherein a cumulative loss of Rs. 55,832/ - crores was reported in 
2019-20 which rose to Rs. 1,32,569/ - crores in 2021-22. He further stated that Air Turbine Fuel 
(ATF) accounts for approximately 40% of total cost of operation depending on  the aircraft type 
and volatility in the ATF prices leads to cost fluctuations.   
9.         The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that DGCA has a Tariff Monitoring 
Unit (TMU), setup in November, 2019 which monitors airfares on both monopo listic and 
competitive sectors, selected on a random basis, as per the Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937. 
He added that TMU keeps a check on predatory/ excessive pricing by airlines and monitors 
variation of airfares vis-à-vis previous month as well as compares average airfares offered by the 
low-cost and full -cost carriers. Further, he informed the Committee that as per the analysis of 
TMU for the month of April, 2023, airfares remained well within the fare bucket uploaded by the 
airlines on their respective website while the percentage of tickets sold in the highest fare bucket 
on the majority sectors is miniscule except few sectors. He also highlighted that though there was 
an increase of 88% in the ATF prices at Delhi, an increase of only 26% in airfa res was reported 
from December, 2019 to December, 2022.  
10.       The Committee was also informed about the various steps being taken by the Ministry to 
rationalize the airfares, viz., reduction in Value Added Tax on ATF in several States; tax 
concessions to Maintenance, Repair & Operations providers from 18% to 5%; provision of 
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) to the airlines for connecting tier -II and tier -III cities under the 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS); and seeking the intervention of Ministry of Fin ance to 
bring ATF under the ambit of Goods and Services Tax. 
11.       The Ministry informed the Committee that the Government has taken a conscious 
decision to deregulate airfares as the  increase in airfare in a few sectors is primarily due to Fuel 
Cost, Seasonality and Demand-Supply constraints and submitted that regulation of airfares is not 

108 
 
desirable for the overall growth of the aviation sector. The Ministry concluded that  fixation of 
airfare should be left to the respective airline operator. 
12.       On a query about the solution for exorbitant fares being charged by airlines, the Ministry 
replied that with the repeal of the Air Corporation Act, 1953 on 21st March, 1994, the domestic 
aviation was deregulated, and that is the present policy of the Ministry. The Chairman also 
remarked that the Ministry should consider various factors viz., operational and fixed expenses of 
airlines; reasons for airlines incurrin g losses; global trends; and comparison of prices between 
Indian and international operators, before concluding that a regulated tariff system is not 
advisable.      
13.       Various Members took exception to the Ministry’s concluding remarks that regulat ion of 
airfare is not desirable for the overall growth of the aviation sector and remarked that the 
Ministry should take appropriate actions in this regard. Members also raised various queries/ 
issues such as:- 
 Airlines which benefited from the 2004 amendm ent of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 
1937; 
 Details regarding CUTE fee and fee which goes to travel agencies; 
 Details of Bilateral A greements done by the Ministry, which will encourage the airlines 
industry and help in the dynamic pricing  and an  issue of a particular company having 
Bilateral Agreement of landing rights at Heathrow Airport, London was also raised; 
 Details of airports which are being given VGF under the RCS and how it has helped the 
flyers; 
 Definition of ‘hedging of fuels’ and global practice in this regard; 
 Details of State-wise reduced taxes on ATF; 
 Details and inputs given by the TMU of DGCA since its inception and evaluation of its 
role in monitoring airfares; 
 Possibility of proposing an Act or law enacting a uniform rate of taxes on ATF across the 
country; 
 Details of ATF prices being charged in other countries and countries with low ATF; 
 Breakup of airfare including the facility charges, Government taxes and others; 
 Losses incurred by SpiceJet airlines and reasons for the same; 
 Regulation of airfares especially during the festive season and profits being made by 
airlines during such period; 

109 
 
 Refusal to grant ‘point of call’ status to Indian airports thereby not allowing foreign 
airlines to operate in the country and leading to monopoly of certain domestic operators; 
 Exorbitant rates of tickets being charged on various routes between Gulf countries and 
Kerala and increase in fares due to hikes in landing, parking and user development fee; 
 Measures to be taken to increase airport capacity; 
 No direct flight on Delhi-Kannur-Delhi route; 
 Different airline operators are charging different fares in the same sector and the role of 
the Ministry in controlling the same; 
 Lack of air connectivity between Calicut/ Kannur and Delhi and discontinuation of flights 
from Kerala to Gulf countries; 
 Instances of passengers being denied boarding due to delays in the security check process 
and closure of boarding gates leading to mental and financial harassment; 
 Surge in airfares due to dynamic pricing method  being followed by airlines which at 
times leads to costlier tickets on domestic routes as compared to international routes; 
 Rationalizing airfare by reducing various fees viz., airport development, user 
development, passenger service, landing and parking; 
 Unavailability of proper grievance redressal mechanism for passengers and communicate 
with airlines; 
 Review of the Ministry’s decision to deregulate airfares in 1994, considering the current 
scenario; 
 Capping of the airfares to/from Manipur taking into ac count the present con dition in the 
State of Manipur; 
 Details regarding the share of basic fare in the total component excluding the taxes and 
other charges; 
 Requirement of upper capping of airfares while keeping in mind the interests of the 
airline operators; 
 Commission being charged by the travel agents for booking of tickets; 
 Monitoring of issues related to Pratt & Whitney engines due to which many aircraft have 
been grounded; 
 Available global practice for deciding fares and Indian standing in this regard; 
 Surge in airfares even when numerous seats are not booked  and specific reference was 
given to Goa-Delhi sector; 

110 
 
 Capacity constraints like infrastructure along with the closure of airlines, and high 
demand leading to higher prices; 
 Figures related to the financial performance of airlines in the year 2022 -23 to project the 
growth and recovery of losses post the pandemic; 
 Absolute implementation of all the Clauses of Rule 135 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 
including provision for air transport undertakings to e stablish tariffs having regard to 
reasonable profits and display of fares in the office of airlines and agent; 
 Airlines fixing airfares on their own as per the revenue management policy and not 
adhering to the clause of reasonable profit under  Rule135(1) of Aircraft Rules, 1937; 
 Granting ‘point of call’ status to Indian airports allowing international airlines to operate 
in India which may result in better services and competition for domestic operators; 
 Airlines fuelling their tanks with additional ATF from States with low taxes, reducing the 
passenger load and increasing the fares; and 
 Airlines to display the total number of seats available on t he website alongwith the 
fares.   
14.       The Chairman of the Committee asked the Ministry to seek financial d etails viz., Capital 
investment, working capital, operational revenue expenditure and fixed cost to calculate and 
decide the reasonable profit to be levied by airlines. He also enquired about the steps taken by 
DGCA to stop the practice of 'arms-lengh pricing' by the airline operators. The Director General, 
DGCA replied that the airlines, as part of regulatory provisions, do furnish their audited annual 
financial statements to DGCA by 31 st December every year. He also added that as per the 
relevant rules, DGCA is not empowered with the economic regulation of civil aviation. 
15.       A Member of the Committee queried about the capping of fares during the Covid 
pandemic. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation replied that the regulation of fares was 
imposed by the Ministry to take care of an emergency situation. The Chairman of the Committee 
also asked the Ministry to examine the possibility of seeking financial data from airlines at  
shorter intervals to ascertain the reasonable profits and arrive at the tariffs. 
16.       The Secretary took note of all queries and suggestions made by the Members. The 
Chairman gave a list of ten questions on the subject to the Ministry and  directed th at written 
replies to the ten questions and also to the points which had not been answered may be sent 
within two weeks. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 

111 
 
17.       The Committee resumed the discussion around guidelines regarding number of officials 
who may be  permitted to accompany a Parliamentary Committee. The Committee deliberated 
upon the issues in planning tours and the functioning of the Secretariat. The Committee also 
raised questions regarding the cancellation of the Study Visit of the Committee and it  was 
directed that it is the responsibility of the Secretariat to ensure that the Members would not be 
put to any hardship during the tour.      
18.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
19.       The meeting adjourned at 5.52 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                                     Swarabji B. 
8th May, 2023                                                                                                                   Director 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

112 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
  
03.30 P.M. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Rajiv Bansal Secretary, MoCA  
2. Shri Vikram Dev Dutt Director General, Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation (DGCA) 
3. Shri Zulfiqar Hasan Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
4. Ms. Puja Singh Mandol Director General, Aircraft Accident Investigation 
Bureau 
5. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Chairman, Airports Authority of India 
6. Shri B. S. Bhullar Chairperson, Airports Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India 
7. Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra Joint Secretary, MoCA 
8. Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary, MoCA 
9. Shri Asangba Chuba Ao Joint Secretary, MoCA 
10. Shri Padam Lal Negi Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor, MoCA 
11. Shri Pramod Kumar Thakur Deputy Director General, MoCA 
12. Shri O. P. Sharma Director (Parliament), MoCA 
13. Shri Ambuj Sharma Deputy Secretary, MoCA 
14. Shri Anup Pant Under Secretary (Parliament), MoCA 
15. Shri Rohit Thakur Deputy Director, DGCA 
  
* * * * 
  
  
 
 

113 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXIII 
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING  
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 29th May, 2023 in Room No. 53, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
 
 1.  Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
 
Rajya Sabha 
 2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
 3. Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak 
 4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
 5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
 6. Shri A. A. Rahim 
 7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 8. Shri Bharat Ram Margani 
 9. Shri Tapir Gao 
 10. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
 11. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
 12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
 13. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
 14. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
 15. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
 16. Shri Prince Raj 
 17. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
 18. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
 19. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 20. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
 21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
 Shri Swarabji B., Director 
 Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
 Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
 Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 

114 
 
  
         Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman 
  
**    **      **    ** 
 
2.        *     *      *      *1 
(The Committee re-assembled after lunch break) 
WITNESSES 
 Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) 
 Shri Satyan Nayar, Secretary-General 
 Air Asia 
 Shri Aloke Singh, Chief Executive Officer 
 Air India 
 Shri Campbell Wilson, Chief Executive Officer & Managing Director  
 Indigo 
 Shri Wolfgang Prock-Schauer, President & Chief Operating Officer 
 SpiceJet 
 Shri Ajay Singh, Chairman and Managing Director 
 Vistara 
 Shri Vinod Kannan, Chief Executive Officer 
     (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure)  
  
(After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
 
31.        The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses who were 
present. The Chairman informed that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the representatives of 
various Private Airlines and the Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO), further, on 
the subject “Issue of Fixing Airfares”. He stated that the Committee had discussed the various 
aspects related to establishing tariffs in accordance with Rule 135(1) of the Aircraft Rules, 19 37, 
in its last meeting. He also remarked that the Committee had sought information regarding 
Capital Investment; Working Capital; Fixed Cost; and Operational Revenue Expenditure which 
is taken into account to decide ‘reasonable profit’ and the tariff for various categories of seats in 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 

115 
 
a flight. He, however, noted that the airlines have not supplied that information. Further, he 
asked the representatives of various Private Airlines and the APAO to brief the Committee on 
the following points: 
i. The challenges being faced by them in offering affordable flights to passengers while 
managing reasonable profitability; 
ii. The components of airfare within the total airfare charged to the passengers; 
iii. Reasons for implementing a “Revenue Management” policy, instead of adher ing to the 
clauses of reasonable profit under Rule 135(1) of Aircraft Rules, 1937; 
iv. The details of the dynamic pricing policy being followed by airlines and steps taken to 
ensure more transparency for passengers;  
v. Details regarding the differential pricing policy wherein airlines offer passengers the 
option to select their seats on an aircraft at different prices;  
vi. Reasons for publication of wrong information on the airlines' website with respect to the 
number and prices of the tickets available on a flight; 
vii. The possibility of publishing fares on the website displaying the total number of seats 
available in different categories; 
viii. The information related to various fees being charged by airport operators  viz., user 
development fee, airport fee, parking/ landing  fee etc., and the feasibility of lowering 
such charges; and 
ix. The provision of extending concession by airport operators to airlines on selected routes 
under the RCS-UDAN. 
32. The Chairman of the Committee flagged an example of exorbitant and unreasonable f ares 
being charged by certain airlines on the flights from Delhi to Hyderabad, in the range of 
Rs.30,000/-Rs.48,000/- for economy class, whereas it should ordinarily cost about Rs.14,000/ - to 
Rs. 15,000/-. He stated that the Committee had asked for the information regarding financial data 
of airlines and in response they have informed that the financial information has been fairly 
taken into consideration while establishing tariffs. The Chairman again asked for detailed 
financial information. He also remark ed that the Committee may make a recommendation to 
constitute a separate monitoring body like the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), 
which will have quasi -judicial powers to enforce the airfares that are reasonable to be collected 
from passengers. 
33. The Chairman asked the airlines to furnish information about the number of seats offered 
to the lower strata of society at subsidized rates. He further added that along with the financial 
information in respect of Capital Invested; Working Capital;  Revenue Expenditure; Capital 
Expenditure; Fixed Cost; and Operating Expenditure, the airlines have to supply information 

116 
 
relating to the number of flights/aircraft, the total number of seats and sectors on which the 
airlines are operating, for considerati on of the Committee. The Chairman also gave a list of ten 
questions on the subject to the airlines and  directed that written replies may be sent to the 
Secretariat within one week. 
34. The representative of Air India informed the Committee that the airline  has not been 
profitable for some years and reported a loss before tax, of around Rs. 7,000/- crores each year in 
the last two financial years. He added that pricing for airlines is highly dynamic, complex, and 
consequential of the demand and supply by pas sengers. He mentioned that business class 
travellers are least price sensitive and book seats closer to the date of travel which in turn 
subsidizes the leisure travellers who book in advance. He also stated that airlines are there to 
serve the customers an d do not intend to overcharge, however, there are commercial interests 
that need to be self -regulated. He further highlighted an example of the fare charged on a 
Nagpur-Mumbai flight from 17 th to 23rd May, 2023, wherein only 1% of seats were sold at the 
highest fare on this sector i.e., Rs. 19,000/-. 
35. The representative of Air Asia deposed before the Committee that transparency is being 
maintained by ensuring the airfares that are shown on the website are the ones actually being 
charged to the passengers. He also stated that India is one of the largest air markets in the world 
and as a global practice, dynamic pricing policy is essential which forecast demand in advance 
and allocate inventory based on that. Further, he also mentioned that the fare structu re for every 
sector is published on their website which is also submitted to the Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation (DGCA) and that the number of seats in each fare class is extremely dynamic which is 
taken care of by the Revenue Management System. He a lso informed the Committee that during 
the peak season, the average fares network -wise for their airlines ranges between Rs. 4,200/ -
Rs.4,600/-, with certain exceptional instances. 
36. The representatives of Vistara and Air Asia stated that the financial information related to 
their airlines is furnished to DGCA on a monthly basis. Further, the representatives of Air Asia, 
Indigo, SpiceJet, and Vistara clarified that they will provide whatever information is sought from 
them by the Committee. 
37. On a query raised by two Members of the Committee regarding the issues related to Air 
India Express flights from Gulf countries to Kerala, the representative of Air India Express/ Air 
Asia responded that there are some engineering -related issues and steps are being t aken to 

117 
 
resolve them. Various Members highlighted the issue of extremely exorbitant airfares being 
charged by airlines and remarked that the airlines should take appropriate action in this regard.  
38. Members also raised various queries/ issues such as:- 
 Airlines to devise a simpler fare plan to enhance transparency as dynamic pricing is 
complex to understand;  
 Airlines to display the total number of seats available on the website along with the fares; 
 Airlines to fix upper and lower caps of fares for ever y sector as  there is a huge variation 
between the pricing system; 
 Increase of monopolistic prices and increase in airfares post the exit of GoFirst; 
 Definition of reasonable profit; 
 Possibility of increasing the average airfare which may lower the highest  fare being 
charged by airlines and the amount of revenue that airlines are making by selling tickets 
at the highest rates in a particular sector; 
 Rationalizing airfares especially when someone has not planned the journey in advance 
and has to travel due to emergencies such as medical emergency;  
 Amount of commission being charged by travel agents/ flight booking portal/ 
aggregators; 
 Monitoring of issues related to Pratt & Whitney engines due to which many aircraft have 
been grounded; 
 Impact of VAT charges on airfares.  
 Provision of Aviation Turbine Fuel at rationalized prices so that airlines get a level 
playing field and can arrive at reasonable profits; 
 Instances of Tariff Monitoring Units affecting the reservation system of airlines; 
 Reasons for surge in airfares especially during summer vacations and the festive season; 
 Disclosure of challenges/issues being faced by airlines in fixation of airfares so that these 
can be taken up with DGCA and a resolution may be arrived at; 
 Increasing frequency of flights to the State of Nagaland as there are no direct flights from 
Delhi; 
 Justification for charging an unreasonable amount for the selection of seats and steps to 
be taken in this regard; 
 Variation in prices depending on the proximity from the travel date is s ignificant as the 
price even varies from Rs. 6,000/- to Rs. 40,000/- on the same route; 
 Airlines should decide and arrive at a consensus to rationalize airfares; 
 Lack of air connectivity to the State of Kerala at Calicut/ Kannur/ Trivandrum and from 
the Gulf countries as well; 
 Exorbitant airfares on different dates and at different times of the day on the Delhi -
Bengaluru sector; 

118 
 
 Impact of deregulation of airfares and opinion of the common man on the same; 
 Deteriorating customer service being offered by Air India and Vistara; 
 Unavailability of proper grievance redressal mechanism for passengers and mode of 
communication with airlines; 
 Possibility of fixing fares for one particular route by every airline; 
 Relationship between the online booking portals/ agents and the amount being charged by 
them for booking of tickets; 
 Change in the market scenario after the privatization of the erstwhile National carrier; 
 Lowered ranking of India on leasing aircraft, by the world rating agencies, post the exit 
of GoFirst, resulting in increased cost of lease rentals; 
 Mechanism being followed by airlines to arrive at the highest fare being charged by them 
on a particular route; 
 Effect of capacity constraints at airports on air connectivity; 
 Increasing profitability of airlines by enhancing international footprint; 
 Aviation sector is a thin -line margin business unlike other Sectors such as Information 
Technology, Infrastructure or Production and Manufacturing; 
 Airlines to create awareness and educate people about ticketing, fares , working of the 
system and rights of the passengers; and  
 Airlines to devise a plan to promote tourist destinations.      
39.      In response to a query raised by one of the Members regarding details of cancellation and 
delay of flights post the disinves tment of Air India in recent years, the CEO of Air India replied 
that in the month of April, Air India was the most punctual airline in the country as per DGCA. 
The Chairman directed the airline to send a complete Report on the matter. The representatives 
of various Private Airlines and the APAO took note of the suggestions made by the Members.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
40. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
41. The meeting adjourned at 5:01 PM. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                        Swarabji B. 
29th May, 2023                                                                                                   Director 
  
  
  

119 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
  
 
 
3:00 P.M. 
 
Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO)  
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Bhaskar Venkatramani Vice-President, Regulatory Affairs, BIAL 
2. Shri Kartik Sood Vice-President, Regulatory Affairs, DIAL 
3. Shri Rakesh Vorkala General Manager, Regulatory Affairs, DIAL 
4. Shri Manoj Chanduka Head, Regulatory Affairs, Adani Airports 
5. Shri Satyan Nayar Secretary General 
 
Air Asia 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Aloke Singh Chief Executive Officer 
2. Shri Vikas Aggarwal Chief Financial Officer 
3. Shri Ankur Garg Chief Commercial Officer 
4. Shri Sunil Joshi  Head-Corporate Affairs 
 
Air India  
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Campbell Wilson Chief Executive Officer & Managing Director 
2. Shri S. Renganathan  Head-Financial Analysis and Planning 
3. Dr. Amit Kumar Pandey Head, Government & Regulatory Affairs 
4. Shri Rohit Dubey  Deputy Manager, Corporate Affairs 
 
 
Indigo  

120 
 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Wolfgang Prock-
Schauer President & Chief Operating Officer 
2. Shri Vikram Chona Vice President, Corporate Affairs 
3. Shri Mukul Jain Manager, Corporate Affairs  
 
Vistara 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Vinod Kannan Chief Executive Officer 
2. Shri Moinuddin Wasil Head, Regulatory Affairs 
 
SpiceJet 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Ajay Singh Chairman and Managing Director 
2. Shri C. S. Palani Vice President, Corporate Affairs & Flight 
Operations 
3. Shri Sudhir Mishra General Manager, Revenue 
4. Shri Sumit Talwar General Manager, Revenue 
 
* * * * 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

121 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXIX 
THIRTY SECOND MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 09th August, 2023 in Committee Room-
4, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
3. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shri A.A. Rahim 
6. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 
 Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
13. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
14. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
15. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri  Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
19. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
20. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 

122 
 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. 
He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the  following 
Reports:- 
(i) Issue of Fixing of Airfares; 
(ii) ****** 
(iii) ****** 
 
2. ******* 
 
3.       The Committee authorized Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P., and in his absence, Shri 
A.A. Rahim, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2023. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Ram Margani Bharat , M.P. and in his absen ce, Shri Chhedi 
Paswan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
 
4.       *******2 
 
5.       The Meeting adjourned at 3:21 P.M. 
                                                                                                                                       
New Delhi,                                                                                                 Monica Baa 
09th August, 2023                                                                                    Additional Director  
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                             
  
 
                                                           
2 Relates to other matter 