PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN
 ITS ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
 (2007-08) OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   20.11.2007)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 20.11.2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2007/KARTIKA, 1929(SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
 
1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                      
2.       INTRODUCTION                            
3.       REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                        
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE           
5.       MINUTES                                                                      
                                                                                                         
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
 
1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury             - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.            Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.       Shri Naresh Gujral
4.       Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
5.       Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6.       Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.       Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
8.
                 Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9.                 Shri Shahid Siddiqui
10.             Shri Shatrughan Sinha
 
LOK SABHA
11.
             Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12.             Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13.             Shri Joachim Baxla
14.             Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.             Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.             Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.             Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.             Smt. Priya Dutt
19.             Shri Dip Gogoi
20.             Shri P. Karunakaran
21.             Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
22.             Dr. P.P. Koya
23.             Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24.             Shri Samik Lahiri 
25.             Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.             Shri Hemlal Murmu
27.             Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28.             Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29.             Shri Dushyant Singh
30.             Shri Suraj Singh
31.             Shri Pralhad Joshi
 
SECRETARIAT
1.                 Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
2.                 Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
3.                 Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director,
4.                 Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
INTRODUCTION
 
       I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One
 Hundred and Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the
 Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Sixteenth Report
 on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation.
 
2.     The One Hundred and Sixteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 14
th May 2007. 
 
 
3.   The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
 and Sixteenth Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 10
th October, 2007.
 
4.   The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 2nd November, 2007.
 
 
 
 
                                               
 
 
NEW DELHI ;
November 2, 2007
Kartika 11, 1929 (Saka)
SITARAM YECH
 Chairman
           Department-related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
 
 
 
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on
 the observations/ recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred and Sixteenth Report on Demands
 for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation , which was presented to both the Houses of
 Parliament on 14
th May, 2007.
2.         Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 10th
 October, 2007 in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have
 been categorised as follows: -
(i)      Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Ministry:
                                                                                         Para Nos.  6, 11, 19, 26, 27. 29. 44.
 45. 51. 56, 57, 58, 65, 71 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
                        Total- 14
(ii)      Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
 the Ministry’s replies:
Para No.                                                                        Nil.
(iii)     Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been
 accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 41,54,62                                                                  Total- 3
(iv)     Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the    Ministry are still
 awaited:
Para No. 32,40,69                                                   Total - 3
 
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have
 been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item
 of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee
 contained in the One-Hundred and Sixteenth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and
 recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the
 succeeding paragraphs.
 
ASSESSMENT OF TENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
(Recommendation at Para 6)
5.       The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has spent the allocated money to a
 satisfactory level except for the year 2006-07.  The Committee feels that the Civil Aviation sector has
 now become vibrant component of our economy and any laxity in utilisation of plan outlay can affect
 the development of the economy. The Committee ,therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation should ensure that all its organisations do utilise the allocated funds to the maximum extent in
 order to maintain its upper hand in the Civil Aviation sector where stiff competition is expected in the
 coming years due to the entry of more private players in the domestic and International arena.  The
 Committee hopes that this positive trend of utilisation of allocated outlay will continue during the 11
th
 Five Year Plan also.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6.       The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.   All efforts will be made
 for optimum utilisation of funds by all organisations under the Ministry during the XI Plan period.  
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7.
                 The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
ASSESSMENT OF ANNUAL PLAN 2006-07 AND ALLOCATION FOR 2007-08
(Recommendation at Para 11)
8.       The Committee notes that except the Airports Authority of India, anticipated expenditure in
 respect of all other organizations is satisfactory. The Committee reiterates that the Ministry should
 ensure that all the organizations under its control utilize the approved outlay optimally.   The Committee
 desires that the utilization of external and internal budget resources for the acquisition of aircraft for Air
 India and Indian Airlines take place systematically.   The Committee also recommends that proper
 exercise should be done to identify the likely expenditure involved in the merger of Indian Airlines and
 Air-India and provision therefor should be made accordingly in the Budget at RE stage.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
9.       The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
10.
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
 
 
AIR INDIA LIMITED
(Recommendation at para 19)
11.     The Committee notes that profit of Air India has gone down from Rs.96.39 crore to Rs.14.94
 mainly because of the reasons of appreciation in value of US dollar and increasing fuel price.   The
 Committee hopes that acquisition of new aircraft would certainly have positive impact on the operations
 of Air India. But still the Committee is of the view that Air India should adopt an aggressive marketing
 strategy to face the stiff competition at global level. The Committee is also of the opinion that more
 passenger friendly amenities be provided in its aircraft so that more and more passengers turn their
 interest towards the national carrier.  The Committee desires that the number of   bilateral agreements
 which were signed during the last year should be materialised to the maximum possible extent.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
12.     Air India is continuously making efforts to increase its revenues and profitability, as well as to
 compete with private sector airlines.   Some of the measures taken by Air India in the recent past are
 given below:
1)    They are proactively adjusting their pricing based on market demand and competitors'
 activities.
2)       In order to tap international traffic from interior points in India, Air India have tied-up with
 IC and are offering very attractive fares to such passengers travelling on IC domestic flights
 and connecting to Air India international flights.
3)    They have improved their schedules to offer convenient timings, non-stop flights,

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
 standardised timings, daily departures and better connectivity to/from interior points in India.
4)    Kerbside check-in, lounge and special handling facilities are offered for high yield First and
 Business class passengers.
5)    To facilitate travel of passengers, facility of Advance check-in and City check-in are offered.
6)    Air India is in the process of acquiring 68 (including 18 for Air India Express) new  state-of-
the-art Boeing aircraft.   With the induction of the first two Boeing 777-LR aircraft, Air India
 has commenced non-stop services between Mumbai and New York (JFK).  The new aircraft
 will include luxurious seats for all classes, more luggage space and personal entertainment
 sets.
Future Plans:
13.     With the acquisition of additional aircraft, Air India will be expanding its network by operating to
 more destinations in USA such as San Francisco, Washington and Houston, as well as to other
 destinations such as Beijing, Australia, Mauritius, South Africa, etc.
14.     As soon as Air India obtains capacity for growth, it will increase its utilization of existing
 entitlements.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
15.     The Committee notes that the Air India is making efforts to increase its revenues and
 profitability as well to compete with private air operators and hopes that with the capacity growth
 and the utilisation of bilateral agreements, the profits of Air India will go up.  
 
INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED (IA)
(Recommendation at paras 26 and 27)
16.     The Committee notes that even though there is a substantial increase in the passenger load factor
 for the period from April to September, 2006, the profit of the IA seems to be declining. The physical
 performance of the Indian Airlines is showing good signs of improvement but it is not resulting in a
 good profit to the company.
17.     The Committee hopes that induction of new aircraft will help Indian Airlines to improve its
 profitability and the merger   of two national carriers will have a positive impact on the performance of
 both the Airlines.  The Committee feels that Indian Airlines should revamp its marketing strategies to
 get its due share in the domestic as well as in the international market and also to match with the
 services offered by the private operators.   The Committee also hopes that proper synergisation in the
 operation of Air India and Indian Airlines will have a positive impact on the performance of the Indian
 Airlines. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
18.     Physical performance of Indian Airlines for the year 2006-07 is given below and shows substantial
 improvement over previous years.
 2006-07 2005-06 %(+/-)
ATK (Million) 1692 1593 6.2

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
RTK (Million) 1236 1141 8.4.
L.F.% 73.1% 71.6% 1.5
ASK (Million) 17576 16308 7.8
RPK (Million) 12087 10891 11.0
S.F.% 68.8% 66.8% 2.0
No. of PAX (Million) 8.57 7.86 9.0
19.     During the month of May, 2007, Indian Airlines has achieved a passenger market share of 21.4%
 as compared to 21.3% of Jet Airways and 17.8% of Air Deccan.  IA’s also retained market leadership in
 RPK terms in May, 2007, being the market leader in RPK terms for the third month in a row, with a
 RPK market share of 21.7%, as compared to 20.8% of Jet Airways and 15.1% of Air Deccan.
20.     It is expected that with the induction of new aircraft into the fleet and with the merger of both
 Indian Airlines and Air India, the profitability of the merged entity would improve as a result of network
 synergies and cost savings.   As recommended by the Committee, marketing strategies will be
 formulated in order to increase the load factors on domestic and international routes and to match the
 services offered by competitors.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
21.     The Committee notes that there is very low margin between the passenger market share of
 Indian Airlines and its nearest competitor.  The Committee feels that the Indian Airlines can
 maintain its market lead only by initiating aggressive marketing and promotional strategies on
 priority. The Committee hopes  that adequate steps, in addition to the acquisition of aircraft, will
 enable Indian Airlines to tap the market opportunities in the domestic as well as the international
 markets.
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(Recommendation at para 32)
22.     The Committee finds that the modernisation and expansion of some metro airports particularly of
 Kolkata and Chennai is also on hold for one reason or the other and privatised airports like Delhi are not
 giving the desired amenities to the air passengers.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
23.     As per the decision taken by the Government, modalities for expansion / modernisation of Kolkata
 and Chennai airport were to be decided in consultation with stakeholders including the State
 Governments of West Bengal and Tamil Nadu, respectively. Based on the outcome of the consultative
 process, it has been decided that modernisation / expansion of Kolkata and Chennai airports will be
 undertaken by AAI.
24.     AAI is in the process of finalising development plans for these airports, with a view to complete
 the expansion work by mid 2010. Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) is finalising Action Plans in this
 regard. 
25.     Delhi airport, which has been restructured, is being modernised by JV Company in a phased
 manner. Master Plan for development has been finalised. It is expected that a new terminal building to

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
 cater to 37 million passengers per annum will be operational by March 2010. A new runway and an
 interim domestic terminal building will be completed by mid 2008.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
26.     The Committee is constrained to note that the developmental activities of Chennai and
 Kolkata airports are still at consultation stage only.   Both Chennai and Kolkata airports are
 already overcrowded with the introduction of more services by operators to these airports and
 these air services are introduced without expanding or developing the existing infrastructure at
 these airports.  The Committee desires that modernisation programme of Chennai and Kolkata
 airports should be implemented on priority basis so that congestion at these airports is reduced to
 some extent.
(Recommendation at para  39)
27.     The Committee notes that the modernisation works undertaken by Airport Authority of India in
 the North-Eastern Region are progressing at a very slow pace.  The Committee recommends that works
 may be completed expediously so that airports in the North-Eastern States can be utilised fully as air
 traffic is vital for the people of North-East and also from the tourists' point of view.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
28.     It is submitted that high priority is accorded to upgradation of airport infrastructure in North-
Eastern Region and all efforts are being made to achieve the development targets. During financial year
 2006-07, AAI has spent Rs. 72 crores for capital works in N.E. Region against a target of Rs. 58 crores.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
29.
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
 
(Recommendation at para  40)
30.     The Committee is disappointed to find that the condition of Patna airport which has already been
 declared as an International airport is far behind the standard of any International airport. The
 Committee recommends that efforts should be made by Airports Authority of India to provide such
 facilities at this airport as are available at the Airports at other countries like Singapore, Thailand, etc. 
 The committee further notes that development work carried out by Airports Authority of India in Gaya,
 Cooch Behar, Jaipur and Udaipur airports is very slow and recommends that all the works should be
 completed within a specified time frame at these airports. The Committee was informed by the Ministry
 that the Defence and environmental authorities have cleared the proposal of new airport in Cannore and
 the proposal has been sent to the Cabinet for approval.  The Committee is of the opinion that Airports at
 important tourist destinations should be modernised and all the amenities should be given to the
 passengers so that more tourists can reach these destinations by Air.   The Committee also feels that the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
 development of non-metro airports should be completed by the end of December, 2009 so that the traffic
 pressure on the metro airports could be eased and these non-metro airports can be developed as major
 tourist destinations.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Patna Airport:
31.     The development of Patna airport has been hampered due to certain constraints.  AAI has been
 constantly reminding State Government for cutting/ pruning of trees in the approach path of runway at
 Patna for smooth and safe aircraft landing and for a possible restoration of displaced runway threshold.As
 regards extension of runway, it is submitted that there is no scope for extension due to land constraints
 and obstructions in approach path on both sides of runway at Patna. AAI has proposed to construct apron
 for accommodating more aircraft and provision for Isolation  Bay subject to availability of land by the
 State Govt.
Gaya
 Airport:
32.     A new integrated Terminal Building has been completed with a capacity for 500 passengers at Gaya
 airport.   Construction of a new fire station Cat-VI has been completed. Extension of apron to
 accommodate two A320 and one B-737 and construction of Isolation  Bay is under completion. The
 location and drawings are being finalized for tender action for construction of new technical block cum
 control tower with modern air traffic management facilities.
Cooch Behar
 Airport
33.     The development works for Cooch Behar airport including runway extension/ strengthening for
 3700 ft & renovation of terminal building have been completed. The remaining 300 ft of runway
 extension work will be taken up after diversion of Mora Torsa stream at the end of runway by State Govt.
 The orders for demolition of identified structures/ buildings posing obstruction in the approach path are
 under issue by DGCA. The airport will be made operational as soon as above identified obstructions are
 removed by State Govt.
Jaipur & Udaipur Airports
34.     The progress of work at Udaipur and Jaipur was affected due to certain design related issues which
 cropped up during execution stage. However, these issues have now been sorted out and progress is
 being monitored closely so as to complete the work by December 2007 and March 2008 for Udaipur and
 Jaipur airports respectively.
Non-Metro Airports
35.     The development of 35 non-metro airports is proposed to be completed by the end of the financial
 year 2009-10.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
36.     The Committee is not satisfied with the pace of development of non-metro airports. The
 initial target for the development and modernisation of 35 non-metro airports is December,
 2009.   Now the target has been revised up to the end of the financial year 2009-10. The

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
 Committee is not satisfied with the explanation given for the delay especially in view of the
 unresolved controversy between the Government machineries on the development of the
 terminals and infrastructure of the non-metro airports. The Committee hopes that the new target
 date of development works of the non-metro airports will be adhered to so that the traffic at the
 metro airports is eased once non-metro airports are developed. 
(Recommendation at para  41)
37.     The Committee feels that Metro airports too require modernisation and expansion.  The
 Committee desires that the amenities available at the Delhi airport be verified to find out whether the
 agreed facilities to air passengers and air traffic are actually being provided or not and a status report be
 furnished to the Committee.  Modernisation of Kolkata and Chennai airports has separately been
 discussed in this report.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
38.     The provision of facilities, development of infrastructure etc. at the restructured Delhi and
 Mumbai airports is being monitored by the AAI in terms of the Operation Management Development
 Agreement (OMDA) entered into with the JV companies. An oversight committee, under the
 Chairmanship of Secretary (Civil Aviation), also periodically monitors the implementation of OMDA
 provisions.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
39.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee, however, expresses its
 dissatisfaction on the pathetic facilities available to the passengers at Mumbai and Delhi airports
 and hopes new mechanism will ensure the improved amenities to the passengers.
 
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED(PHHL)
(Recommendation at para 44)
40.     The Committee is of the view that PHHL can play a key role to provide air connectivity in North
 Eastern States and hilly areas where there is no possibility of laying big runways.  However, the
 Committee is constrained to note that PHHL which is the only PSU providing helicopter service in the
 country has failed to play its desired role effectively for which corrective measures have to be initiated
 on priority.  The Committee desires that funds allocated for purchase of machineries and other ground
 support equipments are utilized fully in 2007-08.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
41.     The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and PHHL shall endeavour to utilize the
 approved Plan Outlay optimally for acquisition of fleet and other major products in 2007-08.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
42.
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
 
(Recommendation at para 45)
43.     The Committee finds that the PHHL is without a regular CMD for quite some time and a Joint
 Secretary of the Ministry is holding additional charge of CMD of PHHL which is affecting the
 functioning of PHHL.  The Committee desires that in the larger interest of PHHL a regular CMD
 preferably from the PHHL establishment should be appointed on priority basis.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
44.     Shri R.K. Tyagi has been appointed as the full time Chairman-cum-Managing Director of PHHL
 w.e.f. 18.5.2007.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
45.
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
 
MERGER OF AIR INDIA LIMITED AND INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED
(Recommendation at para 51)
46.     The Committee feels that the merger of these two national carriers would definitely result in
 proper synergisation of resources and enhance both financial and physical performance of both these
 carriers.  The Committee also feels that this process will help both the national carriers in long run in
 consolidating their position in domestic and international market.   The Committee hopes that the
 synergisation process would help to improve the operational efficiency of both the carriers. However,
 the Committee would like the Government to take care of the  interests of the employees in the new
 merged entity as merger of such large institutions always results in resentment amongst the employees
 as they are likely to lose their existing work position in the new merged entity.    The Committee notes
 the assurance given by the Government that there would be a three tier grievance cell to take care of the
 grievances of the employees of both the carriers after the merger. The Committee hopes that the
 mechanism of grievance redressal proposed by Government will be able to clear the doubts in the minds
 of employees.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
47.     Meetings were held with the Unions – even at the level of the Minister – to allay the
 apprehensions, if any, of the employees in the merger exercise.  The Chairmen & MDs of both the
 airlines have written to the employees explaining the rationale for the merger and assuring them that
 their interests would be protected and no employee would be worse off as a result of the merger.    
 Ministry has also in separate communications to the employees held out the same assurance.   The
 issues that may arise would be addressed on the basis of transparent and objective criteria and that a 3-
tier Grievance Redressal Machinery would be in place to address the employee grievances.   They have
 further stated that interaction with employee representatives would continue and their feedback would
 get due consideration. 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
48.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee hopes that grievances and
 concerns of the employees of the both the organisations are addressed by the Ministry through the
 three tier Grievance Redressal Machinery.   The Committee hopes that the synergisation process
 of the Air India and Indian Airlines will be completed within the scheduled time and should have
 a positive result on the performance of these carriers.    
 
NATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION POLICY
(Recommendation at para 54)
49.     The Committee notes that the present civil aviation sector needs a well balanced and market
 oriented policy to address all the issues relating to the boom in passenger and cargo traffic.   The
 quantum of increase in passenger traffic needs strict enforcement of safety and security related issues. 
 The Committee, however, is constrained to note that Ministry of Civil Aviation has not come out with a
 Civil Aviation Policy till date. Now the Government plans to have a policy with a vision for 2020.  The
 Committee hopes that the policy will be in place soon and take care of all the issues relating to civil
 aviation sector of current as well as future era.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
50.     A Cabinet Note on National Civil Aviation Policy was considered by Cabinet in  its meeting held
 on 15
th June, 2007.  Cabinet decided that the matter may, in the first instance, be considered by a Group
 of Ministers.  Accordingly, a Group of Ministers is  considering the National Civil Aviation Policy. 
 Safety and security related issues have been kept in view and will be addressed in the proposed NCAP.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
51.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
 
 RESTRUCTURING OF DELHI AND MUMBAI AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at para 56)
52.     While scrutinizing the outcome budget of the Ministry for the year 2006-07 the Committee finds
 that a substantial amount of money has been spent by the AAI for repair and maintenance work at
 international airports at Delhi and Mumbai even after these two airports were handed over to the JVCs
 in May, 2006.  The Committee desires to know the reasons for this and also wants to know the
 expenditure incurred by the JVCs on the respective airports for maintenance and up keep of airports till
 date.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
53.     The Outcome Budget for the year 2006-07 was only a projection in the event of delay in handing
 over of the airport by AAI to the JVC.
54.     The expenditure incurred by JVC for maintenance and upkeep of IGI Airport at Delhi  is Rs.33.92

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
 crores while the corresponding figure in respect of  CSI Airport at Mumbai is Rs.28.51 crores.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55.
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
 
(Recommendation at para  57)
56.     A Tripartite Committee with the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airports Authority
 of India and AAI Employees Joint Forum has been constituted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on    
 22nd February, 2006 to look into the issues and proposals of modernizing airports by Airports Authority
 of India and employees related issues including job security.  The Committee desires to know the details
 of meetings which have been taken so far with the decisions arrived therein.   The Committee also
 reiterates its recommendation contained in its 106 th Report that the Tripartite Committee should hold
 regular meetings and finalise its Report in a time bound manner in view of the importance of the issues
 relating to the Committee.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
57.     The meetings of the Committee are held at regular intervals. The Committee has so far held 11
 meetings and various issues as stipulated in terms of reference of the Committee have been deliberated.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
58.
             The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  However, the Committee is unable to understand
 the reasons for the non-finalisation of the Report.
 
(Recommendation at para 58)
59.     There are also reports that after the work of modernisation of Delhi and Mumbai Airports has gone
 in the hands of private operators, the Ministry of Tourism even finding difficult to have space at the
 airports to display the publicity materials meant for information of the tourists particularly coming from
 abroad.  This gives an impression that there is a lack of coordination between the private operators and
 the Government agencies.   The Committee recommends that Government should look into the matter
 and take remedial action to ensure that Ministry of Tourism and other agencies which have to work at
 the airports to provide amenities to the passengers and tourist in particular do not face any problem.    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
60.     Ministry of Civil Aviation  has taken note of the recommendation made and will advise the
 managements of Delhi and Mumbai airports appropriately.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
61.            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
 
CHENNAI AND KOLKATA AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at para 62)
62.     The Committee is constrained to note that the indecisiveness is preventing with regard to
 modernisation of Kolkata and Chennai  Airport as Government is yet to give its approval for
 modernisation plans of these two Airports. The Committee recommends that the modernisation of
 Chennai and Kolkata airports should be completed on priority so as to ease the traffic over Delhi and
 Mumbai airports.  The Committee also desires that both these airports may be developed as international
 hubs to cater the needs of the people in the eastern and southern part of the country.  The Committee
 hopes that the Airports Authority of India will complete the all modernisation and developmental works
 of Kolkata and Chennai airports within a specified time frame.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
63.     As per the decision taken by the Government, modalities for expansion / modernisation of Kolkata
 and Chennai airport were to be decided in consultation with stakeholders including the State
 Governments of West Bengal and Tamil Nadu, respectively. Based on the outcome of the consultative
 process, it has been decided that modernisation / expansion of Kolkata and Chennai airports will be
 undertaken by AAI. AAI is in the process of finalising development plans for these airports, with a view
 to complete the expansion work by mid 2010. Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) is finalising Action Plans
 in this regard.  Delhi airport, which has been restructured, is being modernised by JV Company in a
 phased manner. Master Plan for development has been finalised. It is expected that a new terminal
 building to cater to 37 million passengers per annum will be operational by March 2010. A new runway
 and an interim domestic terminal building will be completed by mid 2008.
 
SHORTAGE AND TRAINING OF PILOTS
(Recommendation at para 65)
64.     The Committee hopes that modernization of IGRUA and establishment of new pilot training
 institute in Gondia will help to meet the shortage of pilots. The Committee recommends that more
 training institute like that of the proposed one of the Gondia may also be established at conspicuous
 places in the Northern, Eastern and Southern parts of the country to meet the shortage of Pilots.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
65      Besides setting up a new flying training school institute at Gondia and upgrading the infrastructure
 and other training facilities of IGRUA, Government has been encouraging existing flying clubs by
 providing aircraft through DGCA and Aero Club of India (ACI).  Rs.9.00 crore was released to ACI
 during 2006-07 for procurement of aircraft to be distributed among identified number of flying clubs.  In
 2007-08  also a budget provision of Rs.17.00 crores has been made for ACI.  Further, DGCA has been
 issuing NOC to new flying training institutes to take up training upto CPL level.   The NEC has a
 proposal for setting up a flying training institute in the North Eastern Region.  The Foundation for
 Aviation & Sustainable Tourism (FAST) has carried out a feasibility study with experts from the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
 airlines, Airports Authority of India and DGCA  and has concluded that Lilabari in Assam would be the
 most suitable location for setting up of an aviation academy.   To make the flying training institutes
 economically viable, Government have already taken steps to exempt customs duty on aircraft and their
 spares etc., being imported for flying training.   If any State Government or any other agency comes up
 with a viable project, the same shall be given due consideration and all possible assistance in this regard
 shall be provided by the Ministry.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
66.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee hopes that the measures
 taken by the Ministry will meet the shortage of pilots as civil aviation sector is witnessing a great
 boom.  The Committee is constrained to express its dissatisfaction on the lack of urgency being
 shown in this regard. However, availability of proper infrastructure for training of pilots and
 setting up of standards for pilots training should also get proper consideration before giving
 licenses to new flying institutes.  
 
UNIFORM TAXATION OF AVIATION TURBINE FUEL
(Recommendation at 69)
67.     The Cost of fuel is an important component of cost structure and has direct bearing on the
 profitability of any airline. High cost of ATF in the country increases the cost of operation of carriers
 which results in escalation in the airfares.  The Committee recommends that Ministry of Finance should
 sympathetically  consider and give approval to the proposal of Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding
 notifying ATF as 'Declared Good' under Section 14 of Central Sales Tax Act on priority basis to all the
 aircraft  so that sales tax on ATF could be contained with the maximum rate of 4%. The Committee
 further recommends that the Ministry of Finance may also discuss the issue with the State Governments
 and try to persuade them to reduce the sales tax on ATF.  The Committee feels that restructuring the
 excise duty on ATF will have a positive impact on the development of civil aviation sector of the nation.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
68.     This Ministry has been requesting for rationalisation of taxes on Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) by
 notifying ATF as ‘Declared Goods’ under Section 14 of the Central Sales Tax (CST) Act, which would
 cap the maximum rate of sales tax rate at 4%.  Ministry of Finance had earlier reduced sales tax on ATF
 for turbo prop aircraft to 4% by notifying it as ‘Declared Goods’.  Ministry of Finance, Department of
 Revenue has further amended the CST Act, 1956, through clasue 132 of the Finance Bill, 2007,
 including the ATF sold to an aircraft with maximum take off mass to less than 40,000 Kgs operated by
 scheduled airlines.   The recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to the Ministry of
 Finance for taking appropriate action.  The progress in this regard will be reported to the Committee.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
69.
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
 
 
UTILIZATION OF CAT III SYSTEM AT DELHI AIRPORT
(Recommendation at para 71)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
70.     The Committee is constrained to note that a huge investment has been made in installation of ILS
 CAT-III facilities at IGI airport.   However there is a lot of delay or cancellation of flights due to fog as
 there are not enough pilots trained to operate the flights during fog. It appears that steps taken by the
 Government in this regard have proved inadequate. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry that
 Airlines have been directed not to roster their CAT III trained pilots on international routes during fog
 season and also recommended that  training of pilots to fly on low visibility conditions be extended to a
 maximum number of pilots in both the national carriers. The Committee recommends that strict penal
 provisions should be imposed on the airlines which are failing to give proper training to their pilots in
 the upgraded instrument landing systems.  The Committee hopes that incidents of cancellation of flights
 during the winter season in 2007 will be minimum.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
71.     The question of making training on CAT-IIIB Instrument Landing System mandatory has been
 examined in this Ministry.  CAT-IIIB system is operational presently at one airport i.e. at the IGI
 Airport at Delhi and there also CAT-IIIB conditions occur only during brief periods in
 December/January.  Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has consulted scheduled airlines
 operators.  Operators have been directed that they shall be required to train their pilots in direct
 proportion to the number of flights operated by them during the morning and evening hours when foggy
 conditions are expected at Delhi Airport.  The DGCA has issued detailed guidelines for operations
 during low visibility condition and also continuously monitors progress of training of pilots.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
72.     The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the guidelines issued for
 operation of low visibility condition are properly monitored and implemented during the coming
 winter season.  The Committee further hopes that advanced landing instruments installed at Delhi
 airport are used optimally during the foggy conditions to minimize the inconvenience to
 passengers.
RECOMMENDATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
ASSESSMENT OF TENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                  
(Para 7)
 
ASSESSMENT OF ANNUAL PLAN 2006-07 AND ALLOCATION FOR 2007-08
         
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                  
(Para 10)
 
AIR INDIA LIMITED
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
           The Committee notes that the Air India is making efforts to increase its revenues and profitability
 as well to compete with private air operators and hopes that with the capacity growth and the utilisation
 of bilateral agreements, the profits of Air India will go up.                                                      
      (Para 15)
INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED (IA)
          The Committee notes that there is very low margin between the passenger market share of Indian
 Airlines and its nearest competitor.   The Committee feels that the Indian Airlines can maintain its
 market lead only by initiating aggressive marketing and promotional strategies on priority. The
 Committee hopes that adequate steps, in addition to the acquisition of aircraft, will enable Indian
 Airlines to tap the market opportunities in the domestic as well as the international markets.
                                                                                                               (Para
 21)                                                        
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
          The Committee is constrained to note that the developmental activities of Chennai and Kolkata
 airports are still at consultation stage only.   Both Chennai and Kolkata airports are already overcrowded
 with the introduction of more services by operators to these airports and these air services are introduced
 without expanding or developing the existing infrastructure at these airports.  The Committee desires
 that modernisation programme of Chennai and Kolkata airports should be implemented on priority basis
 so that congestion at these airports is reduced to some extent.                      
    (Para 26)                                                                             
         
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                          (Para 29)
 
          The Committee is not satisfied with the pace of development of non-metro airports. The
 initial target for the development and modernisation of 35 non-metro airports is December,
 2009.   Now the target has been revised up to the end of the financial year 2009-10. The
 Committee is not satisfied with the explanation given for the delay especially in view of the
 unresolved controversy between the Government machineries on the development of the
 terminals and infrastructure of the non-metro airports. The Committee hopes that the new target
 date of development works of the non-metro airports will be adhered to so that the traffic at the
 metro airports is eased once non-metro airports are developed.                              
                                                 
                     (Para 36)
 
          The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee, however, expresses its
 dissatisfaction on the pathetic facilities available to the passengers at Mumbai and Delhi airports
 and hopes new mechanism will ensure the improved amenities to the passengers.                       
          (Para 39)
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED (PHHL)
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.                
  (Paras 42 & 45)
 
MERGER OF AIR INDIA LIMITED AND INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED
          The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee hopes that grievances and
 concerns of the employees of the both the organisations are addressed by the Ministry through the
 three tier Grievance Redressal Machinery.   The Committee hopes that the synergisation process
 of the Air India and Indian Airlines will be completed within the scheduled time and should have
 a positive result on the performance of these carriers.  
(Para 48)
 
NATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION POLICY
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry                         
 (Para 51)
 
RESTRUCTURING OF DELHI AND MUMBAI AIRPORTS
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry                           (Para 55)
 
 
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  However, the Committee is unable to
 understand the reasons for the non-finalisation of the Report.
                                                                                                        
  (Para 58)
                                                                                                         
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry                           (Para 61)
 
SHORTAGE AND TRAINING OF PILOTS
          The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee hopes that the measures
 taken by the Ministry will meet the shortage of pilots as civil aviation sector is witnessing a great
 boom.  The Committee is constrained to express its dissatisfaction on the lack of urgency being
 shown in this regard. However, availability of proper infrastructure for training of pilots and
 setting up of standards for pilots training should also get proper consideration before giving
 licenses to new flying institutes.                                                
     (Para 66)                                                 
UNIFORM TAXATION OF AVIATION TURBINE FUEL
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
(Para 69)
 
UTILIZATION OF CAT III SYSTEM AT DELHI AIRPORT
          The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the guidelines issued for
 operation of low visibility condition are properly monitored and implemented during the coming
 winter season.  The Committee further hopes that advanced landing instruments installed at Delhi
 airport are used optimally during the foggy conditions to minimize the inconvenience to
 passengers.                                                                                                   (Para 72)
                                                                                    
V
FIFTH MEETING
          The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 2
nd November 2007 in Committee Room 'E',
 Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
          MEMBERS PRESENT
1.     Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.     Shri Naresh Gujral
3.     Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
4.     Shri Janardhana Poojary
5.     Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
6.     Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
7.     Shri Joachim Baxla
8.     Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
9.     Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
10. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
11. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
12. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
13. Shri Samik Lahiri
14. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
SECRETARIAT
          Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary      
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
          Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
          Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
2.       At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.   Thereafter, the Committee

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/125.htm[22-10-2018 12:28:24]
 took up for consideration (i) 125 th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
 recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixteenth Report on
 Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, and (ii)  126 th Report on Action
 Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One
 Hundred Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Tourism.  After
 some discussion the Committee adopted both the Reports with minor modifications. The Committee
 also decided to present both the Reports to the Parliament during the ensuing winter session and
 authorized the Chairman to fix the date and nominate the Members for presentation of the said Reports.
 
3.       *                           *                           *.  
 
4.       The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.45 p.m.
 
* Relate to other matters
 
