PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND THIRD REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07) OF DEPARTMENT OF
CULTURE
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 14TH MAY, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 14TH MAY, 2007)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
PAGES
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................................................ (i)
2. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................................................................................... 1—10
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE  ………………..
……
11—12
5. MINUTES …………………………………………...................................................................... 13—16
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
( 2006-2007 )
    1.    Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
           MEMBERS
           RAJYA SABHA
    2.    Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
    3.    Shri S.S. Chandran
    4.    Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
    5.    Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
    6.    Shri Janardhana Poojary
    7.    Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
    8.    Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
    9.    Shri Shahid Siddiqui
   10.    Shri Shatrughan Sinha
           LOK SABHA
   11.    Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
   12.    Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
   13.    Shri Joachim Baxla
   14.    Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
   15.    Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
   16.    Shri Adhir Chowdhury
   17.    Dr. K. Dhanaraju
   18.    Shrimati Priya Dutt
   19.    Shri Dip Gogoi
   20.    Shri P. Karunakaran
   21.    Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
   22.    Dr. P.P. Koya
   23.    Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
   24.    Shri Samik Lahiri
   25.    Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
   26.    Shri Hemlal Murmu
   27.    Shri Madan Lal Sharma
   28.    Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
   29.    Shri Dushyant Singh
   30.    Shri Suraj Singh
 *31.    Shri Prahlad Joshi
           SECRETARIAT

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
           Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
           Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
           Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
           Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
* Nominated on 20.3.2007 in the vacancy caused due to demise of Shri Manbendra Shah.
       
INTRODUCTION
       I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having
 been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and Twelfth Report of
 the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
 contained in its One Hundred and Third Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Culture.
2.    The One Hundred and Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
 Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 22nd May, 2006.
3.    The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Third
 Report were received from the Department of Culture on the 15th January, 2007.
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 16th April, 2007.
        
NEW DELHI ; SITARAM YECHURY
         Chairman,
 
April 16, 2007
Chaitra 26, 1929 (Saka)
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
        
          
                                                                                                                                                                    .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
 
REPORT
        The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the observations
 recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Third Report on Demands for Grants  (2006-07) (Demand No.
 20) of the Department of Culture, which was presented to the Parliament on  22nd May, 2007.
2.     Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 15th January 2007 in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:-
 (i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:  
  Para Nos. 11, 15, 21, 29, 37, 55 and 61 Total-7
 (ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
 view of the Government replies:
 
  Para No. 65 Total-1
 (iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
 not been accepted by the Committee:
 
  Para Nos. 32 and 49 Total-2
 (iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
 are still awaited:
 
  Para Nos. 18, 24, 40, 44 and 71 Total-5
3.     The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.     On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of the action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee contained in the One Hundred and
 Third, action taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of
 action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
THE APPROACH IN THE TENTH PLAN AND ANALYSIS OF THE ANNUAL PLAN 2005-06
(Recommendation at Para 11)
5.     The Committee is of the view that fixing of the Revised Estimates ceiling by the Ministry of Finance on the
 basis of the level of expenditure attained upto the month of September/October creates problem for the
 Department of Culture. The Committee observes that most of the cultural functions and festivals take place in
 the month of October and November, after the monsoon. The Archaeological Survey of India also incurres
 major expenditure after the monsoon. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government must review
 the budgeting procedure and evolve some mechanism to ensure that the Plan allocation for the Department of
 Culture is not reduced. The Committee recommends that if the review of the budgetary allocation is done in the
 month of December, instead of the month of September then the cut in the budgetary provision could be
 avoided. The Committee observes that the major allocation for conservation work is being done under Non Plan
 Allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that conversation activity should be brought under the Plan
 Head so that conservation is not affected for want of funds, which is causing problem to the Department of
 Culture who wish to increase the conservation activities, hence need more expenditure.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6.     In pursuance of the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, budget provision for conservation
 will be brought under Plan heads while preparing the Budget Estimates for 2007-08 onwards.
7.     In Archaeological Survey of India, field officers are asked regularly to programme  the activities in such a manner
 that flow of expenditure is proportionately distributed in the months and 67 per cent expenditure is achieved by end of
 December. But as the conservation work of Archaeological Survey of India is seasonal in nature and in extreme
 summer and monsoon seasons, the pace of work and the flow of expenditure will be slow and the flow of expenditure
 will not strictly be proportionate every month. Archaeological survey of India is explaining the above to Planning
 Commission and Ministry of Culture every year to minimize the budget reduction on this ground.
8.     With regard to review of Budgetary  allocation in the month of December instead of September, the
 recommendations of the Committee have been forwarded to Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
 obtaining their comments/decision.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
(a)    Release of the Revenue Collected as Admission Fees to Archaeological Survey of India
(Recommendation at Para 15)
9.     The Committee feels that execution of conservation and preservation works need an expertise and timely
 funding of projects. But with its meager resource, it is difficult for the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) to
 protect and maintain all the 3667 monuments/sites. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 100 per cent of
 the revenue collected as entry fees from ticketed monuments should be released to ASI for stepping up the
 activities and to augment resources of ASI. Coordinated efforts should also be taken by the Department to bring
 more monuments under central protection and also efforts should be made to raise the number of monuments
 for ticketing purpose to generate more revenue. The Committee strongly feels that there exists a requirement for
 creation of a non lapsable fund out of the amount generated by the ticketing of monuments which can be used
 for preservation and development of monuments in a dedicated manner.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
10.   A proposal for creation of a Non-lapsable fund for conservation and preservation activities on National monuments
 of Archaeological Survey of India, out of revenue obtained by sale of entry ticket was made to Ministry of Finance
 after consultation with Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission. In this regard the Minister for Tourism and Culture
 had written to Minister of Finance vide letter dated 3.9.2005. Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs
 vide their letter dated 27.12.2005 had asked for further details which were furnished by Archaeological Survey of India
 vide letter dated 16.3.2006. The proposal is now under consideration of Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic
 Affairs.
11.   In the year 1999 the total number of protected monuments was 3597 while now it has increased to 3667. Though
 the manpower resources of Archaeological Survey of India is a limiting factor in taking more monuments for central
 protection, Archaeological Survey of India continues to take more monuments of outstanding architectural/historical
 importance for protection under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958. All field
 officers have been directed to review the number of ticketed monuments with the objective of bringing more
 monuments under ticketing.
(b)    The Post of Director-General in Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)
(Recommendation at Para 18)
12.   The Committee regrets to note that the promotional post of ADG, ASI could not be filled up as there was no
 suitable candidate in the country and ultimately the post was abolished as per the rules/regulations of the
 Department of Expenditure because the post could not be filled within prescribed time limit. It is pity that we
 are having more than hundred year old premier institute like ASI, but there is no archaeologist to be fit for
 promotion to the post of ADG. It clearly shows the callous attitude of the Government so far as management of
 the affairs of ASI is concerned. The Committee is of the view that there is no dearth of talent in the country.
 However, there is need to do away the rigidity in the eligibility criteria for the posts of Joint Director General,
 ADG and then DG, ASI. The Committee hopes that the vacant post will be filled up at the earliest as promised
 by the Secretary during the course of his evidence.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
13.   The post of Additional Director General (Archaeology) is the only feeder post which provides promotional avenues
 to the departmental officers for the post of Director General in the Archaeological Survey of India. The post of
 Additional Director General (Archaeology) in the Archaeological Survey of India has already been revived and the
 UPSC has been asked to fill up the post.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
14.   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that UPSC will take due care to fill up the vacant
 post at the earliest. The Committee however, hopes that recruitment condition for the post of Additional
 Director General (Archaeology) must have been framed taking into account the availability of manpower in this
 connection so that there are enough candidates available for the post.
(c)    Conservation and Preservation of Monuments by the ASI

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
(Recommendation at Para 21)
15.   The Committee is happy to note that more and more corporate houses are coming forward to help the ASI
 in conservation of monuments by way of contributions to National Culture Fund. The Committee recommends
 that the Department of Culture should continue its efforts to ensure more involvement of private sector
 companies/firms. But at the same time the Committee also cautions that private involvement should not lead to
 commercial use of the monuments putting their safety and sanctity at stake.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
16.   The National Culture Fund (NCF) was constituted as a Trust in 1996 for infusion of private and corporate capital
 for cultural activities. Several projects have been initiated under NCF for conservation, preservation and environmental
 development of heritage monuments which are protected by the Archaeological Survey of India.
17.   Under the prevailing scheme, Archaeological Survey of India enters into an MoU with the National Culture Fund
 and the private/public sector company for taking up projects of conservation and preservation of monuments. The
 provisions of the MoU would detail conditions under which the projects are taken up, and due care is always taken to
 ensure that there would be no commercialization of the monuments and the safety and sanctity of the monument are not
 affected in any way.
(Recommendation at Para 24)
18.   The monuments like Taj Mahal, Agra and Sun Temple at Konark which are famous all over the world and
 attract millions of tourists to the country should be conserved/preserved  very carefully and the Archaeological
 Survey of India should pay utmost attention towards this. The Committee recommends the Department to make
 adequate budgetary provision for this purpose. The Committee also recommends that the findings of the expert
 Committee on Konark Sun Temple should be implemented immediately in order to enable this famous
 monument survive.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
19.   Though the budgetary allocation of the Archaeological Survey of India has increased over the period, the available
 allocations are always inadequate to meet the demand of conservation and preservation of the ancient monuments.
 Archaeological Survey of India provides maximum allocation for the important monuments like Taj Mahal, Agra and
 Sun Temple, Konark, which are visited by large number of tourists from all over the world. However, there is an
 overall shortage of funds for the conservation of other centrally protected monuments.
20.   Archaeological Survey of India has constituted an Expert Committee for making detailed study of the structural
 issues at Sun Temple, Konark. The services of CBRI, Roorkee has already been availed. Archaeological Survey of
 India would ensure that the recommendations of the Expert Committee and the CBRI are fully implemented.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
21.   The Committee is constrained to note that Government failed to meet the requirement of funds necessary
 for conservation and preservation of centrally protected monuments and recommends that the Department of
 Culture should continue raising its demand for adequate resource allocation for protection of all monuments of
 national importance.
NATIONAL MUSEUM AND MUSEUM SECURITY
(Recommendation at Para 29)
22.   The Committee agrees with the Department that Museum security is the major area of concern and
 therefore enhancement of security arrangements is very much required. The Committee while recognizing the
 importance of security arrangements of National Museum also recommends that adequate steps should be taken
 to enhance the security of the State Museums also. The Committee considers that the cut imposed by the Finance
 Ministry at RE stage is unreasonable due to which modernization project of major museums in the country had
 to be postponed and some major international exhibitions planed during the year could not be
organised and recommends the Department to take up the matter with the Finance Ministry to avoid such cuts in
 future.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
23.   The recommendations of the Security Committee constituted by the Ministry of Culture have been communicated
 to all State Governments to help them upgrade the security of their Museums. A provision has been made in the
 Ministry’s Scheme for ”Promotion and Strengthening of Regional and Local Museums” for grant of financial assistance
 to State Government Museums to purchase equipment for Security System from 2005-06.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
 
 
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA
(Recommendation at Para 32)
24. The Committee appreciate that the National Archives has undertaken computerization programme in a big
 way. However, the Committee is simultaneously disappointed about the fact that no much attempt has been
 made to acquire documents/manuscripts in the post independence era. The Committee expressed its dismay that
 despite being pointed out by the Committee earlier the Department of Culture has also failed to fill-up the post
 of Director-General of Achieves. The Committee once again recommends that this post should be filled up
 without any further delay.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
25.   The National Archives of India continues to acquire records from the various Ministries and Government
 Undertakings. In order to improve the acquisition, special meetings were held with the concerned officers of the various
 Ministries to ascertain the practical difficulties involved. Special steps were initiated to shift the records to NAI.
 Besides, special meetings were held with the Public Sector Undertakings and Central Government offices located at
 Mumbai, Bangalore , Kolkata, Chennai and Hyderabad to chalk out plans for early declassification and subsequent
 transfer of public records to the NAI. As a result of these steps, there has been steady improvement in the acquisition of
 records during the year 2005-06 as well as the current year.
26.   The post of the Director General, NAI was advertised by the UPSC and interviews were held. However UPSC did
 not recommend any name. Subsequently the post was again advertised. The last date for receiving the applications is
 over and UPSC is expected to conduct the interview soon. It is hoped that UPSC will select a suitable candidate for the
 post.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
27.   The Committee notes that NAI is concentrating upon acquisition of official records only from various
 Government sources. Whereas, the Department of Culture has not given any information on acquisition of
 ancient manuscripts and other documents which are still in the private hands and are facing the threat of
 extinction. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that NAI should attempt to acquire more and more
 manuscripts/documents and take steps for their preservation.
28.   The Committee is however, constrained to note that there is no progress in the matter of filling up the post
 of Director General, NAI. The Committee fails to understand as to what short of recruitment conditions have
 been framed that no candidate is available for the post fulfilling such conditions. The Committee, recommend
 that recruitment conditions be relaxed or modified to make them realistic so that the post of Director-General,
 NAI is filled up at the earliest so that the functioning of the premier Achieves is not affected.
LIBRARY SECTOR
(National Library, Kolkata and other Libraries)
(Recommendation at Para 37)
29.   The Committee observes that there exists a dire necessity to strengthen literary activities in the length and
 breadth of the country and for that purpose these leading libraries like, National Library, Kolkata, Raja
 Rammohun Roy Library and Delhi Public Library play a crucial role. The Committee recommends that the
 budgetary allocation made for these libraries should be spent in a time bound manner. The Committee further
 recommends that the Delhi Public Library should widen its scope of activities and timely purchases should be
 made in order to save this important public organisation from languishing in neglect.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
30.   The Annual Action Plan of National Library, Raja Rammohun Roy Library Foundation and Delhi Public Library
 has been drawn and is being implemented. National Library, Kolkata has taken up the projects related to Digitization,
 Computerised Cataloguing. Networking and providing Internet facilities to users. The Raja Rammohun Roy Library
 Foundation, Kolkata  has drawn and adopted a new formula for assisting the libraries under their matching scheme.
 According to this new formula the libraries in developed States would get State and Central assistance in the ratio of
 50:50 and those in developing and backward States excluding North-Eastern States the ratio of RRRLF and State
 Government assistance will be 60:40. In respect of North Eastern States, the Central assistance will be 90 per cent.
 RRRLF also provides for assistance entirely from Central Plan Grants under its non-matching schemes.
31.   As regards Delhi Public Library, a Review Committee was set up to look into the activities of the Library and its
 Report is under consideration of the Government. During the financial year 2005-06, 55406 books worth Rs.95 lakhs
 were purchased by the Delhi Public Library. The Library has also kept the provision of Rupees One Crore in financial

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
 year 2006-07 for acquisition/replenishment of all type of reading materials. The progress of implementation of Action
 Plan of all libraries is being monitored on the quantitative and financial parameters on monthly basis.
SAHITYA AKADEMI
(Recommendation at Para 40)
32.   The Committee observes that the Sahitya Akademi is the premier institution in the country for literary
 dialogue, publication and promotion of literature. The Committee recommends that the projected budgetary
 allocation i.e., Rs. 10.64 crore should be released to the Akademi. The Department of Culture should also ensure
 that the construction of the proposed office building is completed in time.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
33.   Sufficient grants are provided for the Sahitya Akademi to take up the various activities of the Akademi. As regards
 their new building project, the initial formalities on the building project are yet to be completed. Sufficient provision
 will be made in the budget as and when required.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
34.   The Committee observes that it is an interim reply and the Department of Culture should keep the
 Committee informed of the progress in the matter.
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
(Recommendations at Para 44)
35.   The Committee expresses its happiness over the fact that the National School of Drama has been declared a
 ‘Deemed University’ under Section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and desires that with this
 the scope of activities of the School will be further broadened.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
36.   The Broad-based Committee constituted to look into all the aspects of National School of Drama’s future vision
 including its being a ‘Deemed to be University’. The recommendations of the Broad Based Committee were approved
 by the National School of Drama Society. These recommendation will have to be considered by the Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
37.   The Committee desires that the proposal to give ‘Deemed to be University” status to NSD should be pursued
 by the Ministry until the recommendation to that effect is accepted by Government.
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS
(Recommendation at Para 49)
38.   The Committee is not happy with the manner in which the Department of Culture is handling the affairs of
 Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA). Though the Tenth Five Year Plan is going to end this
 year, however the corpus fund of Rs. 90 crores which was proposed in the Tenth Plan for the IGNCA has not
 been released so far. The Committee recommends that the Department of Culture should take sincere steps and
 do away the problems of IGNCA.. The Department of Culture should also ensure the early release of an amount
 of Rs.90 crore as envisaged during Tenth Plan and it should not be linked to any other project.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
39.   In 2003 the Cabinet resolved that the project based funding would be given to IGNCA and they have to manage
 their own affairs from the interest that they earned from Corpus Fund.
40.   IGNCA has submitted proposal for Rs.2.90 crores for inclusion in the current year’s plan which is under
 consideration. In a meeting taken by the Principal Secretary to the PM on 21.5.2006 the following decisions were
 taken:
              (i)   CPWD in consultation with the IGNCA should access the requirement of funds for completion of buildings
 and also for their maintenance and furnish their revised cost estimates for consideration and approval of
 EFC.
              (ii)   The required funds would be provided in the budget of Ministry of Culture through Supplementary Grant.
              (iii)   Regarding augmentation of Corpus of IGNCA, it was decided that IGNCA will re-assess the need for
 further augmentation of their Corpus and submit it to Ministry of Culture for their scrutiny/examination.
              (iv)  Ministry of Culture after seeking approval of EFC will place the matter for consideration of the Cabinet.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
              The following buildings are to be completed:-
                    (a)   Building -I (Kala Nidhi, Kala Khosa, Shared Resources A)
                    (b)   Building-II (Sutradhara underground parking B)
              The C.P.W.D. has assessed the following estimates:
                                                                                                                                  (Rs. in corres)
A. Non-recurring expenditure  
 Balance work in building-I (Kala Nidhi, Kala Khosa, Shared Resources A)  
 Civil and Electrical 3.66
 B.M.S. Works 0.48
 Centralised UPS and Survellance System 3.03
 Subtotal 7.17
 Building II (Sutradhara underground parking B) 19.42
 Compound wall 1.66
 Outstanding liabilities 4.63
 TOTAL: A 32.88
B. Recurring expenditure  
 Maintenance works 33.58
 TOTAL: B 33.58
 (TOTAL: A + B) 66.46
  (including 3%
 contingencies)
Accordingly draft EFC Memo is under consideration.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
41.   The Committee observes that Department of Culture is silent on the aspect of release of the corpus fund of
 Rs. 90 crore to IGNCA and has not informed about the reason for non-release of this fund for such a long time.
 It is also not clear from the reply furnished by the Department that estimates made by the CPWD pertains to
 release of Rs.66.46 crore  out of the corpus fund of Rs.90 crore or additional amount of Rs.66.46 crore . The
 Committee recommends that the Department should inform every minute detail to the Committee so that this
 premiere institution of Art does not languish any further.
SCIENCE CITIES
(Recommendation at Para 55)
42.   The Committee feels that holding back 60 per cent of the total budgetary amount i.e., Rs.12.00 crore out of
 total Rs. 20.00 crore , for Pushpa Gujral Science City is unjustifiable. More so, when the Pushpa Gujral Science
 City, Kapurthala was not in a position to utilize the same amount due to pending audit objections. Science City
 project which is very crucial for popularizing science amidst masses, therefore, the Committee recommends that
 the Department of Culture should give adequate emphasis to regional Science Centres at Dharwad, Raipur,
 Pimpri, Chinchwad, Pune as well as Sub-Regional Science Centres, at Solapur and Kelimpong and promote
 their activities further.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
43.   It may be submitted that the Ministry of Finance had imposed an overall huge cut in September/October, 2005 on
 Department’s budget. Accordingly the budget under each and every Head had been proportionately reduced. The B.E.
 under ‘Science Cities’ for 2005-06 was reduced to Rs. 8.00 crores. Adequate attention is being paid in respect of
 Regional Science Centre at Dharwad, Raipur, Pimpri Chinchwad, Pune as well as Sub-Regional Science Centres at
 Solapur and Kelimpong and for promotion their activities. Details of progress in each case is explained below:
Regional Science Centres
 1. Raipur : The SFC note in respect of the project has been received from the Executing Agency of
 the project i.e. National Council of Science Museums, Kolkata after inspection of the
 identified 10 acres plot of land. Government of Chattisgarh has released their share for
 the project in one go to the NCSM.
 2. Pimpri : SFC approval has been given for setting up Regional Science Centre Pimpri

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
  Chinchwad, Pune  Chinchwad Municipal Corporation, Pune. NCSM has been giving technical support to
 the project.
 3. Dharwad : This project is at the stage of conceptualisation.
Sub-Regional Science Centres
 1. Kalimpong : The roof casting of two blocks and the RCC work up to plinth level is complete. The
 brickwork in the office block is complete,  Columns of all the four blocks are
 completed.
 2. Solapur : The Sub-Regional Science Centre, Solapur project has been initiated and the land
 for the project has been inspected and finalised.
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENCE MUSEUMS, KOLKATA
(Recommendation at Para 61)
44.   The Committee recommends that the budgeted amount of Rs. 16.00 crore  will be utilized by the National
 Council of Science Museums in a time bound manner so that it will not invite any cut from the Finance Ministry
 at RE stage this year.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
45.   National Council of Science Museums has been able to spend the budgetary allocation in full in all previous years.
 For this year also NCSM has prepared a time bound programme  for spending the Plan allocation of Rs. 16.00 crore. As
 per this plan, 67 per cent of the total allocation is to be spent by end of December.
ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES
(Recommendation at Para 65)
46.   The Committee notes that Zonal Cultural Centres are playing important role to create cultural awareness
 among the public especially, in rural and semi urban areas. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the
 government to strengthen the Zonal Cultural Centres by enhancing the allocation successively.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
47.   No action required.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
48.   The matter is dropped.
NORTH EASTERN REGION
(Recommendation at Para 71)
49.   The Committee observes that proper utilization of the allocated budgetary amount is a major problem in all
 the North Eastern States. The Committee notes the special arrangements made by the Department to re-
appropriate the amount from the NE Budget Head 2552 “Lump Sum Provision for the activities of North
 Eastern Region”, every quarter of the financial year for the expenditure incurred by various Divisions in respect
 of the schemes operated by them as also by the Organizations which have undertaken the activities in the North
 Eastern Region, thereby incurring expenditure. As per this scheme the expenditure so incurred through will be
 re-imbursed at the end of each quarter. The Committee desires that this quarterly appraisal mechanism as
 devised by this Department to facilitate the monitoring of the progress of Plan/Schemes in the North East Area
 and also the expenditure incurred thereon in that region will be implemented successfully.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
50.   In order to monitor the progress of Plan Schemes and expenditure in the North Eastern States effectively, the
 Ministry of Culture had followed the mechanism to re-appropriate the amount from NE Budget Head 2552 - Lump Sum
 provision for the activities of North Eastern Region. This Ministry has been re-imbursing the funds incurred as
 expenditure towards activities undertaken by various organizations i.e. Attached/Subordinate Offices and Autonomous
 Organisations as well as schemes implemented by Divisions at the end of each quarter of the financial year. The re-
 appropriation from the NE Budget Head 2552 has been done at the end of June, September, December and March of
 the financial year, as per the request for re-appropriation of funds under Plan Schemes received from various
 Organisations/Divisions of the Ministry. The mechanism followed has been found to be successful. Further, the pattern
 of fund utilization under NE Budget Head ‘2252’ through re-appropriation has been found to be progressive during the
 last few years.
51.   As per the latest instructions of Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, during the year 2006-07 the
 break up of hitherto lump sum provision kept i.e. 10 per cent of the minimum mandatory Plan outlay out of the total
 plan outlay for the Ministry as a whole has been depicted in Detailed Demands for Grants. The break up of the total

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
 provision for Development of North Eastern Region including Sikkim up to the Budget Head level corresponding to
 different functional major/sub major/minor heads has been included under the Major Head 2552 - North Eastern
 Region. As the break up of amount to be incurred under various organizations/schemes are indicated, the
 organizations/divisions implementing schemes under which activities in the North Eastern Region are to be taken up,
 will be re-imbursed the amount has been in NER as also the anticipated expenditure to be incurred in the quarter of the
 financial year.
52.   A sum of Rs. 260.16 lakhs was re-appropriated under the Major Head 2552 - (Plan) - for the activities of North
 East Areas for the first quarter (i.e. the quarter ending June, 2006) out of the total provision of Rs.47.00 crore kept for
 the activities of the North East Area. The provision of Rs.47.00 crore is the 10 per cent of the total Plan Outlay of
 Rs.470.00 crores which is mandatory minimum outlay. The proposals for re- appropriation of funds under NE Budget
 Head for the second quarter ending September, 2006 have been invited from the concerned Divisions/Organisations of
 the Ministry of Culture, which would be finalized by the 3rd week of October, 2006.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
52.   The Committee notes the reply and would like to review the progress during examination of Demands for
 Grants of the Department for the year 2007-08.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
        The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.                               (Para 3)
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
        The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that UPSC will take due care to fill up the vacant
 post at the earliest. The Committee however, hopes that recruitment condition for the post of Additional
 Director General (Archaeology) must have been framed taking into account the availability of manpower in this
 connection so that there are enough candidates available for the post.                                  (Para 14)
        The Committee is constrained to note that Government failed to meet the requirement of funds necessary
 for conservation and preservation of centrally protected monuments and recommends that the Department of
 Culture should continue raising its demand for adequate resource allocation for protection of all monuments of
 national importance.                                                                                                                   (Para 21)
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA
        The Committee notes that NAI is concentrating upon acquisition of official records only from various
 Government sources. Whereas, the Department of Culture has not given any information on acquisition of
 ancient manuscripts and other documents which are still in the private hands and are facing the threat of
 extinction. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that NAI should attempt to acquire more and more
 manuscripts/documents and take steps for their preservation.
        The Committee is however, constrained to note that there is no progress in the matter of filling up the post
 of Director General, NAI. The Committee fails to understand as to what short of recruitment conditions have
 been framed that no candidate is available for the post fulfilling such conditions. The Committee, recommend
 that recruitment conditions be relaxed or modified to make them realistic so that the post of Director-General,
 NAI is filled up at the earliest so that the functioning of the premier Achieves is not affected.
                                                                                                                                        (Paras 27 and 28)
SAHITYA  AKADEMI
        The Committee observes that it is an interim reply and the Department of Culture should keep the
 Committee informed of the progress in the matter.                                                                  (Para 34)
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
        The Committee desires that the proposal to give ‘Deemed to be University” status to NSD should be pursued
 by the Ministry until the recommendation to that effect is accepted by Government. (Para 37)
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS
        The Committee observes that Department of Culture is silent on the aspect of release of the corpus fund of
 Rs. 90 crore to IGNCA and has not informed about the reason for non-release of this fund for such a long time.
 It is also not clear from the reply furnished by the Department that estimates made by the CPWD pertains to
 release of Rs.66.46 crore  out of the corpus fund of Rs.90 crore or additional amount of Rs.66.46 crore . The
 Committee recommends that the Department should inform every minute detail to the Committee so that this
 premiere institution of Art does not languish any further.                                                        (Para 41)
ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES
        The matter is dropped.                                                                                                       (Para 48)
NORTH EASTERN REGION
        The Committee notes the reply and would like to review the progress during examination of Demands for
 Grants of the Department for the year 2007-08.                                                                      (Para 52)
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 16th April, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
        MEMBERS PRESENT
   1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury   —   Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
   3.  Shri S.S. Chandran
   4.  Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
   5.  Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
   6.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha
        LOK  SABHA
   7.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
   8.  Shri Joachim Baxla
   9.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
 10.  Shri N.S. V. Chitthan
 11.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
 12.  Shri P. Karunakaran
 13.  Dr. P.P. Koya
 14.  Shri Samik Lahiri
 15.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
 16.  Shri Dushyant Singh
 17.  Shri Suraj Singh
 18.  Shri Prahlad Joshi
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
        Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
        Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
        Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.     The Committee considered the following six draft Reports:
             (i)     Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
 and Second Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road Transport and Highways;
             (ii)    Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
 and Third Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Culture;
             (iii)   Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
 and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism;

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/112.htm[28-08-2018 13:22:57]
             (iv)   Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
 and Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Shipping; and
             (v)    Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
 and Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation.
        After some discussion the Committee adopted all the six Reports with minor modifications. The Committee also authorized the
 Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said report to the Parliament during the current session.
3.     The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again on 17th April, 2007 at 3.00 P.M.