REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/36rep.htm[28-08-2018 12:43:00]
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
I, the chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism, having been authorised by the Committee, present this
 thirty Sixth Report of the Committee relating to the Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998. The Bill seeks to
 amend section 42 (sub section 1 & 3 ) and section 88 (sub section 2) of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, which
 provides privatisation and to enable implementation of the joint venture scheme.
2. In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee, the Hon’ble
 Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred * the Bill, as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 2nd December, 1998and pending
 therein to the Committee for examination and report thereon.
3. The Committee discussed the provisions of the Bill at its meeting held on 19
th January 1999.
4. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary Ministry of Surface Transport on the subject.
5. The Committee also heard the views of the Board of Trustees and workers unions of some of the Major Ports.
6. The Committee also deliberated upon the petition which was forwarded by the Committee on Petitions, Rajya Sabha,
 received by them from the All India Port and Dock workers Federation and countersigned by Smt. Kamla Sinha and
 Shri Jibon Roy, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha, in connection with the said Bill.
7. The Committee decided that the evidence tendered by the Secretary Ministry of Surface Transport before the
 Committee should be laid on the table of both the Houses of Parliament.
8. The Committee while considering the Bill took note of the following documents furnished by the Ministry of Surface
 Transport.
(i) Background note on the Bill.
(ii) Guidelines to be followed by Major Port Trusts for Private
Sector Participation in the Major Ports.
(iii) Guidelines for Private Sector Participation in Ports through
Joint ventures and Foreign Collaborations.
9. The Committee, at its meeting held on 26
th February, 1999, discussed the provisions of the Bill and took
 up clause by clause consideration thereof.
10. The Committee was informed of the Objects and Reasons for amendment of the Act. The Committee was also
 explained that Ninety percent of India’s sea trade is conducted through eleven Major Ports in the country which are
 administered by the respective Board of Trustees constituted under Major Port Trusts Act 1963. The Committee was
 apprised that the Sea traffic at the ports has been increasing steadily over the past years.
It was explained to the Committee that on a conservative estimate of cumulative growth of 9% per annum in term of
 traffic, our ports must be capable of handling a traffic of approximately 850 MT by 2012. This would require 300 to
 400 additional berths to handle the cargo of different kinds. The creation of additional port capacity of this magnitude at
 the current costs would require an investment of over rupees 40,000 crores. Projections undertaken by the Ministry of
 Surface Transport indicate that not more than rupees 12,000 crores would be available from plan funds and the internal
 resources of the ports for investment in port development and the balance would have to come from the private sector
 or from the capital market.
The Central Government had announced guidelines for private sector participation in the Major Ports in October,1996.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/36rep.htm[28-08-2018 12:43:00]
 Now it is proposed to modify the said guidelines to permit formation of joint venture between the Board of Trustees
 and the owners of foreign ports, minor ports or any company. These measures; apart from enhancing confidence of
 private sector in funding ports, are aimed at facilitating the Major Ports to:-
(i) Attract new technology.
(ii) Introduce better managerial practices.
(iii) Expedite implementation of schemes and;
(iv) Foster strategic alliance with minor ports for creation of optimal port infrastructure.
To achieve the aforesaid purpose, it is proposed to amend the Major Port Trust Act, 1963.
11. The Ministry of Surface Transport also in their background note submitted to the Committee explained the need for
 introduction of the Bill and the provision to be made in the Bill as under: -
(a) It is proposed to insert clause (f) in sub-section 1 of section 42 of the Act to bring the supporting infrastructure; such
 as road, railways and civic & urban facilities under the purview of the services provided by port Trusts. Such facilities
 being crucial to efficient port operations, they need to be developed in an integrated manner along with the
 development of the port.
(b) A Sub-section 3A of Section 42 is proposed to be added to enable a Major Port Trust Board to form joint venture
 company with foreign port, corporate body or with any other person to perform the services and function assigned to
 the Board under the provisions of the Act.
(c) Insertion of clause(d) in sub-section 2 of section88 is necessary to enable a Port Trust Board to invest funds in the
 joint venture company formed with foreign port, or corporate body or with any other person under sub-section 3A of
 section 42 of the Act. The guidelines provide that the Port Trust will hold a minimum equity & take to enable it to
 block any special resolution.
(d) The insertion of clause (e) in sub-section 2 of section 88 will enable a Port Trust Board to invest funds in the joint
 venture company formed for development of a minor port or any other port. Since such development will be out side
 the jurisdiction of Board of Trustees of a Major Port Trust; a provision separate from clause (d) is necessary.
12. It is also stated that many of the Major Ports have reached or are reaching saturation of their development potential
 pointing to the need for creation of new facilities at the ports. Therefore, the minor ports will be called upon to handle
 substantial cargo in the future. However, only a few of the minor ports are well developed providing all weather,
 alongside berthing facilities. It is in this context that the integrated development of major and minor ports assumed
 crucial importance to avoid duplication of efforts or over creation of capacity, to ensure optimal utilisation of national
 resources. The enabling provision under clause (e) of sub-section 2 of section 88 is intended to achieve such integrated
 development of major and minor ports and to chanelise funds of Major Ports towards development of minor ports by
 forming joint ventures between major and minor ports.
13. The Committee, having regard to the submission made by the representatives of the Ministry of Surface Transport
 and Board of Trustees of some of the Major Ports and the documents furnished to it on the subject is of the opinion that
 there is a need to amend the Major Port Trusts Act 1963 and to insert the provisions in section 42 and 88 as proposed in
 the bill to achieve the objectives set out in the statement of objects and reasons of the Bill. The Committee is in
 agreement with the provisions of the Bill. Accordingly clause 2 and 3 of the Bill were adopted without any change.
14. Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were adopted with some changes which are of consequential nature.
15. The Committee recommends that the bill in its present form be passed.
 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/36rep.htm[28-08-2018 12:43:00]
NEW DELHI PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA
FEBRUARY, 26th 1999 CHAIRMAN
PHALGUNA 7th 1920(SAKA) COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT AND TOURISM
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRAFT
36
TH REPORT
ON
THE MAJOR PORT TRUSTS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1998
 