 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
 
REPORT NO. 
296
_ 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SIXTH REPORT  
Role of Highways in Nation Building 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th July, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th July, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SIXTH REPORT  
 
Role of Highways in Nation Building 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th July, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th July, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
  
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iv)-(v) 
3. ACRONYMS                (vi)-(xiv) 
4. REPORT                                 1-147 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   148-193 
    6. MINUTES         194-222 
7. ANNEXURES        223-239 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(i) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. *Kumari Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
10. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
11. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
12.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
13.  Shri Anto Antony 
14.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
15.  Shri Tapir Gao  
16.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
17.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
18.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
19.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
20.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
21.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
22.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
23.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
24.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
25.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
26.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
27.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
28.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
30.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
31.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
_________________________________________________________  
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020  
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd April, 2020 and re-nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd  
July, 2020  
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 

(ii) 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. *Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
10. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat   
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
________________________________________________________  
*Shri Raj Babbar ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020  
**Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 

(iii) 
 
    SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

(iv) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Sixth Report on 'Role of Highways in Nation 
Building'. 
2. The Committee heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways; Chairman, National Highways Authority of India; and Director, NHIDCL on the 
subject on 4th November, 2019. The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways , State Government of Andhra Pradesh, State Road 
Contractors' Association and National Highways Builders' Federation  on the subject at 
Visakhapatnam on 7th January, 2020. The Committee heard the views of the officials of 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, State Government of Maharashtra, State Road 
Contractors' Association and National Highways Builders' Federation  on the subject at 
Mumbai on 10th January, 2020. The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways, State Government of Goa, State Road Contractors' 
Association and National Highways Builders' Federation  on the subject at Goa on 11th 
January, 2020. The Committee also heard the Secretary, Ministry of  Road Transport and 
Highways on 'Impact of Coronavirus Pandemic on Road Transport Sector' in its meetings 
held on 7 th October and 13 th October, 2020.  The Committee heard the views of the 
President, Indian Road Congress; Director, Indian Academy of Highway Enginee rs; and 
Secretary General, Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers’ Association on the 
subject on 7th January, 2021. The Committee also heard various financial institutions/public 
sector banks on, inter alia, 'Lending aspects of road sector' in its meeting held on 8th January, 
2021. The Committee also heard various financial institutions/ public sector banks on, inter 
alia, ‘Lending aspects of road sector’ in its meeting held on 8 th January, 2021.  The 
Committee heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; 
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Finance; and Chairman, National Highways Authority of 
India on the subject on 19th January, 2021. The Committee heard the views of the officials of 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways ; National Highways Authority of India; and 
Union Territory  Government of Jammu & Kashmir on the subject at Srinagar on 23rd   
January, 202 1. The Committee heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways; Chairman, National Highways Authority of India; and Managing Director, 
NHIDCL on the subject on 24th June, 2021. The Committee heard the views of the officials 
of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NHAI, NHIDCL and State Government of 
Tamil Nadu on ‘Problems of Land Acquisition for Highway Projects’ and ‘Review of CRIF 
works in Tamil Nadu’ at Chennai on 12th July, 2021. The Committee heard the views of the 
officials of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NHAI, NHIDCL and State 
Government of Kerala  with reference to utilization of CRIF in the State of Kerala  at 
Kumarakom on 16th July, 2021.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways; Ministry of Finance; National Highways Authority of India; 

(v) 
 
NHIDCL; State/UT Governments of Andhra Pradesh , Maharashtra, Goa and Jammu & 
Kashmir; and other stakeholders for placing before the Committee, the material and 
information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the 
Members. 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the                     
20th July, 2021.   
 
 (T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                                    Chairman, 
July 20, 2021                                                       Department-related Parliamentary Standing       
29 Ashadha, 1943 (Saka)                               Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(vi) 
 
ACRONYMS 
3G Third Generation  
AD Appointed Date 
ADB Asian Development Bank 
AE Authority Engineer 
AGMC Agartala Government Medical College 
AIF Alternate Investment Fund 
AIIB Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank 
ALM Asset and Liability Management 
AMSL Above Mean Sea Level 
AS Accounting Standards 
ASM Agency for Specialized Monitoring 
ATMS Advanced Traffic Management System 
BC Bituminous Concrete 
BG Bank Guarantee  
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
BM Bituminous Macadam 
BNVSAP Bharat New Vehicle Safety Assessment Program 
BoQ Bill of Quantities  
BOT Build Operate Transfer 
BRO Border Roads Organisation 
BSR Basic Statistical Return 
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation 
CC Cement Concrete 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 

(vii) 
 
CCIE Conciliation Committees of Independent Experts 
CE Chief Engineer  
COD Commercial Operation Date 
CoRS Committee on Road Safety 
COS Change of Scope 
CP Condition Precedent  
CRF Central Roads Fund 
CRIF Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
CRISIL Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited 
CRRI Central Road Research Institute 
CRZ Coastal Regulation Zones 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility  
CTE Chief Technical Examiner 
DBM Dense Bituminous Macadam 
DCCO Date of Commencement of Commercial Operations 
DFG Demands for Grants 
DFI Development Financial Institution 
DFS Department of Financial Services 
DIG Deputy Inspector General 
DLP Defects Liability Period 
DOLA Department of Legal Affairs 
DPR Detailed Project Reports 
DSRA Debt Service Reserve Account 
DTC Driving Training Centers 
EAP Externally Aided Projects 
EI Economic Importance 

(viii) 
 
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment  
EL Expected Loss 
EOT Extension of Time 
EPC Engineering, Procurement, Construction 
EPFO Employees' Provident Fund Organisation 
FB Fund Based 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment  
FDR Flood Damage Repair 
FI Financial Institution  
FY Financial Year 
GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 
GAD General Arrangement Drawing 
GBP Govind Ballabh Pant 
GBS Gross Budgetary Support 
GECLS Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line Scheme 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GoI Government of India 
GPRS General Packet Radio Service 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GVA Gross Value Added 
HAM Hybrid Annuity Model 
HPC High Powered Committee  
HQ Headquarter 
IAHE Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 
IAS Indian Administrative Service 
IBA Indian Banks' Association 

(ix) 
 
IBC Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
ICEMA Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers' Association 
ID Identity Document 
IDBI Industrial Development Bank of India 
IDC Interest During Construction 
IDTR Institute of Driving and Traffic Research 
IE Independent Engineer  
IEBR Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources  
IFC International Finance Corporation 
IFCI Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
IIFCL India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology  
IL&FS Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services 
IMF International Monetary Fund 
InvIT Infrastructure Investment Trust 
IOB Indian Overseas Bank 
iOS iPhone Operating System 
IPO Initial Public Offering 
IRAC Income Recognition and Asset Classification 
IRC Indian Road Congress 
IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
IRF International Road Federation 
IRR Internal Rate of Return 
ISC Inter State Connectivity 
ITI Industrial Training Institute 
ITS Intelligent Transportation System 

(x) 
 
JCB Joseph Cyril Bamford 
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
JOIN Japan Overseas Infrastructure Investment Corporation for Transport & 
Urban Development 
JRA Japan Road Association 
KM Kilometre 
KNT Karnataka 
L&T Larsen and Toubro 
L1 Lower One 
LA Land Acquisition 
LEF Large Exposure Framework 
LiDAR Light Detection and Ranging 
LIE Lenders' Independent Engineer 
LLC Limited Liability Company 
LWE Left Wing Extremism 
M&R Maintenance and Repair 
MCA Model Concession Agreement 
MCLR Marginal Cost of Fund-based Lending Rate 
MDR Major District Road 
MOEF Ministry of Environment and Forest 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment and Forest and Climate Change 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MP Member of Parliament 
MRG Minimum Revenue Guarantee  
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 

(xi) 
 
MSRDC Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation 
MZ Mizoram 
NA Not Applicable  
NBFC Non-Banking Financial Company 
NBFC-ND Non-Deposit taking Non-Banking Financial Company 
NCLT National Company Law Tribunal 
NCT National Capital Territory 
NDB New Development Bank 
NE North-Eastern 
NER North-Eastern Region 
NFB Non-Fund Based 
NGT National Green Tribunal 
NH National Highway 
NH(O) National Highways (Original) 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHBF National Highway Builders Federation 
NHDP National Highways Development Project 
NHIDCL National Highway and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited 
NHIIMPL National Highways Infra Investment Managers Private Limited 
NHIIP National Highways Interconnectivity Improvement Programme 
NIIF National Investment and Infrastructure Fund 
NIP National Infrastructure Pipeline 
NPA Non Performing Assets  
O&M Operation and Maintenance 
OECF Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund 
OM Office Memorandum  

(xii) 
 
OMT Operate, Maintenance and Transfer 
OR Ordinary Repairs 
OSD Officer on Special Duty 
P&M Planning and Management  
PAP Project Affected Persons 
PBFF Permanent Bridge Bee Fund 
PCA Prompt Corrective Action 
PCOD Provisional Commercial Operation Date 
PE Private Equity 
PF Pension Fund 
PIPR Project Implementation Progress Report 
PIU Project Implementation Unit 
PMG Project Monitoring Group 
PMIS Project Monitoring Information System 
PNB Punjab National Bank 
POD Probability of Default 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PR Periodic Renewals 
PRBDB Punjab, Roads & Bridges Development Board 
PS Paved Shoulder  
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
PUC Pollution Under Control 
PWD Public Works Department  
R&D Research and Development 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RDTC Regional Driving Training Centers  

(xiii) 
 
RERA Real Estate Regulatory Authority 
RFCTLARR Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RO Regional Office 
ROB Road Over Bridge 
RoE Return on Earnings 
RoW Right of Way  
RT Road Transport  
RTH/ RT&H Road Transport and Highways 
RUB Road Under Bridge 
SARDP Special Accelerated Road Development Programme 
SARDP-NE Special Accelerated Road Development Programme for North-Eastern 
Region 
SAROD Society for Affordable Redressal of Dispute 
SBI State Bank of India 
SEBI Securities and Exchange Board of India 
SEIAA State Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
SFC Standing Finance Committee 
SH State Highway 
SIA Social Impact Assessment  
SIFTI Scheme for Financing Viable Infrastructure Projects 
SL Single Lane 
SLAO Special Land Acquisition Officer 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SOR Schedule of Rates 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 

(xiv) 
 
SR Special Repairs 
SSA State Support Agreement 
SWAMIH Special Window for Funding Stalled Affordable and Middle-Income 
Housing Projects 
TOT Toll, Operate and Transfer 
TPC Total Project Cost 
TRSFR Tripura Road Safety Fund Rules 
TRW Transport Research Wing 
UK United Kingdom 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
US United States  
US$ United States Dollar 
UT Union Territory  
VGF Viability Gap Funding 
WC Working Capital                   
 

1 
 
REPORT 
INTRODUCTION 
The significance of the role played by highways in the economic growth of any 
modern day nation cannot be overstated. Movement of goods as well as people in India relies 
heavily on its vast road network. This is reflected clearly by the  fact that the share of the 
transport sector in the Gross Value Added (GVA) for the Financial Year 2018 -19 was about 
4.6 percent, of which the share of road transport contributed roughly 67 percent (Economic 
Survey 2020-21, Volume 2) . Thus, there is immens e need to ensure that the road network in 
the country is developed at a brisk pace and is maintained in top shape, so as to bolster the 
economic prospects of the country. 
2. India has the second largest road network in the world of about 62.1 8 lakh km. Thi s 
comprises National Highways, Expressways, State Highways, Major District Roads, Other 
District Roads and Village Roads as under: 
National Highways 1,39,032 km 
State Highways 1,76,818 km 
Other Roads 59,02,539 km 
Total 62,18,389 km 
3. Given the remarkable impact of a robust, well-maintained network of highways on the 
developmental prospects of a country, the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the subject ‘Role of 
Highways in Nation Bu ilding’ for detailed examination and report. The Committee had its 
deliberation with the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways on this subject on 
4th November, 2019; 19th January, 2021 and 24th June, 2021. The Committee heard the views 
of representatives of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NHAI, National Highways 
Builders Federation and State Government of Andhra Pradesh; State Government of 
Maharashtra; and State Government of Goa on this subject, in its meetings held at 
Visakhapatnam on 7th January, at Mumbai on 10 th January and at Goa on 11 th January, 2020 
respectively. The Committee also heard the views of officials of Ministry of Road Transport 
& Highways, NHAI, UT Government of Jammu & Kashmir on this subject, with reference to 

2 
 
the status of National Highways/State Highways in Jammu and Kashmir in its meeting held at 
Srinagar on 23 rd January, 2021 . Further, the Committee heard various stakeholders, viz., 
Indian Roads Congress, Indian Academy of Highway Engineers and Indian Construct ion 
Equipment Manufacturers’ Association, on this subject, in its meeting held on 7 th January, 
2021. The Committee also heard various financial institutions/ public sector banks on, inter 
alia, ‘Lending aspects of road sector’ in its meeting held on 8 th January, 2021.  The 
Committee had its deliberation with the Additional Secretary , Department of Financial 
Services, Ministry of Finance on ‘Lending aspects of Road sector’ on 19 th January, 2021.   
The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
NHAI, NHIDCL and State Government of Tamil Nadu on ‘Problems of Land Acquisition for 
Highway Projects’ and ‘Review of CRIF works in Tamil Nadu’ at Chennai on 12 th July, 
2021. The Committee heard the views of the officials of Min istry of Road Transport and 
Highways, NHAI, NHIDCL and State Government of Kerala  with reference to utilization of 
CRIF in the State of Kerala at Kumarakom on 16th July, 2021. 
4. The Committee also heard the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highwa ys 
on ‘Impact of Coronavirus Pandemic on Road Transport Sector’ in its meetings held on 7 th 
October and 13th October, 2020. 
5. Since State Governments/Union Territories play a significant role in highway projects 
and are therefore a key stakeholder, the Committee sought the written views/comments of the 
State Governments and Union Territories on various issues related to this subject, including 
on (i) Land acquisition; (ii) Environmental and forest clearance; (iii) Road safety; (iv) 
Mechanism for coordinati on with Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; and (v) 
rehabilitation of project-affected people. 
6. The National Highways have a total length of 1,36,440 km, which in totality serve as 
the arterial network of the country. The development of National Hig hways is the 
responsibility of the Government of India. The tasks and responsibilities of the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways encompass, inter alia , construction and maintenance of 
National Highways (NHs); administration of the National Highways Ac t,1956; National 
Highways Authority of India Act, 1988; National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and 
Collection) Rules, 2008; Motor Vehicles Act 1988; and Central Motor Vehicles Rules 1989, 
as also formulation of broad policies relating to road transport and automotive norms, besides 
making arrangements for movement of vehicular traffic with neighbouring countries. 

3 
 
7. The Ministry implements the National Highways development programmes through the 
following agencies: 
(i) The State Government (State PWDs/ RCDs, etc.); 
(ii) National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) – 1988 Act – operational since 
1995; 
(iii) National Highway and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited 
(NHIDCL) – 2014; 
(iv) Border Roads Organisation (BRO) – Set up in 1960. 
8. The development and maint enance works are being implemented on the agency basis. 
The State Governments (State PWDs/ RCDs, etc.), Border Roads Organisation (BRO), 
 National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) and National Highway and 
Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (N HIDCL) are implementing the 
development and maintenance works on NHs. At present, projects of widening to 4 -
lane NH configurations or more and Expressways under Bharatmala Pariyojna(Phase -I) 
and other Schemes have been assigned to the NHAI. The projects of  development to 2 -
lane NH configurations, with or without paved shoulders are primarily being assigned 
to the State Governments, viz. State PWDs, State Road Construction Departments/ 
Corporations, etc. The Projects under Special Accelerated Road Developme nt 
Programme for North -Eastern Region (SARDP -NE), including Arunachal Pradesh 
Package of Roads, are now being primarily assigned to NHIDCL. Further, NHIDCL is 
also being assigned projects under other Schemes in hill States including States in the 
North Eas t Region, the three hill states in North -West Region and the Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands. 
9. Some of the Major Programmes/ Schemes being implemented by the Ministry include 
the following: 
(i) National Highway Development Programme (through 7 phases) 1998 to 2017 – 
about 55,000 km; 
(ii) Bharatmala Phase-I –about 35,000 km 
(iii) SARDP-NE and Arunachal Package – about 10,000 km 
(iv) Left Wing Extremism affected areas – about 5500 km 
(v) Char-Dham Project – 890 km 

4 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF ROAD PROJECTS 
10.  The Ministry, in its background note,  informed the Committee about the different 
modes of implementation of road projects:- 
 Public Private Partnership (PPP) :-  
There are three variants of PPP projects, namely, BOT (Toll), BOT (Annuity) and 
Hybrid Annuity, explained as under: 
(i) BOT (Toll) Projects: Responsibility for design and development of the Project is 
vested with the Concessionaire for the Project under this mode. The 
Concessionaire is also responsible for Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of the 
Project Section for the entire Concessio n Period after it is developed and put to 
Commercial Operation. The Concessionaire has tolling rights during Concession 
Period after declaration of Commercial Operation of the developed section.    
(ii) BOT (Annuity) Projects:  As in case of BOT (Toll) Proj ects, responsibility for 
design, development and O&M of the Project Section for the entire Concession 
Period is vested with the Concessionaire for the Project. Concessionaire is given 
Annuity Payments during the O&M period as per provisions of the Concessi on 
Agreement. Tolling rights during O&M period vest with the employer after 
declaration of Commercial Operation of the developed section.      
(iii) Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM): Under this newly introduced model, 40% of the 
Project Cost is paid by the Gover nment/ Executing Agency as Construction 
Support/ Grant to the private developer and the balance 60% is to be arranged by 
the successful bidder through a mix of Equity and Grant during the construction 
period. The Concessionaire is paid back the amount of 6 0% along with interest, 
O&M and RoE in the form of 1/2 yearly Annuities over a period of 15 years. 
While the Concessionaire is responsible for the O&M during this period of 15 
years, the traffic risk is taken by the Project Executing Agency/ Employer. 
Tolling rights during the O&M period are vested with the employer after 
declaration of Commercial Operation of the developed section.     
     Public funded Projects :- 

5 
 
(i)     Projects as per Engineering - Procurement –Construction (EPC) 
Contracts: Responsibility for design and development of the Project is vested 
with the Contractors for the Projects. The Contractor is responsible for 
maintenance and rectification of defects arising in the Project section during the 
concurrent maintenance -cum-defects liability per iod, which is 4 years as per 
extant policies. The Contracts specify broad project scopes and requirements and 
does not provide for individual item -wise quantities/ rates. There is separate 
provision for payments for maintenance of the Project section to the Contractors.   
(ii) Projects as per Item Rate Contracts:  Design responsibility is that of the 
employer, the Contractor executes the Project as per quantities and rates of 
individual items specified as per the provisions of the Contract Agreements 
including variations in such items/ changes in scopes etc. allowed subsequently. 
Contractor is responsible for rectification of defects during the defects liability 
period, which may vary from one year to three years depending upon the 
specifications allowed in the Projects. 
11. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the Model 
Concessionaire Agreements (MCAs) for the different  modes of implementation of road 
projects from time to time, with inputs from both the concessionaires as well as the 
lenders, since both play a crucial role in the implementation of projects, especially the 
ones executed under the PPP model.  
12. The Committee notes that the concessionaire is responsible for the Operation 
and Maintenance (O&M) of the road projects for the entire Con cession Period (BOT 
(Toll) and BOT (Annuity) projects) or 15 years (HAM projects) in PPP projects, but in 
case of Public funded projects, the contractor is responsible for rectification of defects / 
maintenance only during the defects/ maintenance-cum-defects liability period which 
varies between one to four years. Since a large number of road projects are Public 
funded projects, especially the ones that are deemed not to be financially viable for 
private sector participation, the onus of their maintenance fa lls on the 
Ministry/NHAI/State PWDs.  In this regard, the Committee feels that the amount of 
funds allocated for the maintenance of National Highways every year is minuscule given 
the vast lengths of the National Highways across the country.  The Committee s trongly 
recommends that the maintenance of the existing network of National Highways should 

6 
 
be given topmost priority and the same should be reflected in the budgetary allocation 
made for the same. 
13.  The Ministry further submitted the following informat ion with regard to the basis of 
estimation of National Highways works:-  
(i) The works are sanctioned under various schemes, such as Bharatmala Pariyojna 
(Phase-I), development of roads in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas, 
Special Accelerated Road Deve lopment Programme for North -Eastern Region 
(SARDP-NE) including Arunachal Pradesh Package of Roads, National 
Highways Interconnectivity Improvement Programme (NHIIP) under World 
Bank Loan Assistance, Projects under Asian Development Bank (ADB)/ Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA) loan assistance etc., Besides, keeping in 
view annual fund availability, inter -se priority, the annual plans for NH works 
under National Highways (Original) [NH(O)] are finalized so as to take up works 
on other NHs not covered under any of the Schemes mentioned above.  
(ii) Preparation of Project Reports: - The preparation of Project Reports for road / 
NH Projects including des igns, drawings, estimates, etc.  are taken up by 
appointing Consultants following competitive biddings p rocess through e -
tendering, thus ensuring complete transparency in invitation of bids, their 
evaluations and finalisation of the qualified bidders. The sanction of estimates, 
invitation of bids, their evaluation, approval of tender based estimates, delegat ion 
for approval of various reports (viz. Feasibility Reports, Reports for LA and 
Clearances, Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), Contract Agreements for Civil 
Works including Technical Schedules), etc., are governed by the Ministry’s 
extant policy. The Minis try has stipulated mandatory use of advanced 
technologies such as LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) or any other 
equivalent technology to bring more accuracy and speed in preparation of 
projects correctly reflecting existing ground conditions so as to ob viate need for 
large-scale changes in project scopes / time overruns during project 
implementation. 

7 
 
(iii) Cost Estimates: - The Cost Estimates including detailed Bill of Quantities 
(BOQ) are prepared for the projects as a part of DPR on the basis of the 
Ministry’s Standard Data Book and current Schedule of Rates (SOR), duly 
allowing provisions for various centages as per the extant policies. 
14. The Ministry, in its background note, presented the following information with regard 
to the life cycle (various stages) involved in execution of a National Highways Project:- 
(i)  Land Acquisition: 
(a) The Ministry takes up development of NHs, both green -field and brown -field 
projects. Currently, the practice being followed is as under: 
 Pursuant to establishment of the feasib ility of a project, the process of Land 
Acquisition and other pre -construction activities are commenced, followed by 
decision on mode of execution (BOT/ HAM/ EPC), invitation of bids and 
award of contracts. ‘Appointed Date’ is declared after joint inspecti on only 
after ensuring that majority of land stretch (90% or above) is available in 
contiguity, estimates for Utility Shifting are prepared, and Stage -1 Forest 
clearance is obtained.  
(ii) Preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR): 
The preparation of Project Reports for NH Projects including alignment, RoW, designs, 
drawings, estimates, etc., are taken up by appointing Consultants following competitive 
bidding process through e -tendering, thus ensuring complete transparency in invitation 
of bids, their e valuations and finalisation of the qualified bidders. The sanction of 
estimates, invitation of bids, their evaluation, approval of tender -based estimates, 
delegation for approval of various reports (viz. Feasibility Reports, Reports for LA and 
Clearances, Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), Contract Agreements for Civil Works 
including Technical Schedules), etc., are governed by the Ministry’s extant policy of 
22.08.2016. The Ministry has stipulated mandatory use of advanced technologies such 
as LiDAR (Light D etection and Ranging) or any other equivalent technology to bring 
more accuracy and speed in preparation of projects correctly reflecting existing ground 
conditions so as to obviate need for large-scale changes in project scopes/ time overruns 
during project implementation. The timeline for DPR preparation has been stipulated as 
8 months; further 2 months are allowed for completing the process of scrutiny and 
approval of the DPRs.  

8 
 
(iii)  Cost Estimates:  The Cost Estimates, including detailed Bill of Quant ities (BOQ) are 
prepared for the projects as a part of DPR on the basis of the Ministry’s Standard Data 
Book and current Schedule of Rates (SOR), duly allowing provisions for various 
centages as per the extant policies.    
(iv) Appraisal and Approval of th e Schemes / Projects:  The scope of the projects and 
their mode of implementation are decided based on the viability of the projects as per 
the outcome of the DPRs. Appraisal and approval of the Cost Estimates of the 
Schemes/ Projects are done as per the e xtant policy of the Ministry of Finance. NHAI 
has been delegated the  authority for appraisal and approval of individual projects 
under Phase-I of Bharatmala Pariyojana as under: - 
a) All PPP BOT (Toll) projects, irrespective of the size and cost, where no gr ant (or 
VGF) is given to the concessionaire and the construction and maintenance is 
financed by toll revenues, will be appraised and approved by the Board of NHAI. 
b) All PPP {BOT (Annuity) or BOT (HAM)} projects costing upto Rs. 2,000 crore 
(TPC excluding la nd cost) will be appraised by the SFC chaired by Secretary 
(RTH) and approved by the Minister (RTH). 
c) All EPC projects implemented by NHAI under this program shall be approved by 
NHAI Board after proper appraisal, within the budgeted financial resources 
approved under the program. The Board has further authorised the Chairman/ 
Executive Committee of the NHAI to approve projects entailing civil construction 
cost of up to Rs. 1,000 crore. 
(v)  Invitation of bids and award of works: - Development works on NHs a re awarded to 
the qualified Contractors/ Concessionaires following competitive bidding process. The 
Ministry has made it mandatory to follow e -tendering process, thus ensuring complete 
transparency in invitation of bids, their evaluations, finalisation of the qualified bidders 
and award of projects.       
(vi) Maintenance & Repair (M&R) of NH Network: 
A. Various types of M&R works undertaken on NHs are Ordinary Repairs (OR), 
Periodic Renewals (PR), Special Repairs (SR) and Emergent/ Flood Damage 
Repairs (FDRs).   

9 
 
(a) Ordinary Repairs (OR) involve routine maintenance, such as maintenance 
of culverts, patch/ pot -hole repairs, crack sealing, roadside drainage, 
repairing of shoulders, etc. 
(b) Periodic Renewal (PR) involves provision of renewal coat to the wearing 
surface at a predetermined frequency. This is done to safeguard the road 
crust and at the same time giving pavement a better riding surface.      
(c) Special Repairs (SR) works are urgent works of original nature, such as 
repairs to culverts, bridges, etc. 
(d) Emergent/ F lood Dam age Repair (FDR) works are  immediate repairs to 
roads affected by heavy rains/ flood, cyclone, landslides, sand dunes, etc. to 
restore traffic.  
(B) The M&R of NH stretches are carried out for the stretches not covered under any 
programme or completed stretches where there are no liabilities of contractors to 
maintain such stretches. Usually, the annual outlay earmarked for M&R of NHs is 
about 40% of the estimated requirement of funds as per the Ministry’s norms. 
This leads to the compulsion of thin  spreading of available resources. This is one 
of the main reasons for inability to take up timely maintenance interventions.  
Efforts are made to keep the NHs in traffic worthiness within available resources 
as per inter-se priority and traffic density. 
(C) For the NH stretches developed on EPC mode (Engineering, Procurement, 
Construction), the contractor is responsible for remedying the defects and 
concurrent maintenance of project highway during the four years defect liability 
period after completion of the work.  
(D) For NH stretches developed on BOT mode/ HAM, the Concessionaire is 
responsible for the maintenance of the project highway during the concession 
period.  
(E) For some of the developed NH stretches through public funding, maintenance 
contracts have been taken up for a definite time period (4 to 9 years) on Operate, 

10 
 
Maintenance and Transfer (OMT) basis. The maintenance of the project highway 
under OMT contracts is the responsibility of the Concessionaire. 
15. The Committee takes note of the vari ous stages involved in the execution of a 
National Highways Project.  The Committee feels that the Ministry must undertake a 
holistic review of the DPR preparation stage  of road projects. Preparation of DPR 
should be aided by the latest technology available  for the purpose and the inputs of the 
stakeholders and public representatives, including the local M.P., and the demands and 
concerns of the local populace  should be taken into account  during the process of 
preparation of the DPR . The Committee desires th at the Ministry may come up with 
Rules/ necessary statutory provisions  to fix the accountability of the officials/ 
organization responsible for drafting the DPR till a stipulated period of time after the 
completion of the project, for any negligence on the ir part, that results in construction 
of poor quality roads . Forethought may be given at this stage to ensure ample 
provisions for road safety ; mandatory service lanes;  avoidance of traffic bottlenecks ; 
and minimization of adverse environmental and heritage impact caused by the project . 
The Committee further recommends that traffic projections for the long -term must be 
taken into account while preparing DPR for any road project and where feasible, 
additional land may be acquired adjacent to the alignment pl anned at present, so as to 
enable widening of the highways, when the widening of road is needed at a future date. 
16. The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in para 183 of its 287 th 
Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministry of Road T ransport and 
Highways, which is reproduced below verbatim: 
The Committee is of the view that roads across the country require frequent 
trenching for the purpose of laying of fiber lines, gas pipelines, and other 
similar amenities. The patchwork done therea fter is often delayed and rarely 
meets the desired construction quality, thus thwarting the speed of vehicles on 
the road and acting as a safety hazard. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may consider the inclusion of a provision for dedicated unde rground 
utility corridors in its upcoming National Highways projects to prevent 
frequent trenching. The provision for construction of dedicated underground 
utility corridor should be included at the DPR stage itself. The extra cost 
incurred for building th e underground utility corridors may be replenished by 

11 
 
monetizing the constructed utility corridors by charging the Departments and 
Companies which will benefit from avoidance of frequent trenching of roads. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may cr eate a Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) for the purpose of monetization of the utility corridors. 
 
17. The Ministry informed the Committee that DPR consultants are appointed on Quality 
cum Cost Basis System as per the model RFP documents approved by the Minis try for 
appointment of DPR Consultants. DPR Consultants are engaged for carrying out all project 
preparation activities including surveying, traffic studies, pre-construction activities including 
assisting the Authority in land acquisition and procuring various project clearances. 
18. The Ministry further submitted that DPR consultants after extensive survey, 
interactions with all stake holders arrive at the most feasible alignment factoring in the own 
ground realities and site requirements.   Meetings are held with State Government at the time 
of finalisation of project alignment and comments, if any, are duly considered while 
preparing the DPRs. Use of LIDAR has been made mandatory to ensure that ground level 
situation are capture in the DPR. 
19. The Commit tee recommends that DPRs of National Highways road projects 
should have provisions for right of way and service roads. The DPRs should be 
prepared after public consultation and inputs from Members of Parliament of the area. 
The Committee further recommends  that provisions for public amenities such as 
dhabas, washroom facilities etc. should be included at the DPR stage of NH projects. 
20. The Ministry, in its Press Release dated 6 th July, 2020 (Annexure -A), has informed 
about the recent initiative taken by N HAI to undertake performance assessment and ranking 
of the highways in the country, wherein the assessment parameters are categorized in three 
main heads: Highway Efficiency (45%), Highway Safety (35%) and User Services (20%). On 
the basis of outcome of the assessment, the authority will undertake a comprehensive analysis 
and decide on the level of intervention required to enhance the overall service quality. 
Additionally, important parameters like operating speed, access control, time taken at toll 
plaza, road signages, road markings, accident rate, incident response time, crash barriers, 
illumination, availability of Advanced Traffic Management System (ATMS), functionality of 

12 
 
structures, provision for grade separated intersections, cleanliness, plantation,  wayside 
amenities and customer satisfaction will also be considered while conducting the assessment. 
21. The Committee notes that Highway Safety has been given 35% weightage in 
NHAI’s parameters for assessment and ranking of National Highways. Number of 
accidents and deaths happening on the particular National Highway must be taken into 
account while calculating such scores. 
22. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take steps to assign scores to 
all the National Highways projects, including the o nes executed by State Government 
PWDs, after assessing their quality of construction. A central database may store the 
scores obtained by the different road projects of each concessionaire/contractor, which 
may be analyzed to ascertain the quality of work executed by all the concessionaires. 
The Committee recommends that the quality of previous works carried out by the 
concessionaires should also be a factor, besides the bid amount, during the awarding 
process of a road project tender. This would ensure tha t concessionaires that produce 
quality roads are not left out of having the opportunity to work on a project because of 
minor differences in bidding amounts. 
23. In the meeting s of the Committee held on 4th November, 2019; 19th January, 2021; 
and 24 th June, 2021, one of the Members of the Committee raised the issue of awarding of 
road contracts to the lowest bidders, which,  especially in cases when the project is sub-let by 
the contractor further , comprised the quality of road projects. He stated that at pr esent, 
tenders are awarded to the lowest bidder and that there is no room for justifications . He 
further stated that many such contractors abandon the projects, causing delays. 
24. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that adequate pr ovisions 
are there in the contract agreements to ensure that the main contractor, who is fully 
responsible to employer for the work, complies with the various terms of the agreement 
irrespective of employment of sub -contractor for the work. However, to str engthen the 
resources available with the Contractor for execution of the Project, practice of sub -
contracting is resorted to. This is admissible under contract. 
25. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider breaking down big 
road projects int o smaller chunks so as to attract the interest of the small contractors 
themselves. The Committee feels that provisions should be in place to ensure that there 

13 
 
is a well-defined lower limit, below which bids for a road project would not be accepted. 
The Committee agrees with the apprehension raised by the Member of the Committee 
regarding a likely hit on the quality of work that can be carried out by a contractor who 
bids substantially lower than the approved project cost. The Committee believes that 
such bids are made with the sole intent of winning the bid and more often than not, it 
would not be possible for such bidders to do quality work with such low bids. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may lay even greater focus on 
arriving at accurate estimates for the project cost for a given road project and specify 
an upper and lower limits within which bids can be placed. 
26. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to carefully analyze the 
shortcomings of the existing mechanism for aw arding road projects to the lowest 
bidder, since doing so includes little thought for ensuring quality of the work. The 
Committee believes that there should be consideration for other importance factors 
besides the bidding amount, while  awarding a project to a concessionaire. A qualitative 
approach must be formulated for awarding road projects.  The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may take up with  the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), the 
shortcomings of the existing system of awarding a project to  the lowest bidder, 
presenting its arguments for modification of the CVC guidelines for awarding of tender 
in a suitable way to permit an element of qualitative approach in the tender awarding 
process for road projects. The Committee feels that a criterion may be developed where 
certain weightage is given to objective parameters such as the awards presently being 
executed by the contractor, their financial record, and most importantly, the past 
performance of a contractor, in terms of quality of work and ti mely execution . The 
database recommended by the Committee in para 22 of this Report may be useful for 
such purposes.  
27. As per Ministry's policy circular dated 21.08.2018 and as per provisions in Model 
EPC agreement circulated on 05.03.2019: 
• Renewal of wearing course is required due to oxidation of bitumen in the layer after a time 
gap of 5-6 years. 
• Where renewal is required, it has to be done by hot -in-place recycling of entire layer of 
bituminous concrete wearing course. If this is not feasible, fre sh layer of bituminous concrete 
with 40 mm thick has to be laid. 

14 
 
• Where stretches require improvement of riding quality, it has to be done by laying layer of 
DBM/BM and BC. 
• In cases, where development work for 2/4/6 laning is awarded, Contractor has to maintain at 
its own cost the existing lanes, no time materially inferior as compared to condition on 
appointed date. 
• Quality checks are to be carried out for each layer of pavement at various stages and as per 
frequency specified in MoRTH specifications. 
• The Contractor is primarily responsible for quality of works, prepares quality assurance 
plan and set up field laboratory with the approval of Authority's/Independent Engineer. 
• The Contractor deploys adequate Plant & Equipment and experienced personne l for testing 
of material in laboratory. 
• The Authority's/Independent Engineer have to witness certain percentage of quality tests as 
specified in the Contract Agreement.( 10% in Hybrid Annuity Mode contract and 50% as 
per new EPC Contract document). 
• There is also a provision for appointment of external technical auditor by the Authority to 
conduct an audit of the quality of works. 
• Authority Representatives (PIU/ PWD Division/ Regional Offices) may inspect quality of 
construction during execution and witness certain tests on completion of the work. 
The completion certificate is to be issued after satisfying the tests on performance parameters 
by the Authority's/Independent Engineer with the prior approval of Authority. 
28. The Committee recommends that thorough quality checks may be performed 
before the issuance of completion certificate  for any NH project , with special focus on 
rigorous testing of quality of the construction material used . The frequency of quality 
checks performed during the constructio n stage of a project may be increased suitably 
and independent third party audits may be conducted more often in order to deter the 
connivance of the Authority’s Engineer with the road contractors. The Committee 
further desires that extensive quality checks may be performed when the defect liability 
period of a project is nearing its end, so as to ensure that the issues arising near the end 
of the defect liability period are addressed by the contractor before their liability for the 
same is over. 

15 
 
29. The Co mmittee further recommends that the Ministry should look into the 
authenticity of the quality checks cleared by road projects, which later performed 
poorly and/or deteriorated at a quick pace, since the same alludes to either the 
insufficiency of the quali ty checks in place, or the connivance of the officials/engineers 
in charge of conducting the quality checks. A suitable mechanism may be put in place to 
ensure that the IRC guidelines are followed in the execution of road works without fail. 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
30. National Highways Authority of India is a statutory body created through an Act of 
Parliament, namely the NHAI Act 1988 and operationalised in 1995. The rationale for setting 
up NHAI was primarily to ensure more effective development, maintenance and management 
of the network of National Highways, while ensuring consistency in the quality of work and 
level of services. The functioning of NHAI is governed by NHAI Act 1988 and the rules, 
regulations framed thereunder. NHAI has been envisaged as a body corporate in perpetuity 
under the Act, subject to Government of India’s (GoI) decisions with regard to entrustment of 
National Highways to NHAI, funding support, etc., within the parameters set by the Act in 
particular, and the overall legal framework in general. 
31. The following functions are entrusted to NHAI under the National Highways Authority of 
India Act, 1988: 
a) Subject to the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, it shall be the 
function of the Authority to develop , maintain and manage the national highways 
and any other highways vested in, or entrusted to, it by the Government; 
b) Survey, develop, maintain and manage highways vested in, or entrusted to it; 
c) Construct offices or workshops and establish and maintain hote ls, motels, 
restaurants and rest-rooms at or near the highways vested in, or entrusted to it; 
d) Construct residential buildings and townships for its Employees; 
e) Regulate and control the plying of vehicles on the highways vested in or entrusted 
to it for the proper management thereof; 
f) Develop and provide consultancy and construction services in India and abroad 
and carry on research activities in relation to the development, maintenance and 
management of highways or any facilities thereat; 
g) Provide such facilit ies and amenities for the users of the highways vested in, or 

16 
 
entrusted to it as are, in the opinion the Authority, necessary for the smooth flow 
of traffic on such highways; 
h) Form one or more companies under the Companies Act, 1956 to further the 
efficient discharge of the functions imposed on it by this Act; 
i) Engage or entrust any of its functions to, any corporation or body corporate owned 
or controlled by the Government; 
j) Advise the Central Government on matters relating to highways; 
k) Assist, on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon, any State 
Government in the formulation and implementation of schemes for highway 
development; 
l) Collect fees on behalf of the Central Government for services or benefits rendered 
under section 7 of the National  Highways Act, 1956, as amended from time to 
time, and such other fees on behalf of the State Governments on such terms and 
conditions as may be specified by such State Governments; and 
m) Take all such steps as may be necessary or convenient for, or may be incidental to, 
the exercise of any power or the discharge of any function conferred or imposed 
on it by this Act. 
32. The Committee notes that carrying out research activities in relation to the 
development, maintenance and management of highways is one of the functions 
entrusted to NHAI under the NHAI Act, 1988. Research activities are crucial for 
NHAI to figure out the best methodologies for construction and maintenance of 
National Highways across the significantly diverse geography present in India. The 
Committee desires to be apprised of the amount of funds spent by NHAI on carrying 
out this mandate and recommends that it may lay a much greater focus on its 
research activities and ensure good budgetary allocation under this head. 
Vacancies and Staffing in NHAI 
33. During its examination of the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministry, the 
Committee has been given to understand that 754 no. of posts in the Technical and Non -
technical cadre of NHAI are lying vacant as on 31.12.2020. During 2020 -21, advertisements 
for filling -up of 278 posts (Technical -245 & Non -technical-33) have been issued. Besides 

17 
 
these, fresh advertisement for filling up 172 posts are also issued. In the recruitment 
processes undertaken during 2020-21, 175 candidates have been selected. 
34. The Committee reiterates the recommendation that it made in para 67 of its 
287th Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways, which is reproduced below verbatim: 
The Committee is distressed to note that a large number of vacancies are 
existing in NHAI, which is implementing a large number of National Highways 
projects in the country. With this shortfall in manpower, the Committee 
wonders how the NHAI can work effectively and efficiently. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take urgent action to fill up the 
vacant positions in NHAI at the earliest. The details of NHAI staff posted on 
deputation basis and how many of them are working on permanent basis may 
also be shared with the Committee. 
35. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may look into the 
reasons for the existence of such a large number of NHAI vacancies. The Committee 
desires to be apprised of the same, alongwith reasons for why the vacancies cannot 
be filled up on t ime, since in most cases, the retirement timelines of employees are 
known well in advance. The Committee fails to understand how NHAI can ensure 
that its road projects are not delayed and are executed with the best possible quality, 
when almost one third o f its staff requirements is not filled up. The budget granted 
to NHAI has significantly grown over the last few years. Similarly, the quantity of 
road projects being taken by NHAI has also witnessed a consistent increase.  Only a 
fully-staffed organization can ensure that the huge amount of funds available with 
NHAI are optimized optimally in order to push the NH infrastructure in India to 
greater heights. NHAI may also carry out an extensive study into its present staff 
requirements, keeping in mind the inc reased workload being taken by NHAI each 
year. The Committee recommends that a n effective,  time-bound plan may be 
devised to fill these vacancies at the earliest. 
35A. The Committee recognizes the fact that even though the Highways sector is 
one of the hig hest funded sectors in the country, with the amount of funds 
earmarked for the same increasing every year, crucial senior level posts in NHAI in 
the Finance cadre from Deputy Manager up to CGM level are lying vacant. It is a 

18 
 
matter of grave concern that ma jority of posts up to DGM level are vacant since 
many years, even though several attempts have been made to fill them on 
deputation. The Committee could understand that such a situation arose due to non-
availability of eligible candidates because of different accounting pattern in NHAI & 
Government (Double entry & single entry accounting), pay scale disparity between 
NHAI & PSUs at mid level (CDA and IDA) and court cases by internal candidates 
for promotion.  
35B. The Committee takes note that the existing Recruitment Rules equate 
graduates/ B.com  with candidates having professional qualifications such as 
CA/ICWA/MBA (Finance) and that in the past, recruitment at lower level were 
done under the existing Rules, resulting in the promotion of persons, who are merely 
graduates, holding such senior posts. The Committee feels that it is paramount that 
in a vital organization such as NHAI, only persons who possess required educational 
qualifications occupy higher posts in specialised cadre like Finance.  
35C.  Taking into account the above mentioned issues, the Committee suggests that 
apart from promotion and deputation, NHAI may amend the existing Recruitment 
Rules for the Finance cadre, by including reasonable percentage of posts on direct 
recruitment basis for ca ndidates having qualification of CA/ICWA/MBA (Finance) 
etc. and that at least 30% of posts of senior level, such as Deputy Manager, 
Manager, DGM etc. may be taken through direct recruitment, which will foster 
merit and selection of qualified candidates.  
35D. The Committee feels that such a modification in the recruitment process will 
enable NHAI to not only fill up the long pending vacancies, but also improve its 
operational efficiency. The Committee hopes that a mix mode of recruitment viz., 
direct recruitment, promotion and deputation for crucial and specialised cadre such 
as Finance, will provide NHAI with candidates having knowledge and expertise of 
new taxation laws such as GST, resource mobilisation and InvIT. 
Monetization of National Highways through innovative financing models 
36. The Ministry, in its background note, informed the Committee that TOT Model has 
been approved by the CCEA. As per the Model, the right of collection of Toll Fees for 
operational public funded NH projects is to be assigned f or a pre -determined period to 

19 
 
concessionaires (developers/investors) against upfront payment of a lump-sum amount. O&M 
obligations of such projects shall be with the concessionaire till the completion of the period.  
First bundle, of 9 project stretches wi th aggregate length of 680 km, of TOT is already 
awarded and Concession fee of Rs. 9,681.5 crore has been received in 2018 -19.  Further, 
initiatives has been taken to raise about Rs. 5,262 crore from award of TOT Bundle -2 in 
2019-20.  
37. With regard to In frastructure Investment Trusts (InvITs), the Ministry, in its Annual 
Report (2020 -21), informed the Committee that in order to enhance NHAI's resource 
mobilization, the Cabinet has accorded the approval (vide c ommunication 39/CM/2019(i) 
dated 13.12.2019) authorizing NHAI to set up Infrastructure Investment Trust (s), as per 
InvIT Guidelines issued by SEBI, to monetize completed National Highways that have a toll 
collection track record of at least one year. NHAI reserves the right to levy toll on the 
identified highway and incorporate SPV(s), which are essential and integral part of the entire 
InvIT structure. Present status of the NHAI InvIT is as under:  
a) SBI Caps has been appointed as transaction advisor. 
b) Trustee has been appointed – IDBI Trustee Services Limited 
c) Company Secretary has been appointed to form SPVs and Trust 
d) Registration application for NHAI InvIT submitted to the SEBI 
e) SPVs have been incorporated 
f) NHAI Board has approved investment in the two newly incorporated SPVs 
g) The Investment Manager of NHAI InvIT has been appointed and accorded the 
name of “National Highways Infra Investment Managers Private Limited” 
(NHIIMPL). NHIIMPL has also been incorporated under the Companies Act, 
2013. Management Structure of Board of Investment Manager and the 
appointees thereon have been approved.  
38. The Committee takes note of the various innovative financing models being 
employed by the Ministry/NHAI to monetize its existing assets, to fund the development 
and maintenance of the NH network across the country. The Committee is of the 
considered view that the ongoing coronavirus pandemic has impacted the traffic 
volumes across the country since March, 2020 and might continue to do so in the near 
future. This is likely to affect the asset monetization plans made b y NHAI for the short-
term future, since it would lower the interest of private players in BOT projects as well 
as in TOT mode. The Committee recommends that NHAI should factor in the effect of 

20 
 
the pandemic on its financial plans for the near future. NHAI m ay take appropriate 
steps to allay the traffic volume related concerns of the stakeholders by holding 
constructive dialogue with them, take steps to share the risk caused by the uncertainty 
of traffic volume, due to such unforeseeable events, among the different parties involved 
and, if need be, make suitable modifications to this effect, in its Model Concession 
Agreement (MCAs) and Request for Proposal (RFPs) for the short term. 
39. State Bank of India, in its written reply to the Committee, stated that it has put in -
place lending policy for financing of InvIT and participated in funding of IRB InvIT and 
funding of other InvITs is also under evaluation. SBI suggested that the Government policies 
should be reviewed periodically so that challenges faced by in vestors are addressed in timely 
manner.  
40. IFCI Limited, in its written reply, opined that minimum investment amount in an 
InvIT Initial Public Offering (IPO) be reduced from the current floor of Rs.10 lakh to 
improve wider participation. 
41. The Committ ee recommends that NHAI may consider lowering the minimum 
investment amount in InvIT IPO to a suitable amount so as to attract participation  
from a larger number of participants. 
42. With regards to InvITs, India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIF CL) 
suggested that IFCs including IIFCL should also be permitted for lending to InvITs and 
opined that this shall enhance its role and participation for infrastructure projects by way of 
easing availability of debt requirement of InvITs. 
43. The Committee feels that Infrastructure Finance Companies such as IIFCL play 
an important role in meeting the huge financial requirements of the road infrastructure 
sector in India. The Committee therefore desires to know the reasons for not permitting 
IFCs to lend to I nvITs and desires that NHAI may grant such permission to IFCs with 
suitable limits, if need be, so as to ensure InvITs attract the amount of targeted funds. 
Rising debt of NHAI 
44. During the examination of the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministry by the 
Committee, the Ministry stated that NHAI shall be exploring the possibility of restructuring 
its existing debt and also planning to procure the bank loan with repayment on ballooning 

21 
 
basis so that the existing debt servicing liability is not stresse d further. The Ministry 
furnished the following details regarding the debt servicing liability of NHAI for the next 3 
financial years, based on the debt raised and outstanding as on 31st January, 2021:- 
FY Amount (₹ in Cr.) 
2021-22 38,997 
2022-23 28,800 
2023-24 29,318 
Total 97,115 
45. The Committee is concerned to note the huge debt servicing liability of NHAI in 
the coming years . For the ongoing Financial Year 2021 -22, NHAI’s debt servicing 
liability is equivalent to 33% of the overall budgetary allocation of Rs. 1,18,101 crores of 
the Ministry at the Budgetary Estimates stage of the  FY 2021 -22. The Committee 
reiterates the recommendation made in para 72 of its 287 th Report on Demands for 
Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministry and recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may 
undertake earnest measures to ensure that its stuck projects are completed at the 
earliest and delay is minimized in the ongoing projects, since delays are one of the core 
reasons behind cost overruns. 
46. The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the interest rate of the debts that are 
to be repaid by NHAI. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that NHAI 
has raised funds from various sources & the Rate of interest is payable as under: 
i) Funds raised through 54EC Bonds -  5.25 % - 5.75 % p.a. 
ii) Funds raised through other sources/instruments – ranging from 7.02 % - 8.75 % p.a. 
47. The Committee enquired from various financial institutions and banks regarding 
innovative f inancing models that may be adopted to help address the issue of huge debts 
being faced by NHAI. 
48. SBI, in its written reply, suggested that NHAI set -up an investment vehicle to directly 
raise funds from following sources: 
a) Foreign Pension Funds: The foreign pension funds such as Australian Pension 
/ Superannuation funds, Ontario Teachers' Pension Fund etc. have significant 
quantum of funds for investments. With limited investment options available 
domestically, these funds are likely to be invested in offshore ventures. 

22 
 
b) Sovereign Wealth Funds: They have liabilities of uncertain duration since it is 
not generally known when they will have to make payments to support the 
nations that own them. They are particularly active in investing in 
infrastructure equity. 
NHAI, which is viewed as a quasi -sovereign entity may explore ways to 
directly tap such funds by providing suitable comforts from Govt. of India / 
regulatory environment. 
c) Japan Overseas Infrastructure Investment Corporation for Transport & Urban 
Development (JOIN):  It is Government -Private founded equity provider in 
Japan focusing on overseas infrastructure investment. It provides funding and 
Japanese expertise & high -end technology. They invest in greenfield and 
brownfield projects in transportation & u rban infra space. NHAI may identify 
few road projects under Bharatmala Program for implementation in 
collaboration with JOIN by setting-up a suitable investment vehicle. 
d) Multilateral Agencies:  NHAI to meet part of its fund requirements from 
multilateral ag encies to finance projects with lower Project IRR (usually 
project of social / national importance) so that weighted average cost of funds 
can be minimized. 
e) Securitization / Monetization of Operational Highways:  NHAI to securitise its 
operational projects directly with domestic Pension Funds , s ince PF would 
expect nominal return of around 8 -9% (as against higher return expectation 
15-18% on pretax basis under Toll-Operate-Transfer model. 
49. IDBI Bank suggested the following to help address the issue of hug e debts faced by 
NHAI: 
a) NHAI may consider raising fund through Infrastructure bonds/ Tax Saving bonds, 
Overseas fund raising through Masala Bonds, monetization of assets for a specific 
concession period. 
b) NHAI may come out with an IPO. 
c) NHAI can issue LCs instead of giving direct funding support to the Projects. The LCs 
can be discounted by the Project companies / Assignees which also can be rolled over 
from time to time till maturity. This would help in reducing cost for NHAI. 
50. IFCI Limited, in its written reply, suggested that NHAI may consider floating its own 
Infrastructure Investment Trust (InvIT) which may help create an opportunity for asset 

23 
 
monetisation and collecting long term capital. It further opined that a dedicated financing 
agency for the sect or can also be considered on the lines of similar agencies set up for the 
power sector like the Power Finance Corporation and the Rural Electrification Corporation. It 
suggested that bond markets should be developed for long -term infra project financing 
supported by credit enhancement mechanisms. Further, it submitted that life insurance 
companies and pension funds are well -positioned to address the longer -term capital 
requirements of this sector. For insurance companies, there is a limit they can invest in  the 
infrastructure sector, such limits can be increased. 
51. India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) suggested that in order to 
address the issue of huge debts of NHAI, an SPV type of model could be adopted by floating 
separate SPVs for implementation of large size projects (say projects involving cost in excess 
of Rs 5000 crore) like the SPV floated for implementing Delhi Mumbai Expressway.  IIFCL 
stated that t his requires  raising debt in a separate SPV for implementation of the project. 
NHAI being a sovereign entity,  can raise debt at a much cheaper rate, thereby reducing 
interest burden for the project at the development stage itself. NHAI may also call for equity 
participation from large funds like insurance and pension funds, if required.  Subsequently, 
once the project becomes operational, NHAI can divest its equity thereby not only reducing 
debt from its balance sheet, but also gaining premium on divested equity. NHAI can monetize 
projects which are operational and are generating revenue s tream including HAM projects. 
This will free up its capital and same can be used for retiring debt of higher cost. 
52. IIFCL further furnished the following information on its role in increasing fund flow 
to Road Projects: 
Permission to IIFCL 
for Lending b y way 
of Subscribing to the 
Corporate Bonds 
Project bonds are instruments issued by Infrastructure Project SPVs The main 
objectives of the bonds would be to ensure and enable the implementation of the 
infrastructure project. The exposures for both Infra Pr oject loans and Project bonds are 
similar in nature and would be duly appraised for the attendant risks.  
Presently, there is a thrust for companies to raise debt from capital market and many 
project developers are looking to replace their bank loans with bonds in order to reduce 
their bank exposures.  
In India, project bonds are issued by Infra SPVs in respect of completed projects. 
Therefore, such an exposure to project bonds would be withoutconstruction risk where 
project revenues would be easier to predict. 
Since IIFCL is already providing financial assistance to infrastructure projects by way 
of term loans, it will only be appropriate to extend this by covering project bonds as 
well. 

24 
 
This will free up banks' capital and exposure to the developers and wi ll also enable 
development of the Capital Bond market for Infrastructure Sector. 
 
Permission for 
IIFCL to Invest in 
InvIT 
RBI vide its circular dt October 14, 2019 has permitted Scheduled Commercial Banks 
& All India Financial Institution lending to InvIT s subject to certain guidelines. 
However, IIFCL is not mentioned in the aforesaid referred circular. 
IIFCL is a AAA rated wholly Govt. of India owned company and is registered as a 
NBFC-ND-IFC with RBI. It is also a systemically important NBFC as defined b y the 
extant RBI Master Directions (viz. RBI/DNBR/2016 -17/45, Master Direction DNBR. 
PD. 008/03.10.119/2016-17 dated 01st September 2016).  
Currently, various InvITs are being floated by the Infrastructure Companies consisting 
of infrastructure SPVs/projec ts. Most of the InvITs are raising funds from the primary 
market by way of listing on the stock exchanges and/or from the Commercial lenders 
by way of raising funds at the InvIT level and refinancing existing debt of underlying 
SPVs. 
 
It has been observed that most of the InvITs involves raising sizable funds which is 
time consuming. IIFCL being an infrastructure financing institution, it will be 
appropriate for IIFCL to take exposure to InvITs, given its mandate to promote credit 
flow to the Infrastructure Sector. 
 
Allowing IIFCL to 
directly extend 
assistance to NHAI 
& State Authorities 
outside the purview 
of SIFTI 
Infrastructure projects are of very long term in nature and with the ability & mandate to 
raise long term funds, IIFCL can directly lend funds to State Govt. & other entities like 
NHAI, NHIDCL and these Authorities can further utilize these funds for development 
of road projects on EPC as well as PPP model. 
 
53. PNB opined that re -introduction of schemes like Flexible Restructuring Scheme 
(5/25), Take out Financing, Issuance of policy guidelines on lending through Hybrid 
Instruments may help. 
54. Canara Bank suggested that an exclusive infrastructure fu nd can be set up by 
Government which in turn shall fund commercially viable projects including the stalled 
projects. Foreign Institutional Investors and other PE fund houses should be allowed the 
participate and invest in the fund. It further opined that monetization of assets where the 
positive cash flows has commenced shall be fastened. 
55. Central Bank suggested the following innovative financing models that may be 
adopted to help address the issue of huge debts being faced by NHAI. 

25 
 
a) Through NCDs  
b) Govt. Guarantees. 
c) Credit Guarantee Enhancement Scheme. 
d) Specialized Rates for Road and Hospitality Sect or on Expected Loss (EL) and 
Probability of Default (POD) basis  
e) Securitization of Assets of both Sectors. 
56. Indian Bank suggested that NHAI may go for issuing papers which are quasi-equity in 
nature. A separate fund in line with SWAMIH fund established for stalled housing project 
may also be setup for stalled road projects, which are otherwise viable. It stated that NHAI 
has already examined plans to leverage its resources to set up an alternative investment fund 
(AIF), as it aims to ease funding for hig hway building. Indian Bank further stated that NHAI 
has some liquid funds of around ₹ 10,000 crore and that NHAI can instead raise more funds 
against this capital and use it to lend to stalled or greenfield projects. Part of the returns can 
be used to serv ice the loans and part of it can be reinvested. Indian Bank informed the 
Committee that NHAI had also given India Infrastructure Finance Co. Ltd (IIFCL) the 
mandate to prepare a detailed project report to explore the various structures available  and 
that N HAI has plans to convert each road project into a separate SPV and funds will be 
arranged by that company. 
57. Indian Bank further informed the Committee that India Ratings have suggested for 
enhancing PPP by exploring other variants of BOT models such as MRG (minimum revenue 
guarantee) structures, sub -ordinated debts, shadow toll payment etc. Furthermore, the 
stakeholders may also explore the possibility of setting up a dedicated secondary market for 
road financing and ensure the availability of multiple d ebt structures (Deferred Principal 
Payment, Bullet Debt insurances) alongwith securitization structures to achieve low cost 
financing and diversified investor community.  
58. The Committee takes note of the various innovative measures that have been 
suggested by the different financial organizations and banks in order to tackle the issue 
of huge debt servicing costs of NHAI.  The Committee feels that NHAI should tap into 
the funds available with insurance companies and pension funds, both Indian and 
foreign. Securitization of NHAI’s existing assets may be suitable to attract the interest 
of pension funds since the return targeted by pension funds is on the lower side. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into any changes in the existing 

26 
 
provisions that may be needed to allow insurance companies and pension funds to 
participate in funding road infrastructure sector in the country. Multilateral agencies, 
Japan Overseas Infrastructure Investment Corporation for Transport & Urban 
Development (JOIN),  foreign pension funds and sovereign wealth funds may also be 
approached by NHAI, with suitable assurances/comforts from Government of India. 
59. The Committee notes that land acquisition costs form a significant portion of the 
total road project costs and  hopes that NHAI, in coordination with State Governments, 
take suitable steps to capture the value generated by the implementation of road 
projects so as to finance the rising land acquisition costs in road sector. 
60. The Committee reiterates its recommen dation made at para 43 of this Report 
and desires that suitable steps may be taken to permit IIFCL to play a bigger role in 
long-term lending to the road infrastructure sector, by way of subscribing to corporate 
bonds, investing in InvIT s, and by allowing IIFCL to lend directly to NHAI and State 
Departments concerned to finance long-term road projects. 
61. The Committee notes that India’s foreign exchange reserves, as per RBI  
(Annexure-B), have risen substantially in the recent past. The Committee recommend s 
that RBI, with due consideration to the sufficiency of the foreign reserves, may consider 
the possibility of utilization of surplus funds to finance long -term road infrastructure 
projects in the country.  RBI may also look into the feasibility of utilizat ion of the 
surplus reserves for the creation of a sovereign wealth fund to finance long -term 
infrastructural assets. 
Keeping a check on possible connivance between contractors and Approving 
Authorities 
62. The Committee enquired from the Ministry regarding  the steps being taken by NHAI 
to break the nexus that sometimes exist between the contractors and engineering wing that 
monitors the projects. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that the 
Vigilance Division of NHAI conducts CTE type inspections, periodic inspections, joint check 
with CBI and surprise inspections as preventive measures to monitor irregularities in NHAI 
projects. 
63. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the current 
mechanism in place to deter the conni vance of the Authority’s Engineers with 
contractors/concessionaires. Cases where roads deteriorate shortly after their 

27 
 
completion should be looked into and the basis on which completion certificate for the 
project had been issued, should be scrutinized.  Accountability may be fixed in cases 
wherein guidelines have been blatantly ignored during execution of road projects. 
64. The Committee believes that the level of security and integrity of information 
provided by decentralized networks such as blockchain ca n be helpful in affixing 
accountability in case of sub-standard projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that NHAI may employ the use of blockchain technology to store data about 
implementation of road projects – including data about the tests perfor med to ascertain 
the quality of material used in the construction, the guidelines followed in the execution 
of the project, the observations made by the Authority’s Engineers at the time of grant 
of completion certificate for any given project, etc. Doing so will make such information 
immutable and remove any possibilities of fudging of records by any corrupt 
individuals. 
65. The Committee recommends that it should be made compulsory to submit video 
recordings of the specifications of the completed works, wherever possible, confirming 
that all works have been carried out by the concessionaire/contractors , before the grant 
of completion certificate of the road project to any concessionaire/contractor. This 
would ensure that ancillary specifications such as ro ad signs, markings, shoulders etc. 
are duly completed as per the provisions of the contract. 
FACTORS IMPEDING THE PACE OF NH PROJECTS 
66. During its examination of Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministry, the 
Committee was informed about the road projects under the Ministry which have been delayed 
for a period of more than 5 years  (Annexure-C). The State-wise information furnished by the 
Ministry regarding delayed projects and their quantum is given at Annexure-D. 
67. The Ministry, in its written reply , informed the Committee that some  National 
Highway projects are delayed/stuck up  due to multiple reasons, such as poor performance of 
contractor, utility shifting, land acquisition, cash flow problem of the 
concessionaire/contractor and law & order proble ms etc. The Ministry further stated that the 
following steps have been taken by NHAI/Government to expedite the process: 
 Streamlining of land acquisition 
 Disputes Resolution mechanism revamped  

28 
 
 Award of projects after adequate preparation in terms of land acquisition, clearances 
etc.  Process of obtaining clearances from different Ministries/Department would 
commence as soon as the alignment is finalized and final feasibility report is submitted. 
 Correctly worked out utility estimates is to be obtained at t he earliest after the 
alignment finalization and shall form part of appraisal proposal. 
 The process of project appraisal should commence at the earliest on receipt of the Final 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) and Technical schedules. 
 ROBs: The procedure for GAD approved by Railways for ROBs simplified and made 
online.  Maintenance charges which were hampering the progress of many projects 
stand waived by railways.  Standard design put on website. 
 Close coordination with other Ministries and State Governments 
 One time fund infusion 
 Completion of major portion of land acquisition prior to initiation of bid. 
 Regular review at various levels. 
 Proposed exit for Equity Investors 
 Securitization of road sector loans 
 Rationalize compensation for delays attributed to authority  
 Notification of Guiding Principles for Resolution of Stuck Projects aiming at 
foreclosure of projects which are stuck on account of the concessionaire/contractor in 
NCLT or mutual default of both Authority and Contractor/Concessionaire. 
68. The Committee feels that the information furnished by the Ministry regarding 
road projects delayed for more than 5 years, makes it evident that delays in road 
projects is one of the most substantial issues being faced by the road sector in India at 
present. Thou gh the Committee commends the efforts made by the Ministry in 
increasing the pace of construction of highways in the last several years, the large 
number of projects that are delayed for a significant period of more than 5 years, is a 
cause of concern. Such delays are accompanied by significant cost overruns and in case 
of brownfield projects, cause a lot of discomfort and added traffic times to the existing 
traffic. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may establish a dedicated 
mechanism to keep projects on track as far as possible, notice delays at the earliest and 
take necessary action to proactively tackle factors causing delays in any given project. 

29 
 
68A. Some Members of the Committee informed about the delays in execution of road 
projects at vario us highways such as NH -77 near Sonpur, four laning work at NH from 
Sambalpur to Cuttack,  Goa to Karnataka NH, Belgaum to Goa NH, North Goa to Mumbai 
NH, NH183A  near Sabarimala Shrine, NH -29, NH from Nagpur to Bhandara, NH -353C, 
NH-19, NH-709B from Shamli t o Dehradun, Mahi -Thalasery bypass,  Kuthiran Tunnel  and 
NH-2 from Banaras to Aurangabad via Chandoli and Sasaram. 
68B. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may assess the reasons 
behind all such delayed road projects across the country and t ime-bound remedial 
measures may be initiated at the earliest so as to avoid further delays in the completion 
of already delayed projects. 
Land Acquisition Issues 
69. The Ministry, in its background note, informed the Committee that for streamlining 
land ac quisition (LA) under NH Act,  1956 and applicability of the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
(RFCTLARR) Act 2013 for LA of NH projects, the Ministry issued comprehensive 
guidelines on 28.12.2017 in supersession of all previous guidelines/ circulars on the issue 
after obtaining legal advice from learned Attorney General of India. These guidelines have 
been circulated to all State /UT Governments and all concerned executive agencies of the 
Ministry. These guidelines cover all possible aspects related to applicability of the 
RFCTLARR Act, 2013 to the NH Act, 1956, such as determination of market value of land, 
payment of additional amount, issue regarding multiplication factor, bulk acquisition/ 
purchase of land through consent of land owners, determination of compensation amount by 
competent authority, disbursement of compensation amount and possession of land, etc. 
Further, the Ministry has issued Manual of guidelines for land acquisition for NHs und er the 
NH Act, 1956. 
70. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that the  constraints being 
faced in Land Acquisition are mainly the following:- 
(a) Encroachment & public resistance. 
(b) Litigation & arbitration. 
(c) Delay in declaration of 3G award. 

30 
 
(d) Erroneous/un-updated revenue records leading to issue of incomplete/faulty 
notifications. 
(e) High Cost of land. 
(f) Compensation award not in accordance with provisions of NH Act. 
(g) Inadequate manpower with the land acquisition units at field level. 
(h) Delays due to changes in alignment 
71. The Committee observes that land acquisition issues are at the core of delays 
faced in road projects. The Committee takes note of the guidelines issued by the 
Ministry to streamline acquisition of land for NH projects in the count ry and 
recommends that the Ministry may ensure that these guidelines may be reviewed from 
time to time, incorporating suitable modifications to simplify the process of land 
acquisition and ironing out the various constraints faced in land acquisition. 
72. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take immediate steps to 
ensure that adequate manpower is present with the land acquisition units at the field 
level across the country . The alignment given for any given project should be finalized 
only after taking in inputs from all stakeholders and the local population, with due 
consideration to the future traffic projections, environmental concerns etc.  Changing 
the alignment at a later stage of the project can be a costly affair and should be avoided 
at all costs, through application of foresight. 
73. The Ministry, in its presentation made in the meeting on the subject held on 4 th 
November, 2019, informed the Committee of a Value Capture Mechanism wherein a MoU 
would be signed between NHAI and the State Gov ernment, wherein development of NH rest 
with NHAI and LA cost with the State. It was further informed that under this mechanism, 
the State Government will deposit at least 50% of estimated LA cost before publication of 
notification under Section 3D of the National Highways Act, while NHAI shall contribute the 
remaining amount for LA, to be reimbursed later by the State Government. Post construction 
of the NH, the State shall capture the value created in the influence zone, which is defined as 
the areas with in 500 meters on either side of the NH, through suitable mechanisms such as 
development charges, levy of transaction tax, increase in FAR etc. 
74. The Committee desires to be apprised of the present status of the implementation 
of the Land Value Capture Me chanism. This mechanism may help the Ministry in 
managing the huge increase in road project costs on account of a significant jump in 

31 
 
land acquisition costs in the past several years. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may consider making the upfro nt contribution of State Governments flexible, 
fixing it on the basis of the financial ability of the State Government. 
75. The Committee feels that the Ministry may modify the land value capture 
mechanism in a way that the value captured by the State Government is, in part, shared 
with the previous owners of the land. A major reason for the hesitation of land -owners 
to part with their land is that the land is often their only source of livelihood. A 
mechanism may be worked out  where an upfront payment is m ade to the land -owner 
and they are guaranteed a payment in the form of annuity for the long -term, financing 
the same through the land value captured by the State Government. The Committee 
believes that such a system would lower the frequency of land acquis ition matters 
ending up in litigation, which cause huge delays to the projects, besides causing cost 
overruns. 
76. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that the steps being taken 
to sort out land acquisition issues in coordination with the State Governments are as under:- 
(a) Constitution of High Powered Committee under Chief Secretary to monitor the 
pre-construction activities. 
(b) Strengthening of Land Acquisition Units by way of providing manpower and 
resources. 
(c) Effective formal public cons ultations at the time of project preparation to address 
the concerns of public. 
(d) Introduction of Bhoomi  Rashi Portal for on -line publication of notifications under 
NH Act. 
(e) Introduction of Centralized LA Account for efficient monitoring of disbursement 
of LA compensation. 
(f) Monthly meetings with the District Authorities and Nodal Officers of the State 
Government along with the Competent Authorities.   
(g) Periodic monitoring of progress through PMIS, Pragati portal etc. 
(h) Adopting light detection and ranging (LiDAR) technology for finalizing alignment. 
77. The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Ministry to resolve land 
acquisition issues in coordination with State Governments. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may analyze the historical data from th e PMIS, Pragati Portal and  

32 
 
Bhoomi Rashi portal to figure out the presence of any bottlenecks or bureaucratic 
delays that might be slowing down the land acquisition process. Steps may then be 
taken to further streamline the land acquisition process, which, in turn, would help 
keep the NH projects on track. 
 
78. Public Works Department, Government of Arunachal Pradesh informed the Committee 
that the required land for Right of Way (RoW) of National Highways is acquired through the 
concerned District Administra tion as per section 10 of Jhum Land Regulation 1947. This 
procedure has been followed for land acquisition of all National Highways in Arunachal 
Pradesh without any problem. 
79. Public works (Building & National Highway) Department, Government of Assam 
informed the Committee that the land Acquisition for National Highway projects, whenever 
necessary, are carried out as per Section 3 of the National Highway Act,1956 and 
compensation to the affected people is disbursed as per “The Right to fair Compensation a nd 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement Act,2013”. The Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways has launched BhoomiRashi portal on 01.04.2018 for uploading 
notifications such as 3a, 3A etc. The MoRT&H has given emphasis on L.A. and all major 
highway construction projects are being sanctioned after clearing the L.A. as per EOT mode 
of contract. It submitted that timely sanction of L.A. estimate is necessary as well as Civil 
Authority’s immediate response to clear the dues of the land owners. 
80. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into reasons behind 
delays in sanction of L.A. estimates and address the same. 
81. Department of Tourism, Government of Goa informed the Committee that the delay 
in the handing over of the enc umbrance-free land to the contractor generally takes as long as 
about 30 months. Even when the land is finally made available, still there are some 
encumbrances which put a constraint on the contractor's capacity to undertake construction 
work in an un -interrupted and continuous manner. Since encumbrance free site is not made 
available to the contractors in the initial stages of the project, the contractors delay the 
mobilization and also consume the mobilization advance. Because of the above reasons, 
substantial extensions of time are required to be given to the contractors. The Department of 
Tourism, Government of Goa made the following s uggestions for improvement of the land 
acquisition activity: 
 Fast tracking the acquisition process through Legislature cure. 

33 
 
 Strengthening of public consultation process to address the relevant concerns 
of public related to the project prior to commencement of the construction 
activities. 
 Strengthening of Land Acquisition Units and streamlining the process of 
clearances related to land acquisition. 
 Minimize the requirement of land acquisition during the planning stage. 
 Numerous government agencies involved from which clearances 
/approvals/permissions are required to be obtained before the utilities can be 
shifted or relocated. 
 Expediting the process of Utility shifting (such as existing ROB / RUB, 
transmission lines, temple shifting, drainages etc.) shall thereby provide a 
continuous portion of encumbrance free land to the contractor for quick laying 
of the carriageway. 
 Respective departments shall maintain proper records of existing underground 
utilities like water supply, electrical lines, cables, drainage etc. as these are 
generally not available and impose extra liability on the developer / contractor. 
 Revenue maps should be updated frequently as the acquisition plans are prepared 
basis the revenue maps that are generally not updated. 
 Once the award is declared by Special Land Acquisition Officer ( SLAO), the 
award amount is made available with SLAO for its distribution/rele ase to the 
affected parties for speedy disbursal to the affected parties whose land is acquired 
for construction of Highway. 
82.     The Committee recommends that the Ministry may sort out the issues faced by 
road contractors because of encumbrance  on the land, once made available to them 
after acquisition. Further, the Ministry may urge upon the State Governments to 
carry out exercises to update their revenue maps periodically, in order to permit the 
Ministry to prepare more informed acquisition plans  for its road projects. The 
Ministry may urge upon the State Governments to carry out exercises to update their 
revenue maps periodically, in order to permit the Ministry to prepare well -informed 
acquisition plans for its road projects. 
83. Public Works Department, Government of Karnataka informed the Committee that:- 

34 
 
i. The National Highway Act 1956 read along with National Highways Rules 
provide for Acquisition of Land under section 3 for Up -gradation/Improvements 
of National Highways. Whereas Sub Sections under Section 3 provides for 
acquisition of land by fixation of land price based on the market value. The Act 
also provides for enhancement of compensation by Arbitration under section 3G 
(7). But, the Act does not provide for a fixed time frame with in which th e land 
losers can prefer an appeal for Arbitration. Hence, suitable mechanism should be 
introduced to fix the time frame (preferably 90 days) from the day of award to 
prefer appeal under Arbitration appeal seeking higher compensation. 
ii. The Act provides for Land Acquisitions under section 3 of the National Highway 
Act This Act/Rules do not provide for repatriation of excess land acquired by over 
sight and un-utilized for the project. As there is no provision for de -notification of 
excess land acquired, t he land losers will get the benefit of taking compensation 
for the acquired land as well as he will be in adverse position of the excess land 
and utilizing the same. Hence, provision for de -notification of the excess land 
acquired is to be provided in the NH act. 
iii. The process for acquiring and taking possession of forest land which is necessary 
for Development/Improvements of existing/newly declared National Highways is 
very cumbersome and process of acquisition is time consuming and is causing 
inordinate delay in implementation of the project within the stipulated time frame. 
Hence, Policy decision has to be taken to simplify the Acquisition of Forest land 
to enable completion of the projects within stipulated time in order to avoid 
financial implication and breach of contractual obligations. 
iv. In identified projects, 50% of Land Acquisition cost should be deposited upfront 
by the State Government in to an Escrow Account and then balance would be 
deposited by the Ministry. In this regard, a Policy Decision may be ta ken to grant 
the entire Land Acquisition cost by Ministry as the State Governments are not in a 
position to bear 50% of Land Acquisition cost for construction of Ring 
Roads/Bypasses. 
v. In respect of land Acquisition if the land Acquired more than 80% need no t have 
to wait for DPR. 
84. The Committee takes serious note of the lack of provision for de -notification of 
any land that might get identified and acquired for a road project but does not get 
utilized. While the Committee feels that such instances should be minimized, one cannot 

35 
 
deny that there is still possibility for such occurrences because of oversight or change in 
alignment. The Ministry may make the necessary changes in the legal provisions for 
land acquisition to rectify such mistakes. Provision for  compensation amount for the 
period that the land was acquired may be incorporated so as to prevent any undue 
losses to the landowner for no fault of theirs. 
85. With regard to upfront deposition of 50% cost of land acquisition by the State 
Government, the  Committee reiterates its recommendation made at para 75 of this 
Report and recommends that the Ministry may frame a policy to accommodate State 
Governments that might not be financially able to deposit such large amounts upfront. 
86. Public Works Department, Government of Kerala informed the Committee that as far 
as Kerala is concerned, land acquisition for the Right of way, as per the development manual, 
is the difficult task due to high population intensity in the state, ribbon developments in the 
existing highways, high cost of land etc. Hence elevated highways at built up area may be 
preferred to reduce the impact of acquisition. 
87. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may evaluate the feasibility of 
construction of elevated highways in areas wit h high population density where 
acquisition of land would possibly be a long and tough task. 
88. Public Works Department, Government of Manipur informed the Committee that land 
acquisition is a sensitive issue in the State, as private lands and cultivable land is very limited 
not only in the valley (which is about 10% of the total area), but also in the hills due to 
affinity of the people to their roots to the land, religion and culture. Despite the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquis ition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
(RFCTLARR) Act, 2013, having made social impact assessment (SIA) the cornerstone of the 
new regime that seeks to establish a participative, informed, and transparent process of land 
acquisition, for speedy development  and collective welfare of the people, the construction / 
development of expressway, railways, industrial corridors and highways projects shall be 
extremely difficult, unless relaxation /exemption in the hill areas of the State (90% of the 
geographic area of the State) where the tribal people occupies. 
89. Public Works Department, Government of Mizoram informed the Committee that at 
present, most of the Land Acquisition is done through prevailing LA Act through concerned 
Department viz. Revenue Department. However, for External Aided Funded Project such as 
World Bank, Asian Development Bank etc, are done by Special Land Acquisition Officer, 
posted in the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). As there are many Court Cases in 

36 
 
connection with LA Cases in the Department, PWD, Govt. of Mizoram felt necessary to have 
LA officer posted in the Department who will handle all LA issues in consultation with the 
implementing Department to speed up and avoid such court cases since Gov ernment is losing 
many of the cases.  It f urther informed the Committee that the MoRTH has taken up 
development of highway projects of various standards namely 2 lane with paved shoulder (10 
m carriageway), 4/6/8 lane both as Greenfield projects as well as brownfield projects. A 
majority of these NH projects are brownfield i.e. upgradation of the existing roads. 
Upgradation on project involves (i) acquisition of additional land (ii) Shifting of utilities (iii) 
Felling of trees, and (iv) Removal of existing structures which fall in the Right of Way 
(ROW) of the proposed expansion. The policy of the guideline (vide MoRTH No. NH -
15017/21/2018-P&M dt. 10.05.2018) stipulates that the project implementation agencies shall 
undertake additional land acquisition on one side of an existing road to the extent feasible for 
expansion of existing roads to next level of configurations. 
This is not perfectly suitable/feasible in hilly terrain because when land is acquired for new 
alignment or upgradation (either uphill or downhill side), there is a possibility/tende ncy of 
huge quantity of earth spoil, excavated rock -cut debris to fall from uphill to the downside 
damaging crops and properties at the downhill side. 
90. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review its guideline which 
stipulates that the project  implementation agencies shall undertake additional land 
acquisition on one side of an existing road to the extent feasible for expansion of existing 
roads to next level of configurations, in light of the difficulties faced in such 
implementation in hilly areas. 
91. Transport Department, Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi informed 
the Committee that the provis ions in 'The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 ' are uniformly applicable for 
States and UTs like Delhi which is highly urban and have different aspirations for taking up 
Road Transport Infrastructure Projects. The following comments are offered:  
(i) Time Frame: Time frame for carrying out various notifications/activitie s for land 
acquisition needs a review, as every stage takes substantial time . Possibility for 
separate, reduced time lines could be explored for UTs like Delhi to make the 
projects take off/accomplished in a fast track manner. It is suggested to review and 
reduce the time lines for the various stages of LA  
(ii) Special powers in case of urgency: Special powers in case of urgency to acquire 
land in certain cases are available in the Act. This needs to be reviewed for UTs like 

37 
 
Delhi making it truly effective for emergent nature of Projects. Example. Construction 
of elevated road over BarapullahNallah starting from Sarai Kale Khan to MayurVihar 
(Phase-lll) is stuck for quite long because of a small piece of land could not be 
acquired and end entire project got derailed. 
92. The Committee agrees with the suggestion made by the Transport Department, 
Government of NCT of Delhi  and recommends that the Ministry should assign a fixed 
time-frame for the different processes involved in land acquisition for a project. Th e 
Committee feels that doing so would help minimize bureaucratic delays and any delays 
happening in the process would be spotted quite early. 
93. Chief Engineer (National Highways), Punjab PWD informed the Committee that as per 
Clause 26 of RFCTLARR Act 2013, the market value of land to be acquired is determined by 
Collector based on registered sale deed/collector rates. The market price determined by this 
method generally does not represent actual market rate of the land. This results into low 
compensation amount for the acquired land. The land owners then resort to Arbitration and 
court cases for enhancement of the compensation amount. This legal procedure goes on for 
years together causing harassment to land owners and financial loss to the Government. Thus, 
there is requirement for rationalizing the procedure for determination of market of value of 
land so that it is more realistic and closer to actual market rates. 
94. The Committee takes note of the discrepancies pointed out by the Punjab PWD 
in the value of land determined at present based on registered sale deed/ collector rates 
and the actual market rate of the land. The Committee feels that such discrepancy, if 
present, would invariably cause dissastisfaction among the land owners and the ensuing 
delays on account of arbitration and legal procedures cost the public exchequer a lot of 
money due to project cost overruns. The Committee, therefore , recommends that the 
Ministry may review the accuracy of the provisions existing at present in determining 
the amount of compensation to be paid to land -owners, as compared to the actual 
market value of the land. If substantial differences are noticed in the compensation 
value and the market value in many instances, the Ministry may come up with a 
suitable mechanism for determination of a more fair value for the land to be acquired. 
Environment and Forest Clearance Issues 
95. Public works (Building & National Highway) Department, Government of Assam 
informed the Committee that the  procedure for Environmental and F orest Clearance for 

38 
 
National Highway projects are done as per National Environmental Policy, including 
Highway under Environmental Protection Act, 1986 vide MOEF Notification dt 27.01.1994, 
and revised EIA notification on 14.09.2006 and further amendments on 01.12.2009. The new 
National Highway projects and the projects of more than 30 Km length involving widening of 
the existing alignment through acquisition of more than 20  metre land will require prior 
environmental clearance. The DPR consultants are enga ged for the preparation of necessary 
proposal for taking prior approval for Environmental and Forest Clearance from the Ministry 
of Environment & Forest, Govt. of India.  The process of Environmental and Forest 
Clearance has been made online and need to be assessed the progress made by MoEF&CC by 
proposing Deptt. at all time. The process can be made user friendly. 
96. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change may make the online process for obtaining environmental and forest 
clearances for road projects, more user friendly. 
97. Department of Tourism, Government of Goa informed the Committee that earlier, any 
developmental/infrastructure project was reviewed only keeping in view the technical 
feasibility and financial viability of the project. However, with the introduction of the concept 
of EIA (Environmental Impact Assessment), the environmental considerations have also been 
included as one of the important factors to be considered while deciding about the feasibili ty 
and sustainability of these developmental /infrastructure projects. Further, EIA has also 
emerged as an established procedure for environmental protection/conservation and its 
management, thus ensuring that final finite natural resources are utilized wi thin the "carrying 
capacity" of the system. Tree Cutting is majorly in scope of the authority and the developer / 
contractor is required to be provided with clear encumbrance free land for road construction. 
Suggestions for expediting the process of Environmental & forest clearance are: 
 There are ambiguities over inclusion of certain local breeds of shrubs and plants in 
forest cover. 
 The clearances and permissions from the Ministry of Environment &Forest 
(MoEF) is a pre -requisite and takes some time before the trees can be cut and the 
ROW as per the design is made available to the contractors, thereby the process 
should be initiated in timely manner. 

39 
 
 For all the highway project for length upto 100  kms., all the clearances such as 
CRZ, Environmental, Forest e tc. shall be within the ambit of State level 
authorities within its jurisdiction. 
 As far as forest clearance concerned as and when proposal received for 
construction of road; it is scrutinized and processed as per Forest (Conservation) 
Act. 1980 
98. The C ommittee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the application 
process for obtaining the necessary environment and forest clearances is initiated as 
soon as the alignment of the project is finalized, in order to avoid any undue delays in 
obtaining the permission. 
99. Public Works Department, Government of Manipur informed the Committee that in a 
state where forest area covers 78% of the total geographical area (out of 22,327 Sq Km, forest 
area in the State is 17,418 Sq Km), any sort of development project involves forest land and it 
is necessary to obtain the forest clearance prior to take -off of any major project. Hence, it is 
suggested that “Forest loss and Fragmentation” shall be allowed to address by ensuring that 
only extremely site -specific prop osals of State/National importance are accorded clearance 
after considering all possible alternatives. In such cases such projects shall be allowed to 
disaggregate further for minimising impacts by rigidly applying the filter of site specificity. 
For instance, a 100 Km long road project proposal, a linear intrusion in the forest zone can be 
separated from pit stops and toll plazas which can be located outside. 
100. Public Works Department, Government of Mizoram informed the Committee that 
based on the fragmentary studies as well as from the observations and collection made in the 
fields, the forest types of the State (Mizoram) based mainly on the altitude, rainfall and 
dominant species composition as mentioned below :  
(a) Tropical Wet Evergreen and Semi-Evergreen Forests-Southern & Western part  
(b) Montane Subtropical Forest — 900m to 1500m Eastern part bordering Chin Hill 
(c) Temperate Forest : Above 1600m-Lengteng &Phawngpui mountainous ranges  
(d) Bamboo Forests  
(e) Quercus Forests 
(f) Jnumlands 
101. PWD, Govt. of Mizoram further submitted that in order to construct/develop 
highways as greenfield projects, i.e. if proposed alignment passes through Forest land, it is no 
doubt, a long process to completely fulfill mandatory requirements viz. Notification 3 (a), 

40 
 
3(A),3C,3D,3G,etc., as per Land Acquisition act 1894 which in turn delays the overall project 
completion schedule. Hence, it is suggested that the State Nodal Department be 
empowered/authorized to execute the development ' work avoiding the hier archy of the 
competency of authority at various stages in order to streamline the long procedure. 
102. Public Works Department, Government of Mizoram informed the Committee that 
while formulating Detailed Project Report, the need for Forest and Environmental cle arances 
are also work out in consultation with the concerned Department. However, the following 
problems were faced during project implementations : 
(a) 1st stage Forest Clearances were usually received without much delay for the project but 
the final Fore st Clearance are delayed which in the later stage of the project created friction 
between the two departments.  
(b) Late issuance of Tree cutting permit often cause become hindrance for the Contractor for 
claiming extension of time for project completion. 
(c) Due to improper protection Of Riverina Forest Reserve, many claims for compensation 
were received from Private partied claiming that they have land within the Riverine Forest 
Area. 
103. The Committee desires that the Ministry may analyze the suggestion s given by 
Mizoram PWD and if feasible, extend the implementation of the same to other States 
with high forest coverage. The Committee further recommends that delays faced in 
obtaining final forest clearance as well as tree cutting permissions may be looke d into 
and resolved on a priority basis, to avoid delays in execution of road projects. 
104. Chief Engineer (National Highways), Punjab PWD informed the Committee that the 
existing procedure for environmental and forest clearance of highway projects is qui te 
workable. 
105. Department of Science, Technology and Environment Science, Technology and 
Environment Branch, Government of Punjab informed the Committee that as per the EIA 
Notification 14.09.2006 amended from time to time, New National Highways and Exp ansion 
of National Highways greater than 100 KM involving additional right of way or land 
acquisitions greater than 40m on existing alignments & 60m on re - alignments or by -passes 
falls under Category -A projects. Similarly, all new State Highway Project an d all state 
highways projects & State Highway expansion project in the hilly terrain (above 1,000m 
AMSL) or ecologically sensitive areas falls under Category -B projects. The Category -A 

41 
 
projects are being appraised by the MoEF&CC, Gol and the Category - B projects by State 
Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) for grant of Environmental Clearance. 
However, in the absence of an SEIAA, Category B project will be treated as Category -A 
project. Also, Category ‘B’ will be treated as Category A, if locate d in whole or part within 
10 km from the boundary of: (i) Protected Areas notified under the Wild Life (Protection) 
Act, 1972, (ii) Critically Polluted areas as notified by the Central Pollution Control Board 
from time to time, (iii) Notified Eco -sensitive areas, (iv) inter -State boundaries and 
international boundaries. In the State of Punjab, Highways projects are mostly apprised by 
MoEF&CC, Gol. No Highway projects has been apprised by SEIAA, Punjab since last 5 
years. 
106. The Committee feels that the Mo EF&CC may coordinate with the various State 
Governments and ensure that the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority is 
formed in the different States so as to permit MoEF&CC to focus on assessing the 
environmental impact of bigger projects. This woul d help increase the pace at which 
road projects across the country are assessed in terms of their environmental impact. 
Delays in terms of financing of road projects 
107. The Committee enquired from various banks/financial institutions as to whether any 
delays in terms of financing has led to delayed road projects and if so, the possible solutions  
thereto.  
108. SBI, in its written reply, stated that apart from assessing Project specific risk, lenders 
also evaluate financial and technical capabilities of th e Promoter to execute the project. 
Lenders usually factor its own experience / dealings with Promoter Group while considering 
any credit proposal. It further added that lenders usually find difficult to support projects 
which are backed by Promoter with we ak financials (high leverage), does not have prior 
experience in executing similar scale infrastructure project as a developer, promoter entity 
has delayed servicing of its credit facilities etc. SBI suggested that awarding a high value 
project to a Promot er with weak financials may be avoided or they may be mandatorily 
required to bid in consortium with strong financial partner. 
109. IDBI, in its written reply, suggested the following to avoid delays in road projects due 
to delays in financing thereof: 

42 
 
a) Substantial Promoter contribution say 50% should be taken upfront. NHAI 
Grant shall be on pro-rata basis with Bank funding and Equity by Promoters in 
HAM Projects and others where Viability Gap Funding is envisaged. 
b) The Concession Agreements should have a provision for enhancing grant from 
the project authority for infusing additional need based funds wherever there is 
a change in scope, delay due to force majeure reasons, lower cashflows than 
envisaged, etc. 
110. IIFCL informed the Committee that NHAI is prov iding around 150 days of time for 
achieving Financial Closure for HAM projects and 180 days for BOT Toll projects. While, 
larger group with credit rating of ‘A’ (i.e. A, AA, AAA) and above are managing to achieve 
Financial Closure within in stipulated time lines, smaller groups which are new to the sector 
and are having credit rating of BBB or lower are not able to tie up for the funds. This results 
in delayed road projects. The concept of underwriting of debt by private lenders has been 
introduced, but it i s often seen that lenders are not disbursing the debt till the time they 
further downsell their exposure. This results in further delay in project completion.  IIFCL 
proposed the following possible solutions: 
Awarding Projects 
with pre achieved 
Financial Ti e Up by 
Authority 
Before awarding a project, Concessioning Authority can arrange for in -principal 
approval from lenders which can be offered to road developers. Presently, there are 
many developers whose accounts are NPA with Banking System and bidding and  
receiving the award of the projects due to aggressive bidding. However, due to lack of 
financial assistance from Banks, projects couldn’t be executed and many get delayed 
due to the same. The proposal for submission of bids with fully tied up finance woul d 
reduce the project lead time, eliminate non -serious bidders and avoid aggressive 
bidding by ensuring participation 
Ensuring 
Compliance by 
Concessioning 
Authority 
Many road projects, particularly under Public Private Partnership (PPP) framework 
have suff ered owing to reasons viz. non availability of requisite land, delay in 
approvals viz. Forest & Environmental Clearances by concerned Authorities, delayed 
and/or short payment of grants by the Concessioning Authority. Such reasons are 
obligations on part o f the Concessioning Authority and are beyond the control of 
project developer or the lenders. 
Due to unfavorable past experience in road sector, lenders are shying away from 
assisting road projects and as a result this has resulted in huge delays in achiev ement of 
Financial Closure in a time bound manner. 
Before awarding a project, Authority should ensure availability of land in particular 
and all applicable clearances in general to regain the confidence among lending 
community. 

43 
 
 
Priority Sector 
Status for  financing 
Road Projects 
As per the regulatory requirement, Banks in India are required to mandatorily lend to 
certain sectors viz. Agriculture, Education etc which are categorized as Priority Sector 
Lending. This ensures channelizing flow of a minimum par t of total loans by a lender 
to be such sectors which plays huge role in the development of the sector and for the 
Country in whole. 
RBI may  grant Priority Sector Status for financing Road Projects which will nudge 
Banks to enhance lending to the sector 
Need for Road 
Sector Regulator 
 
Road sector is one of the largest private investments destinations and have many 
Private Financiers, Pension Funds, Institutional Financers. Banks & FIs have made 
large investments in this sector. The Indian road sector is th e largest PPP market in the 
world. However, the sector lacks independent regulation at present. For instance, 
NHAI acts both as a Regulator and Concessioning Authority, which often leads to 
conflict of interest. In order to attract more domestic and intern ational private funding 
of road infrastructure, a more robust regulatory environment with an independent 
regulator, is essential. An independent regulator would ensure that disputes between 
Concessioning Authority and Developers are resolved in a fair and transparent manner 
thus reducing delay in project completion. 
Separate Asset 
Classification Norms 
by RBI 
 
Infrastructure sector, inter alia including road projects are prone to majorly two kind of 
risks, i) Development risk & ii) revenue risk. Since road project involve 
implementation period ranging from 2 to 3 years and further operational period of 15 
to 25 years, a project sees various cycles of economic fluctuations in comparison to 
retail loans or other industrial projects. Accordingly, having same as set classification 
norms for retail loans and also for road project loans is not judicious. RBI may 
consider granting relaxation in Asset Classification (IRAC) norms 
111. Canara Bank opined that no such delay in terms of financing has led to delayed road 
projects. It further submitted that delay in approvals has caused delay in completing the road 
projects. Clearances are required to be obtained from multiple administrative level. To 
mitigate the same, Single Window Clearance shall be made available and to  the extent 
possible this shall be available upfront i.e., at the pre -bidding level itself. Definitive timelines 
for approvals to be pronounced. Certainty in availability of approvals at the pre -finance stage 
will provide lot of comfort in appraising the project. 
112. The Committee recommends the Ministry to work upon the different suggestions 
put forth by the financial institutions/banks for avoiding delays in road projects on 
account of delays in terms of financing. 
113. The Committee feels that given the  immense role played by good road 
connectivity in the economic growth of the country, the Ministry should request RBI to 

44 
 
grant the Priority Sector tag to the road infrastructure sector in order to encourage 
financial institutions and banks to lend higher a mounts to supplement the maintenance 
and growth of the NH network in the country. 
114. The Committee recommends that in order to avoid delays in financing of road 
projects in case a consortium of banks is considering the grant of loans for a given 
project, RBI may look into defining a reasonable time limit for the consortium to make 
its decisions regarding the financing of the road projects. 
Disputes Resolution Mechanism 
115. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that NHAI has 
entered/entering into various type of Contract with the Contractors/ 
Concessionaires/Consultants for implementing the Highway Projects in various modes i.e. 
Item rate , BOT(Toll), BOT (Annuity), Hybrid Annuity, EPC, OMT etc. Each said 
Contracts/Agreements contains the relevant Clause of the Dispute Resolution Mechanism, 
thus both the parties to the said agreement are bound to comply/proceed accordingly.  
Further, in terms of the said mechanism, time has already been prescribed in the Contract/ 
Agreement. If the amic able settlement process fails, the matter may be referred further for 
Arbitration, in terms of the said Contract/Agreement, to adjudicate the disputes between the 
parties. With regard to the costs and time to resolve the disputes by way of Arbitration, the  
same shall be in terms of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act 2015, as amended from time to 
time. 
116. Besides that, to save the time and costs, NHAI has also constituted /established 
Conciliation Committees of Independent Experts (CCIEs) under the provisi ons of Part-III of 
the Arbitration & Conciliation Act inviting all claimants to resolve / settle the disputes of 
claims at initial stages, post arbitral award or for arbitral awards under challenge. The CCIEs 
are mandated to resolve and settle the claims with a period of 5 months. So far out of 59 cases 
referred to CCIE; 20 cases are resolved/settled, 8 failed and 31 are in progress. Authority is 
encouraging resolution/settlement of more such cases through such Conciliation. 
117. The Ministry further stated  that the Government has amended the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 by way of amendment Act 2015 and thereafter in 2019. According to 
the amendment, Government has notified the Institutional Arbitration in -spite of ad -hoc 
Arbitration, so that the a wards can be passed by the specialized Arbitrators within stipulated 

45 
 
time.  NHAI alongwith National Highway Builders Federation (NHBF) has established a 
Society named Society for Affordable Redressal of Dispute (SAROD) under Society 
Registration Act 1860 o n 25.10.2013 and having its own Rules and panel of Arbitrators. 
Further, SAROD is trying to enter into a MOU with some institutional Arbitration Centre of 
excellence to improve functioning of SAROD and quality Arbitration. 
118. Further, recently the Cabine t has approved the proposal of NITI Aayog to review 
construction sector by involving the authority to seek DOLA views before filing appeal in the 
arbitrate award. By relaxing the condition of providing interest on bank guarantees on  
deputed amounts in s uch appeals by concessionaires will  unlock capital with player to 
executes projects. The CCEA considered the proposal of NITI Aayog in its meeting held on 
20th November, 2019 and approved the following: 
i) With respect to arbitral awards decided in favour of  the 
contractors/concessionaires, the concerned Government entity will take the 
decision to initiate proceedings for setting aside of the arbitral award, and any 
appeal (s) thereto, with the opinion of a Law Officer -Attorney General of India/ 
the Solicitor -General of India/The Additional Solicitor -General of India -in 
consultation with the Department of Legal Affairs (DOLA) at the Ministry of Law 
and Justice as per the procedure laid down in this respect. DOLA is to ensure that 
the aforementioned process of soliciting and communicating the opinion of Law 
Officer to the concerned Government Entity is completed within 30(Thirty) days 
of the receipt of request. 
ii) In case where the Government entity has challenged the arbitral award, and, as a 
result, the amount of the arbitral award has not been paid, 75% of such award will 
be paid by the Government Entity to the contractor/concessionaire against a Bank 
guarantee only for the said 75% and not for its interest components. With respect 
to the interest payable to the Government Entity, should the subsequent Court 
order require refund of the said 75%, payment of the same will be as per the Court 
order, non -compliance of which by the contractor/concessionaire would be a 
contempt of Court. And, the concerned Government En tity will have the right to 
recover the said interest by way of legal/judicial remedies. In cases where bank 
guarantees for the interest components has already been submitted by the 
contractor/concessionaire, the same will be returned by the concerned 

46 
 
Government entity. Should the court order prescribed the rate of interest, the same 
will prevail. 
119. The Committee takes note of the mechanism existing at present for arbitration 
and resolution of disputes. Disputes between the concessionaire and the authori ty is one 
of the core reasons behind delays in road projects and having effective mechanisms in 
place to minimize the delay resolution time is crucial.  The Committee desires the 
Ministry to thoroughly examine the efficacy of the current arbitration and dis pute 
resolution mechanism in settling disputes between the involved parties, helping avoid 
litigation processes to the maximum possible extent. Effective efforts may be made to 
address any bottlenecks causing delays in such arbitrations. 
120. The Committee notes that despite the best efforts at arbitration, many disputes 
between concessionaires and NHAI still end up in courts, which sometimes take years to 
finally settle the dispute. In light of this, the Committee recommends that amicable 
resolution should be the priority of the Ministry to the extent possible and the cost of 
taking the matter to courts should be considered both in terms of delays as well as cost 
overruns. The Committee desires that the Ministry may request fast-track hearing of its 
cases in courts, since delays in delivery of verdict in such cases directly take a toll on the 
public exchequer. Further, the Ministry may request the Government and the judiciary 
to empower a panel of retired judges having expertise in infrastructural litigation s in 
order to enable quicker judgements in case of disputes with concessionaires, thereby 
helping minimize delays in execution of road projects. 
MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
121. Maintenance of National Highways is one of the foremost responsibilities of the 
Ministry. The Committee enquired about the repair and maintenance norms for National 
Highways laid down by the Government. In its written reply, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that in projects under Operation & Maintenance (O&M), the Concession aire / 
contractor is required to follow the relevant specifications with clearly laid down timelines 
for different activities e.g. filling of potholes, repairing the shoulders etc.   In order to ensure 
the riding comfort, the roughness index is not allowed to exceed the prescribed limit.   The 
repair and maintenance activities are supervised by Independent Engineer/Authority Engineer 
/Supervision Consultant on day to day basis. There are also local field units at Project 

47 
 
Implementation Unit (PIU) and Regional Office (RO) level to ensure strict compliance of the 
norms. As regards quality control, development and construction works are executed as per 
the provisions of MoRTH Specifications for Road and Bridge works, IRC/ BIS guidelines.  In 
order to monitor the quality of work, the Authority Engineer/Independent Engineer are 
engaged during construction, operation & maintenance period of National Highways projects.  
Besides, officers also inspect works from time to time. 
122. The Committee feels that maintenance o f the existing road network is an area 
which is not given enough attention to, by the Ministry. Maintenance of the existing 
NHs is essential not only from economic aspects, but also to reduce the number of road 
accidents that take place due to potholes, po or quality of roads , damaged roads due to 
floods, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry make extensive 
use of network survey vehicles and latest technological innovations  such as drones  to 
regularly assess the quality of the existing NH network in the country and to figure out 
the stretches that need to be worked upon. The maintenance requirements thus 
analyzed should be prioritized on the basis of potential safety hazards posed by the poor 
quality, the traffic volume on the stretch, a nd other relevant factors. The Committee 
believes that carrying out a task of such scale on the vast NH network in the country 
requires significant funds and recommends that the Ministry may request funds for the 
same in the coming financial years. 
123. The Committee observes that special focus must be laid on high quality 
maintenance of roads in flood -prone regions. Specialized techniques may be used to 
ensure that the maintenance work carried out in such regions is long lasting and that 
sufficient provisions for drainage are included in the project.  
124. The Ministry informed the Committee about NHAI’s Sukhad Yatra mobile 
application, which has been prepared to empower the Highway user. The key feature of the 
app includes provision for the user to enter r oad quality-related information or to report any 
accident or pothole on the highway. It also provides users with real -time data related to 
waiting time expected at Plazas and various facilities like points of interest, highway nest/nest 
mini, etc., availab le across the highway. The app can also be used by the users to purchase 
the FASTag and further facilitate the highway user experience. 
125. The Committee is distressed to note the poor feedback received by the Sukhad 
Yatra application on the Play Store  for Android devices, where it is rated 2.7 stars out 

48 
 
of a maximum possible 5 star user rating. Similarly, the app has received poor ratings 
on the App Store for iOS devices. The Committee feels that this depicts that the Sukhad 
Yatra app, although brilliant in concept and its scope of use, is failing to achieve its 
intended goal of allowing users to enter road quality related information and to report 
accidents and potholes on the highways. The Committee recommends that NHAI may 
work out an intuitive user int erface for the app. The poor feedback received by the 
application from its users should be seriously looked into and addressed at the earliest. 
Further, once the application is improved and well -received by its users, NHAI should 
promote the usage of the a pplication through social media as well as signages on the 
NHs. 
126. The Committee may be briefed about the highlights of the data received by 
NHAI through the submission of information by the users of the Sukhad Yatra app, 
alongwith details regarding the number of road quality/pothole related issues raised by 
the app users and the time taken by NHAI to address the same.  
LENDING ASPECTS OF ROAD SECTOR 
127. The Committee heard the representatives of various banks and financial institutions 
on lending aspects of road sector in its meeting held on 8 th January, 2021. In another meeting 
held on 19th January, 2021, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways on, inter alia, lending aspects of road sector. 
128. State Bank of India, in its written submission on the subject, informed the Committee 
that around 40-42% of the awards in FY2022 are expected to through the HAM route , while 
the balance award is expected mainly through EPC mode as the BOT (toll) mode may have 
only a few takers due to the uncertainty in traffic growth on account of COVID -19 
restrictions and muted economic activity. Various modifications have been made in Model 
Concession Agreement for Hybrid Annuity projects aimed at protecting developers’ returns 
and easing their cashflows during construction period, major being interest payment linked to 
average 1-year MCLR of top five banks instead of RBI bank rate, release of NHAI grant in 
10 milestones of 4% each, as against five installments of 8% earlier. Simil arly, modifications 
have been made in MCA for BOT projects to reinstate developer interest in the model, major 
being handing of over 90% Right of Way (RoW) prior to Appointed date, testing of shortfall 
in projected traffic years as against once in a projec t life tested earlier. It was further 

49 
 
informed that the Bidder eligibility criteria has been reduced for HAM project (minimum net 
worth of 15% of Project Cost as against 25% earlier) and EPC projects (1x of project cost) 
which would promote entry of smaller players. 
129. IDBI Bank, in its written submission on the subject, informed the Committee that the 
Government has taken various measures / initiatives to alleviate the impediments being faced 
by the Road Sector and also to boost the investment sentiments in the Sector viz.  
(i) Revision in Model Concession Agreement for BOT projects which envisages (a) that 
the Work Order for Highway projects will be issued only when 90% of the land Right 
of Way (RoW) is acquired and the same will form part of Condition Prece dent (CP). 
Besides, the Private Developer (Concessionaire) has to submit a letter satisfying that 
90% of the land has been acquired before taking over the project. 
(ii) NHAI has formed the Conciliation Committees of independent Experts (CCIE) of 3 
members each. The CCIE is headed by senior retired officials from Judiciary, experts 
from Public Administration and Private Sectors. 
(iii) 100% FDI has been allowed in the Sector under automatic route. 
130. The Committee takes note of the various initiatives taken by the Min istry to 
boost investment and lending in road sector.  
131. Union Bank, in its written note furnished to the Committee, presented the following 
comparative analysis of the different models of financing road projects in the country being 
employed at present: 
Types Description 
Revenue 
Stream 
Concession 
Period 
Award 
Criteria 
Risks borne by Concessionaire 
Project  Financing  Traffic 
BOT 
(Toll) 
Private party 
builds roads, 
undertakes 
O&M and 
collects toll  
Toll ~20-25 years  
Highest 
revenue  
sharing bid 
or lowest 
grant 
   
BOT 
(Annuity) 
Private party 
builds roads, 
Annuity 
payment  
~20-25 years  
Lowest 
annuity  
   

50 
 
undertakes 
O&M and 
collects 
annuity  
Hybrid 
Annuity 
Private party 
builds roads, 
undertakes 
O&M and 
collects 
annuity, 
Construction 
Support 4 0% 
from Authority 
Annuity  
+ interest 
+ O&M 
15 years post  
construction 
Lowest bid 
project 
cost and 
O&M cost 
 
Concessionaire 
(60%) 
Authority 
(40%) 
 
EPC 
Private party 
builds roads  
(money spent 
by 
government)  
Contract 
amount  
Not required  
Lowest 
tariff 
requested 
   
 
132. In its written note on the subject, Canara Bank stated that HAM model introduced by 
NHAI and other agencies has given a level playing on both sides and that the bank has 
introduced a board approved policy for financing HAM projects th at are technically feasible, 
financially viable and bankable projects undertaken by both public sector and private sector 
undertakings. Canara Bank further observed that infrastructure financing pose s some unique 
risk on the credit and liquidity fronts on account of long -gestation period involved  and that 
appraising the credit proposal of infrastructural project in terms of necessary skill sets is 
distinctly different from credit appraisal of other types of loans that banks normally provide. 
133. The Committee agrees with the observation made by Canara Bank regarding the 
necessary skill sets for appraising credit proposal of infrastructural project being 
distinctly different from credit appraisal of other types of loans. The Committee 
recommends that the pub lic sector banks must ensure that only qualified people with 

51 
 
experience in appraising infrastructural proposals should be allowed to make decisions 
in this regard. 
134. Indian Bank, in its written note on the subject, stated that the toll based projects ha ve 
suffered the most during the COVID -19 pandemic, on account of traffic restrictions which 
impacted the revenue and that annuity based projects fared better. It further opined that 
investments in state roads and rural roads will be hit because of fund div ersion to the health 
and social sectors. It informed the Committee of the various steps initiated by the bank vis -à-
vis lending in road sector viz. financing In vIT Trusts based on RBI guidelines; providing 
restructuring facility, wherever warranted, under COVID-19 framework; and extending 
sanction of additional facility under GECLS 2.0. The Indian Bank stated that its financial 
benchmarks are more relaxed than the Kamath Committee recommendations, enabling it to 
consider proposals under stress in a leveraged way. 
135. The Committee agrees with the apprehensions raised by Canara Bank regarding 
impact of Coronavirus pandemic on investments in State roads and rural roads on 
account of fund diversion to the health and social sectors.  State roads and rural roads 
provide last-mile connectivity to crores of people in the country, besides being of great 
economic importance to countless industries requiring raw materials to be transported 
from small towns and villages.  The Committee , therefore,  recommends that the 
Ministry may consider extending a one -time financial assistance to State Governments 
to help ensure that State roads and rural roads are maintained in motorable conditions.  
136. Indian Overseas Bank, in its written note on the subject, stated that given the 
challenges in lending in road infrastructure sector, rating agency CRISIL expects investments 
in the roads sector to contract marginally by 7 -9% in fiscal 2021 in the base case, after 
witnessing a healthy growth of ~17% in fiscal 2020. National Highways an d State roads 
make up more than 90% of these investments. It further informed that as per CRISIL’s 
analysis, Rs 10,000 Crore of debt of under -construction hybrid annuity model (HAM) 
projects is at risk. 30% of under -construction HAM projects that have sche duled completion 
date due by September 2020, may face delay in execution. 
137. The Committee desires that the Ministry may take remedial measures to address 
the apprehensions raised by the rating agency CRISIL regarding the debt of under -
construction HAM projects being at risk because of delays in execution. 

52 
 
138. Punjab National Bank, in its written note on the subject, informed the Committee that it 
has financed directly /indirectly to concessionaire and authority in Infra -Road sector through 
various alternate modes for development and growth of road. Some of the measures that have 
been set in place are as under:  
a) Bank funded Various Concessionaire for development of Road project under both 
BOT (Toll, Annuity) and HAM model, through Senior Debt and Subordinate Debt. 
b) Bank funded Various Sponsor Companies i.e. EPC contractor, Working Capital 
Facility (Funded & Non funded) for construction of Road under EPC model. 
c) Bank also funded through Asset securitization mode for completed Road Project to 
various Concessionaire. Create future cash inflows by selling those future inflows to 
an investor as securities. Through securitization banks unlock their capital, rebalance 
risks and coped with their asset–liability management.  
d) Bank also participated through long term Bond route floated by Concessionaire. 
e) Credit Enhancement: banks to offer partial credit enhancements to corporate bonds 
issued by private entities and Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) for financing 
infrastructure projects. 
f) Funded also the Authority i.e. NHAI for development of Road Project through 
unsecured/Secured Loan. 
g) For early recognition and time bound resolution of stresses Road sector Assets, bank 
using Prudential Framework for resolution of these assets 
139. The Committee takes note of the various meas ures taken by PNB to finance the 
concessionaires in road infrastructure sector, 
Challenges faced by lenders in financing road projects  
140. SBI listed the following challenges/ issues faced by lenders that need to be addressed: 
a) Land Acquisition Issues: St atus of land acquisition should be made available to all 
bidders at tendering stage. Appointed Date shall be issued only when compensation is 
paid to landowners for 80% of the Project length for HAM projects and 90% for Toll 
projects.  
b) De-scoping: Land not  handed over by NHAI within 180 days from Appointed date 
may be automatically de-scoped (deemed de-scoped provision). 

53 
 
c) Large funding requirement for road sector: To meet investment envisaged in NIP, a 
dedicated development finance institution for financing infrastructure projects may be 
established. 
d) Take-out financing / refinancing: Government may mandate institutions like NIIF to 
establish a fund for facilitating take -out financing for operational projects which will 
create additional headroom for Banks to fund fresh projects.  
e) Stressed Asset Fund for Road Sector: Under construction stressed projects attract 
lower valuation in case of sale and have limited takers. Hence, stressed asset fund 
may be created to complete the project and then considered for asset  sale as it may 
evince greater interest from investors.  
f) Stuck Road Projects: NHAI pays lenders an amount equal to the lower of (a) value of 
work done; or (b) 90% of Debt Due. However, the payment is held till settlement of 
claims with Concessionaire. We s uggest, payment to lenders should not linked to 
settlement process and concurrence of concessionaire should not be required.  
g) Fixed Concession Period (Toll): Concession Agreement to allow fixed Operation 
period rather than fixing Concession Period as any d elay in construction reduces 
operational period which affects project viability.  
h) Termination Payment shortfall risk: The Project cost assessed by Authority and 
Concessionaire / lenders shall be harmonized and termination payment shall be linked 
to revised repayment schedule for refinancing cases.  
i) Traffic Risk: If actual traffic is lower than anticipated, the Concession Agreement to 
provide higher cap of upto 30% for increasing Concession Period (as against existing 
cap of 20%)  
j) Delay in receipt of approva l: A suitable mechanism may be developed for providing 
single window clearance for all approvals required for executing a project. 
k) Termination payment in refinancing/ restructuring cases: Refinancing / restructuring 
of Project loan involves extension of re payment period based on revised cash flows 
projections by utilising longer available tail period. However, NHAI does not 
consider termination payment / Debt Due as per revised repayment schedule. No 
termination payment is available to lenders beyond maturi ty date of original loan. 
This result in shortfall in termination payment and loan will be classified as unsecured 
exposure. 
141. SBI, in its written reply, further proposed the following steps that need to be taken to 

54 
 
resolve the issues faced by financiers: 
a) Group exposure limit may be a challenge to Banks: Many of large business 
groups e.g. Tata, L&T, Large PSUs etc. have substantial exposures with 
Banks. RBI’s Large Exposure Framework (LEF) limits Group exposure to 
25% of the Banks’ Total Capital Funds. W e suggest additional 5% to 10% 
window may be made available for funding of infrastructure projects. 
b) Concession Agreement: Any amendment to provisions of Concession 
Agreement should be done only with prior approval of Lenders (illustration: in 
one case Delhi Agra Tollways the escrow waterfall mechanism was modified, 
and supplementary concession agreement was executed without approval of 
lenders). 
c) Land Acquisition Issues: Large number of projects experience delays due to 
non-availability of required land for completion of relevant project stretch. 
Government has already agreed to provide 80% (for HAM projects) / 90% (for 
Toll projects) land on Appointed Date. We suggest land where compensation 
has been paid -off to landowners shall be treated as available on Ap pointed 
Date rather than treating issuance of Notification for `acquisition’ of land as 
`availability of land’. An Independent Regulatory authority may also be 
established in road sector to speed -up resolution of contractual disputes / 
counter claims. 
d) Arbitration: Once arbitration is awarded in favor of Concessionaire; it should 
not be challenged further in courts and Authority to release funds promptly to 
settle lenders dues. 
e) NHAI Right to set -off from Termination payment: NHAI has introduced a 
new provision in Model Concession Agreement which enables it to deduct any 
payment due towards NHAI such as premium payment, penalties from 
Termination payment and only balance amount is released to lenders. Lenders 
should get their 90% or 100% of debt dues as per el igibility. Any such 
deduction should be recovered from the Concessionaire / adjusted against his 
claims. 
142. The Committee takes note of the information furnished by SBI with regard to 
the various challenges faced by lenders in road sector, alongwith its proposed solutions 

55 
 
to the same . The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure transparency 
regarding the status of land acquisition for a given project, starting from its tendering 
stage, for public scrutiny as well as to help bidders and lenders b e more aware of the 
progress being made in the same. The Committee agrees with SBI’s suggestion to make 
provisions for automatically de-scoping the portion of land which is not handed over by 
the Ministry/NHAI to the concessionaire within a defined period of time.  
143. The Committee recommends that NHAI may timely settle the amount it claims 
to be due, to the lenders , in case the project goes to  arbitration and dispute resolution, 
and not wait till the settlement process is over. Any additional amount that  may be 
needed to be paid, can be settled after the settlement process. This would help free up 
lenders’ capital for financing other road projects, while lowering the adverse impact of 
long-drawn arbitration/settlement processes on the lenders. 
144. The Committee believes that infrastructure lending poses a unique challenge to 
banks in terms of the heavy amounts that need to be sanctioned for a long duration of 
time, with the investment being subject to several risks that might hamper the 
successful execution of a given road project. Innovative financing methods such as take -
out financing can permit increased participation of banks since the duration of time for 
which the funds lent by the bank are locked up decreases significantly, thereby also 
reducing the  risk faced by the banks in their investments made to the road 
infrastructure sector. The Committee agrees with SBI’s suggestion and recommends 
that the Government may consider mandating institutions like NIIF and the upcoming 
Development Finance Instituti on announced in Budget Session, 2021 by the Hon’ble 
Finance Minister, to establish a fund for facilitating take -out financing for operational 
projects so as to create additional headroom for Banks to fund fresh projects. The 
Committee recommends that the n ecessary framework for take -out financing may be 
put in place.  The Ministry may also look into the creation of a special Stressed Asset 
Fund for road sector to fund the completion of stuck road projects, which might 
otherwise have limited takers. 
145. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may develop a suitable 
mechanism for providing single window clearance for all approvals required for 
executing a project, with timelines being fixed for taking decisions regarding such 
approvals, where possible, so a s to minimize delays on account of obtaining necessary 

56 
 
approvals. 
146. The Committee desires that RBI may look into the feasibility of SBI’s suggestion 
to provide an additional 5% to 10% window to the existing group exposure limit of 25% 
of the Banks’ Tota l Capital Funds under its Large Exposure Framework limits. In this 
regard, RBI may consider placing slightly increased exposure limits in case of business 
groups which are considerably large and are in financially sound condition, since the 
existing limits  might be too low, especially for smaller banks , which might not have 
enough funds to  diversify their long-term infrastructure investments beyond a certain 
point. 
147. The Committee recommends that in cases where arbitration is awarded in favor of 
concessionaire, the Ministry/NHAI may assess the soundness of its claims and whether 
it is felt that these claims have reasonable chances for being considered to be valid by 
courts. The Ministry/NHAI should not make it an unwritten rule to challenge 
arbitration decisions in courts when these are not awarded in its favor, and the possible 
resultant delays in the project on account of court proceedings may be duly considered 
before reaching upon a decision regarding whether to appeal the award in courts. 
148. Central Bank informed the Committee that the major issues faced while lending to 
Road Sector are: 
a) Inherent problems such as mismatch between the tenor of deposits that banks can 
raise and the duration of the loans required for long gestation, capital intensive 
infrastructure projects.  
b) Project implementation issues like cost overruns which is caused due to the following 
reasons: 
- Delay in Land acquisition. 
- In ability/delay in obtaining commitment from lenders for financing the project. 
- Delay in obtaining necessary approvals like environmental clearances, access to 
project site etc., 
- Inadequate project viability studies carried out by Govt. / implementing authority. 
- Various legal issues intervene during implementation stage of the project which may 
lead to stall the project. 
- Issues in construction phase: 
i) Project design 

57 
 
ii) Delay in construction due to change in construction parameters such as project 
specification, requirement of additional material. 
iii) Failure/delay in obtaining the regulatory approvals. 
-    Issues concerning NHAI: 
i. Rigidity in Concessionaire Agreement of NHAI to engage in re -negotiations of 
terms of Concessionaire Agreement 
ii. Overleveraged Balance Sheet causing inability to pump in promoter capital or 
obtain refinancing to fund cost overruns 
149.  Central Bank suggested that there should be a one-stop window for all approvals. 
150. The Committee notes the issue pointed out by Central Bank regarding project 
delays on account of delay in obtaining commitment from lenders for financing a given 
road project. In th is regard, the Committee  recommends that provisions may be 
included in bidding requirements to ensure that only serious bidders who can raise the 
amount necessary for execution of the project, should it be awarded to them, are 
allowed to place a bid. This may be implemented by way of requirement of a certificate 
from an institution  stating that they’d be willing to finance the 
concessionaire/contractor in case the project is awarded to them. The Committee feels 
that doing so would help eradicate delays caus ed by financially inept bidders from 
winning bids and causing delays later on when they are unable to get lenders to finance 
them to execute the project. 
151. IDBI Bank, in its written note, furnished the following details of various issues faced by 
the sector and the possible solutions thereto: 
a) Lot of Gap in the Original project cost and Actual cost.  
 Reasonable assessment of the Project cost shall be carried out in detail and shall be 
accepted by the authority, before commencement of the Project. Bank fun ding shall be 
availed based on the cost approved by the authority and the difference, if any, shall be 
funded by the Promoter through Equity upfront.  
 Banks shall stick to the Project cost as approved by the authority without any increase. 
b) Lot of Mismatch in Financial Progress and actual progress. 
Certification of the progress (both Physical and Financial) shall be furnished by authority 
/ Owners Engineer from time to time to the Banks. Further, Authority shall also vet fund 
requirement for the next 3 month s. Based on the above, Lenders Independent Engineer 

58 
 
(LIE) shall submit confirmation to the Banks for release of further funding. In other 
words, Lenders Independent Engineer and Authority shall agree to the same Physical and 
Financial progress. 
c) Project Monitoring, a big challenge. 
 Project Monitoring report of the Authority / Owners Engineer / third party shall be 
furnished to LIE. LIE shall quickly review and submit to Banks. 
d) Gap in envisaged and actual cashflows from the Projects. 
 Authority / Contractor sh all amicably resolve the issue after analyzing the reasons for 
such shortfall in cashflows.  
 Authority shall pay the compensation or unsustainable debt to the Banks and the same 
could be recovered by the Authority over the concession period, as the case may be.  
 Create a provision for Special Grant / funding from Authority for meeting such shortfall. 
e) Authorities not approving increased cost leading to dispute and Arbitration. Court 
litigation. 
 Contracts shall be very clear without any ambiguity or scope for  different interpretation. 
Wherever discretion / scope for interpretation is there it would lead to dispute.  
 Arbitration (other than where recent Niti Ayog Guidelines are applicable) and Court 
Litigation are very long drawn process. Therefore, all the pro jects awarded shall have a 
set process for dispute resolution. 
 Further, design change, if any, should get approved (Instances of delay in approval for 
design changes are also prevalent) along with the final cost for the proposed changes.  
 Arbitration/ Court litigation blocks the BG limits sanctioned by the Banks. 
 SoP (for all sorts of contracts) to be put -in place to approve any changes and associated 
costs within a time bound period.  
f) There is no set procedure for deciding on Arbitration in respect of proj ects granted by 
State Govt Authorities. 
 There should be a proper procedure (similar to Niti Ayog Guidelines) for the Projects 
awarded by the State Government Departments, Undertakings and Others. 
g) WC limits are getting blocked in the stalled projects. BGs a re being en -cashed by 
Authorities: 
 Niti Aayog or similar Central Govt Ministry to issue SoP to all Depts. / Agencies, not to 
en-cash BGs of stalled projects. Instead Corporate Guarantees of Contractors can be 
obtained by authorities and Banks BGs shall be released. 

59 
 
 Further, there are many instances, where even after completion of  Defects Liability 
Period (DLP), BGs are getting extended due to non -settlement / approval of final bills. 
SoP may incorporate that Authority shall not seek BG extension, after DLP  irrespective 
of status of bill settlement / approval.  
h) In stalled projects, Banks are forced to renew the BGs (without payment of commission) 
to avoid invocation and further stress in the companies. 
 On implementation of any project, Authority is getting t he physical assets post 
implementation of the Projects, contractors are earning profit. The anomaly is, in case of 
stalled projects Banks are unduly getting affected.  
 Banks are ultimately carrying all the associated risks of stalled projects.  
 For each Project being executed with Bank’s support viz., BGs obtained, Loans extended, 
a mechanism of recognizing Bank’s claims / dues, on priority, to be put -in place. This, to 
some extent, may alleviate concerns of Banks as well as remove any scope for diversion 
of compensations / awards to Contractors. 
 Banks may move away from generic WC loans to Project specific loans. with ring 
fencing of project cash flows 
i) Companies are seeking enhancement in limits. 50% of construction companies are below 
investment Grade. Banks are not comfortable to sanction / release limits. 
 Banks shall finance only companies with minimum BBB and above rating.  
 No fresh funding to existing below investment Grade companies. 
 For accounts with below investment grade, suitable credit enhancement s like Guarantee 
from funds like National Investment and Infrastructure Fund (NIIF) or similar longterm 
funding agencies, may be put in place. 
j) In case of default by the Borrower, there is no fall back for the Banks, as there is no 
tangible security other than Project cash flows, loosing the total sanctioned amount. 
 Industry shall come up with a solution on what sort of security it could offer as a fall back 
arrangement. 
k) Monitoring Utilization of WC limits is a big challenge. Agency for Specialized 
Monitoring (ASM) is mainly Chartered Accountants (may be hiring Engineers on part 
time). Having no Knowledge on Technical issues. 
 IBA may prescribe guidelines on minimum number of Chartered Accountants and 
Engineers (on permanent basis) to be associated in the Agen cy for Specialized 
Monitoring (ASM) assignment based on the Project complexity / turnover.  

60 
 
152. IDBI, in its written reply, further suggested that the following steps need to be taken 
to resolve the issues faced by financiers: 
a) Claims filed by project implementation companies need to be processed expeditiously 
to ease the cash flows during implementation/ operations. 
b) Usually claims arise primarily on triggering of certain events as per Concession 
Agreement such as delay in right of way as well as change in scope during project 
implementation or de -scoping certain stretch of land due to non -receipt of Govt./ 
environmental/ forest clearances etc. 
c) A separate dispute resolution body may be constituted of retired judges/ technical 
experts / Bankers exclusively in  respect of Road projects which are in dispute with 
NHAI/ Central Government/State Governments. Resolution suggested by such Body 
shall be implemented in a time bound manner. 
d) This will result in time bound resolution and provide way forward for the Develop ers/ 
banks and FIs. 
153. The Committee  takes note of the apprehensions raised by the IDBI Bank 
regarding a lot of gap in the original project cost and actual cost. A reasonable 
assessment of the estimated project cost should be made by the authority. Provi sions 
should be made to make necessary re -assessment of the project cost approved by the 
authority, in case substantial delays occur on account of reasons other than the 
concessionaire, factoring in present  raw material costs, effect of inflation etc. . The  
Committee agrees with the IDBI Bank’s suggestion that the bank funding should be 
availed based on the cost approved by the authority and the difference, if any, should be 
funded by the promoter through equity upfront. 
154. The Committee notes the observat ion of IDBI Bank regarding there being a lot 
of mismatch in the financial progress and actual progress of road projects. The 
Committee recommends that a mechanism may be put in place to ensure that the 
progress made in a project is assessed periodically an d where possible, proof of the 
progress achieved so far may be recorded through drone shots or other technology. The 
information regarding the physical progress of the project may be uploaded on a public 
platform, so as to allow public scrutiny of the prog ress achieved, as well as to permit 
banks to release further funds based on the actual progress made in the project on 
ground. 

61 
 
155.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may coordinate with State 
Governments to help establish well -defined procedures for arbitration and settlement 
for the projects awarded by State Government Departments, Undertakings etc. 
156. The Committee notes the very valid observations of IDBI Bank that in case of 
default by the Borrower, there is no fallback for the Banks, as the re is no tangible 
security other than project cashflows , causing a high level risk of losing the amount 
Banks lend to Borrowers. Banks face this inherent problem of lack of tangible security 
while lending to road projects. The Committee recommends that an in-depth study may 
be made by the Ministry with regard to the possible solutions to the same. Having some 
sort of security to fall back on would solve a major pain -point faced by banks and 
financial institutions while lending to the road sector, and allow them to make more 
credit available to fund the road infrastructure projects. 
157. The Committee notes the issue mentioned by IDBI Bank regarding the 
challenges faced in monitoring utilization of Working Capital limits through Agency for 
Specialized Monitor ing (ASM). The Committee recommends that the Indian Banks’ 
Association may make it mandatory for ASMs to have experienced Engineers on -board, 
besides Chartered Accountants, so that the ASM has knowledge regarding technical 
issues of road projects as well, which will substantially aid it in monitoring the 
utilization of working capital limits in road sector lending. 
158. The Committee desires the Ministry to look into the creation of a dedicated 
dispute resolution body comprising of retired judges/ technical  experts/ bankers 
exclusively to settle disputes pertaining to road infrastructure projects.  
159. IFCI Limited informed the Committee of the various challenges faced in lending in 
the Highway sector: 
• Land Acquisition: Delay in acquisition of land is the  major cause of stress in the 
road sector.  
• Substantial cost overrun: Due to delays in obtaining timely clearances/approvals, 
land acquisition/ROW issues  
• Traffic Risk: Many roads do not realize the envisaged traffic, which skews the 
financial viability for the developer.  
• Stalled Projects: Developers are not in a position to infuse equity into stalled project, 

62 
 
which hampers tie-up of debt.  
• Weak Financial Strength of Concessionaire: In HAM projects, 40% of the project 
cost is funded by NHAI and res t has to be funded through debt and equity. Bid 
Eligibility criteria has been revised from the min Net worth criteria from earlier 25% 
of EPC Cost to 15% of EPC Cost. As a result , some very small companies can 
participate in the bidding and may not have en ough technical/financial wherewithal to 
complete the project. Banks may also not be inclined to fund leading to overall delay 
in the process.  
• Subdued capital market: There haven’t been major IPOs / FPOs of major road 
developers in the recent past, which  restricts their access to equity capital and thereby 
their ability to take up new projects. 
160. IFCI suggested the following possible solutions for resolving the funding constraints 
in the road infrastructure sector: 
• Refinancing: Refinancing of loans extended by banks and NBFCs themselves.  
• 5:25 Scheme  
• Take out financing: Frees up capital for banks and helps manage ALM.  
• Revival of DFI: DFIs have access to long term low cost funds, the benefits of which 
can be passed on to projects. 
161. The Comm ittee desires that the Ministry may look into solutions proposed by 
IFCI for resolving the funding constraints in the road infrastructure sector. 
162. India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) , in its written reply furnished 
to the Committee,  threw light on  various issues faced by lenders in financing road projects , 
along with its suggestions for the same: 
S.No Issue Suggestions 
1 Lack of 
Tripartite 
Agreement 
between 
Lenders, 
Concessionaire 
and the 
Concessioning 
Authority 
PPP concession agreemen ts are executed among the Concessioning  Authority 
and the private sector developer. 
Lenders are unable to pre -empt any unilateral action even when ~70% of 
project cost is provided by them. 
 

63 
 
2 Expediting 
remittance of 
termination 
payment  
Receiving termina tion payment has witnessed significant delays thereby 
making accounts as NPA. The process needs to be expedited. At least 75% of 
the claimed amount should be paid immediately, and in case of disputes, 
arbitration process may continue. 
3 Implementation 
of MoRTH 
Circular on 
stuck projects 
At present, there are multiple Guidelines and policies of MoRTH which need to 
be considered by the parties involved. 
 
In case of BOT Toll/Annuity projects, during the construction phase, there is no 
security available to th e lenders in case the project is terminated before 
achieving COD. MoRTH has issued an Office Memorandum dt March 9, 2019 
for the resolution of such stuck projects. The circular should be implemented by 
all central / state level authorities.  Termination pa yments should be paid based 
on the loan disbursed/ physical completion. (In many cases lenders disburse the 
funds based on the physical completion and to meet IDC to keep the account 
being standard pending release of grant / VGF by NHAI.) 
4 Expediting 
Arbitration 
Process 
Huge delays are being observed in completion of arbitration process resulting in 
low recovery for lenders and accounts turning into NPA. Presently, NHAI does 
not have any grievances redressal time except SAROD which is almost non -
functional and no awards have been received till date through SAROD 
mechanism. 
Greater transparency is needed in the sector by putting the hearing details / 
orders in the public domain 
5 Right of 
Way(RoW) 
Appointed Date should only be declared on acquisition of at -least 90% of 
unhindered RoW which is presently 80% as per the Concession Agreement. 
Delay in handing over of land results in project getting stuck. Balance land 
should strictly be made available within 180days of Appointed Date as per the 
provisions of Concession Agreement.  
6 Approvals/ 
Clearances 
All approvals and clearances must be obtained by the NHAI before award of 
the project or declaring Appointed Date. Most of the road projects in the past 
have suffered either due to non-availability of ROW and/or approvals like GAD 
for Railway Over Bridge, Forest, Environmental Clearances not being in place.  
Time-Bound approval for important matters such as cost overrun, time overrun, 
granting of PCOD/COD, approval for toll collection, remedial action in terms 

64 
 
of prevention of leakage of traffic, corrective/punitive steps in case of instances 
of diversion of toll, extension of concession period etc. should be in a time 
bound manner 
7 Extension of 
Time and 
Confirmation for 
non-lapse of 
annuity 
NHAI is issuing EOT  to HAM projects getting delayed owing to various 
reasons. However, with grant of EOT it shall be desirable if NHAI also 
mentions the fate of annuities due to the delay in DCCO. It is important for 
lenders to be sure that annuities shall not get lapsed on account of granting EOT 
to a project.  
8 Change of Scope 
(CoS) 
Any CoS to be given by NHAI should be approved within a definitive time 
frame from the Appointed Date and the amount of CoS should also be limited 
based on the Bid Project Cost.  
9 Limited number 
of projects 
should be 
awarded to a 
single developer 
It has been observed that a single developer with limited resources is obtaining 
large number of projects. This not only results in delayed Financial Closure but 
also projects getting stuck due to no n-availability/ limited availability of 
resources with such developers. NHAI may limit the projects to a single 
developer based on the analysis of their resources viz man, machinery, financial 
strength etc. and their past track record. 
 
10 No Back dated 
Appointed Date 
In some cases it is observed that ante dating of Appointed Date has been 
declared by NHAI which impacts the projects viability and dampens the 
confidence of lenders. It should be ensured that the Appointed Date issued to 
any project should not be back dated. 
11 Benchmarking 
of O&M Cost 
NHAI should provide a benchmark for O&M cost based on factors such as 
state-wise input cost, terrain etc. which may be updated on half -yearly basis. 
NHAI should evaluate first year O&M component quoted by the b idders as part 
of the Bid against these benchmarks to ensure adequacy of O&M payment for 
O&M of the project. 
12 Availability of 
Independent 
Engineer (IE) 
report 
IE report should be made available to the Lead Bank on regular basis.  IE report 
may also be made available online for easy accessibility by lenders.  

65 
 
13 Delayed 
decision making 
It has been observed that NHAI takes time in decision making which causes 
abnormal delays to the project particularly with respect of release of grant, 
annuity, revenue shortfall loan, change of scope, claims for utility shifting / tree 
cutting, etc.  
 
14 Meeting 
Obligations  
All stakeholders in a project must  fulfill their duties and obligations in a timely 
manner.  
It has been observed that NHAI has often failed to fulfi ll its obligations which 
has resulted in the projects losing their financial viability and lenders have been 
the main sufferer in both Toll and Annuity projects. NHAI should be advised to 
meet its obligations under the Concession Agreement.  
15 Rationalized 
compensation  
Projects wherein delay in implementation is on account of delay in handing 
over of requisite RoW / defaults attributable to Authority and hence resulted in 
cost and time overrun should be compensated by the Authority through suitable 
extension in the Concession period or restoration of the lapsed Annuities as per 
the existing policy.  
16 Cost Overrun 
Funding  
NHAI should recognize funding of Cost Overrun for calculation of Termination 
Payment.  
17 Project Report 
Preparation 
Activities 
Project reports prepared by NHAI before bidding for inviting RFP vary with 
ground realities in terms of Bill of Quantities (BoQ) of works to be executed 
and traffic projections. These lead to projects facing cost overrun and time 
overrun and therefore adverse ly affect the viability of the projects during 
implementations. There is a need to strengthen the Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) so that fully prepared projects come for appraisal to the Lenders. Further, 
the cost estimation in the DPR should be close to the actual value. 
18 Quoted annuity 
amount to be 
credited in 
escrow account 
NHAI should release quoted Annuity amount without any set -off / deduction in 
escrow account and dues owed, if any, to NHAI shall be paid following 
waterfall mechanism in terms of Escrow Agreement. 
19 Increase in Time 
for Financial 
Closure  
Considering lockdown in the Country and COVID 19 situation, time frame of 
150 days for achievement of Financial Closure may be increased to 180 or 210 
days. 

66 
 
21 Compliance by 
Concessioning 
Authority 
 Pending Termination Payments must be settled in a defined timeframe to 
protect the interest of lenders and developers by the Authority.  
 Many road projects, particularly under Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
framework have suffered owing to reasons inc luding non -availability of 
requisite land, delay in approvals like Forest & Environmental Clearances 
by concerned Authorities, delayed and/or short payment of grants by the 
Concessioning Authority. Such reasons are obligations on part of the 
Concessioning Authority and are beyond the control of project developer 
or the lenders. 
 At present, there is a lack of fair distribution of penalties imposed in case 
of default by the developers and/or concessioning authority. . For instance, 
in case of NHAI’s concession agreements, the concessionaire bears almost 
double the penalty for a default, as compared to the penalty charged on the 
concessioning authority in case of similar default. 
 In many of the road projects, requisite Right of Way (ROW), land and 
clearances are not handed over to the SPV on or before appointed date or 
even after elapse of substantial time. 
 Lack of a mechanism in the road sector which ensures that disputes 
between Concessioning Authority and Developers re resolved in a fair and 
transparent manner. 
 
22 Asset 
Classification 
Norms by RBI 
 Since road project involve gestation period ranging from 2 to 3 years and 
further operational period of 15 to 25 years, a project sees various cycles 
of economic fluctuations in comparison to retail loans or other industrial 
projects. 
 Accordingly, having same asset classification norms for retail loans and 
also for road project loans is not judicious. 
 
 
163. The Committee feels that lenders play a critical role in successful execution of 
PPP projects in the road se ctor. The Committee notes the apprehension of IIFCL 
regarding the lack of a tripartite agreement between the Concessioning Authority, the 
Concessionaire and the Lenders. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI 

67 
 
should frame Tripartite Agreements for  its PPP projects, so as to provide some 
protection to the lenders, clearly listing the rights and remedies available to all the 
parties involved in the agreement. 
164. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work on resolving the issues 
causing delays in remittance of termination payment. In case of disputes, the minimum 
amount agreed upon by both the Concessioning Authority and the Concessionaire may 
be released immediately, so as to minimize the impact caused  by delays in arbitration 
processes on the lenders and the concessionaire. 
165. The Committee desires that the Ministry may put in place provisions to ensure 
that all necessary approvals and clearances for a given road project are obtained before 
the declaration of its Appointed Date, so as to  eradicate the delays faced by 
concessionaires on account of delays in obtaining such approvals. 
166. The Committee recommends that NHAI may issue clarification regarding the 
fate of annuities in cases where Extension of Time (EOT) is issued in HAM project s 
facing delays. 
167. The Committee takes strong note of the observation made by IIFCL regarding 
large number of projects being awarded to a single developer with limited resources. 
The Committee feels that such carelessness on account of NHAI/Concessionin g 
Authority while awarding road projects would inevitably lead to road projects getting 
delayed on account of the concessionaire’s inability to make simultaneous progress on 
multiple projects with limited resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends tha t a 
Central Database may be maintained by the Ministry to keep track of the various 
awards presently being carried out by a bidder. Alternatively, submission of such 
information may be made mandatory for the bidder. The database thus created by the 
Ministry may be updated as soon as a bid is awarded, so that the other bids made by the 
bidder reflect that they are already working on that project and an informed decision 
can be made regarding whether the bidder would be capable of working on another 
project. Clear limits may be defined for concessionaires regarding the number/size of 
projects that can be awarded to a concessionaire, based on the resources viz. labor, 
machinery, financial strength etc. available with them. 
168. The Committee recommends that the  reports furnished to the Ministry by 
Independent Engineer (IE) should be made available online to the lenders involved in 
the project. This information would be crucial for the lender to make decision regarding 
the further release of funds for the road project.  

68 
 
169. On its potential role in increasing flow of funds to road projects, IIFCL stated that its  
financial assistance has led to the development of around 28,000 Kms of roads, which 
constitutes around 16% of India’s National Highway Capacity. IIFCL h as provided gross 
sanctions of over ₹ 51,000 Crore and disbursements of over ₹ 26,000 Crore to Road Sector 
under its Direct Lending and Takeout Finance Schemes. IIFCL is also the largest lender to 
HAM Projects with disbursements of around ₹ 10,000 Crore to  around 60 Projects of NHAI. 
However, in order to increase its support to the road sector in a manner that is presently 
required, and to suitably adapt to the changing market conditions, the following modifications 
in IIFCL's Scheme SIFTI, are considered necessary:  
a) Reduction of minimum door to door maturity to 5 years, from present limit of 10 years  
b) Reduction of minimum borrowing tenor to 1 year from present 10 years, suited to manage 
the Assets and Liabilities of the Company.  
c) Permission for IIFCL to Invest in InvITs and Project Bonds  
d) Allowing IIFCL to assist NHAI & State Authorities. 
170. The Committee takes note of the  important role played by IIFCL in financing 
road infrastructure sector projects and recommends that the Ministry may consid er 
granting permission to IIFCL to invest in InvITs and project bonds and to assist NHAI 
and State Authorities in financing road projects. 
171. Indian Overseas Bank, in its written note furnished to the Committee, listed the 
following risks faced by lenders in the road sector: 
 Change of scope of work 
 Land acquisition delay 
 Poor preliminary soil information and investigations 
 Schedule delay caused by rejection of unqualified materials  
172.  IOB shared the following problems faced by bank in lending and reco very in the road 
infrastructure sector: 
 Delay in servicing the debt is mainly due to stretched liquidity position on 
account of lower than envisaged toll revenues  
 Borrowers requesting for extension concession agreements based on traffic 
study which is subject to NHAI scrutiny which is getting delayed  
 Low traffic on the project stretch in the current fiscal due to the slowdown and 
lockdown on account of global pandemic COVID 19 
 Lower than expected Toll collection, impacting the cash flow. Termination of 

69 
 
projects 
 State Governments exempting toll for certain vehicles and not compensating 
the concessionaire in spite of continuous follow up.  
 Subsequent to completion of the project, State Highways have developed 
roads parallel to NHAI road resulting in diversion of traffic  
 Projects are not completed due to various issues like handing over of land, 
clearance from various offices, local public issues delay in PCOD/COD.  
 Cost overrun loans by lenders in order to complete the project affected the 
viability of the project.  
 Major Maintenance Work every five years diverts the toll collection amount 
resulting in default  
 NHAI without consulting lenders unilaterally withheld Annuities for the 
disputes with concessionaire.  
 Though Hybrid Annuity model appears to be assur ed recovery source for 
lenders compared to toll collection due to delay, non -maintenance of road etc., 
NHAI delays/refuses to disburse Annuity.  
 Based on concession agreement whenever lenders opt for termination of the 
contract there was undue delay in releasing the eligible amount to lenders  
 Authorities not accepting cost overrun loans for arriving claim amount at the 
time of termination.  
 While processing termination of claim lenders, NHAI  deducts various counter 
claims without proper justification /consultation with lenders.  
 In some incomplete projects instead of engaging L1 concessionaire, NHAI 
authorizes existing concessionaire to complete the work with escalation 
{clause out of the Annuity amount withheld. Banks are mute spectators and 
have to bear the loss for concessionaire's failure to complete the project. 
 Since securities are toll collection which is intangible, the scope for resolution 
through NCLT is bleak. 
173. IOB threw light upon the following issues it is facing with NHAI: 
 Loss in operation  in FY 13 due to drop in commercial traffic due to bifurcation of 
state of Andhra Pradesh and ban on sand mining in the region. Company has claimed 
compensation from NHAI on account of change in law to recover losses and has 
requested for deferral of reven ue share. NHAI has not accepted the claim due to 

70 
 
differences in claim computation methodology. Request for reversal of Revenue share 
was also rejected. Under Arbitration with NHAI. Verdict of Tribunal holds the key 
 NHAI suspended toll collection and operat ing rights of the company. The toll 
collection by NHAI will continue to be deposited in an escrow account maintained 
with the lead lender and the said funds will be utilised for servicing debt as per the 
escrow mechanism. The company has filed case against  the action of the NHAI in the 
Delhi High Court. 
174. IOB further briefed the Committee about the regulatory support required by the banks 
to improve lending in road infrastructure sector. In this regard, it suggested the following: 
 Special Restructuring m echanism is to be implemented for Road sector without 
changing the asset classification.  
 Any change in repayment programme should not be treated as Restructuring as Road 
projects are depending on the toll collections which may differ from initial projections  
 Provision requirement in Road sector should be relaxed for certain period.  
 Extension of COD should be permitted based on the actual basis, without restrictions 
on number of times. (presently max two times).  
 When resolution plan is accepted and imple mented as per guidelines, the account 
upgradation and reversal of provisions to be allowed. 
175. The Committee recommends that the  Ministry may thoroughly examine the 
issues mentioned by Indian Overseas Bank and take effective steps to address the same. 
176. Indian Bank informed the Committee about the following issues faced in lending in 
road sector: 
 Inability or delay in getting the required land for the road project lead to partial 
completion based on the land availability, and delay in declaring COD/PC OD due 
to non -availability of land to the extent required as per concession agreement 
result in account being declared as NPA. There must be a provision to declare 
PCOD based on the completion of the project if the delay is beyond the control of 
the concessionaire.  
 Lower level of Traffic and diversion of traffic due to parallel roads developed 
subsequently resulting in lower revenues affecting the repayment capacity in toll 
projects.  

71 
 
 Now under HAM model land availability is ensured and Government will bear 
traffic risk as the developer receives annuity payment.  
 Non acceptance of the increase in the overall project cost at the tim e of sanction / 
execution vis-à-vis the cost accepted by the authorities at the time of conceiving 
the project resulting in disp ute in the settlement in case of termination of the 
concession agreement. Risks related to increase in raw material cost.  This is 
largely mitigated in the HAM model as the project cost is adjusted for inflation at 
regular intervals during construction period. 
 Delay due to COVID. 
177. The Committee reiterates the recommendation it made in para 1 53 of this 
Report and desires that steps may be taken to ensure that project cost is revised to 
factor in inflation as well as changed raw material costs, in case of  project delays which 
are caused by reasons other than the concessionaire’s sub-optimal performance. 
178. PNB informed the Committee that long-term loans sanctioned to Road sector are 
turning into non-performing assets (NPAs) due to various reasons:- 
a) Financial difficulties inherent in Road project such as acquisition of long segment 
Right of Way (RoW), environmental clearance and associated with resettlement 
issues as well as unforeseen weather and geological condition. As a result due to 
project delay increase both cost and time overrun. 
b) Lack of dispute resolution is one of the major hurdles in clearing stressed or delayed 
projects 
c) Substantial risk associated with unpredictability of revenue and toll receipt due to 
competing route, unexpected revision of to ll rates, waiver of toll fee for certain 
segments and availability of connecting roads. 
d) Non infusion / delayed infusion of promoter contribution 
e) Delay in approval and release of funds in case of Change of Scope (COS) / utility 
shifting and delay also in decision making at various level. 
f) Shortage of skilled manpower and equipment in large number of projects. Poor 
quality Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
g) Recently Awarded project under HAM address the issue in certain extent. 
 

72 
 
179. The Committee recommends that t he Ministry may take appropriate steps to 
ensure training facilities to tackle the shortage of skilled manpower in road projects. 
Assessment may be made regarding the present shortfall in terms of human resources 
in road infrastructure sector and a detailed plan may be made to address the same. 
180. The Committee desires the Ministry to look into the issue of delay in approval 
and release of funds in case of Change of Scope/ utility shifting, as well as in delay 
caused in road projects due to delays in deci sion making at various levels. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may prescribe reasonable but fixed timelines 
for decision-making by the Concessioning Authority at different levels. 
181.  Union Bank furnished the following list of issues faced by the banks in financing road 
projects: 
A. Data not available on site of the authority/company financials:  At the time of 
assessment of credit limits, banks have to rely on the data submitted by the 
company. There is no validation of the same from the authority. 
B. Excessive dependence on outside agencies: Infrastructure projects are highly 
technology driven and becoming more and more complex in nature in view of 
rapid changes in technology. Banks run the risk of excessive dependence on 
outside agencies to evaluate the techno economic viability of the projects. 
C. Delay in achieving financial closure in HAM projects: With a few issues like low 
equity requirements on the part of the developer under the HAM model, financial 
closures have become difficult, thus explaining  the over 10 -month delay. Some 
bidders have won a disproportionate number of projects and as a result they now 
have orders that add up to over three times their annual revenue, creating 
difficulties in achieving financial closure.  
D. No clear policy for redr essal of complaints: There are delays in redressal of 
complaints/grievances by authority. Clear policy at NHAI, HQ level in dealing 
with contractual disputes to be in place. 
182. Union Bank submitted the following g eneral suggestions to improve funding tow ards 
Road Projects: 
a) Increase in promoters’ contribution and corporate guarantees of sponsors to be 
stipulated to improve skin in the game in HAM projects. 

73 
 
b) Setting up of Infrastructure Debt Funds (investment vehicles which can be set up as 
NBFCs and are use d for investments in infrastructure projects) to overcome the 
sectorial ceiling issues being faced by Banks. 
c) Banks are not involved in Bid Document stage and allotment of contracts. The 
Bidding criteria mainly focus on meeting the bidding parameters rather  than 
capacity of the bidders in completion of the project. A qualitative approach may be 
adopted in bidding stage. 
d) Recently revised Model Concession Agreement guidelines by MORTH may 
address this issue to a greater extent. 
e) A National Level Infra Authority  (like RERA) may also be considered for the 
purpose of redressal of complaints/grievances. 
f) Provision should be made for signing of Supplementary Agreement for balance 
works and issue Completion Certificate to avoid inordinate delay in identifying and 
sanction of Change of Scope (COS) / Extension of Time (EOT). 
g) Indian government has set up a PMG (Project Monitoring Group) in January, 2013 
to oversee and ensure speedy implementation of large value infrastructure projects 
that are of national importance. The p roject funding Banks and FIs though are one 
of the key stakeholders, currently they are not part of the PMG. It is suggested that 
these Banks and FIs may be included in the PMG meetings as observers/invitees. 
h) Sharing information on line in public domain of  projects along with the reasons for 
the costs and time overruns. This mechanism will lead to greater accountability by 
fixing responsibility on the concerned stake holders and reduce the delays in project 
implementation. 
i) Automation of all toll plazas to c apture the toll revenue collections effectively by 
the banks, avoiding diversion of funds. 
j) Project site inspections at periodical intervals by banks and financial institutions 
should also include NHAI and other related government agencies so that the 
collective responsibility of all stake holders in project review and monitoring is 
reflected in letter and spirit. 
183. The Committee takes note of the issue faced by Union Bank wherein it has to 
rely on the data submitted by the company alone, at the time of a ssessment of credit 

74 
 
limits. The Committee strongly recommends the creation of a well -maintained central 
database keeping track of the projects executed by different concessionaires across the 
country. The database may have important details like the presen t status of the current 
projects being executed by a concessionaire, the quality of their past works, financial 
liabilities (if any) of the Concessionaire as per the Concessioning Authorities. The 
Committee feels that having such a database would not only help bankers make more 
informed decisions while lending in the road sector, but it would also help 
Concessioning Authorities to take a more nuanced approach while considering bids 
submitted by the concessionaire for any given road project. 
184. The Committ ee desires the Ministry to look into the delays being faced in 
achieving financial closure in HAM projects and make suitable amendments to the 
MCA for the HAM projects, if necessary. The Committee further feels that the Ministry 
should review its current t ender awarding methodologies and include safeguards to 
ensure that the number and size of projects awarded to concessionaires are reasonable 
enough with their financial capabilities, present annual revenue etc. 
185. The Committee recommends that the Minist ry may set up Infrastructure Debt 
Funds and consider providing some special tax benefits to attract investment from the 
general public in the road sector. 
186. Department of Financial Services, in its written note, informed the Committee that the 
following challenges are faced by Banks and Financial Institutions in the Road Sector, 
particularly in BOT: 
a) Land Acquisition Issues:   
 Non-Availability of Land or details thereof – The detailed status of land 
acquisition is not made available to all bidders at tendering stage, to enable it to 
assess construction risk and factor in the same in the Bidding Cost. In several 
instances, project construction gets delayed due to non-availability of land for actual 
construction purpose. 
 Right of Way (RoW) – Right of Way is the total land area acquired for the 
construction of the roadway. Delays in land acquisition have led to non- availability 
of contiguous stretch for construction and thereby resulting in time and cost 
overruns in the project. All stakeholders suffer due to lack of preparedness with 
respect to 100% contiguous encroachment free and required clearances, before 
initiating the bidding process. 

75 
 
 Land de-scoping in a project- Appointed Date (ADs) in projects, has in the past 
been given when a significant part of the land was not available. In case, balance 
land is not made available to the concessionaire (developers), concession agreement 
provides for descoping (removing from the scope of work) of the same from Project. 
However, banks have informed that the process of getting balance land descoped is 
cumbersome owing to delays in approval from project authority, disputes between 
the developer and project authority, which hampers the viability of the project.  
 Delay in receipt of approval - Concessionaire is required to seek separate 
approvals for mining and installation of Plant & Machinery from respective state 
governments. Delay in receipt of approval restriction on sand mining, soil 
excavation affects project completion timelines. 
b) Traffic Risk: Developers / Lenders remain wary of investing in toll projects, given the high-
risk factors associated with estimating toll collection and changing traffic flows on account of 
new roads / expressways coming-up nearby. Prospective Revenue generation estimate are not 
in line with estimates based on Actual status (Traffic Vertical Study Estimate) which effects the 
toll collection and puts the project under stressed condition. There have been instances wherein 
there was over 30% gap in actual toll collection and assumed toll collection at the time of bid, 
leading to loan defaults. 
c) Fixed Concession period: In BoT Projects, any delay in construction period reduces operation 
/ tolling period by same duration thereby impacting the Project viability vis-à-vis., increased 
project cost and increases the debt burden leaving the project totally unviable for all the 
stakeholders. Hence in line with HAM, in case of BOT projects also, the operation period 
should start on the project becoming operational.  
d) Termination Payment Shortfall Risk: Detailed Project Report (DPR) prepared by the project 
authority does form not part of the tender documents and at times, it is 12 months older. The 
project authority recognizes the project cost based on the DPR which does not factor in the 
latest cost of construction, traffic estimates etc. The lenders fund the project based on the 
project cost assessed by them based on actual cost of construction, which leads to variation in 
NHAI project Cost and Lender’s Project cost. In case of termination, as the payments are linked 
to NHAI assessed Project costs which are generally substantially lower than the actual project 
costs, it leads to a high under-recovery for debt and equity during termination. 
e) Termination Payment for refinancing cases –In case BOT model, if the lender’s debt has 
been refinanced/ restructured, which involves extension of repayment period based on revised 
cash flows projections, NHAI does not consider termination payment as per revised repayment 

76 
 
schedule. No termination payment is available to lenders beyond maturity date of original loan. 
This result in shortfall in termination payment and classification of loan as unsecured exposure. 
 
f) Arbitration: In case of arbitration, even after award of arbitration in favor of concessionaire, it 
is observed that NHAI invariably appeals against the arbitration award in high court, which 
leads to delay in payment of lender’s dues.  
g) Stuck Road Projects: In case of stuck projects i.e. project termination prior to achieving COD, 
MoRTH has policy to pay value of work or 90% of debt due whichever is lower. However, no 
payment is made until arbitration matter is settled with SPV. Thus, lenders do not benefit from 
the policy. Hence, payment to lender should be linked to settlement of arbitration claims with 
lenders. 
h) Bank Guarantees (BGs) issued by Banks – It is observed that in case of stalled projects, 
authorities encash the BGs or seek extension of BG beyond Defects Liability Period (DLP) due 
to non-settlement / approval of final bills. As BGs, also form part of the exposure of the 
lenders, any encashment or extension of BG affects the cash flows of the already stressed 
projects, thereby increasing lender’s stressed debt.   
187. DFS stated that some of the abovementioned challenges in the BOT Projects have been 
substantially addressed by HAM Model.. However, the Banks/FIs have informed that the 
Concessionaire/Developers are facing following challenges in HAM Projects which need to be 
addressed by MoRTH:-  
a) Interest rate on annuities in HAM projects: Model Concession agreement of HAM project 
has been amended to change the interest rate on annuities from the erstwhile Bank rate + 3% to 
Average MCLR + 1.25%. However, the same has been effected only for new HAM projects, 
whereas the steep decline in Bank rate over last 2-3 years, has resulted in many existing 
projects becoming unviable. Further, the Interest Rate on annuities linked to MCLR may be 
fixed for a period of say 5 yrs, to enable the Lender’s factor in the same while assessing the 
project cost.  
b) Land Acquisition & De-scoping of Land – Project Authority declare the appointed date even 
when the 80% of the land is not fully acquired. It may be ensured that 80% of the land is fully 
acquired with clear title and free from any encumbrances before declaring Appointed Date. 
Further, even though there is a provision that allows for descoping of the unavailable land from 
the overall project and issuing a partial completion date if the developer completes the project 
on the available land, disputes between the developer and the government often hinder a quick 
resolution. Quick reassessment and approval of revised bid project cost post descoping of the 

77 
 
unavailable land poses a challenge from a credit perspective as delays in the former can result 
in deferral in term debt disbursement by lenders and in turn impede project progress. 
188. DFS further stated that apart from the above, following issues may also be addressed 
by MoRTH :-  
a) Lack of alternative funding sources: Long tenor financing from non-conventional funding 
sources are subject to various limitations including several regulatory requirements, like IRDAI 
(Investment) Regulations, Investment guidelines for EPFO and other PF trusts, rating 
requirements like minimum “AA” credit rating on a standalone basis or with Government 
support for raising bonds, higher interest rates and high carry cost during project 
implementation stage etc. Thus, MoRTH may consider having a Scheme for Credit Guarantee 
in this regard to facilitate bond issuing companies/ PE investors to participate in road sector 
financing.  
b) Introduction of Insurance Product for Termination Payments in Infrastructure Projects may be 
considered to address issue of payment in stuck projects in consultation with IRDA.  
c) Lack of a Tripartite Agreement between Lenders, Concession aire and the Concessioning 
Authority – Lender being providers of about 70% of the project cost, are the major financial 
stakeholders in an infrastructure project. However, PPP concession agreements are executed 
among the concessioning authority and the pri vate sector developer. Therefore, lenders are 
unable to pre -empt any unilateral action adversely affecting them. Thus, there is a need for 
Tripartite Agreements between Lenders, Concessionaire and the Concessioning Authority. 
Such a system is followed in c ountries like the UK and Australia. This would provide comfort 
to domestic lenders. This would also act as fulfilment of a basic condition for enabling the 
overseas lenders to participate. 
d) Lenders to be a part of Project Monitoring Group (PMG) - The Project Monitoring Group 
(PMG) is an institutional mechanism set up for the expedited resolution of issues and regulatory 
bottlenecks in projects with investments upwards Rs.500 crores in India. It seeks to enlist the 
unresolved project issues in respect of all mid and large sized Public, Private and PPP Projects 
and takes up fast-tracking of approvals, sectoral policy issues and removal of bottlenecks in 
expeditious commissioning. Lenders are not part of said group. Inclusion of Lenders, which are 
the largest financial stakeholders in any project, in the PMG would go a long way in enhancing 
the confidence of lenders in supporting such projects. 
189. The Committee takes note of the plethora of challenges faced by Banks/ 
Financial Institutions in the road sectors, as shared by the Banks/FIs and DFS. The 

78 
 
Committee is of the considered view that lenders play an integral role in allowing PPP 
projects in road sector.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
hold periodic meetings with the lenders to learn about the issues they are facing and 
address the same to the extent possible by making suitable amendments to the existing 
provisions. In this regard, an effective coordination mechanism may be established with 
the lenders, the concessionaires, RBI as well as the Ministry of Finance. 
190.  The Committee observes that many banks and financial institutions raised 
several issues regarding the present provisions for termination payment. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that NHAI may review its current p rovisions for 
termination payments in consultation with the concessionaires and the lenders, and 
work out a mechanism to assess a fair value to be paid in case of termination of a road 
project. Doing so would help reduce the number of cases that go to arbi tration and 
litigation, thereby resulting in minimiz ation of delays on account of disputes arising out 
of termination payments.  
NPAs in Road Sector 
191. SBI further informed the Committee that the total outstanding of Banks to road sector 
is Rs. 1,94,921 crore, of which SBI’s share is about Rs. 55,941 crore i.e. 29% of total 
outstanding. As on June 30, 2020, total exposure of SBI to road sector is Rs.71,546 Cr 
(outstanding Rs,55,941 Cr). The road exposure of SBI increased from Rs.51,904 Cr 
(June-19) to Rs. 71,546 Cr (June -20) with growth of 38%. SBI has extended credit 
facilities to 170 entities in road sector and major exposure in its portfolio includes NHAI 
(~Rs,37,000 Cr), Nagpur Mumbai Super Communication Expressway of Maharashtra 
road development corpor ation (Rs.8,000 Cr) and operational road projects viz. IRB 
Mumbai Pune Expressway (Rs.5,000 Cr), third TOT bundle of Cube Highways (Rs.3,500 
Cr) first TOT bundle of Macquarie (Rs.2,000 Cr),) and MSRDC Sealink (Rs.1,650Cr) . 
Total stressed assets of SBI in R oads sector is around Rs.7,500 Cr and NPAs stood at 
Rs.4,077 Cr as on 30.06.2020 which is about 7% of outstanding credit to the road sector.  
SBI has put in-place well-defined lending policy for financing NHAI HAM Projects. Till 
date, SBI has sanctioned 7 H AM projects having aggregate Project Cost of Rs.10,493 Cr 
with total debt requirement of Rs.4,490C r (SBI share: Rs.3,779 Cr). The Bank is in 
discussions with NHAI / State Authorities for funding of large -scale greenfield projects 
such as Delhi Mumbai Expressway, Ganga Expressway etc. To ensure adequate supply of 

79 
 
credit to road sector, SBI has recently increased its internal exposure ceiling for Road 
Sector by Rs. 24,500 Cr. 
 
Source: SBI Note on Role of Highways in Nation Building 
192. The Committee notes t he exposure of SBI to the road sector and applauds the 
recent increase made by SBI in its internal exposure ceiling for road sector by Rs. 
24,500 crores. The data shared by SBI, however, points to the dwindling lending figures 
of the Banking Sector as a wh ole, wherein if one were to exclude SBI, the banking 
sector’s exposure to road sector has declined from Rs. 1,45,326 crores in June, 2018 to 
Rs. 1,38,980 crores in June, 2020. The Committee feels that lending institutions play an 
indispensable role in financing the road infrastructure sector in the country and desires 
that the Ministry may take strong note of this. The Ministry may address the issues 
faced by lenders in the road sector, many of which have been shared by them with the 
Committee, to ensure th eir support in funding the future growth of the road sector in 
the country. 
193. The Committee notes that SBI’s stressed assets in road sector are about Rs. 4,077 
crores as on 30 th June, 2020, which is about 7% of the bank’s overall outstanding credit 
to the road sector. This is the best figure in terms of NPAs in road sector, as compared 
to the data regarding NPAs furnished to the Committee by the other banks/financial 
institutions. The Committee recommends that other banks/financial institutions should 
look into the methodologies followed by State Bank of India while extending loans to 
concessionaires in road infrastructure sector, and apply the same in their own 
institution in order to bring their respective NPA levels down. 


80 
 
194. In its written note on th e subject, Central Bank of India submitted the following 
reasons for slowdown in financing fresh road projects by the bank: 
i. Central Bank is under PCA.  So there is restriction in fresh financing related to 
external rating, internal rating and risk weight. 
ii. NPA percentage in Road sector is very high compared to other sectors and a limited 
exposure is being taken judicially as the sector is under ‘Watch List’ as per our Risk 
Management policy.  
iii. Scarcity of Capital : The existing capital is being used for promot ing Retail and 
MSME. 
iv. In order to mitigate the issue of ALM mismatch of the tenor of deposits and the 
duration of infrastructure loans, the sale of long -term infrastructure bonds had been 
permitted by RBI, but few banks had exercised the option. RBI is expe cted to 
minimize certain “regulatory pre -emptions” to nudge banks into raising more long -
term resources. 
v. Why accounts became NPA in past?: 
a. Delay in acquisition of land and right of way.  
b. Delay in shifting utilities 
c. Construction of roads running parallel to  the highways, thereby impacting the toll 
revenue.  
d. Delay in encroachment removal & slum rehabilitation 
e. Delay in approval of design and drawings by the project authority 
f. Various legal issues intervene during the implementation stage of the project 
which may lead to stall the project. 
g. Getting clearances from various authorities. (Environment clearance, tree cutting, 
shifting of utilities) 
h. Delay in getting approval from Railways for Rail over Bridge. 
i. The need for infrastructure financing in the country is hug e.  However, the non -
bank sources (such as bond financing) have made insignificant contribution in this 
respect, forcing the banks to shoulder a large part of the burden of the financing 
needs. 
195. Central Bank further stated that d espite various measures  taken by Govt. to push 
investments in Road Sectors, road construction so far in the current financial year has been 
lagging, attributable in large measure to the lockdown led disruptions, mainly, the 

81 
 
displacement of labour. The total projects announced in  road sectors in the past 6 months 
have been the lowest.          
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year ending             31-03-2019         31-03-2020          30-11-2020 
Exposure 5287.00 4328.00 4773.00 
NPA 2681.00 2316.00 2297.00 
NPA% 50.71% 53.51% 48.13% 
Road Sector Exposure of Central Bank of India 
196. The Committee is alarmed by the high level of NPA in Central Bank of India’s 
road sector exposure, which has been at such highs even before the start of the COVID -
19 pandemic. The Committee feels that this might poi nt to grant of loans without high 
quality in -depth analysis of the inherent risk in extending the loans, and should be 
looked into on priority basis by the bank so as to prevent this from snowballing into a 
bigger problem in the future. 
197. Canara Bank submitted the following details regarding the NPAs in road sector before 
and Coronavirus pandemic and after it: 
 Rs. In Crore 
Sector Dec19 Mar20 Jun20 Sep20 Dec20 
Road  2466.82 2242.62 1893.14 1476.47 1430.63 
198. On the issue of NPAs in road infrastructur e sector, Canara bank stated that NPA in 
the industry is primarily on account of the Company not being able to generate cash 
flows as originally envisaged at the time of starting the project. Project cash flows depend 
upon various factors including traffic / foot fall. Loans are sanctioned as per the risk 
appetite of individual Banks. Bank considers various aspects while  examining the 
projects under Road Sector which includes 
 Credit profile of the Concessionaire 
 Execution capability of the Concessionaire 
 Financial flexibility of the Concessionaire 
 Commitment to support the project in exigencies 
 Track record for completing the projects within envisaged time and cost parameter 
and signing of fixed price EPC contract with reputed EPC contractor or sponsor 
having good creditworthiness. 

82 
 
 Availability of Right of Way (RoW) 
 Status of clearances including forest clearance 
 Complexity of the project road in terms of presence of structural work and terrain 
 Stage of project progress and current project progress against stipulated progress 
 Sponsor support undertaking to fund cost overrun and any cash deficit during 
under construction phase (including due to delay in release of grant) 
 Corporate guarantee of sponsor till COD and receipt of first annuity 
 Creation of Debt Servi ce Reserve Account (DSRA) especially prior to 
commercial operations date (COD) 
199. Canara Bank further submitted that it has adopted Board approved policies on 
financing MSMEs and Corporates (including project finance), and  appraisal of such 
projects is done based on amount and complexity by specialized departments. Also, there 
are certain benchmarks which have to be adhered for considering a particular proposal, in 
normal course, and powers to permit deviations in such benchmarks are vested with 
certain d elegated authorities. Hence, Bank normally  exercises the required credit 
prudence while handling such proposals. Besides, NPA may also be registered on  
account on non-realization of book-debts, failure in managing the business efficiently by 
promoters, int ernal and  external demographic factors, natural phenomenon, regulatory 
reasons etc. 
200. IDBI Bank, in its written note on the subject, informed the Committee that it has 
sanctioned loans to various companies from time to time in the Road Sector and presently has 
exposure in 36 accounts with outstanding of about Rs.7911 crore [FB -Rs.7701 crore, NFB -
Rs.210 crore]. Of the above, 15 accounts are NPA with Gross Principal FB Outstanding of 
about Rs.5719 crore [FB -Rs.5719 crore, NFB -Rs.0.04 crore]. IDBI further s tated that the 
Bank is under PCA frame work from May 2017. In view of the same, it is not taking any 
additional exposure in any companies, other than small exposures upto Rs.25 crore, as per the 
relaxations granted by RBI. Reasons for the accounts becoming  NPA, inter-alia, include the 
following: 
 Liquidity continues to be a major challenge for the developers / contractors; 
 Delay in land acquisition / environmental clearances are leading to delays in project 
implementation; 
 Lot of Gap in the Original project cost and Actual cost; 

83 
 
 Gap in envisaged and actual cash flows from the Projects; 
 Delay in grant of various approvals like Extension of Time, Change of Scope, 
Extension of Concession Period, etc.  
 Authorities not approving increased cost leading to dispute a nd Arbitration, Court 
litigation. There is no set procedure for deciding on Arbitration in respect of projects 
granted by State Govt Authorities 
 WC limits are getting blocked in the stalled projects. BGs are being en -cashed by 
Authorities. 
 Large amount of receivables of developers stuck in various stages of litigation; 
 Delay in monetization of existing completed projects by the Developers. 
 50% of construction companies are having below investment grade credit ratings. 
201. IFCI Limited, in its written reply furnished to the Committee, informed that as per 
the current book of IFCI, out of the total outstanding exposure of Rs.1094 crore in 
road sector, sub -standard assets amounts to Rs.671 crore, which is 61% of the total 
road assets, which looks inflated prim arily due to exposure to the IL&FS road 
projects being classified as NPA. 
202. IFCI informed the Committee that there has not been any new NPA in the road 
sector post the Coronavirus pandemic for IFCI. On need basis, RBI’s 1st and 2nd 
moratorium (which was a good 6 months period) was extended and road projects financed 
by IFCI were able to recover in that period. 
203. The Committee is concerned to note that 61% of the outstanding exposure of 
IFCI is NPA. The Committee is not convinced by IFCI’s justificatio n that the 
figure looks inflated due to exposure to IL&FS road projects. The Committee 
recommends that RBI may look into the matter and consider issuing guidelines 
limiting the extent to which a financial institution/bank can lend the funds to a 
particular infrastructure company. 
204. IIFCL, in its written reply, stated that there is no adverse effect of COVID -19 on 
NPAs in Road sector,  as far as IIFCL is concerned , only one account slipped to NPA under 
Road Sector during the pandemic period. This is in vie w of the regulatory forbearances such 
as the moratorium, the standstill on asset classification and restructuring allowed in the 
context of the COVID-19 pandemic.  

84 
 
205. Indian Bank informed the Committee that due to COVID -19 relief measures initiated 
by RB I by way of moratorium, funding of interest during moratorium period etc, no fresh 
NPA added in Road and Hospitality sector and remained at the same level before and after 
pandemic. Indian Bank  furnished the following information regarding its NPAs in Road  
Sector: 
NPA in Road Sector: as on 31.12.2020         (Rs in crores) 
STANDARD NPA TOTAL % of 
NPA 
FB NFB Total FB NFB Total FB NFB Total 
18.97% 
7140 30 7170 1678 0.00 1678 8818 30 8848 
206. Indian Overseas Bank (IOB) furnished the following details rega rding their exposure 
in the road sector: 
IOB’s Experience: (As on 31.03.2020) 
Sector Gross Exposure Outstanding NPA NPA as % to 
Credit 
Outstanding 
Roads& Ports* Rs.8709 Cr Rs.6244.06 Cr Rs. 1776.31Cr 28.45% 
*Sector details for Road not available separate ly. As per BSR code, both Roads & Ports 
sectors are available together. 
207. PNB furnished the following details regarding its exposure to lending for 
Infrastructure – Road & Port: 
Particulars Sept-20 
Outstanding(Rs in Cr) 30400 
% of gross credit in the Industry 3.82% 
Ceiling of our Bank 6.00% 
Amount of NPA in Industry 4464.20 
% of total advance in the Industry 16.91% 
208. PNB further informed the Committee that during the FY 2019 -20, it has Sanctioned 
Rs.9877 Cr in Infra - Road sector. Similarly in FY  2020-21, PNB has sanctioned up to 

85 
 
Rs.2800 Cr in this sector till Dec 20.  It furnished the following details regarding the 
NPAs in road sector before the Coronavirus pandemic and after it: 
Particulars As on 31.12.2019  (Before 
Pandemic) 
As on 31.12.2020  (After 
Pandemic) 
No. Of Accounts 52 56 
Amount 5338.96 Cr 5304.39 Cr 
209. PNB stated that long -term loans sanctioned to Road sector are turning into non -
performing assets (NPAs) due to various reasons:- 
 Financial difficulties inherent in Road project such a s acquisition of long segment 
Right of Way (RoW), environmental clearance and associated with resettlement 
issues as well as unforeseen weather and geological condition. As a result due to 
project delay increase both cost and time overrun. 
 Lack of dispute resolution is one of the major hurdles in clearing stressed or delayed 
projects 
 Substantial risk associated with unpredictability of revenue and toll receipt due to 
competing route, unexpected revision of toll rates, waiver of toll fee for certain 
segments and availability of connecting roads. 
 Non infusion / delayed infusion of promoter contribution 
 Delay in approval and release of funds in case of Change of Scope (COS) / utility 
shifting and delay also in decision making at various level. 
 Shortage of skill ed manpower and equipment in large number of projects. Poor 
quality Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
 Recently Awarded project under HAM address the issue in certain extent. 
210. PNB submitted the following suggestions to improve lending in road infrastructure  
sector: 
 Delay in land acquisition/ Right of Way as encumbrance free land is not made 
available to the concessionaire during the initial stages of the project.  Land 
acquisition has proved to be a time consuming process. Further, clearances and 
permissions from the Ministry of Environment and Forests is a pre -requisite and take 

86 
 
considerable time. In such cases, sufficient extension of time is required to be given to 
the concessionaire. 
 In many accounts, PCOD/ COD have not been achieved due to various reasons . In 
these stuck projects, the authority i.e. NHAI/ PWD should compensate an equivalent 
amount of value of work done at the project site as full and final settlement 
immediately and the requisite clause should be incorporated in Model Concession 
Agreement. 
  MoRTH has issued guidelines on 09.03.2019 vide office memorandum for the 
resolution of stuck projects and these guidelines are applicable on NHAI NHIDCL or 
State PWD (i.e. Authority). Guidelines be effectively implemented for timely 
settlement between lenders, concessionaire and Authority. 
 The delay in construction leads to a large gap between the estimated project cost and 
actual expenditure on the road construction. The A uthority should consider the cost 
overruns and revise their estimate accordingly in  case of delayed projects so that the 
compensation is paid on realistic basis.  
 If tolling is stopped by effect of any order of court/ authority, then the Authority 
should compensate the lenders promptly.  
 It has been observed that Arbitration process take s approx. 4 -5 years or more for 
completion of the settlement process. Arbitration process should be speedy and should 
be completed in a time bound manner. Authority should not challenge arbitration 
awards routinely and usually honour the same.   
 Further Funding issues of the Industry can be sort out by developing bond market for 
long-term infra project financing supported by credit enhancement mechanisms to 
improve the credit ratings of the bonds which in turn will ease out the financial 
constraints in the sector. 
 Increasing availability of finance by creating dedicated institutions and providing 
viability gap funding helps to meet large scale funding requirement.  
 Our country needs to take the external assistance from the various sources like AIIB, 
ADB, NDB and OECF to accelerate the growth of the Road network.  
211. PNB further submitted that non -servicing of installments within 90 days renders the 
account NPA which has severe impact in the financials of the banking industry which attracts 
additional provisioning on such sub standard assets. 
212. Union Bank  stated that the bank ( Amalgamated Entity) has funded 127 
Toll/Annuity based projects. Details are as under: 

87 
 
Asset 
Classification 
No. of Accounts Limit  
(Rs. in crore) 
 % in total portfolio 
Standard 98 22016.95 83% 
Sub-Standard 2 550.00 2% 
Doubtful 24 3546.07 14% 
Loss 3 366.50 1% 
Total 127 26479.52 100% 
213. According to Union Bank, the main reasons for stress observed in its loans to the road 
sector are: 
 Many projects a warded in the past hit a road block due to delay in land acquisition 
and clearances.  
 Also, in cases of projects which saw completion there was a wide gap between actual 
traffic and initial estimates due to alternate routes, low maintenance. 
 Sluggish growt h industrial activity. There is a high correlation between growth in 
industrial activity and growth in road traffic. 
214. On the query regarding why promoters with failed projects still get financed by the 
banks, Canara Bank stated that Banks examine the p erformance/ status of all the projects 
of the group before examining any new proposal to the group. Fresh loans will be 
considered only after thoroughly examining the reasons for project failure earlier. 
215.  IIFCL suggested the following measures for controlling NPAs in road sector: 
Preventing slippage 
in the existing 
standard asset 
portfolio 
A more stringent risk assessment approach for projects and identification of early 
warning signals that could lead to potential default have been adopted. The learni ng 
points have been generated based on analysis of existing portfolio of NPA/ Stressed 
Assets. The learnings are being used for enhanced due diligence and to strengthen the 
appraisal, disbursement and monitoring processes. 
Expediting 
Resolution/Recovery 
in NPA/Stressed 
Accounts 
Focused recovery actions for each project inter-alia includes optimum recovery solutions 
by referring to NCLT under IBC 2016, pursuing termination payments, resorting the 
legal actions against the Borrower/Authorities, expediting th e settlements under stuck 
project circulars, addressing the delays in Arbitrations. 
Aggressive IIFCL has been making provisioning towards the stressed assets as well as NPAs. IIFCL 

88 
 
provisioning / 
technical write-off 
has adopted the Ind -AS accounting stand ards which mandates higher provisioning than 
the GAAP as well as RBI norms. Further, IIFCL has also stringent policies and direction 
of the Board for making the provisioning as well as resorting to technical write -offs well 
ahead of other lenders. 
Increasing the Book 
size by building 
quality assets 
At present, IIFCL’s portfolio is concentrated mainly on road and power sectors. IIFCL is 
proposing to scale up its assistance to other sectors and also to venture into new 
Infrastructure sectors so as to diversify risk and build quality assets to minimize the risks 
arising from the asset concentration. 
216. The Committee is happy to note that Covid -19 pandemic has not had any 
worsening impact on the NPAs in road sector. This points to the efficacy of the 
Covid-19 relief measures initiated by RBI as well as the Ministry. Despite the 
minimal effect of COVID-19 on worsening the road infrastructure sector loan assets 
of the banks, however, the Committee notes that most public sector banks have been 
carrying a substan tial percentage of NPA assets in the road sector since before the 
onset of the pandemic. The Committee feels that this is a cause of grave concern and 
would act as a deterrent to the banking sector from lending more funds to the road 
sector going forward. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
take serious notice of the issues and challenges faced by the financial institutions and 
take effective steps to address them to the extent possible, aiming for a desirable 
level of sharing of risk s between the Ministry, the concessionaire and the lending 
institution. 
217. The Committee sought to know from the various financial institutions and Public 
Sector Banks regarding how the NPA figures in the road sector for their institution 
compare with th at of their peers and in case their institution fared poorly in this regard, 
the Committee desired to know the reasons for the same. In the written replies received 
regarding this query, the Committee was informed that the Banks did not have the sector -
wise NPA details of the other Banks are not available in the public domain.  The 
Committee feels that sector -wise exposure information, at least in respect of public 
sector banks, should be made available in the public domain to permit more 
transparency and pu blic scrutiny. The Committee recommends that RBI must 
analyze the reasons behind substantial variations in the percentage of sub -standard 
assets of NPAs in different Public Sector financial institutions/banks and come up 
with stricter rules and regulations that must be followed while sanctioning long-term 
loans to the infrastructure sector. 

89 
 
218. The Committee further recommends that the financial institutions/banks with 
more than acceptable level of NPAs in the road sector should also undertake a study 
into the possible inefficacy of their existing mechanism to analyse the financial 
soundness as well as project execution  capabilities of the concessionaire. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the financial institutions/banks should revisit 
their policies i n this regard, while also having strong checks in place to ensure that 
there is no connivance between the bank's officials responsible for assessing the loan 
proposals received from the concessionaire, and the concessionaire themselves.  
219. It has come t o the notice of the Committee that in certain cases, the loan sought 
by the concessionaire is against a substantially higher project cost, as compared to 
the Total Project Cost approved by NHAI for the project which already includes 
provisions for contractor’s/concessionaire’s margin  and the financing cost for 
raising the amount needed to execute the project as well. The Committee 
recommends that the banks should treat proposals with such higher estimated 
project cost with great caution and make its own in -depth study into the estimated 
project cost, or hire an independent third party consultant for this purpose. The 
Ministry/NHAI should communicate with the banks the procedure followed by them 
to arrive at the Total Project Cost for any given project. While sanctioning any loans 
for a project while considering estimated cost to be substantially higher than the 
Ministry/NHAI's approved TPC, the banks may record its reasons in writing 
regarding why they feel that the higher project cost, against which  the loan is being 
sanctioned, is justified. 
220. The Committee notes the submission made by PNB that non -servicing of 
installments within 90 days renders the account NPA, which attracts additional 
provisioning on such sub -standard assets. The Committee recommends that RBI 
may look into the possibility of setting a higher limit for long -term infrastructure 
projects, since unfortunately as for now, delays of several months is not too 
uncommon in infrastructure projects in India, often for no fault of the 
concessionaire. 
221. The Committee feels that the banks should give due importance to a 
concessionaire's performance in similar projects in the past. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry, in coordination with State PWDs, may 

90 
 
maintain a database o f all road contractors and concessionaires with details 
regarding their performance in past projects, the quality of work etc. Such a 
database may be made public so as to make it easy for the financial institutions and 
banks to analyse the past performance  of their prospective borrowers. The 
Committee believes that doing so would help prevent the banks from lending to 
poorly performing contractors/concessionaires. 
Loss of revenue due to construction of parallel roads 
222. During the meeting of the Committee  held on 8th January, 2021 on lending aspects of 
road sector, various financial institutions raised the issue of construction of parallel highways 
which hampers the toll revenue of the existing highway project, which depending upon the 
mode of implementati on of the project, impacts NHAI, the concessionaire as well as the 
financiers. 
223. In this regard, SBI, in its written reply, informed the Committee that various State 
Road Development Corporation / State nodal agencies, as part of their plan, develop new  or 
augment existing state roads which acts as a parallel route to National Highways resulting in 
traffic leakage / reduction in initial toll revenues estimates thereby affecting project viability. 
State Support Agreement should be implemented in letter an d spirit to avoid such issues. 
State Government may be required to offer suitable monetary compensation to developers for 
loss in revenue on account of parallel route or suitable extension in concession period should 
be offered to ensure project viability at the time of original due -diligence state remain intact. 
In many cases, there may not be a direct parallel road for a small stretch as per the definition 
provided under the Concession Agreement/ State Support Agreement, but when observed 
over a long dist ance, the impact is found significant. For example, a new road between two 
Metro Cities which are more than 1000 kms apart, may permanently divert the traffic from 
small stretches that are financed by lenders. SBI stated that in its experience, the signifi cant 
revenue contributors are long distance vehicles, and once diverted, the toll revenue drops 
significantly. NHAI may have to take lenient view while charging/demanding its share in the 
form of premium payments in these projects, unless repayment of lender’s debt is assured. To 
mitigate traffic related risks which are posed by parallel roads or competing infrastructure, 
NHAI has come -up with Hybrid Annuity Projects which have predetermined cash -flows in 
form of inflation adjusted annuities. For toll proje cts, large TOT bundles also provide risk 

91 
 
diversification to lenders and additional comfort is available in the form of adequate 
termination payments. 
224. IDBI Bank, in its written reply, suggested that a provision for providing interim grant 
by authority may be included in the concession agreement in lieu on extension of concession 
agreement in the event of shortfall in traffic. This will help the concessionaire to tide over the 
cash flow shortfall. It further stated that claims due to triggers (such as al ternate road) as per 
the Concession Agreements lodged by project companies need to be processed expeditiously, 
so that cash flows are not impacted. IDBI Bank opined that  integrated planning approach 
[among NHAI. Morth, State Government, Local Authorities]  towards development of local 
roads at the time of designing the Highways/ Expressways would resolve the issue. 
225. IFCI Limited, in its written reply, informed the Committee that parallel toll free roads 
are generally constructed by the State Governments , despite having signed the state support 
agreement with NHAI and the private road developer while building national highways. As a 
solution, it must be made mandatory for the states to take approval from NHAI regarding any 
development/expansion of roads, to the extent that such roads are not competing with any 
national highway under PPP mode in that region. 
226. IIFCL suggested the following steps to mitigate the risks arising out of construction of 
roads parallel to existing highway projects: 
a) Honouring of State Support Agreement (SSA) in true spirit.  
b) Wherever, SSAs are not being honoured, appropriate deductions for that particular should 
be made from the common central pool account.   
c) Project could be terminated with suitable compensation to the developer and the lenders. 
227. Indian Bank opined that the commitment of not building parallel road is most important 
characteristic of the agreement after State Support in Land acquisition. The reduction in 
traffic estimates is a discouraging factor for the concessionaire. In many cases these parallel 
roads may already be in usage by the locals before the construction of new tollways. State 
Highway Authorities generally maintain such roads. The Bank suggested that a proper traffic 
study will help avoid such issues before building such parallel load. The agencies which build 
such parallel road should either compensate the revenue loss or share revenue.  
228. The Committee feels that the construction of roads parallel to an existing road 
stretch with toll pl azas, points to lack of foresight and coordination between the 
Ministry and the State Governments. Construction of such parallel roads causes a loss 

92 
 
of revenue to the concessionaire without any fault of their own. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should come up with guidelines that may be enforced 
across the country to avoid such construction to the maximum extent possible. In the 
event where construction of such parallel road is not avoidable, efforts may be taken to 
ensure that the concessionair e does not face losses on account of decrease in traffic 
volume for no fault of their own. This would act as a confidence building measure and 
would help attract higher bids for the Ministry/NHAI’s future plans for monetization of 
the existing road assets. 
229. The Committee feels that the suggestion furnished by Indian Bank, regarding 
making the agency responsible for the construction of parallel road pay for the losses 
faced in revenue of the existing road, seems to be a feasible solution to this problem. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may implement this with 
introduction of appropriate rules/laws in order to deter construction of parallel roads, 
and in cases such thing is unavoidable, paying compensation to the concessionaire. 
Close monitoring of awarded road projects 
230. One Member of the Committee pointed out that the contractors often sublet their 
works to a smaller contractor who further sublets it to even smaller contractors, with each 
contractor taking their own cut, thus leading to sub-standard road quality. He was of the view 
that banks and financial organizations that extend loans to contractors, should have 
monitoring authorities to keep a check on such activities, and that banks should have 
financing system for smaller co ntractors as well. He further opined that the present practice 
of awarding the road construction contract to the lowest bidder should be done away with. 
231. On the issue of contractors subletting to others who do sub -standard work and lenders 
not monitori ng the same, Canara Bank stated that proper mechanism is put  in place to 
monitor the progress of  the projects funded. Further besides appointment of Lenders 
Independent Engineer, Banks also appoint Agencies for Specialized Monitoring as well. 
Releases are made after receipt of project progress certificate, certificate for contribution 
of promoter’s equity etc. to ensure progress in the project as envisaged. It further stated 
that it monitors the progress of work done in respect of term loans granted by obtaining 
PIPR (Project Implementation progress report), LIE certificate (Lender’s Independent 
Engineer) certificate etc. and Bank guarantee progress reports, in case of Bank 
Guarantees issued. Further, the government departments verify the  progress of the 

93 
 
project by involving engineers appointed by them. 
232. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should break down big road 
projects into smaller stretches, making it optional for interested parties to choose the 
number of stretches for which they are willin g to bid upon. This would encourage 
smaller contractors to participate in the bidding process, while also not dissuading big 
players from bidding for the entire project. 
233. The Committee further desires that the Ministry may incorporate provisions for 
more frequent quality checks in road projects that are sub -let by the main contractor, 
since the earning margin available with the sub -contractors in such cases is much 
thinner, making these projects more prone to lapses in quality of materials used as well 
as failure to follow established guidelines for construction. 
BHARATMALA PARIYOJANA 
234.  The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approved the implementation of 
an umbrella programme for the National Highways – “Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase-I” in 
its meet ing held on 24th October 2017, for construction/ up -gradation of National 
Highways of 34,800 kms length over a period of 5 years (2017 -18 to 2021 -22) at an 
estimated outlay of Rs. 5,35,000 Crore. The programme focuses on optimizing efficiency 
of freight an d passenger movement across the country by bridging critical infrastructure 
gaps through effective interventions like development of Economic Corridors, Inter 
Corridors and Feeder Routes, National Corridor Efficiency Improvement, Border and 
International C onnectivity roads, Coastal and Port Connectivity roads and Green -field 
expressways. Multi-modal integration is also built into this program. Special attention has 
been paid to fulfilling the connectivity needs of backward and tribal areas, areas of 
economic activity, places of religious and tourist interest, border areas, coastal areas and 
trade routes with neighbouring countries. 
235. The Ministry, in its written note, informed the Committee that the scope of Phase -I of 
Bharatmala Pariyojana includes development of: 
Sr. 
No. 
Scheme Length 
(km) 
Cost (Rs. 
crore) 
1.  Economic Corridors 9,000 120,000 
2.  Inter-Corridors & feeder roads 6,000 80,000 

94 
 
3.  National Corridor Efficiency 
improvement 
5,000 100,000 
4.  Border & International connectivity 
roads 
2,000 25,000 
5.  Coastal & port connectivity roads 2,000 20,000 
6.  Expressways 800 40,000 
 Sub Total 24,800 3,85,000 
7. Ongoing Projects, including 
NHDP* 
10,000 1,50,000 
 Total 34,800 5,35,000 
 *-balance works under various phases of National  Highways Development Project (NHDP) shall be 
fully subsumed under the proposed Bharatmala Pariyojana, to remove overlap and undertake 
comprehensive development. Balance works under NH(O), SARDP -NE, EAP & LWE schemes would 
continue under relevant schemes. 
236, The Financing Plan indicating the source of Fund upto 2021 -22 for Phase -I of 
 Bharatmala Pariyojana and other schemes for development of roads/ NHs are as 
 follows:  
 
Sr. 
No. 
Source Estimated fund  
(Rs. Crore) 
1 CRF earmarked for NH 2,37,024 
2 GBS (SARDP, EAP Counter Part etc.) 59,973 
3 Expected monetisation of NHs through TOT (Toll-Operate-Transfer) 34,000 
4 PBFF (Toll- NHAI) 46,048 
5 Market Borrowings 2,09,279 
6 Private Investment (PPP) 1,06,000 
 
Total  6,92,324 
237. Expenditure / Release dur ing the last five years and current year for NHDP/ 
Bharatmala Phase-I:-  
Amount in Rs. crore 
Year CRF Toll TOT Out of Total IEBR Total Pvt. Sector Grand 

95 
 
Cess Remittances Remittances NH(O) 
fund 
(GBS) Raised Budgetary Investment Total 
2014-15 9,565 5,448 
 
600 15,613 3,343 23,225 19,232 42,457 
2015-16 21,018 6,500 
 
370 27,888 23,281 70,583 29,770 1,00,353 
2016-17 7,410 7,500 
 
5,389 20,299 33,118 79,578 16,029 95,607 
2017-18 15,429 8,462 
 
3,900 27,792 50,533 87,071 16,501 1,03,571 
2018-19 16,567 9,570 9,682 
 
35,819 61,217 97,819 20,618 1,18,437 
2019-20 15,733 10,600 5,000 1,150 32,483 74,988 1,07,471 21,926 1,29,397 
2020-
21* 
7,379 3,875   11,254 6,750 18,004 3,448 21,901 
*Till July, 2020 
238. The Ministry, in its written note, furnished the following i nformation regarding the 
status of appraisal and award of Projects under Bharatmala Pariyojana: -  
(a) Status of appraisal and award – Mode of Implementation-wise: -  
In Bharatmala Pariyojana, 60% projects on Hybrid Annuity Mode, 10% projects on 
BOT(Toll) Mode and 30% projects on EPC mode have been envisaged respectively. 
Total of 543 nos. road projects with an aggregate length of 19,062 km have been 
approved & awarded till date under Bharatmala Pariyojana (including 117 nos. of 
residual NHDP works of aggre gate length of 5,087 kms) with Total Capital Cost as 
Rs. 5,51,078  cr. Out of the total approved 543 nos. projects, 358 nos. of projects 
covering an aggregate length of 10,972 kms have been approved on EPC mode, 181 
nos. of projects covering an aggregate length of 7,749 kms on HAM mode and 4 Nos. 
of projects covering an aggregate length of 341 kms on BOT (Toll) mode [EPC: 
HAM: BOT:: 58%:41%:2%]. 

96 
 
Details are as follows (as on 17th June, 2021) : - 
S. 
No. 
Mode of 
Implementation 
Bharatmala & 
Residual NHDP-
Awarded 
Bharatmala & 
Residual NHDP – 
Approved – To be 
Awarded 
Bharatmala & 
Residual NHDP – 
Awarded and 
Approved 
Capital 
Cost 
(Rs. Cr.) 
% 
Length 
No. of 
Projects 
Length 
(km) 
No. of 
Projects 
Length 
(km) 
No. of 
Projects 
Length 
(km) 
1. EPC 337 10,34 21 627 358 10,97 278,492 58% 
2. HAM 147 6,657 34 1,092 181 7,749 265,772 41% 
3. BOT Toll 4 341   4 341 6,814 2% 
Total 488 17,343 55 1,719 543 19,06 551,078 100% 
 
(b) Status of appraisal and award: - 
Out of the 24,800 km approved under Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase -I, total of 488 
projects of length 17,343 km have been awarded till date. Similarly, out of the 
residual NHDP component to be completed Bharatmala Phase -I, a total of 116 
projects covering 5,077 km length have been awarded till date. The details are as 
under: 
As on 17.06.2021 
Sr 
No. 
Type of Corridor 
(approved length & 
amount) 
Awarded Appraised but 
Pending for Award 
Total Completed 
Length 
(km) No. of 
Projects 
Length 
(km) 
No. of 
Projects 
Length 
(km) 
No. of 
Projects 
Length 
(km) 
1 Economic Corridors 162 4,975 20 636 182 5,611 1,260 
2 Inter Corridor Routes 41 1,613 10 323 51 1,936 327 
3 Feeder Routes 13 446 3 107 16 553 97 
4 National Corridor 52 1,411 4 169 56 1,580 566 
5 National Corridor 
Efficiency Improvement 
25 705 0 0 25 705 271 
6 Expressway 59 1,666 17 474 76 2,140 335 
7 Border Roads 14 1,282 0 0 14 1,282 1,068 
8 Coastal Roads 2 77 0 0 2 77 21 

97 
 
9 Port Connectivity 4 91 0 0 4 91 9 
 Bharatmala Total 372 12,266 54 1,709 426 13,975 3,954 
10 NHDP 116 5,077 1 11 117 5,087 1,875 
 Grand Total 488 17,343 55 1,719 543 19,062 5,829 
 
239. The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the reasons for huge cost overrun in 
Bharatmala Pariyojana Phase I, with the revised estimates being substantially higher than the 
approved budget. The Ministry, in its wr itten reply, informed the Committee that  an overall 
financial outlay of Rs. 5,35,000 crores had been approved by the CCEA for estimated project 
expenditure based on the prevalent Land Acquisition and Civil Construction Cost in the year 
2017. However, the actual cost of Land Acquisition is about 3.5 times the estimated cost and 
the prevailing costs of civil construction are 40% more than the estimated cost at the time of 
approval of CCEA. Details of the same are presented below:  
 
240. The Committee notes that significantly higher cost of land acquisition has been 
listed as the main reason by the Ministry for the huge cost overr uns in Bharatmala 
Pariyojana Phase -I. While the exact cost of land acquisition cannot be precisely 
estimated especially in such long -term projects, the Committee feels that the Ministry 
Component Total Civil Cost 
including 
centages 
(Rs. Crore per 
km) 
Land Acquisition 
& Pre -
Construction 
Expenses  
(Rs. Crore per 
km) 
Total Capital 
Cost (Rs. Crore 
per km) 
As per 
actual 
As per 
CCEA 
approva
l 
As per 
actual 
As per 
CCEA 
approva
l 
As per 
actual 
As per 
CCEA 
approv
al 
Bharatmala 20.1 13.7 6.4 1.8 26.5 15.5 
Residual 
NHDP 
15.9 - 5.7 - 21.6 15.0 
Grand 
Total 
19.0 - 6.2  25.2 15.4 

98 
 
should factor in the average rate of growth of land prices in its esti mates, alongwith the 
effect of inflation to arrive at more accurate project estimates, which, in turn, would 
allow the Ministry to be proactive in terms of managing its finances.  
241. The Committee believes that the significant delays in the execution of Phase-I is 
also one of the main reasons behind the cost overruns. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry/NHAI may proactively monitor all road projects and any deviation from 
the targeted timeline for each project should be dealt with on an urgent basis in order to 
minimize the delays, and thus, the cost overruns. 
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION 
242. The Ministry, in its Annual Report (2020 -21), has stated that it has been paying 
special attention to the development of NHs in th e North-Eastern Region and 10 per cent of 
the total budget allocation is earmarked for NE region. The total length of National Highways 
in North-East is 13,658 Km and these are being developed and maintained by four Agencies - 
the state PWDs, BRO, NHAI and  NHIDCL. Of the total length of 13,658 Km, about 12063 
Km is with the NHIDCL and respective state PWDs, 864 Km is with NHAI and 731 Km is 
with BRO. 
243. The Ministry, in its written note, informed the Committee that the Special Accelerated 
Road Development Programme for North -Eastern region (SARDP -NE) including Arunachal 
Pradesh Package of Roads, has been envisaged to be taken up under three parts as under:- 
(i) Phase ‘A’ of SARDP-NE approved by the Government envisages improvement 
of about 4,099 km length of r oads (3,014 km of NH and 1,085 km of State 
roads).  However actual length as per DPR is 4007 km. Out of 4,007 km 3,610 
km roads has been approved for execution and balance  397 km is yet to be 
awarded. Till May, 2021, 2,783 km of road has been completed. The SARDP-NE 
Phase ‘A’ is expected to be completed by March, 2024.. 
(ii) Phase ‘B’  of SARDP -NE, covers 3,723 km (2,210 km NHs and 1,513 km of 
State roads) of road. Phase ‘B’ SARDP -NE shall be taken up after completion of 
Phase ‘A’. 
(iii) Arunachal Pradesh Package:  The Arunachal Pradesh Package for Road & 
Highways involving development of about 2,319 km length of road (2,205 km of 

99 
 
NHs & 114 km of State / General Staff / Strategic Roads) has also been approved 
by the Government. Projects on 776 km are to be taken up on BOT (Annuity) 
mode and the remaining are to be developed on EPC mode / Item Rate Contract 
as per Ministry’s extant policy. However actual length as per DPR is 1991 km. 
Till May, 2021, projects in total length of about 1,991 km have been awarded out 
of which 1,163 km has been completed. The entire Arunachal Pradesh package is 
targeted for completion by March, 2024. 
An amount of Rs. 41,341 crore has been spent in SARDP -NE including 
Arunachal Pradesh Package of roads. 
243A.  The Committee observes that in view  of the strategic location of 
Arunachal Pradesh, good road connectivity is of crucial  importance for the smooth 
movement of Forces guarding the border, on account of National Security . The 
Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry may explore the pos sibility of taking up 
the SARDP-NE Phase-B, along with SARDP-NE Phase-A. 
244. The Committee noted that the proposed target date of completion for sanctioned road 
stretches of Phase A was March, 2015 and the entire Arunachal Pradesh package was 
targeted for  completion by March, 2017. The Committee enquired from the Ministry the 
reasons for the delays which led to the expected completion date for both the projects being 
fixed for March, 2024. In its written reply, the Ministry furnished the following reasons for 
the same:- 
(i) In general completion of projects/Scheme is delayed mainly due to following: 
~ Land Acquisition 
~ Less working season 
~ Non-availability of local Agencies, 
~ Scarcity of good quality quarry materials/ Aggregates 
~ Termination of contract for poor progress by Agency 
(ii) In order to fast track implementation in areas including hilly terrain, following steps have 
been taken to remove the bottlenecks and to complete the work early: 

100 
 
~ Set up and operationalized a new corporate entity namely NHIDC L, dedicated  
exclusively to the task of fast pace constructing/upgrading/widening of National  
Highways in NER & Hilly region. 
~ Close monitoring of the projects at field level as well as in Ministry level 
~ Sanctioning of project after completion of at least 80 % Land acquisition 
~ Upfront shifting of utilities, environment/forest clearance in close coordination with 
State Government. 
~ Streamlining of LA acquisition through Bhumi Rashi portal. 
As of now , Scheme (SARDP -NE Phase -A, Arunachal Pradesh Package of SARDPNE)  is 
targeted to be completed by March, 2024. 
245. The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons furnished by the Ministry behind 
the huge delays in the completion of the road projects under SARDP -NE Phase A and 
Arunachal Pradesh package. The C ommittee feels that most of the reasons behind the 
delays in the execution of the projects could have been preempted and proactive 
measures should have been taken to minimize the delays caused due to them. The 
Committee hopes that the present timeline for completion of the projects have been 
made realistically and is met without any further delays. 
246. The Committee feels that construction of roads in difficult terrains such as 
North-East regions  requires skilled contractors with prior experience of road 
construction in hilly regions. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure 
that due care is taken not to award the road projects to contractors who have a history 
of construction of below-par quality of roads.  
247.  The Committee further recommen ds that the Ministry may allocate funds to 
carry out research for best construction techniques in the North -East regions , with 
focus on the hilly nature of the region as well as the frequent rains and floods . The 
Committee desires that NHIDCL may lay special focus on ensuring sufficient provisions 
for road safety in the projects carried out in the region. 

101 
 
SCHEME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF ROADS IN THE LEFT WING EXTREMISM 
AFFECTED (LWE) AREAS 
248. The Government has approved a scheme for development of about 1,177 k m of NHs 
and 4,276 km of State Roads in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas as a Special 
Project with an estimated cost of about Rs. 7,300 Crore. As on 31 st May, 2021, the detailed 
estimates for 5,436 km length have been sanctioned at an estimated cos t of Rs. 8,946 Crore, 
out of which, works on 5,436 km length costing Rs. 8,996 Crore have been awarded. 
Development in 5,012 km length has been completed and cumulative expenditure incurred so 
far is Rs. 8,161 Crore. 
249. Development of Vijayawada Ranchi r oute: Out of 1,622 km long LWE affected 
Vijayawada - Ranchi route, development of 600 km (net length 592 km) of State Roads in 
Odisha (549 km Newly declared NH and 43 km SH), not covered in any Central or State 
Scheme has been approved by the Government at  a cost of Rs 1,200 crore on 4th November, 
2010. So far, the detailed estimates for all the 9 packages in an aggregate length of 592 km 
have been sanctioned at an estimated cost of Rs. 1,347 crore and works were awarded. The 
development on 583 km has been completed at a cumulative expenditure of Rs. 1,112 crore.. 
250. The Committee enquired from the Ministry regarding the steps taken to ensure the 
required security for carrying out maintenance and construction of NHs in the LWE affected 
areas. In its writte n reply, the Ministry informed the Committee that for Maintenance and 
Construction of National Highways in the LWE affected areas under the jurisdiction of 
NHAI, no security issues are involved. LWE works on National Highways (NHs) are almost 
complete in C hhattisgarh. Security camps are already established on the stretches to aid in 
maintenance work.  Security for LWE works is dealt by the State Government.  At present, 
Govt. of Chhattisgarh is providing security at work sites based on availability on centr al 
security forces.  The procedure being followed by the State Govt. is that upon completion of 
works stretch, the security camps are shifted to the next works site based on priority accorded 
by the Govt. of Chhattisgarh from security point of view. 
251. The Committee takes note of the progress made in the various road projects in 
the LWE affected areas. The Committee believes that these road projects would have a 
highly positive effect on the developmental avenues of the LWE affected areas and 
hopes that the Ministry is able to complete the remaining length of these projects at the 

102 
 
earliest. 
RESEARCH AND TRAINING IN ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE SECTOR 
252. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that NHAI has a full -
fledged SRD&Q Division at its HQ. Its mandate on R&D related activities is as under: 
a) To track and introduce new technological developments 
b) To track and introduce international best practices  
c) To facilitate design consistency and standardization  
d) To undertake R&D activities 
e) To formulate technical manuals, standards and specifications 
f) To advise the technical divisions on the matters relating to standards and 
specifications for all stages of contract management 
g) To interact with organizations involved in R&D activities/ standardization in 
highway sector 
h) To study best practices in various countries and encourage concessionaires to use 
upcoming techniques and material in India which will help in reducing cost and 
time period of road construction 
i) To track and introduce testing procedures and technology up gradation 
253. The Ministry further submitted that the scope/ objectives, methodology, interim/ final 
conclusions etc. of the research studies are reported to the Highway Research Board of the 
Indian Roads Congress from time to time. NHAI had en trusted the following studies to 
research/ academic institutes. 
Sl. 
No. 
Research area MoU with Status 
1 
Development of High Modulus 
Asphalt (HiMA) Mixes for Indian 
Highways  
IIT, Kharagpur Ongoing 
2 
Laboratory and Field investigations 
on Panelled Cement Concrete 
Pavements for Highways  
IIT, Kharagpur Ongoing 
3 
Performance of Geogrid and 
Geocell Reinforced Pavement for 
low bearing soils  
IIT, Hyderabad Ongoing 

103 
 
4 
Utilization of Municipal Solid 
Waste at Ghazipur for embankment 
construction in proposed wide ning 
of NH-24 
CRRI, Delhi Completed 
 
254. The Ministry stated that no specific budget allocation has been made to the Division 
during the last five years. However, the same is planned for the current year. 
255. The Committee is disappointed to note that d espite having a dedicated NHAI 
division with an extensive mandate for carrying out research activities, no specific 
budget allocation has been made to the division during the last five years. The 
Committee feels that this points to the lackadaisical attitu de of the Ministry towards 
carrying out research activities in the road sector.  The geographical diversity of the 
country, the often poorly-informed drivers and the large number of road accidents that 
take place on the National Highways are all crucially i mportant matters that can be 
resolved by carrying out serious R&D activities regarding the same. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may ensure that sufficient funds are available 
with the SRD&Q Division of NHAI. 
Indian Roads Congress 
256. The IRC was formally registered as a Society on 24 th September, 1937 under the 
Societies Registration Act of 1860 for periodical holding of road conferences to discuss 
issues related to road construction, maintenance & development. IRC has over 16,850 
registered members comprising engineers & professionals of all Stakeholders of the road 
sector, from Central and State Governments; Public Sector; Research Institutions; Academic 
Institutions, Local bodies; Private sector; Concessionaires; Contractors; Consultan ts; 
Equipment manufacturers; Machinery manufacturers; Material producers & suppliers; 
Industrial Associations; and Multilateral & Institutional organizations like World Bank, 
ADB, JICA, JRA, IRF etc. 
257. In its written note, IRC informed the Committee that it is a pivotal society of Highway 
Engineers which provides a common platform for pooling of wisdom of highway engineers 
and practitioners from all over the country which is being used in development of Standards, 
Specifications, Code of Practices, Guide lines, research -based State of Art Reports, etc. on 

104 
 
various aspects of road and bridges. These Standards are of great help in planning, designing, 
implementation of road construction and maintenance programmes both on National 
Highways as well as for other categories of Roads. So far, IRC has developed/ revised over 
245 nos. of standards, Codes, Guidelines, Manuals, etc on: the subjects dealing with the 
construction and maintenance of roads; bridges; tunnels and road transportation including 
technology, equ ipment, machinery, research, planning, finance, safety, environment, ITS, 
organization, etc and all connected policy issues, which form the backbone for the various 
activities related to road/ highway works across India. IRC is also moving on the path of 
growth and development of codes, guidelines of innovative technology, green technologies, 
faster construction technology viz use construction and demolition waste/mining and 
industrial waste, waste plastic, tyre rubber waste, warm mix asphalt, chemical stab ilization, 
Recycling of Bituminous Pavements — etc. in road & bridge construction. 
258. IRC has stimulated interest in research by publishing articles in the Journals and by 
providing a forum for discussion on research activities during the Annual Sessions  of the 
Congress. In addition, Highway Research Board of IRC fix priorities and schedules for 
research, evaluate and interpret research findings, digest wealth of information from research 
currently going on abroad and tailor the results to the needs of th e country, act in an advisory 
capacity to the Central and State Governments for suggesting priority road research to 
undertake, act as a forum for discussions, disseminate research knowledge and publish 
research findings. In order to guide and support Central & State road departments to construct 
2/4/6 lane Highways & Expressways, IRC published exclusive Manuals for 2 laning, 4 
laning,6 laning & Expressways which are part of their contract documents. 3.5 With aim to 
allow the industry to take early advantag es of the latest developments in the field of highway 
design and construction, IRC has evolved a mechanism, wherein, any entrepreneur, 
developer, promoter, etc. can seek accreditation from IRC for any new know -how, 
technology, material, equipment, etc. The se accredited new materials/ technologies are being 
used on trial basis by various state & central government road departments with aim to judge 
its performance and later on successful materials/ technologies incorporate in IRC documents 
in generic manner.  
259. In the meeting of the Committee held on 7 th January, 2021, President, IRC informed 
the Committee that IRC  has a small staff, but most of the Engineers, Superintending 
Engineers and Chief Engineers from the States and the Centre, who are Council memb ers, 

105 
 
work voluntarily for this organization.  Briefing the Committee about the challenges being 
faced by the Indian Roads Congress, Secretary General, IRC stated that IRC has no funds at 
all and that the salary of their staff is paid out of the membership fees received from the State 
and Centre Governments. He stated that every code made by IRC should be based on local 
research done in India and that IRC is facing difficulties in that since IITs and NITs are not 
coming out with such researches because of lack of funding. He pressed upon the urgent need 
to provide liberal funding to the academic and research institutions for carrying out research 
in the country. He informed the Committee that the Council of IRC has set an agenda to have 
one code for the natio n for Highways and one unified code for bridges and that the services 
of professionals would need to be engaged in order to carry it out. 
260. During its presentation before the Committee in the meeting held on 7 th January, 
2021, Indian Roads Congress high lighted the need for capacity building and skill 
development of road departments, consultants, contractors, construction workers and 
equipment operators. 
261. The Committee takes note of the extensive role played by Indian Roads Congress 
in development of Standards, Specifications, Code of Practices, Guidelines, research -
based State of Art Reports, etc. on various aspects of road and bridges. The Committee 
is distressed to note the fund crunch being faced by Indian Roads Congress despite 
playing such an imp ortant role in research -led development in the road sector  in the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may urgently look 
into the budgetary requirements of this important organization so as to fuel research on 
important subjects pertaining to the road sector and to permit the framing of a single 
code for Highways, and for bridges across the nation. 
262. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may set up capacity building and 
skill development programmes for State Road Departmen ts, consultants, contractors, 
construction workers and equipment operators. This would ensure that guidelines 
framed by IRC are duly followed during construction of roads. 
263. During its meeting held on 7 th January, 2021, one of the Members of the Committ ee 
raised the issue of roads being damaged due to lack of drainage provisions in flood -prone 
reasons.  
264. In this regard, IRC informed the Committee that it has published following documents 

106 
 
on this subject: 
a.  IRC:34-2011 ‘Recommendations for Road Constru ction in Areas Affected by 
Water Logging, Flooding and/or Salts Infestation’ (First Revision) 
b. IRC:SP:113-2018 ‘Guidelines on Flood Disaster Mitigation for Highway 
Engineers’ 
265. The Committee desires to be apprised as to  whether the IRC’s documents are 
being followed by the Ministry in the flood -prone regions of the country. The frequent 
damage caused by floods to NHs in such regions means that either the existing 
recommendations/guidelines in this regard are not being implemented, or the 
documentation in question needs to be updated to develop more effective norms. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take necessary action to work out this 
issue at the earliest, since connectivity is of utmost importance in flood-hit regions. 
Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 
266. Indian Academy of Highway Engineers (IAHE), in its written note furnished to the 
Committee on the subject ‘Role of Highways in Nation Building’, informed the Committee 
that it is a registered Society under the administrative control of  Ministry of Road Transport 
& Highways, Government of India. A collaborative body of the Central and State 
Governments, IAHE was set up in the year 1983 with the primary objective of fulfilling the 
longstanding need for training of Highway Engineers at the  entry level and during the service 
at all levels. IAHE is the premium national training institute of the country for sharing of 
knowledge and pooling of experience on the entire range of subjects dealing with design, 
construction, operation & maintenance of roads; bridges; tunnels and road transportation 
including technology, equipment, research, planning, finance, taxation, organization and all 
connected policy issues. 
267. In the meeting of the Committee held on 7 th January, 2021, Director, IAHE informed  
the Committee that  IAHE is governed by a Governing Council, where Minister of Road 
Transport and Highways  is the President , Minister of State for RT&H is the  Senior Vice -
President and Secretary, MoRTH is the Vice -President of the council.  He further infor med 
the Committee that  IAHE runs a foundation course for newly recruited officers of the 
Ministry, NHAI, BRO and various State PWD departments. He further stated that IAHE 

107 
 
conducts refresher courses at various levels and orientation courses are also conduc ted for 
officers who are on deputation to various organizations in order to familiarize them with their 
requirements and needs. He informed that besides key personnel, contractors and consultants 
also participate in the training courses conducted by IAHE. 
268. The Committee appreciates the training programmes conducted by IAHE for 
officers of the Ministry, NHAI, BRO, various State PWD departments as well as 
contractors and consultants. The Committee hopes that the curriculum of the training 
programmes is re freshed periodically to reflect the latest developments in the road 
infrastructure sector. 
269. The Committee enquired from IAHE about the changes required in the existing rules 
regarding construction of NHs in the country. IAHE, in its written reply, sugg ested that in 
order to improve the quality of construction, contract provisions may be changed so as to 
make the training at IAHE etc. compulsory for all highway professionals in the country. 
270. The Committee agrees with the suggestion made by IAHE and 
recommends that the Ministry may make it mandatory for all highway professionals 
in the country to attend relevant training programmes at IAHE.  
ROAD SAFETY 
271. The Ministry, in its background note, informed the Committee that high 
priority has been accord ed for identification and rectification of black spots (accidents 
prone spots on National Highways). Concerted efforts towards improvement of road 
safety through engineering measures on National Highways have been made. 789 black 
spots have been identified  and notified with unique ID numbers assigned to each of the 
spots. Guidelines have been prepared and notified for investigation and rectification of 
the road accident black spots on National highways. 129 black spots are under State 
Government. It was decided to install immediate cautionary measures to alert and caution 
the road users about road accident black spot through signs, solar blinkers and speed 
reduction measures till black spots are rectified through long term permanent measures. 
NHAI has rectified 307 nos. of Black Spots out of 510 spots on NH network with NHAI 
through long term measures such as construction of flyovers, service roads, VUPs and 
PUPs etc., 174 nos. of Black Spots are under rectification. 26 nos. of Black Spots are in 
bidding stage and 3 nos. of Black Spots are being taken up. Out of total 150 road accident 

108 
 
black spots on NH stretches under jurisdiction of State PWDs, 136 are already rectified, 
12 have been awarded and are in progress and 2 are in bidding stages. 129 spots are on 
State Roads which are not under the jurisdiction of MoRT&H. Further, a World Bank 
funded Road safety study for the Ministry has been completed; recommendations of these 
will be implemented in a phased manner with the support of all important stakeholders.  
272. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry by means of 
identification and rectification of black spots on NHs across the country. The 
Committee appreciates the work done so far in this regard but feels that a large 
number of black spots stil l remain unidentified, given the extremely high number of 
road accidents that take place in India each year. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may conduct an extensive study to identify as many bottlenecks as it 
can, and rectify the same at the ea rliest. Latest technology and data science tools 
may be employed in this process, in order to utilize the data gathered by the 
Ministry regarding road accidents, in order to identify black spots across the 
country. Topmost priority should be given to recti fication of black spots, once 
identified. Preventive measures must be immediately taken at such black spots, till 
the time the rectification process can be completed. 
273.  The Committee desires to be apprised of the number of black spots 
identified on NHs  across the country in the last five years, alongwith details 
regarding the number of black spots rectified each year. The Committee 
recommends that findings from the black spot identification and rectification process 
may be looked into as a whole, to gai n insights into how to avoid the black spots in 
the future road projects of the Ministry. The Committee further desires that all the 
NH projects should be minutely examined right from the DPR stage to their 
completion, eliminating geometrical design errors  that compromise the safety of the 
road users.  
274.  The Committee recommends that the black spot identification and 
rectification process may be streamlined so as to remove delays in the decision -
making process, by implementing provisions for delegation of powers to carry out 
rectification measures with due urgency. 
274A. As per the information available on NHAI’s website regarding status of 
rectification of black spots as on June, 2021 (Annexure -E), 348 black spots have been 

109 
 
rectified so far  i.e. 69.18 percent of the total 503 black spots identified during the period 
2011-14. Out of these 348 rectified black spots, the rectification measures on 101 black 
spots are of short -term nature. As for the status of the 3996 black spots identified during 
the period 2015-18, 2254 black spots i.e. 56.4% have been rectified while work for 536 
black spots i.e. 13.4% is still under DPR stage. 
274B. The Committee is anguished to note that even after passing of 7 -10 years 
after identification of black spots during the peri od 2011-14, long-term rectification 
measures have been carried out only on 247 out of the 503 identified black spots i.e.  
less than even 50%. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may 
make it mandatory for both NHAI and State Departments concerned, to rectify black 
spots within a fixed time -frame. Delays in the rectification of black spots directly 
leads to more lethal road accidents continuing to happen at such spots, which cannot 
be permitted at any cost. The Committee also desires to know the status of the black 
spots identified by the Ministry/NHAI since 2018 and reasons for not updating the 
status of the same on the website. 
275. The Ministry, in its written reply informed the Committee regarding the 
following steps taken by NHAI to prevent road accidents on NHs: 
a) NHAI is taking several road engineering/traffic calming measures to curb speed on 
minor roads/NHs as per the codal provisions (IRC:99 -2018, Guidelines for traffic 
calming measures in urban and rural areas) such as  
i. rumble strips or bar marking at the approaches of the major junctions on NHs, 
ii. speed limit signs at desired locations of NHs network,  
iii. speed breaker and associated signage on side roads,  
iv. flashing amber beacons for traffic approaching a junction or a mid -block 
median opening of NHs.  
b) Road Markings, Sign Boards, Blinkers, Reflectors are provided by 
Concessionaire/Contractor for the Safety of the road users as per IRC guidelines. 
c) In addition, as per contract provisions road safety audit is being conducted during 
design/construction/operation stage. 
d) Road Safety Consultants are appointed for projects for conducting Safety Audits and 
to deal with the road safety issues. The Road Safety Audit recommendations 

110 
 
submitted by Safety Consultants are being communicated to concerned 
Concessionaires for ensuring and adopting these recommendations. 
e) Speed calming measures on approaching roads at junctions and necessary sign 
boards provided to follow lane discipline etc. 
f) Roadside Safety Crash barriers are installed at roadside hazards as per provisions 
mentioned in “Manual of specifications and standards for 2/4/6 -lane highways”. 
Provision of crash barriers at all the required locations is an integral part of NH 
development/improvement project.  
Further, Road Safety Week is conducted every yea r to create Safety Awareness among 
the road users and also in various Schools, Villages/Local public, and Eye check -up 
camps for drivers etc., to reduce and prevent accidents. 
276. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the codal 
provisions prescribed to enhance road safety on highways should be periodically 
updated from time to time, to reflect international best practices in this regard. 
277. The Committee feels that the Ministry should lay much more emphasis on 
its road safety awarene ss initiatives. Social media may be utilized for this purpose. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may, in coordination with Min istry of 
Education, introduce information pertaining to road safety, basic road etiquettes, 
action to be taken in case of an  accident, etc. in school curriculum across the 
country.  
278. The Ministry further stated that the following steps have been taken by NHAI 
to ensure timely treatment to the road accident victims: 
a. Incident Management System is provided on NH through the co ntract/concession 
agreement of the Contractor/Concessionaire. The facilities of patrol vehicle, recovery 
crane and ambulance with trained paramedics are provided. 
b. Further, as per concession agreement, concessionaires have provided highway 
patrolling vehicl es to check the road conditions and assist in diverting the flow of 
traffic during the repair and maintenance works.  Further, these vehicles are used to 
provide assistance in case of any road user emergency. These vehicles are 
provisioned near the NHAI fee plazas. 
c. There is no establishment for Highway Patrol, however NHAI is doing incident 
management with the following on-road units:  

111 
 
i. Ambulances :466 
ii. Patrol Vehicles : 509 
iii. Tow-away Cranes:443   
d. Further, the tender invited for incident management services on all India level has the 
following features: 
i. 203 Ambulances 
ii. 203 Highway Surveillance vehicles  
Central command center for integration of the existing on -road units and the new to be 
deployed units with GIS mapping and tracking of the vehicles and Computer Aided 
Dispatch.  
279. The Committee feels that the number of ambulances, patrol vehicles, tow -
away cranes available with the Ministry are not commensurate with the extensive 
size of the National Highway network in India. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may steadily increase this number to ensure that help is made available 
within a short and reasonable time of any accident taking place on the NHs. 
280. The Ministry further informed the Committee about a toll-free number, 1033, 
which enables users  to report an emergency condition, or highway -related feedback, 
across the highway. The service has also integrated with various ambulance/tow away 
services along the road to ensure rapid response time in emergency. The service is 
supported by a multi -lingual support and user location tracking features to provide the 
user with accurate and responsive complaint resolution.  
280A.  The Committee feels that the knowledge that such a helpline number 
exists and should be called in case of an accident, is very li mited among people and 
awareness drives must be carried out in the form of signages and billboards on 
National Highways, and through the usage of social media, to ensure that NH users 
are aware of this emergency number. The Committee further recommends tha t the 
Ministry may work on tying up this emergency number with the number 112, i.e. the 
Emergency Response Support System, since people cannot be expected to remember 
too many numbers, especially in high-panic situations such as road accidents. 
281. The Mi nistry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that the 
Government has issued a notification G.S.R 634(E) dated 23.06.2017 mandating Motor 
Vehicles (Driving) Regulations, 2017 which provides for guidance on various factors 

112 
 
including driving technique s. For smooth traffic flow as well as to avoid road accidents, 
drivers are guided through a number of cautionary/ warning signboards along NHs such 
as sharp curves, no overtaking zone, speed limit etc. Further, Ministry has been working 
in association with States, Vehicle manufactures and NGOs for strengthening the driving 
training. Scheme for setting up of Institute of Driving training and Research (IDTRs), 
Regional Driving Training Centers (RDTCs) has been implemented by the Ministry for 
establishing mode l Driving Training Centers in the States/UTs with state of art 
infrastructure. Ministry has also launched a scheme for creating Driving Training Centers 
(DTC) in all the districts of the country with the objective to provide quality training to 
commercial vehicle drivers to improve road and environment safety and strengthen 
overall mobility on roads. 
282.  The Committee observes that driving habits in India need to be improved 
upon drastically and the most effective way to do is by way of training  people to  
drive better. Therefore, IDTRs and RDTCs should be present in every district of the 
country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may chalk out a plan to 
create such training infrastructure across the country and thereafter, make it 
mandatory to att end a driving training course of a sufficient duration in order to 
obtain a driving licence.  
283.  While making its presentation before the Committee in the meeting held on 7 th 
January, 2021, Indian Roads Congress suggested th at a Highway Protection force  should 
be created, in line with the Railway Protection Force. 
284.  One of the members of the Committee suggested that companies and 
organizations involved in the road infrastructure sector , including banks and financial 
organizations, should allocate the ir CSR funds towards road safety, so as to decrease the 
number of road accidents that take place in the country. Canara Bank informed that no 
CSR funds have been allocated to the road sector to aid the training of drivers and reduce 
the number of road accidents. 
285. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may reach out to the 
private sector with proposals to invest their CSR funds into road safety initiatives 
such as training of drivers, road safety awareness drives, developing infrastructure 
for quickly reaching out to road accident victims etc., which will undoubtedly save 
many lives each year, across the country. 

113 
 
286. The Committee sought to know IRC’s suggestions on solving the problems 
causing road accidents. IRC, in its written reply, suggested the  following measures to 
minimize road accidents: 
i) By stricter enforcement on speed control of vehicles plying on roads. 
ii) By stricter enforcement on use of seatbelts and airbag-equipped vehicles 
iii) By stricter enforcement on use of helmets by motorcyclists. 
iv) Making vehicles more visible with the provision of reflectors in its body and 
roadside lighting wherever possible.  
v) By separating local and through traffic on different roads, or by separating slow 
and fast traffic on the same road. 
vi) by providing convenient and safe road crossing facilities along highways to 
vulnerable road users. 
vii) by facilitating and use of traffic-calming techniques, roundabouts, and the 
provision of pedestrian facilities &bicycle lane facilities in urban areas. 
viii) by reserving adequate space for non-motorized modes on all roads where they are 
present. 
ix) by construction of service lanes along all4-lane, 6 lane highways for use by low 
speed and non-motorised traffic. 
x) by establishing safety departments within all road agencies by Modern knowledge  
xi) Pre-hospital care should be made widely available with training of specialists in 
trauma care in the hospital setting. 
287.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may implement the 
various suggestions made by Indian Roads Congress to make the NHs safer for  
people. 
288.  Below is the State -wise number of persons killed in accidents, as per the 
Ministry’s Report on Road Accidents in India – 2019: 
  

114 
 
State Wise number of persons killed in accidents and their ranking in accident related deaths during 2015 -2019 
Sl. 
No. 
 
States/UTs 
 
State/UT-Wise Total Number of Persons Killed 
in Road Accidents during 
 
change 
in 19 
over 
18 
 
% 
change 
in 19 
over 
18 
Rank of States/UTs in Total 
Number of Persons killed in road 
accidents 
 
  2015 2016 2017 2018 2019   2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
8,297 8,541 8,060 7,556 7,984 428 5.7 7 7 7 8 7 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
 
127 
 
149 
 
110 
 
175 
 
127 
 
-48 
 
-27.4 
 
29 
 
28 
 
28 
 
27 
 
28 
3 Assam 
 
2,397 2,572 2,783 2,966 3,208 242 8.2 18 18 18 18 18 
4 Bihar 
 
5,421 4,901 5,5554 6,729 7,205 476 7.1 11 13 11 9 9 
5 Chhattisgarh 
 
4,082 
 
3,908 
 
4,136 
 
4,592 
 
5,003 
 
411 
 
9.0 
 
16 16 15 15 14 
6 Goa 
 
311 336 328 262 297 35 13.4 23 23 23 23 23 
7 Gujarat 
 
8,119 8,136 7,289 7,996 7,390 -606 -7.6 8 8 8 7 8 
8 Haryana 4,879 5,024 5,120 5,118 5,057 -61 -1.2 13 12 12 13 13 
9 Himachal 
Pradesh 
1,096 
 
1,271 1,203 1,208 1,146 -62 -5.1 20 20 20 20 20 
10 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
917 958 926 984 996 12 1.2 21 22 22 22 21 
11 Jharkhand 2,893 3,027 3,256 3,542 3,801 259 7.3 17 17 17 17 17 
12 Karnataka 10,856 11,133 10,609 10,990 10,958 -32 -0.3 4 4 4 4 4 
13 Kerala 4,196 4,287 4,131 4,303 4,440 137 3.2 15 15 16 16 16 
14 Madhya 
Pradesh 
9,314 9,646 10,177 10,706 11,249 543 5.1 6 6 6 5 3 
15 Maharashtra 13,212 12,935 12,264 13,261 12,788 -473 -3.6 3 3 3 2 2 
16 Manipur 139 81 136 134 156 22 16.4 27 30 27 28 26 
17 Meghalaya 183 150 182 182 179 -3 -1.6 25 27 25 26 25 
18 Mizoram 72 70 60 45 48 3 6.7 30 31 31 32 32 
19 Nagaland 30 46 41 39 26 -13 -33.3 34 32 33 33 34 
20 Odisha 4,303 4,463 4,790 5,315 5,333 18 0.3 14 14 13 12 12 
21 Punjab 4,893 5,077 4,463 4,740 4,525 -215 -4.5 12 11 14 14 15 
22 Rajasthan 10,510 10,465 10,444 10,320 10,563 243 2.4 5 5 5 6 5 
23 Sikkim 70 85 78 85 73 -12 -14.1 31 29 30 30 30 
24 Tamil Nadu 15,642 17,218 16,157 12,216 10,525 -1691 -13.8 2 2 2 3 6 
25 Telanagana 7,110 7,219 6,596 6,603 6,964 361 5.5 9 9 9 10 10 
26 Tripura 158 173 161 213 239 26 12.2 26 25 26 25 24 
27 Uttarakhand 913 962 942 1047 867 -180 -17.2 22 21 21 21 22 
28 Uttar Pradesh 17,666 19,320 20,124 22,256 22,565 399 1.8 1 1 1 1 1 
29 West Bengal 6,234 6,544 5,769 5,711 5,500 -211 -3.7 10 10 10 11 11 
30 Andaman &  
Nicobar Island 
23 17 21 19 20 1 5.3 35 35 35 35 35 

115 
 
31 Chandigarh 129 151 107 98 104 6 6.1 28 26 29 29 29 
32 Dadar& Nagar 
Haveli 
42 46 43 54 49 -5 -9.3 32 32 32 31 31 
33 Daman and 
Diu 
42 38 36 35 28 -7 -20.0 32 34 34 34 33 
34 Delhi 1,622 1,591 1,584 1,690 1,463 -227 -13.4 19 19 19 19 19 
35 Lakshadweep 0 1 0 1 0 -1 -100.0 36 36 36 36 36 
36 Puducherry 235 244 233 226 147 -79 -35.0 24 24 24 24 27 
 Total (all India) 1,46,133 1,50,785 1,47,913 1,51,417 1,51,113 -304 -0.20      
Total (NE States) 
 
3,176 3,326 3,551 3,839 4,056 217       
Share of NE States 
 
2.17 2.21 2.40 2.54 2.68        
 
289. The Committee feels that the State -wise data available with the Ministry can be 
put to great use by analyzing the trend of road accidents and death caused thereby, in 
the past few years. The Committee recommends that in case of such well -performing 
States, the Ministry may analyze the measures take n by the departments concerned of 
such States and to see how these compare with the States that are showing a consistent 
increase in the number of road accidents taking place each year.  
290. Public Works (Building & National Highway) Department, Governmen t of Assam 
informed the Committee that all major works projected under SARDP -NE, NH(Original) & 
Periodical Renewal have provisions for inclusion of road safety measures such as centre 
line/Edge line marking, mandatory signs, cautionary/informatory signs, o ver head signs, 
delineators, road studs, tree reflector, guard post etc. which are sanctioned along with the 
sanctioned jobs under respective head. In EPC Contract, the safety audit shall be carried out 
by the Safety Consultant in respect of all such desig n details that have a bearing on safety of 
Road Users. There is a policy of MoRT&H to provide crash barriers in the high embankment 
and bridge approaches on different NHs to ensure better safety to the high speed traffic of the 
National Highways. Awareness  programme on the rules and regulations of road safety can 
reduce accidents on Highways. 
291. Transport Department, Government of Assam informed the Committee that highways 
are extremely important in the matter related to Road safety. As per statistics, a large number 
of accidents occur on National Highways. Proper and scientific design can reduce the 
accidents in the road to a great extent. Following are some important points which the 
NHAI/NHIDCL may take up to improve the Road safety scenario of Assam.  
a) All the Roads under Highways may be designed and constructed as per guidelines of 
MoRTH and IRC standards.  

116 
 
b) Single Lane Highway is one of the major cause of accidents and high rate of fatality. 
As such all Highways may be converted to double or multiple Lane.  
c) Junction points of Highways and other smaller grade road are also major area of 
concern where number of accidents occurs. All important junction point may be 
covered with Over Bridge, underpasses etc.  
d) Illegal parking of vehicles on Highways causes a number of accidents. To avoid the 
occurrence of illegal parking on NH, wayside amenities, including parking spaces, at 
regular intervals should be included in the design of Highways.  
e) Proper signage should be provided at all important locations and accident prone areas.  
f) Non availability of proper speed calming measures and insufficient sight distance at 
junction points is also one of the reasons for accident. The accident at junction points 
may be minimised if the design of Highways includes the same too.  
g) Construction of service lane and lane for non -motorised vehicles can improve the road 
safety scenario on Highways. 
h) Emergency care facility should be upgraded to a large extent. There should be a 
provision of ambulance at an interval of 50 Kms. And all the  Ambulances should be 
linked with a common emergency number.  
i) All accident prone areas, vulnerable stretches and black spots etc. should be rectified 
by taking appropriate road safety measures.  
j) Over speeding detection system and overload of goods vehicles  checking system may 
be incorporated on highways. 
292. The Committee agrees with the various suggestions put forth by the Transport 
Department, Assam and recommends that the Ministry may work to ensure that all the 
highways projects are in conformation wit h the guidelines of IRC and the Ministry 
itself. The Ministry may make concerted efforts to curb the menace of overloading and 
overspeeding on National Highways, since both pose a significant risk to the safety of 
the commuters. 
293. Ports & Transport Depa rtment, Government of Gujarat informed the Committee that  
Gujarat has been working diligently on Road Safety over the years and its resultant effect is 
that percentage of number of accident could be brought down by 39% in the year 2019 as 
compared to the data of the year 2012. As such, it is envisioned to reduce number of 
accidents and fatalities to 50% by the year 2030.  
Accidents on National and State Highways in Gujarat 

117 
 
Parameter 2018 2019 
National 
Highway 
State Highway National 
Highway 
State Highway 
Total Number of 
Road Accidents 
3997 4952 3538 4536 
Numbers of 
Fatal Accidents 
1913 2126 1707 1998 
Total Number of 
Persons Killed 
2171 2477 1905 2221 
Share in total 
fatalities 
27.1% 30.9% 25.8% 30% 
Rate of fatality 
per Accident 
0.54 0.5 0.53 0.48 
It w as stated that Gujarat has robust road connectivity of 99.87% which includes 
National/State Highways, Major District Roads etc. On the other hand, number of registered 
transport and non -transport vehicles in the State are 2.72 crore which indicates a huge 
increase of 45% in the last five years. It makes Road Safety a very challenging task. As such, 
following comments are offered to ensure Road Safety on Highways.  The road accidents 
occurring on National/State Highways tend to cause more fatalities. Therefor e, constructions 
of new Highways, widening of existing Highways, construction of fly overs are very 
necessary. 
General causes of Accidents on Highways , as submitted by the Ports & Transport 
Department, Government of Gujarat :- 
Drivers  
Over speeding, rash driving, violation of traffic rules, non -wearing of helmets, seat 
belts, etc.  
Pedestrian  
Carelessness, illiteracy, crossing at wrong places  
Passengers  
Illegal traveling by goods carriers, catching a running bus, projecting their bodies 
outside Vehicle  
Vehicles  
Overloading, projecting loads, poor fitness  

118 
 
Road conditions  
Pot holes, damaged road, damaged connection of rural roads with highways, 
diversions, illegal speed breakers, unauthorised gap in median, inadequate traffic 
calming measures at juncti ons at the points where lower hierarchy roads meet higher 
hierarchy roads, lack of/inadequate barricading on hilly roads/water bodies, lack of 
proper Work Zone Traffic Management Plans, vulnerable road segments/black spots 
etc. 
The intensive enforcement for wearing helmets, seat belts, prevention of illegal movement of 
passengers in goods vehicles, over speeding, wrong lane driving/ over taking, drunken 
driving etc. have been done by the State’s traffic Police and Transport Department. However, 
road enginee ring has also a significant role to play and hence, following suggestions are 
worth considering:- 
 Proper Traffic Calming Measures must be ensured at the spots/junctions where lower 
hierarchy roads join higher hierarchy roads. There must not be any differen ce in 
surface level of approach roads joining highways.  
 Closure of unauthorised Gap-in-Median must be ensured.  
 There must be adequate pedestrian safety on routes where religious Padyatras take 
place often. As such, Zebra crossings, Pedestrian Access (Saf e Passages) with  
Delineators, Crash Barriers, Reflective Lights, Cat Eye, etc. should be provided.  
 Installation of signages, and crash barriers at hilly locations and water bodies’ area, 
road marking must be done during construction and its maintenance m ust be done 
periodically. 
 Removal of unauthorized speed breakers and make new speed breakers as per IRC 
standards with cat eye and road marking must be made priority. 
 Implementation of Work Zone Traffic Management Plan as per IRC guidelines at 
work sites a nd installation of barricades, signages and give proper diversion with 
proper signages must be done scrupulously and its supervision should be done by 
senior official of road owning department.  
 Road side amenities like lay by, rest areas, refreshments, pa rking of heavy vehicles 
etc. must be the responsibilities of the Concessionaire/Contractor and the road 
owning department/agency.  

119 
 
 There must be inbuilt provision in an award of contract (also condition in tender _ 
document) to the Concessionaire/Contracto rs regarding installation of Solar Street 
lights at locations of habitats/Educational Institutions alongside Highways.  
 In large projects of Highways, it must be mandatory for Concessionaires /Contractors 
to provide for well -equipped Ambulances at strategi c locations to extend emergency 
care on an urgent basis.  
 It must be made mandatory for Concessionaires / Contractors to provide for a few 
JCB / Crains in hilly areas and at bridges over large rivers/ reservoirs. 
 National Highway Authority of India and Pub lic W orks departments of the States 
must have well trained and dedicated Engineers for road safety to enhance sensitivity 
for road safety. 
 Training should be imparted to the officials of all levels of the Stake holder 
Departments periodically regarding roa d safety for better compliance of road safety 
measures in their States/UTs. 
294. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government of Gujarat and 
the Ministry, in order to bring down the number of road accidents by 39% in the year 
2019 as compared to the data of the year 2012. The Committee hopes that the reduction 
seen in the deaths caused due to road accidents in the State is commensurate with the 
reduction in the number of accidents. 
295. The Committee takes note of the reasons furnished by th e Ports & Transport 
Department, Government of Gujarat, behind the road accidents. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may work in coordination with the State 
Governments to encourage stricter implementation of traffic laws, while wor king in 
tandem to improve the quality of roads, both in terms of construction and design, in 
order to bring the number of accidents significantly down.  
296. The Committee strongly recommends that special attention may be given to the 
design and implementa tion of approach roads and entry & exit ramps on highways, 
since poor design and construction of these stretches inevitably leads to road accidents. 
297. The Committee desires that the Ministry may ensure that road safety audits are 
conducted across the en tire National Highways stretch in the country, for projects 
executed by both the Ministry itself, as well as the State Government PWDs. The 
findings arrived upon by conducting such audits must be carefully analyzed and acted 
upon urgently. 

120 
 
298. Department of Tourism, Government of Goa informed the Committee that according 
to a 2018 report  by the Ministry of Transport and Highways, India ranks first out of 199 
countries in the number of road accident deaths. The largest number of all deaths in the 
country happen not because of war or epidemics, but due to road accidents. Over 1.5 lakh 
deaths and 4.5 lakh injuries due to road accidents were reported in 2018. Two-wheeler drivers 
constitute over 30 per cent and working age people, between 18 -60 years, account fo r 82 per 
cent of all deaths. The report also states that 62 per cent of deaths happen on National and 
State highways, which comprise 5 per cent of road network of India. In light of the above, 
following are the suggestions for improvement of road safety: 
 As most of the deaths are caused due to traffic violations thereby strict traffic 
laws are required. 
 However, the value of fines imposed for traffic violations were increased by the 
Union government through the Motor Vehicle Act, 2019, still strict 
implementation is required to enhance safety on road 
 Also, the design of pavements should be strictly as per the IRC guidelines to 
enhance the quality of the finished ROW. 
 Operations & Maintenance of the finished carriageway is required on continuous 
basis. 
 The sp eed limits defined for the highways should be re -visited and should be 
strictly as per the design speed of the carriageway. 
 A designated road safety wing at State level and RO level need to be  formed for 
immediate re-dressal and continuous monitoring of road safety related issues. 
299.   The Committee notes the findings of the 2018 MoRTH Report shared by the 
Government of Goa and observes that the findings are direct evidence of the 
devastating effect road accidents have on lakhs of families in the country , often causing 
the death of the sole earning member of the family, very likely impacting the financial 
health of the family, besides the emotional trauma. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may enhance its focus on maintenance of the N Hs in a 
good condition and implement road safety measures across the entire network, on a war 
footing. The Committee desires that the Ministry may form designated road safety wing 
at State level and RO level for immediate redressal of road safety related i ssues, as 
suggested by the Government of Goa. 

121 
 
299A.    The Committee desires to know the present status of the Bharat New Vehicle 
Safety Assessment Program (BNVSAP) for testing the safety performance of new 
vehicles in India, which was expected to be impl emented several years ago. The 
Committee also may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry for introduction of 
safety standards and technologies in two -wheelers manufactured in the country, since a 
large number of the road accidents on Indian roads involve two-wheelers. 
300. Public Works Department, Government of Karnataka informed the Committee that the 
road accident scenario in Karnataka causes a great concern as more than 10000 persons die 
every year due to road accidents. While fatal accidents cau se loss of invaluable human life, 
all accidents cause pain, grief and misery as well as economic loss. The increasing number of 
accidents, loss of lives and resources necessitate the State Government to frame policy on 
Road Safety. Accordingly, the Government of Karnataka has formulated Road Safety Policy, 
2015 which will act as a guide to the concerned stake holders department and to the public to 
take concerted measures to control the incidents of road accidents and to ensure safe travel 
for all road users. The objectives of the policy are as under: 
 Improving road engineering and design, increasing awareness, providing emergency 
care and strict enforcement on road. 
 Design, develop and implement a Accident Information System to enable crash 
management in the State in the next two years.  
 Provide a framework for undertaking coordinated actions and corrective measures by 
all concerned stake holder departments.  
 Provide the basis for accountability, evaluation, funding and research.  
 To reduce the road accidents by 25% and fatalities by 30% by the year 2020. 
 Supporting and building capacity by working with the road safety community with 
better tools to support Road Safety Programs. 
One of the main reasons for accidents is inadequacy in road geometric or non fulf illment of 
safety standards as per the codal provisions. Considering all the above facts, 
recommendations and directions of the Supreme Court Committee on Road Safety 
constituted by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and to implement the Karnataka Road 
Safety Policy, 2015, the standard operating procedure (SOP) and protocol has been designed 
for identification of black spots, preparation of a time bound action plan for implementing the 
rectification measures. A G.O. to that effect has been issued vide G.O. No. 
PWD:42:EAP:2017, Bengaluru dt:4 -4 2017. As per the protocol, a black spot is a stretch of 

122 
 
road of about 500 m in length in which either (a) FIVE Road Accidents (in all three years put 
together involving fatalities/grievous injuries) took place during t he last THREE calendar 
years or (b TENFatalities (in all three years put together) took place during the last THREE 
calendar years during the last 3 consecutive calendar years. In Karnataka 942 black spots 
have been identified which come under different de partments / authorities. 215 black spots 
come under Karnataka Public Works Department out of which 58 black spots have already 
been rectified, rectification is being carried out in 89 black spots and action is being taken to 
invite tenders for the remainin g 69 black spots. 569 nos. of vulnerable locations have been 
identified on State Highways and it is proposed to take up traffic calming measures at the 
above locations in a phased manner during 2021 -22 and 2022-23.  Similarly, to ensure safety 
on hilly roads, near water bodies and other vulnerable locations numbering 1108 throughout 
the State on SH and MDRs, action plan is being drawn. 
301.   The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Government of Karnataka to 
reduce the number of road accidents in the State and hopes that the black spots 
identified by Karnataka PWD are rectified as soon as possible.  
302.  Public Works Department, Government of Manipur informed the Committee 
that roads should be designed for the safety of all road users, which means  ensuring adequate 
facilities for pedestrians, cyclists and motorcyclists. Traffic in Imphal and other District HQs 
have to address the sudden growth in traffic which requires measures such as separate 
footpaths, cycling lanes, safe crossing points includi ng Foot Over Bridge (pedestrian bridge, 
pedestrian overpass) and traffic calming measures are critical to reducing the risk of injury 
among these road users. Potholes, a nuisance for accidents needs to be mended / repaired on 
priority basis which demands a dequate maintenance budgetary support and constant 
monitoring and supervision. 
303. Transport Department, Government of Tripura informed the Committee that as per 
direction of Supreme Court Committee on Road Safety (CoRS), Transport Department in 
State Government has taken various effective measures to reduce the accidents and save the 
lives of the people of the State :- 
 State Government re-published the Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Act, 2019 in Tripura 
Gazette on 9 September, 2019 which is presently in force in the State. 
 State Road Safety Policy- 2017 has been notified on 29th May, 2017.  
 State Road safety Fund has been constituted from the 50% of fund collected from 
enforcement, fines etc. 

123 
 
 Tripura Road Safety Fund Rules (TRSFR) - 2017 has been notified on 29t h May, 
2017. 
 Wearing of helmet has been done compulsory for both errant and pillion riders of two 
wheelers. 
 Wearing of Seat Belt for the drivers and the person occupying the front seat of all four 
wheeler vehicles (including Govt. vehicles drivers) has been done mandatory. 
 State Road Safety Action Plan as per prescribed format of MoRTH has been prepared 
and forwarded to CoRS. 
 ‘Standard Operating Procedure’ for protection of Good Samaritans who save lives of 
road accident victims has been notified. 
 Mandatory fitment of Speed Governor in commercial vehicles has been notified. 
 All Liquor Shops has been shifted 100 meter away from National Highways of the 
State. 
 The Trauma Centre has been started at AGMC and GBP hospital and commissioned 
from 12-12-2017. Trauma Care Centre in Kulai, Dharmanagar, Gomati&Shantirbazar 
District Hospital is under process. 
 30 (thirty) nos road safety awareness hoarding has been erected beside the road side 
of NH from Amtali to Garjee. 30 another hoarding will be erected from Garjee to 
Sabroom very soon. 
 There is State Road Safety Council headed by the Hon’ble Minister as the chairman 
of the Council. 
 State Road Safety Committee under the chairmanship of Principal Secretary, 
Transport is reviewing the Road Safety issues quarterly in prese nce of the 
representatives of stakeholding Departments like Police (SP,Traffic), DIG, 
PWD(NH), PWD(R&B), Health, Fire Service, Education etc. Department and 
devising work plan/ way forward on road safety. 
 Further, there are District Level and Sub -Division Level Road Safety Committee who 
are reviewing the road safety issues at District & Sub- Division level. 
304.   The Committee takes note of the various steps taken by the Transport 
Department, Government of Tripura to reduce the number of road accidents in  the 
State. 
305. Public Works Department, Government of Mizoram informed the Committee that 
National Highways historically are declared through upgradation of lower category roads like 

124 
 
State Highways, Major District Roads etc and are being developed in sta ges considering 
traffic, resources, availability of land etc. Lack of road safety education, lack of enforcement 
etc are contributing to the present high rate of accidents on NHs . Road Safety Audits of the 
National Highways at different stages like feasibi lity, design, construction, pre-opening stage 
and also carrying out road safety audits of existing NHs is a systematic way of critically 
examining and identifying such safety concerns with the objective of adopting feasible 
remedial measures. IRC:SP-88-2010 contains salient aspects of carrying out the road safety 
audits at different stages. Additional aspects which have not been covered in the above IRC 
publication could be brought out into the terms of reference of these audits (refer 
OM.RW/NH-15017 /120/2015/P&M dated 09.11.2015). For improvement of locations prone 
to accidents on the road network, a systematic approach is required which includes a common 
definition for road accident black spots on NHs and a sequence of actions with time frame for 
removal of those black spots. For this purpose, the protocol for identification and rectification 
of road accident black spots on NHs vide OM dated 28.10.2015 :-  
a) Definition of road accident black spot : A stretch of about 500m in which either 5 road 
accident took place during the last 3(three) calend ar years or 10 fatalities took place during 
the last 3 calendar years.  
b) Forwarding the road accident data on NHs to TRW of MOoRTH : No of accidents 
involving fatalities/grievous injuries, number of fatalities if any during a calend ar year are to 
be forwarded by Police authorities/National Crime Records Bureau so as to reach Transport 
Research Wing of MoRTH by 31st March of the subsequent calendar year.  
c) Forwarding of compiled road accident black spot data on NH s by TRW to R oad Safety 
Cell (Engineering) of MoRTH : TRW compile/analy ze accident data and furnish black spot 
details to Road Safety Cell (engineering) of MoRTH by 31 st May of the subsequent calend ar 
year.  
d) Remedial measures for rectification of road accident black spots. 
This is very important subject. In compliance to above Ministry’s instruction, the Department 
had invited quotation to carry out independent road safety audit for suggesting rectification 
measures for black spots identified by the Mini stry. However, as most of the projects 
entrusted to the State are small projects only with scattered locations, may be the works are 
not big enough to attract independent auditors from out state, hence there was no bidder 
within the time frame as the quota tion/tenders are small in amount and the location of 
accident black spots are scattered. These result in Quotation/tenders re - invitations for same 
works, which is hampering the start and progress of the whole projects. 

125 
 
306.  Public Works Department, Gover nment of Mizoram informed the Committee 
that while framing the Project Report for road project, provision for some items of road safety 
work such as Road Marking, Road Signages and Crash -Barriers are usually included and are 
found to be very beneficial for initial safety features of the road. However, Road Safety Audit 
is now becoming more or less essential to further strengthen the road safety feature after 
opening to the public for various road user, under such circumstances it is felt important to 
provide some percentage of the project cost for Road Safety Audit and its implementation 
which may be from 3% to 5% depending on the type of road. 
307.   The Committee notes that the Mizoram PWD is facing issues in attracting bids for 
carrying out independent r oad safety audits in the State  audit for suggesting 
rectification measures for black spots identified by the Ministry. The Committee 
strongly feels that rectification of black spots cannot be delayed because of lack of 
interest in bidding for this purpose.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry/NHAI may step up to help Mizoram PWD through its expertise in rectification 
of black spots on the NHs. If the reason for the lack of interest in bidding for the 
projects is ascertained to be the small  scale of the overall project, the Ministry may 
invite bids to conduct such an audit in multiple North-Eastern States together. 
308. The Committee agrees with the suggestion of PWD, Government of Mizoram 
regarding making specific budgetary provisions for conducting road safety audits in the 
project cost itself. Any new NH project implemented by the Ministry/State PWDs 
should be duly audited in terms of road safety before opening it to the public and time -
bound plan must be made for conducting road safety au dits to cover the existing NH 
network as well. 
309. Commerce & Transport Department, Government of Odisha informed the Committee 
that in Odisha, NH comprises of about 2% of the total Road Network whereas SH comprises 
near about 1.5% of the total road netwo rk, but still it contributes more than 50% of the road 
accidents and road accident fatalities. It was stated that road improvement in the country has 
been taken up on a large scale with the launching of National Highway Development Project 
(NHDP) / Nationa l Highway Authority of India under its various phases and State 
Governments are having their own programmes for improvement of state roads. The 
Commerce & Transport Department  found that though signs and markings are provided on 
these improved roads, they are still far from being the appropriate system to meet the 
intended requirements of safe and efficient travel. Now that the objective is to develop the 

126 
 
National Highway System to a world class standard, it is essential that all the roads including 
these w hich are under improvement / up gradation are provided with a detailed system of 
traffic signs and pavement markings. The following points can be considered in Road Safety 
point of view in Highways.  
a) Traffic Signs  
The traffic signs and markings for promot ing highway safety and efficiency have to be 
effective and should meet the following basis requirements objectively:- 
 Fulfill-specific needs as per the site situation. 
 Command attention from all categories of road users. 
 Convey a clear, precise meaning in a simple form. 
 Command respect from road users and for this, they should be appropriately sited, 
visible/ readable and uniform throughout.  
 Prominent to attract attention of the drivers and should be readable from sufficiently 
far away to be read without diverting the line of sight through too great an angle.  
 Placed such that they are not hidden by other objects or vegetation and no huddle has 
taken place. 
 Road markings should be clear and visible during the hours of darkness (luminous/ 
reflective) so that  drivers can see them clearly in time to position themselves 
correctly.  
b) Safety Standards 
The objective of Safety Standards is to provide safe travel to the drivers of vehicles plying on 
the Project Highway at all time, say, throughout the year and provide protection to the Project 
Workers when they are at work, The guiding principles for safety measures shall include:- 
 Warning to the drivers unambiguously and sufficiently in advance of the situation on 
the highway. 
 Providing clear demarcation for movement of vehicles. 
 Providing devices to guide the drivers and their movements through construction 
zones/ lane closures/ traffic diversions etc. 
c) Traffic Management Planning 
 Warn the road user clearly and sufficiently in advance.  
 Provide safe and clearly marked lanes for guiding users.  
 Provide adequate measures that control driver behavior through construction zones 
d) Black spot identification & Rectification Measures 

127 
 
 Black Spots identification as per the criteria  
 Vulnerable locations /accident prone zones to be identified  
 Rectification measures to be taken as per the requirement.  
 Monitoring of the rectification measures undertaken frequently.  
 Checking of the efficacy in the accident prone spots after rectification. 
310. Department of Transport, Govern ment of Punjab informed the Committee that in the 
State of Punjab the following steps have been initiated to monitor & look after the road safety 
issues in an efficacious manner as under: 
 In the Transport Department, Punjab the Punjab State Road Safety Cou ncil has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of the Hon'ble Transport Minister, Punjab. 
 Two meetings of the Punjab State Road Safety Council are held in a calendar year to 
deliberate upon the road safety issues to implement them in a proper & rightful 
manner.  
 In compliance to the directions issued by the Supreme Court Committee on Road 
Safety, the Lead Agency to the Punjab State Road Safety Council has been 
constituted vide notification No.4/119/2010 - 2T2/313 dated 4.12.2020 headed by the 
Director Gene ral (a retired IAS Officer who had worked as Additional Chief 
Secretary or the Principal Secretary to Govt. of Punjab) with official members, 
Member Secretary & Non Official Members on full time basis for effective 
coordination of Road Safety measures and to continuously monitor the 
implementation of the directions issued by the Supreme Court Committee on Road 
Safety and the Govt. of India. The post of Director General is filled up.  
 Road Safety fund has been created to facilitate the proper execution of ro ad safety 
issues. 
 Currently there is an amount of about Rs.40.52 Crore as road safety fund for the road 
safety issues. 
 The Chief Engineer, Punjab, Roads & Bridges Development Board (PRBDB) has 
been nominated as the Chief Engineer, Road Safety for the purpo se of strong & 
effective coordination with the Police Department (Traffic) to settle the road safety 
issues in a rapid & faster way. 
 32 Black Spots have been identified on the vulnerable roads out of which 10 Black 
Spots have been examined by the Chief Eng ineer, PRBDB and for their rectification 
funds are being released from the road safety funds. 

128 
 
 The Executive Engineers (PWD) have been nominated as the Executive Engineers 
(Road Safety) at the District Level.  
 At the District Level too Road Safety Committees have been constituted to monitor & 
look after the road safety issues in an effective manner.  
311. Chief Engineer (National Highways), Punjab PWD informed the Committee that there 
is need for a formulating comprehensive manual for drivers to strictly fol low the traffic rules. 
Further the traffic rules, if, so required may also be reframed in accordance with SOP for the 
drivers. Dedicated funds should be provided to States for execution of Road Safety projects 
on State Roads. 
312. The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by Department of Transport, 
Government of Punjab to enhance road safety on the road network in the State and 
hopes that it makes optimal utilization of the Road Safety Fund available with it, for 
resolution of road safety related issues.  
313. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the fund crunch 
faced by State Departments in execution of road safety related projects and to consider 
developing an incentive based funding scheme wherein a part of the funds spent by the 
State Government on road safety projects and activities for State roads, may be 
reimbursed by the Ministry. 
CHAR DHAM PARIYOJANA 
314. The Ministry has taken up the connectivity Improvement Program for Char -Dham 
(Kedarnath, Badrinath, Yamunothri & Gango thri) in Uttarakhand. The program includes 
projects of improvement /development of 889 km length of NHs at total estimated cost of 
about Rs. 12,070 crore. The projects include provisions like widening of existing narrow & 
geometrically deficient NHs to 2 -Lane NH standards with paved shoulders, protection of 
landslide prone zones, construction of bypasses, long bridges, tunnels, bus /truck lay bye /rest 
area and elevated corridors. The program was initially targeted for completion by March 
2020. However, it has been delayed due to petitions filed by NGOs in NGT and Supreme 
Court. The Hon’ble Supreme Court passed an order on 08.08.2019, directing MoEF&CC to 
constitute a High Powered Committee (HPC) to submit a report within 4 months as per 
Terms of Reference p rescribed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The HPC has submitted the 
final report in July 2020. 

129 
 
315. Out of total 53 civil works covering the entire length under Chardham project, 40 civil 
works of total project cost amounting to Rs. 9,474 crore (including co st of pre -construction 
works amounting to Rs. 491 cr.) in a length of 673 km have been sanctioned. 38 works in a 
length of 647 km amounting to Rs. 8,379 cr. have been awarded out of which 27 works 
amounting to Rs. 7,011 cr. in length of 543 km are ongoing and 11 works amounting to Rs. 
1,368 cr. in a length of 104 km have completed. Out of total 889km length, projects in 514 
km length has been completed. Balance 2 nos. works amounting to Rs. 604 cr. in a length of 
25 km are in tender stage. Physical progress  on ongoing works is 79% with the total 
expenditure of Rs. 5,400 crore. The program is targeted for completion by December 2023. 
316. The Committee feels that the Char Dham Pariyojana is of immense importance 
because of the pilgrimage tourism aspects of th e region. Completing this project at the 
earliest should thus be accorded high priority by the Ministry. 
317. The Committee notes the delays caused in the project on account of the petitions 
filed by NGOs in the NGT and Supreme Court. The Committee desires  to be apprised 
of the progress made in this regard.  
318. The Committee further recommends that the region being highly sensitive in 
ecological terms, the Ministry must undertake every possible measure to minimize the 
environmental impact caused by its pr ojects in such regions. If need be, consultants 
specializing in the same may be hired for the purpose of minimizing the adverse impacts 
of the projects on environment. This would help address the issues raised by the NGOs 
regarding such projects as well.  
IMPACT OF CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC ON ROAD TRANSPORT SECTOR 
319. The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways on the 
impact of Coronavirus pandemic on road transport sector, in its meetings held on 7 th October 
and 13 th October, 20 20. The Ministry, in its written note, informed the Committee of the 
various measures taken by it as part of the Atmanirbhar Bharat campaign to ease the cash 
flows of the contractors and concessionaires and help the construction industry cope with the 
shocks of the economic downturn:- 
a) Retention money (which is a part of the Performance Security till construction 
period) is to be released in proportion to work executed and further retention 
money from the period from 03 months to upto 06 months are not to be  deducted 

130 
 
from the Contractors’ Bills. For HAM/ BOT Contracts, Performance Guarantee 
can be released on pro -rata basis of that as provided in the Contract, if 
Concessionaire is not in breach of the Contract. 
b) Extension of Time to Contractor/ Concessionaire for meeting their obligation 
under the Contract for 03 months to upto 06 months depending on site conditions. 
c) Relaxation in Schedule H to provide monthly payments to the Contractors for the 
works done and accepted for EPC/HAM Contracts. 
d) Direct payment to approved Sub-Contractor through Escrow Account. 
e) Waiver of penalty for delay in submission of Performance Security/ Bank 
Guarantee in new Contract entered into during March, 2020 to September, 2020. 
f) To allow Extension of Time to Consultants i.e. I.E/ A.E, fo r 03 months to upto 06 
months depending on site condition. During this Force Majeure Event, they may 
be considered as if they were on duty. 
g) BOT/ TOT Concessionaire: Before CoD, the concession period of BOT contracts 
shall be extended by a period of 03 mont hs to upto 06 months. Further for loss in 
collection of user fee, the concession period shall be extended by a period in 
accordance with the Contract till the time daily collection is below 90% of the 
average daily fee. 
h) For all National Highway Tolling Contracts, loss in collection of fee (remittances) 
shall be compensated. 
320. The Ministry further furnished the following summary of relief granted under the 
above measures: 
Sr. 
No. 
Relief Given to Contractors / Concessionaires 
due to COVID 19 pandemic 
No. of 
Applications 
received 
under the 
category 
No of 
Projects 
Covered so 
far 
Remark 
1 
Retention money (which is a part of the 
Performance Security till construction period) is 
recommended to be released in proportion to the 
work already executed in accordance  with the 
Contract specification and further retention money 
from the period from 03 months to upto 06 months 
1,253 1,155 Rs. 3,527.07 
crore released to 
contractors 

131 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Relief Given to Contractors / Concessionaires 
due to COVID 19 pandemic 
No. of 
Applications 
received 
under the 
category 
No of 
Projects 
Covered so 
far 
Remark 
may not be deducted from the Bills raised by the 
Contractor. For HAM/ BOT Contracts, Performance 
Guarantee can be released on pro -rata basis of th at 
as provided in the Contract, if Concessionaire is not 
in breach of the Contract 
2 
Extension of Time to Contractor/ Concessionaire for 
meeting their obligation under the Contract for 03 
months to up to 06 months depending on site 
conditions 
207 196  
3 
Relaxation in Schedule H to provide monthly 
payment to the Contractor for the work done and 
accepted as per the specification of the contract 
during the month EPC/HAM Contract. 
863 774 Rs. 6,562.18 
crore payment 
made 
4 
Direct payment to approved Sub -Contractor through 
Escrow Account 
21 19 Rs. 241.10 crore 
payments made 
5 
Waiver of penalty for delay in submission of 
Performance Security/ Bank Guarantee in new 
Contract entered into during March, 2020 to 
September, 2020. 
17 17  
 
321. The Ministry furnished the following information to the Committee regarding the 
award and construction of Highways in the last few years.  
Sl. 
No. 
Year Award (km) Construction (km) 
1.  2014-15 7,972 4,410 
2.  2015-16 10,098 6,061 
3.  2016-17 15,948 8,231 

132 
 
4.  2017-18   17,054 9.829 
5.  2018-19 5,494 10,855 
6.  2019-20 8,948 10,237 
7.  2020-21 10,964# 13,327# 
8.  2021-
22* 
663 1,470 
# -Surpassed award and construction targets and recorded highest annual 
NH construction of 37 km/day 
*As on 31.05.2021 
322. The Committee appreciates the various steps taken by the Ministry to help the 
road construction industry cope with the adverse impact of the Coronavirus pandemic. 
The Committee is happy to note that despite the pandemic and the ensuing lockdow n in 
the Financial Year 2020 -21, the Ministry managed to achieve an impressive pace of 
construction of 37 kilometers highways per day. The Committee hopes that the Ministry 
takes necessary action to keep up this pace  of construction and minimizes delays in  its 
road projects in the coming years to ensure optimal utilization of allocated funds. 
COORDINATION OF THE MINISTRY WITH STATE GOVERNMENTS 
323. On the query  of the Committee  regarding any help extended by the 
Ministry/NHAI to the State Departments, the M inistry, in its written reply, informed the 
Committee that the NH works are executed as per specifications/guidelines laid by 
MoRTH and IRC. Further, these documents are updated from time to time based on 
inputs received from various stake holders includin g the officers of State Government. 
These specifications are also to be followed by State PWDs in their highway/road 
projects. Through training programme of IAHE, officers from Selection Grade are being 
given exposure to new technology and best practices o f contract and construction 
management.  
324. The Committee takes note of the training programmes conducted by 
IAHE for officers from State Governments. The Committee recommends that the 
NHAI may proactively extend its technical expertise to the State Gove rnment 
departments, to help them utilize their funds in a better way, while ensuring a better 
state of construction and maintenance for the State Highways, as well as the 

133 
 
National Highways network maintained by State PWDs. 
325. While making its presentation before the Committee in the meeting held on 7 th 
January, 2021, Indian Roads Congress suggested that financial assistance should be 
provided to State Governments for maintenance and upgradation of their road network 
other than NHs from the CRF fund. 
326. The Committee observes that State Highways  and local roads  play a 
significant role in the economic growth of our country and thus, need allocation of  
sufficient funds for their maintenance.  The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may seriously consider IRC’s suggestion to provide financial assistance to 
State Governments for the maintenance of Highways and roads under their control, 
from the CRF fund. 
 327. Office of the Director of Tourism, Government of Assam informed the 
Committee that a coordination mechanism is needed for Tourism Department with 
Ministry of Transport and Highways for parallel development of Highways and Tourist 
Destinations in Assam. 
328. Department of Tourism, Government of Goa informed the Committee that 
post Covid -19, road travel has seen a rise as it provides a personal space to tourists 
travelling to various destinations in India. Thereby as part of the planning exercise, 
representatives from the tourism departments should also be part of the Committee 
meetings so as to provide relevant suggestions. 
a. Director (tourism) should be invited to be part of the committee meetings 
chaired by Joint Secretary. 
b. A special officer from MORTH may be placed at State Level for Screening of 
Project proposals before submission to the Ministry. The s aid officer shall act 
as Liaison Officer between the state and MORTH for taking up any issues 
related to state pertaining to National Highway. 
 329.  The Committee agrees with the suggestions put forth regarding the 
need for the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to have a coordination 
mechanism with the Tourism Departments of State Governments. Tourism can 
give impetus to economic growth of any region . Excellent road connectivity to 
existing tourist attractions as well as potential tourist sites is a prerequisite for the 
same. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may hold 

134 
 
periodic meetings with the Ministry of Tourism as well as State Tourism 
Departments, and devise a time -bound Master Plan to enhance road connectivity 
to tourist places across the country, in order to bolster both domestic and foreign 
tourism.  
330. Public Works Department, Government of Karnataka informed the Committee 
that the Chief Engineer, National Highways Zone will co -ordinate and liaison with 
Ministry of Road T ransport and Highways to resolve the issues. Further, a High 
Power Committee under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to Government of 
Karnataka has been constituted to resolve the issues related to Project implementation 
of National Highways. 
 331. Public Works Department, Government of Kerala informed the Committee 
that regional office of MoRTH headed with a Superintending Engineer is functioning 
along with CE (NH) for liaising with MoRTH. State PWD is responsible for arranging 
works sanctioned under  MoRTH heads for NH(O) and M&R, from inviting bids to 
award of contract. Though the State PWD is signing the contract with the contractor as 
the Authority, no powers delegated to State PWD by MoRTH for granting extension of 
time for any delay in completion  of project in case of delay due to reasons other than 
from Contractor or making any essential change of scope. 
332. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider Kerala 
PWD’s suggestion to permit State PWDs to grant extension of time for delays in 
completion of project in case of delay due to reasons other than from Contractor, 
if it is felt that delegating such a power would allow road projects executed by 
State PWDs to be executed more smoothly with lower delays due to paperwork. 
333. Public Works Department, Government of Manipur informed the Committee 
that MoRT&H’s role is crucial in states with hilly terrains not only for economic 
relevance but also for strategically significance due to proximity to international 
borders and defence establish ments.. An Officer on Special Duty (OSD) is proposed 
to be appointed to link and communicate directly with MoRT&H officials and 
Ministry to expedite sanction process and execution of projects. 
334. Public Works Department, Government of Mizoram informed th e Committee 
that State PWD coordinate mainly for National Highway and CRIF (i.e. CRF/ISC/EI) 
works only. The State Government request for early clearance/release of fund and 
early award of Contract work in view of short working season in the NE region. 

135 
 
335. Public Works Department, Government of Mizoram informed the Committee 
that as of now, unresolvable issues have not been encountered. However, it is 
suggested that if the appropriate authority from the Ministry for making decision as 
and when needed on th e spot visit the construction site more frequently especially 
during rainy season which will bring fruitful outcome. Due to limited practical 
knowledge of the terrain especially unstable hilly terrain like North East, there seems 
to be unwillingness from t he Ministry to invest huge amounts in the projects and 
limited understanding of the problem face in the actual work. 
 336. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that 
clearances, release of funds and award of contract work for NH projects in  NE 
regions are mindful of the short working season in the region. Procedural delays 
should not hamper the timely completion of projects in North-Eastern region.  
 337. The Committee desires that the Ministry may look into the observations 
made by Mizoram PWD regarding unwillingness of the Ministry to invest large 
amounts in projects in the North East and having limited understanding of the 
problems faced in the actual work. Coordination mechanism with the State 
Government of Mizoram may be strengthened so as to resolve the issues being 
faced by it in execution of road projects in the State.  
338. Transport Department, Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
informed the Committee that there is good co-ordination between Delhi with MoRTH. 
Many of t he National Highways pass through Delhi.  The city roads including 
National Highways are being maintained by Govt. of Delhi. There is need for more 
and significant contribution from MoRTH in planning and upgradation of the NHs of 
Delhi. 
 339. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into possibilities 
for upgradation of NHs in Delhi that may help the region to tackle the issues of 
traffic and pollution. 
340. The Committee, in its meeting held on 7 th January, 2020 in Visakhapatnam, 
was informed by the representative of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
that out of the overall network of 132,500 kms of National Highways across the 
country, Andhra Pradesh has a NH network spanning over 6,859 km. Out of total 433 
black spots identified on NHs  in Andhra Pradesh by Ministry of Road Transport and 

136 
 
Highways and NHAI, 76 have been rectified, 41 are yet to be rectified and 
rectification work is yet to be taken up at 316 spots. It was informed that 41 projects 
of Ministry of Road Transport and Highway s through State PWD and 12 projects of 
NHAI are presently under implementation in Andhra Pradesh, with a cost of Rs. 
9,500.53 crores and Rs. 12,601.39 crores respectively. 
341.  Principal Secretary, Department of Transport, Roads and Buildings informed 
the Committee that land acquisition is a core issue involving a lot of litigations, and 
that to overcome the same, a special bench has been formed.  He further stated that 
they are in regular touch with the concerned Regional Officer and Project Directors to 
resolve the points.  He submitted that a lot of accidents take place on the 
Rajahmundry Bypass and requested NHAI to take necessary measures to minimize 
the occurrence of road accidents. The Committee also noted the need of upgradation 
of State Highways in to National Highways. During the meeting, Hon’ble Minister of 
Roads & Building, State Government of Andhra Pradesh informed the Committee that 
the flyover constructed at Benz Circle, Vijayawada by NHAI is not able to cater large 
traffic and requested layin g another lane.  He also asserted the need for Amaravati 
Express Highway. The representatives of the State Road Contractors’ Association 
stated that the contracts for road construction and maintenance should be investment 
friendly. 
342. The Committee takes  note of the status of the ongoing road projects in 
Andhra Pradesh and desires that the Ministry may analyze the need of 
upgradation of suitable State Highways in Andhra Pradesh into National 
Highways. 
343. The Committee recommends that NHAI may ensure tha t urgent 
necessary action is taken to reduce the accidents taking place on the 
Rajahmundry Bypass. NHAI may also assess the need for addition of another 
lane on the flyover constructed at Benz Circle, Vijayawada. 
344. In the meeting of the Committee held o n 10 th January, 2020 in Mumbai, the 
representative of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed the Committee 
that 35 black spots have been identified in Maharashtra, for which improvement 
measures, such as localized curve improvement, junction impr ovement, extra wide 
signages, line marking, blinkers, crash barriers, rumble strips etc., have been taken. 
As part of long term measures, localized widening / divider construction, curve 
improvement / extra widening through land acquisition etc., are incor porated in 4/6 

137 
 
laning widening projects. 
345. The representatives of the Government of Maharashtra also briefed the 
Committee about the NH projects under implementation through PWD and MSRDC 
in Maharashtra, including the status of major corridor improvement projects going on, 
Mumbai-Goa Road NH-66 and Kalyan-Nirmal Road NH-61. It was informed that the 
major reasons for delay in ongoing works are delays in acquisition of land, joint 
measurement survey, tree -cutting permission, approval of proposal of forest land 
diversion, approval of estimates for utility shifting and financial issues with 
contractors. 
346. The Committee takes stock of the ongoing road projects in the State of 
Maharashtra. The Committee desires that the Ministry may take effective steps 
in close coordination with PWD and MSRDC, to resolve the issues causing delay 
in the execution of road projects in Maharashtra. 
347. The Committee, in its meeting held on 11 th January, 2020 in Goa, was briefed 
by the representatives of the Ministry regarding t he status of the road projects in Goa 
ongoing at the time. The representatives informed the Committee that the State of Goa 
has a National Highway network of 293.1 kilometers, out of which 244.2 km length is 
with the State Government, while 48.9 km length is with NHAI. Another 108.5 km 
length has been declared as In Principal NH in Goa, out of which 100.5 km section 
has already been awarded. The Committee was informed that 22 NH projects with a 
sanctioned cost of Rs. 5687 crores, are presently under impleme ntation in Goa. The 
Committee was also briefed about the important NH(O) projects in Goa.  The 
representatives of Government of Goa informed the Committee that two NH projects 
have been completed in the year 2019 -20 in Goa, including the construction of a h igh 
level new Khandepar bridge with a cost of Rs. 355.44 crores. Thereafter, the 
Committee was apprised of the ongoing and upcoming NH projects of PWD, 
Government of Goa. The representatives of State Roads’ Contractors Association 
submitted that workshops should be arranged for engineers, contractors and other 
stakeholders involved in the construction of NHs before the Ministry to bring out its 
model contract document. They further submitted that the present provisions for first 
payment being made to contra ctors only after 25% completion of a project is a cause 
of concern in case of large size projects, as money invested by the contractors, to the 
tune of hundreds of crores of rupees, is paid to them after over an year of awarding of 
the project. The represe ntatives also raised the issue of absence of cash flow in the 

138 
 
present market, with banks issuing notices for repayment of loans before payment is 
released to the contractors by the State Government. 
348. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may recon sider its 
provisions regarding first payment being made to contractors only after 25% 
completion of a project, in case of large size projects.  
349. In their presentation made before the Committee in the meeting held in 
Srinagar on 23 rd January, 2021, the officials of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways apprised the Committee of the upgardation of of NH 144 -A to 4-lane, with 
the paved shoulder of Jammu Akhnoor road section in the region to be executed on 
EPC basis, alongwith widening and 2 - lanning of NH 244, with shoulder 
configuration and geometric improvement. The representatives of NHIDCL shared 
the progress of construction of 83 Km long Bi - directional tunnel between Khellani - 
Kishtwar which would improve connectivity between the regions and red uce travel 
time. The Committee also noted the status of the projects in UTs of J&K and Ladakh, 
with special reference of Srinagar ring road (42 Km) project targetted to be awarded 
by March, 2021. The officials of NHAI apprised about the current status of Z ozila 
tunnel for connectivity to Kargil, Drass and Leh, which is likely to be completed by 
September, 2026. 
350.  The Committee notes the status of the ongoing projects in the UT of J&K 
and Ladakh. The Committee may recommends that the Ministry may lay spe cial 
focus on road safety aspects of projects in the region, giving due significance to 
minimizing the ecological impact caused by the NH projects in the ecologically 
sensitive region. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Issues faced in transport of heavy goods on National Highways 
351. During the meetings of the Committee on the subject, some of the Members raised the 
issue of overloaded vehicles causing damage to the roads which are not built to withstand 
such heavy vehicles. It was stated that the damages caused because of th e same takes very 
long to be rectified and leads to contractors going into arbitration stating that their design is 
not for such heavy loads. 

139 
 
352. The Committee strongly feels that overloaded vehicles not only cause severe 
damage to the roads, but also pos e a significant safety risk to other vehicles plying on 
the road. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may take immediate 
measures to install weigh -in motion system at all its toll plazas across the country to 
detect vehicles which are carry ing more weight than their prescribed limits. Hefty fines 
should be charged on vehicles not abiding by the limits. The usage of weigh -in motion 
system to issue automated challans/ penalty would eliminate the possible collusion of 
corrupt officials with the  heavy vehicle owners. The Ministry further recommends that 
the Ministry may consider charging toll on the basis of tonnage of the vehicles. 
353. In its written note furnished to the Committee , All India Transporters ’ Welfare 
Association highlighted the ne ed to work on the following parameters in order to enable 
reliable movement of goods on road in a predictable manner:- 
 Maintenance: The construction of good roads have to be followed up by good 
maintenance. A pot hole on an express highway is much more dan gerous than on 
a city road. The vehicles move at a high speed and are not prepared for any strong 
jerk due to potholes. 
 Intervention free: There are a number of interventions, especially, for goods trucks 
on highways. Unauthorized policemen and taxmen hold  up the vehicles in the 
guise of checking. Most of these checking are only to extract some money and not 
on valid grounds. Government should take action about this. A truck driver is only 
driving the vehicle and he is not responsible in any error in docume nts or any 
malafide intention of any consignor/consignee, yet he has to suffer in the hands of 
these officers. 
 Respect the driver: For no reason, a truck driver is treated with contempt on road. 
Policemen often abuse them and sometimes manhandle them. In g eneral, no one 
appreciates his contribution to the national economy; even though he  is the 
backbone of national economy. Government  gives lot of respect to soldiers and 
farmers; but hardly recognizes the contribution of truck drivers, who live an 
equally hard life, away from their family. During the pandemic, the US President 
Donald Trump invited the truckers to White House and praised their contribution 
during pandemic. They were handed over awards for their role in nation building. 
Such a thing was missin g in India. It should be appreciated that when the 
lockdown was declared in the month of March, 2020; lakhs of drivers got 

140 
 
marooned on highways. All the eateries were closed and they were left to survive 
of their own as the movement of vehicle was stopped by State Governments.. 
There was no reference of contribution of a driver in any of the speeches or 
celebrations of the leaders of the country. Truck drivers were denied the essential 
Covid insurance which was given to other Corona warriors. If a country c annot 
honor its truck drivers, the highways will always remain incomplete in its 
progress. 
 Safety & Security: Safety and Security of road users is of utmost importance. 
Unexpected entry of animals on high -speed roads can cause big calamities. Roads 
have to  be fully fenced. There should not be any direct entry and exit on 
highways; all such things should be properly guided and should be through 
exclusive exit and entry chutes. 
 Infrastructure: Infrastructure on all highways is highly needed. Sufficient number  
of eateries, toilets, motels are needed at proper distances. Stand alone Telephone 
booths are needed for the highway users. For heavy vehicles drivers, there should 
be affordable rest houses where they can get sleep, rest and toilet facilities. 
Absence of such facilities forces truck drivers to continue driving until he reaches 
where he gets a break; fatigue caused due to overdriving becomes the reason of 
accidents on highways. Fire brigade and ambulance are required for quick action 
on highways. Internati onally helicopters are kept standby to airlift the accident 
victims to the nearest pre-decided hospitals for addressing the crisis during golden 
hours. Indian certainly can afford such facilities. 
 Civic Awareness: Finally, a massive civic awareness program me is desired 
through electronic media. People who do not drive very often on highways, they 
do not understand the importance. Unaware drivers drive their cars in the high 
speed lane at low speed. The awareness program should use animations to train 
about the lane discipline on highways. It has been noted on few National 
highways that highways are divided by flower beds. These flower beds are 
watered by slow speed watering vans in the high speed lanes. These slow speed 
vehicles can become a source of accident in high speed lane. 
354. The Committee takes note of the various issues faced by heavy vehicle owners/ 
transporters. The Committee feels that the installation of weigh -in motion systems at 

141 
 
toll plazas on National Highways across the country would be ver y helpful in saving the 
truck drivers from harassment and illicit demands from corrupt officials. 
355. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work on development of 
eateries, toilets, rest house etc. on National Highways, to allow truck drivers mor e 
comfort while travelling long distances. This would also help them be more 
concentrated while driving and would thus lead to lesser road accidents. 
Standardization of construction equipments used for road development 
356. While deposing before the Committee on the subject in its meeting held on 7 th 
January, 2021, Senior Vice President, Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers' 
Association (ICEMA) informed that ICEMA is a 71 -year old industry body 
comprising 70 construction equipment manufacturers in th e country. He stated that 
the construction equipment intensity, which is defined as the investment in 
construction equipment per thousand dollars of investment in infrastructure, is low in 
India – at about 5 dollars per thousand dollars of infrastructure, as compared to 20-40 
dollars of equipment per 1000 dollars of infrastructure. He was of the view that this 
points to the low level of mechanization in the country. He opined that the road 
infrastructure contracts should be specific in terms of mechanizatio n to used since it 
has a lot of advantages in terms of quality. 
357. The Committee believes that the usage of modern machinery for 
construction can lead to improved road quality, while saving time as well. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the feasibility of the 
suggestion made by ICEMA to specify the details of mechanization to be used in 
the execution of a road project, in the road construction contract. A decision may 
be taken in this regard with due consideration to the benefits o f prescribing such 
a mandate and the financial ability of the road contractors in India to 
purchase/rent such machinery. 
Promotion of usage of electric vehicles 
358. The Ministry, in its written reply to a query of the Committee regarding 
electric vehicles , informed that the number of registered electric vehicles in the 
country is 5,11,910 as on 28th January, 2021, as per the VAHAN database.  

142 
 
359. The Committee notes from the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry 
that the total number of registered vehicl es in India is 29.57 crores, according to 
the provisional data for the year 2019, with a CAGR of 9.91 percent for the years 
2009 to 2019. The percentage of electric vehicles in the country thus comes out to 
be somewhere around 0.17 percent of the total veh icles plying in the country. 
The Committee is disappointed to note the very slow adoption of electric vehicles 
in India, with several countries across the world already having share of electric 
cars in double digits. The Committee desires that concrete measures are taken by 
the Ministry to enact policies to aid much faster growth of adoption of electric 
vehicles in the country . The Committee recommends that the Ministry, in 
coordination with Ministry of Power and automobile manufacturers may come 
up with a time-bound plan to create a robust vehicle charging infrastructure 
across the entire National Highways network in the country.  Such infrastructure 
is critical to give a boost to the adoption of electric vehicles in the country, which 
would lead to consider able environmental benefits and help resolve the issue of 
pollution to some extent. 
360. Further, t he Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may 
exempt electric vehicles from registration charges and toll tax. Financial 
incentives are necessary to  create a spurt in the adoption of electric vehicles in 
the country, which, in turn, will increase the pace at which infrastructure is 
being created for the shift to such vehicles. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may undertake an in-depth analysis of the policies adopted by countries 
across the world which have succeeded in enabling mass adoption of the electric 
vehicles in the country, and come with an effective time -bound plan with well -
defined targets for electric vehicle adoption in India. 
GPS based tolling 
361. The Ministry, in its background note, informed the Committee that the 
RFP for pilot project of this new technology of distance based tolling is 
culminated into award to M/S RT-Invest Transport Systems LLC. The tolling will 
be done by G PS and GPRS technology without any Physical Tolling 
Infrastructure on ground. Pilot project is under Indian SPV/ Company M/s 
Rustintelsys is under progress. 

143 
 
362. The Committee also takes note of the statement given by the Hon’ble 
Minister of Road Transport and Highways regarding the removal of all toll plazas 
across the country within the next one year. He had informed that toll charges will 
instead be collected through the global positioning technology. A camera will 
record the vehicle details at the point  of entry to the toll section as well as exit 
from the toll section. The user will be charged only for the segment of the toll 
road used. 
363. The Committee appreciates the initiatives being taken by the Ministry 
with regard to the introduction GPS based t olling in the country, which will  
remove the need for physical tolling infrastructure on ground. The 
Committee hopes that implementing this country -wide would eliminate the 
delays faced by people at toll booths and thus would shorten the journey 
times on N ational Highways, while saving fuel as well. The Committee 
recommends that the fee collection system may be designed in such a way so 
as to link the fee deduction with the bank account of the vehicle owner, so as 
to remove the need for frequent recharge of FASTags. This would be of great 
help to people who are not well versed with technology to recharge their 
FASTags online themselves. 
Re-habilitation of project affected people 
 364. Public Works (Building & National Highway) Department, Government of 
Assam informed the Committee that re -habilitation of project affected people is 
covered under NH Act, 1956. Transport Department, Government of Assam informed 
the Committee that the Government of Assam had announced Relief package for 
boatman, restaurant etc. affected due to opening of Dhola- Sadiya and Bogibeel Bridge 
in the year 2019-2020.  
 The statement of expenditure and nos. of beneficiaries is given below:-  
 2019-2020  
  Budget provision = Rs. 500.00 Lakh  
  Expenditure = Rs.330.80 Lakh  
  No. of beneficiaries people = 935 Nos.  
 2020-21 
  Budget provision =Rs. 190.00 Lakh  

144 
 
  Expenditure = Rs.16.65 Lakh  
  No. of beneficiaries people =46 Nos.  
Proposal has been moved to Finance department for releasing the amount of Rs.66.95 
lakh for 178Nos. beneficiaries for the current financial year 2020-21. 
 365. Department of Tourism, Government of Goa informed the Committee that in 
the absence of clear guidelines on providing compensation in special cases (including 
landowners with unclear titles or more than one own er), the settlement process takes a 
much longer time. In addition to the above, the reasons for delay in resettlement are as 
follows: 
 Delay in finalization of the alignment and corridor of impact during project 
preparation stage. 
 Delay in identification and finalization of the list of displaced persons. The list of title 
holders gets finalized after the declaration of award by the competent authority. 
 The alternative land for relocation during preparation stage is not firmed up. 
 Clear & transparent communic ation between the affected people and  
the authority to reduce conflicts and enhance rehabilitation process. 
 366. Public Works Department, Government of Kerala informed the Committee 
that the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition , 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 is being followed for land acquisition and 
rehabilitation of PAP. 
 367. Public Works Department, Government of Manipur informed the Committee 
that the Governing Authority need to give special attention to the pop ulation getting 
affected by such projects/plants to protect their rights, minimise their losses and to help 
them to restore a secure means of livelihood by establishing and maintaining few 
resources inter alia Mobile Health Clinics, Market Centres and Gree nfield Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITI) to facilitate a sustained source of income to the newly 
inhabitants to ease the problem faced by the poor people inhabited in rural areas, when 
they undergo development -induced resettlement due to the current pra ctices 
concerning the environmental impact assessment (EIA) of a roadway project, that 
changes the social fabric of the affected communities as well as the consequences 
faced due to forced rehabilitation. 
 368. Public Works Department, Government of Mizora m informed the Committee 
that the State Government gives compensation for the land, crops building and any 

145 
 
other properties belonging to the affected families or persons for the State projects and 
NH Projects. But for the Externally Aided Projects, Social Safe Guard guidelines are 
followed for which, apart from the above stated compensation, shifting charges, rental 
charges during construction of new buildings were reimbursed/paid to the affected 
families or person. However, such type of assistance for the State Government is found 
difficult to implement due to shortage of fund. 
 369. The Committee takes note of the mechanism in place to facilitate the 
rehabilitation of people who have to let go of their land for the development of 
road projects. The Committee observes that the land is the only source of income 
for many people in India and desires that the Ministry may come up with 
solutions to provide sustained source of income to the people who were solely 
dependent on their land for their livelihood. Land value capture mechanism may 
be employed to capture value from the land nearby National Highways and a part 
of the same may be shared with the previous landowners. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may look into the feasibility of employing  the 
project-affected people to operate/provide roadside facilities such as rest 
house/rooms, eateries, etc. 
Implementation of more stringent Pollution Checks 
370. The Committee takes note of media reports pointing to falsification of 
emission data at emis sion testing centers for issuance of Pollution -Under-
Control Certificates to vehicles. This poses a serious threat to the environment 
and air, thus having a direct detrimental effect on public health. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may devise w ays to prevent such 
cases. Feasibility of making video recording of the emission tests mandatory 
for issuance of PUC certificates may be evaluated. The Ministry may 
implement provisions to ensure that the emission testing equipments used by 
the testing cen ters are evaluated from time to time to check their accuracy of 
emission data. 
Planting of trees by NHAI 
371. One Member of the Committee raised the issue of planting of saplings by 
NHAI to replace the trees that are to be cut for clearing load for constru ction of 

146 
 
roads. He stated that all such saplings get vanished after a month or so after being 
planted. 
372. The Committee strongly recommends that it must be ensured that the 
saplings planted by NHAI are looked after in their formative years and that 
the l and be regularly watered and looked after.  Suitable provisions may be 
introduced to ensure that the trees planted are of a suitable specific height  
and are looked after well, once planted. The Committee desires to know the 
existing mechanism in this regard, alongwith the reasons the same is failing at 
present. 
Ensuring elimination of hindrances on waterways 
373. During its study visit to Chennai and Kochi during July, 2021 , the 
Committee took note of the issue of road bridges constructed across rivers causi ng 
obstruction to boats and ships because of insufficient height of the bridges. 
374. The Committee feels that the development of waterways across the 
country will bring significant benefits to the Tourism sector as well as the 
Shipping sector. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends that strict guidelines 
may be framed and implemented by the Ministry across the country  to ensure 
suitable clearance for boats and/or ships , keeping in mind the present as well 
as future scope for waterways  – both National waterwa ys and other inland  
waterways, while building road bridges over water bodies.  In this regard, the 
Ministry should work in close coordination with the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways and the  concerned Department of the  State 
Government. 
Allocation of funds under CRIF 
375. During its meetings on utilization of CRIF works in Tamil Nadu and 
Kerala, held on 12 th July and 16 th July, 2021 at Chennai and Kumarakom 
respectively, the Committee was informed that the funds under CRIF are allocated 
based on 30% weightage to fuel consumption and 70% weightage to geographical 
area of the States/UTs. The Ministry apprised the Committee that the total cost of 
the schemes to be approved for a State is to be limited to the Bank of Sanctions 

147 
 
(BOS), which is generally th ree times of the annual allocation/accrual of CRIF for 
a State, while for hilly and North-Eastern states, this is limited to four times. 
376. The Committee is of the view  that the existing mechanism of bank of 
sanctions is causing a visible lack of clarity  between the State Government 
Departments concerned and the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, 
regarding the amount that the State is yet to be awarded.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may look into the issue and come up with 
suitable guidel ines to ensure that there is no confusion among the State 
Government Departments and the Ministry, regarding the share of funds to 
be received by the State , in any particular year , after factoring in the Bank of 
Sanctions.  
 
***** 
  

148 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF ROAD PROJECTS 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the Model 
Concessionaire Agreements (MCAs) for the different modes of implementation of road 
projects from time to time, with inputs from both the co ncessionaires as well as the 
lenders, since both play a crucial role in the implementation of projects, especially the 
ones executed under the PPP model.  
(Para 11) 
 The Committee notes that the concessionaire is responsible for the Operation 
and Maintenan ce (O&M) of the road projects for the entire Concession Period (BOT 
(Toll) and BOT (Annuity) projects) or 15 years (HAM projects) in PPP projects, but in 
case of Public funded projects, the contractor is responsible for rectification of defects/ 
maintenance only during the defects/maintenance -cum-defects liability period which 
varies between one to four years. Since a large number of road projects are Public 
funded projects, especially the ones that are deemed not to be financially viable for 
private sector  participation, the onus of their maintenance falls on the 
Ministry/NHAI/State PWDs. In this regard, the Committee feels that the amount of 
funds allocated for the maintenance of National Highways every year is minuscule given 
the vast lengths of the Natio nal Highways across the country. The Committee strongly 
recommends that the maintenance of the existing network of National Highways should 
be given topmost priority and the same should be reflected in the budgetary allocation 
made for the same.  
(Para 12) 
 The Committee takes note of the various stages involved in the execution of a 
National Highways Project. The Committee feels that the Ministry must undertake a 
holistic review of the DPR preparation stage of road projects. Preparation of DPR 
should be aided by the latest technology available for the purpose and the inputs of the 
stakeholders and public representatives, including the local MP, and the demands and 
concerns of the local populace should be taken into account during the process of 
preparation of the DPR. The Committee desires that the Ministry may come up with 
Rules/ necessary statutory provisions to fix the accountability of the officials/ 

149 
 
organization responsible for drafting the DPR till a stipulated period of time after the 
completion of th e project, for any negligence on their part, that results in construction 
of poor quality roads. Forethought may be given at this stage to ensure ample 
provisions for road safety; mandatory service lanes; avoidance of traffic bottlenecks; 
and minimization of adverse environmental and heritage impact caused by the project. 
The Committee further recommends that traffic projections for the long -term must be 
taken into account while preparing DPR for any road project and where feasible, 
additional land may be a cquired adjacent to the alignment planned at present, so as to 
enable widening of the highways, when the widening of road is needed at a future date. 
(Para 15) 
 The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in para 183 of its 287 th 
Report on Demands for  Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways, which is reproduced below verbatim: 
The Committee is of the view that roads across the country require frequent 
trenching for the purpose of laying of fiber lines, gas pipelines, and other 
similar amenities. The patchwork done thereafter is often delayed and rarely 
meets the desired construction quality, thus thwarting the speed of vehicles on 
the road and acting as a safety hazard. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may consider the inclusion of a provision for dedicated underground 
utility corridors in its upcoming National Highways projects to prevent 
frequent trenching. The provision for construction of dedicated underground 
utility corridor should be included at the DPR stage itse lf. The extra cost 
incurred for building the underground utility corridors may be replenished by 
monetizing the constructed utility corridors by charging the Departments and 
Companies which will benefit from avoidance of frequent trenching of roads. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may create a Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) for the purpose of monetization of the utility corridors. 
(Para 16) 
 The Committee recommends that DPRs of National Highways road projects 
should have provisions for right of w ay and service roads. The DPRs should be 
prepared after public consultation and inputs from Members of Parliament of the area. 

150 
 
The Committee further recommends that provisions for public amenities such as 
dhabas, washroom facilities etc. should be included at the DPR stage of NH projects.  
(Para 19) 
 The Committee notes that Highway Safety has been given 35% weightage in 
NHAI’s parameters for assessment and ranking of National Highways. Number of 
accidents and deaths happening on the particular National Hig hway must be taken into 
account while calculating such scores.  
(Para 21) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take steps to assign scores to 
all the National Highways projects, including the ones executed by State Government 
PWDs, after assessi ng their quality of construction. A central database may store the 
scores obtained by the different road projects of each concessionaire/contractor, which 
may be analyzed to ascertain the quality of work executed by all the concessionaires. 
The Committee r ecommends that the quality of previous works carried out by the 
concessionaires should also be a factor, besides the bid amount, during the awarding 
process of a road project tender. This would ensure that concessionaires that produce 
quality roads are not left out of having the opportunity to work on a project because of 
minor differences in bidding amounts.  
(Para 22) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider breaking down big 
road projects into smaller chunks so as to attract the interest of the small contractors 
themselves. The Committee feels that provisions should be in place to ensure that there 
is a well-defined lower limit, below which bids for a road project would not be accepted. 
The Committee agrees with the apprehension raised by the Member of the Committee 
regarding a likely hit on the quality of work that can be carried out by a contractor who 
bids substantially lower than the approved project cost. The Committee believes that 
such bids are made with the sole intent of winning th e bid and more often than not, it 
would not be possible for such bidders to do quality work with such low bids. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may lay even greater focus on 
arriving at accurate estimates for the project cost for a g iven road project and specify 
an upper and lower limits within which bids can be placed.  
(Para 25) 

151 
 
 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to carefully analyze the 
shortcomings of the existing mechanism for awarding road projects to the lowest 
bidder, since doing so includes little thought for ensuring quality of the work. The 
Committee believes that there should be consideration for other importance factors 
besides the bidding amount, while awarding a project to a concessionaire. A qualitative 
approach must be formulated for awarding road projects. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may take up with  the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), the 
shortcomings of the existing system of awarding a project to the lowest bidder, 
presenting its arguments for modification of the CVC guidelines for awarding of tender 
in a suitable way to permit an element of qualitative approach in the tender awarding 
process for road projects. The Committee feels that a criterion may be developed where 
certain weightage is given to objective parameters such as the awards presently being 
executed by the contractor, their financial record, and most importantly, the past 
performance of a contractor, in terms of quality of work and timely execution. The 
database recommended by the Committee in para 22 of this Report may be useful for 
such purposes.  
(Para 26) 
 The Committee recommends that thorough quality checks may be performed 
before the issuance of completion certificate for any NH project, with special focus on 
rigorous testing of quality of the construction material used. The frequency of quality 
checks performed during the construction stage of a project may be increased suitably 
and independent third party audits may be conducted more often in order to deter the 
connivance of the Authority’s Engineer with the road contractors. The Committee 
further desires that extensive quality checks may be performed when the defect liability 
period of a project is nearing its end, so as to ensure that the issues arising near the en d 
of the defect liability period are addressed by the contractor before their liability for the 
same is over.  
(Para 28) 
 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should look into the 
authenticity of the quality checks cleared by road projects, w hich later performed 
poorly and/or deteriorated at a quick pace, since the same alludes to either the 
insufficiency of the quality checks in place, or the connivance of the officials/engineers 

152 
 
in charge of conducting the quality checks. A suitable mechanism may be put in place to 
ensure that the IRC guidelines are followed in the execution of road works without fail.  
(Para 29) 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
 The Committee notes that carrying out research activities in relation to the 
development, mai ntenance and management of highways is one of the functions 
entrusted to NHAI under the NHAI Act, 1988. Research activities are crucial for NHAI 
to figure out the best methodologies for construction and maintenance of National 
Highways across the significa ntly diverse geography present in India. The Committee 
desires to be apprised of the amount of funds spent by NHAI on carrying out this 
mandate and recommends that it may lay a much greater focus on its research activities 
and ensure good budgetary allocation under this head.  
(Para 32) 
Vacancies and Staffing in NHAI 
 The Committee reiterates the recommendation that it made in para 67 of its 
287th Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways, which is reproduced below verbatim: 
The Committee is distressed to note that a large number of vacancies are 
existing in NHAI, which is implementing a large number of National Highways 
projects in the country. With this shortfall in manpower, the Committee 
wonders how the NHAI can wo rk effectively and efficiently. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take urgent action to fill up the 
vacant positions in NHAI at the earliest. The details of NHAI staff posted on 
deputation basis and how many of them are working on permanent basis may 
also be shared with the Committee. 
(Para 34) 
 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons 
for the existence of such a large number of NHAI vacancies. The Committee desires to 
be apprised of the same, alongwith reasons for why the vacancies cannot be filled up on 

153 
 
time, since in most cases, the retirement timelines of employees are known well in 
advance. The Committee fails to understand how NHAI can ensure that its road 
projects are not delayed and are executed with the best possible quality, when almost 
one third of its staff requirements is not filled up. The budget granted to NHAI has 
significantly grown over the last few years. Similarly, the quantity of road projects 
being taken by NHAI has also wit nessed a consistent increase. Only a fully -staffed 
organization can ensure that the huge amount of funds available with NHAI are 
optimized optimally in order to push the NH infrastructure in India to greater heights. 
NHAI may also carry out an extensive study into its present staff requirements, keeping 
in mind the increased workload being taken by NHAI each year. The Committee 
recommends that an effective, time -bound plan may be devised to fill these vacancies at 
the earliest.  
(Para 35) 
 The Committee recognizes the fact that even though the Highways sector is one of 
the highest funded sectors in the country, with the amount of funds earmarked for the 
same increasing every year, crucial senior level posts in NHAI in the Finance cadre from 
Deputy Manager up to CGM level are lying vacant. It is a matter of grave concern that 
majority of posts up to DGM level are vacant since many years, even though several 
attempts have been made to fill them on deputation. The Committee could understand 
that such a situation  arose due to non -availability of eligible candidates because of 
different accounting pattern in NHAI & Government (Double entry & single entry 
accounting), pay scale disparity between NHAI & PSUs at mid level (CDA and IDA) and 
court cases by internal candidates for promotion.  
(Para 35A) 
 The Committee takes note that the existing Recruitment Rules equate graduates/ 
B.com  with candidates having professional qualifications such as CA/ICWA/MBA 
(Finance) and that in the past, recruitment at lower level were done under the existing 
Rules, resulting in the promotion of persons, who are merely graduates, holding such 
senior posts. The Committee feels that it is paramount that in a vital organization such 
as NHAI, only persons who possess required educational qua lifications occupy higher 
posts in specialised cadre like Finance.  
(Para 35B) 

154 
 
  Taking into account the above mentioned issues, the Committee suggests that 
apart from promotion and deputation, NHAI may amend the existing Recruitment 
Rules for the Finance cadre, by including reasonable percentage of posts on direct 
recruitment basis for candidates having qualification of CA/ICWA/MBA (Finance) etc. 
and that at least 30% of posts of senior level, such as Deputy Manager, Manager, DGM 
etc. may be taken through direct recruitment, which will foster merit and selection of 
qualified candidates.  
(Para 35C) 
 The Committee feels that such a modification in the recruitment process will 
enable NHAI to not only fill up the long pending vacancies, but also improve its 
operational efficiency. The Committee hopes that a mix mode of recruitment viz., direct 
recruitment, promotion and deputation for crucial and specialised cadre such as 
Finance, will provide NHAI with candidates having knowledge and expertise of new 
taxation laws such as GST, resource mobilisation and InvIT. 
(Para 35D) 
Monetization of National Highways through innovative financing models 
 The Committee takes note of the various innovative financing models being 
employed by the Ministry/NHAI to monetize its exi sting assets, to fund the development 
and maintenance of the NH network across the country. The Committee is of the 
considered view that the ongoing coronavirus pandemic has impacted the traffic 
volumes across the country since March, 2020 and might contin ue to do so in the near 
future. This is likely to affect the asset monetization plans made by NHAI for the short -
term future, since it would lower the interest of private players in BOT projects as well 
as in TOT mode. The Committee recommends that NHAI sh ould factor in the effect of 
the pandemic on its financial plans for the near future. NHAI may take appropriate 
steps to allay the traffic volume related concerns of the stakeholders by holding 
constructive dialogue with them, take steps to share the risk caused by the uncertainty 
of traffic volume, due to such unforeseeable events, among the different parties involved 
and, if need be, make suitable modifications to this effect, in its Model Concession 
Agreement (MCAs) and Request for Proposal (RFPs) for the short term.  
(Para 38) 

155 
 
 
 The Committee recommends that NHAI may consider lowering the minimum 
investment amount in InvIT IPO to a suitable amount so as to attract participation 
from a larger number of participants.  
(Para 41) 
 The Committee feels that In frastructure Finance Companies such as IIFCL play 
an important role in meeting the huge financial requirements of the road infrastructure 
sector in India. The Committee therefore desires to know the reasons for not permitting 
IFCs to lend to InvITs and des ires that NHAI may grant such permission to IFCs with 
suitable limits, if need be, so as to ensure InvITs attract the amount of targeted funds.  
(Para 43) 
Rising debt of NHAI 
 The Committee is concerned to note the huge debt servicing liability of NHAI in 
the coming years. For the ongoing Financial Year 2021 -22, NHAI’s debt servicing 
liability is equivalent to 33% of the overall budgetary allocation of Rs. 1,18,101 crores of 
the Ministry at the Budgetary Estimates stage of the FY 2021 -22. The Committee 
reiterates the recommendation made in para 72 of its 287 th Report on Demands for 
Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministry and recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may 
undertake earnest measures to ensure that its stuck projects are completed at the 
earliest and delay is minimized in the ongoing projects, since delays are one of the core 
reasons behind cost overruns.  
(Para 45) 
 The Committee takes note of the various innovative measures that have been 
suggested by the different financial organizations and banks in order t o tackle the issue 
of huge debt servicing costs of NHAI. The Committee feels that NHAI should tap into 
the funds available with insurance companies and pension funds, both Indian and 
foreign. Securitization of NHAI’s existing assets may be suitable to attr act the interest 
of pension funds since the return targeted by pension funds is on the lower side. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into any changes in the existing 
provisions that may be needed to allow insurance companies and pension f unds to 

156 
 
participate in funding road infrastructure sector in the country. Multilateral agencies, 
Japan Overseas Infrastructure Investment Corporation for Transport & Urban 
Development (JOIN), foreign pension funds and sovereign wealth funds may also be 
approached by NHAI, with suitable assurances/comforts from Government of India.  
(Para 58) 
 The Committee notes that land acquisition costs form a significant portion of the 
total road project costs and hopes that NHAI, in coordination with State Governments,  
take suitable steps to capture the value generated by the implementation of road 
projects so as to finance the rising land acquisition costs in road sector.  
(Para 59) 
 The Committee reiterates its recommendation made at para 43 of this Report 
and desires that suitable steps may be taken to permit IIFCL to play a bigger role in 
long-term lending to the road infrastructure sector, by way of subscribing to corporate 
bonds, investing in InvITs, and by allowing IIFCL to lend directly to NHAI and State 
Departments concerned to finance long-term road projects.  
(Para 60) 
 The Committee notes that India’s foreign exchange reserves, as per RBI 
(Annexure-B), have risen substantially in the recent past. The Committee recommends 
that RBI, with due consideration to the sufficiency of the foreign reserves, may consider 
the possibility of utilization of surplus funds to finance long -term road infrastructure 
projects in the country. RBI may also look into the feasibility of utilization of the 
surplus reserves for the creat ion of a sovereign wealth fund to finance long -term 
infrastructural assets.  
(Para 61) 
Keeping a check on possible connivance between contractors and Approving 
Authorities 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the current 
mechanism in plac e to deter the connivance of the Authority’s Engineers with 
contractors/concessionaires. Cases where roads deteriorate shortly after their 
completion should be looked into and the basis on which completion certificate for the 

157 
 
project had been issued, shoul d be scrutinized. Accountability may be fixed in cases 
wherein guidelines have been blatantly ignored during execution of road projects.  
(Para 63) 
 The Committee believes that the level of security and integrity of information 
provided by decentralized ne tworks such as blockchain can be helpful in affixing 
accountability in case of sub-standard projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that NHAI may employ the use of blockchain technology to store data about 
implementation of road projects – including data about the tests performed to ascertain 
the quality of material used in the construction, the guidelines followed in the execution 
of the project, the observations made by the Authority’s Engineers at the time of grant 
of completion certificate for any given project, etc. Doing so will make such information 
immutable and remove any possibilities of fudging of records by any corrupt 
individuals.  
(Para 64) 
 The Committee recommends that it should be made compulsory to submit video 
recordings of the spec ifications of the completed works, wherever possible, confirming 
that all works have been carried out by the concessionaire/contractors, before the grant 
of completion certificate of the road project to any concessionaire/contractor. This 
would ensure that  ancillary specifications such as road signs, markings, shoulders etc. 
are duly completed as per the provisions of the contract.  
(Para 65) 
FACTORS IMPEDING THE PACE OF NH PROJECTS 
 The Committee feels that the information furnished by the Ministry regardi ng 
road projects delayed for more than 5 years, makes it evident that delays in road 
projects is one of the most substantial issues being faced by the road sector in India at 
present. Though the Committee commends the efforts made by the Ministry in 
increasing the pace of construction of highways in the last several years, the large 
number of projects that are delayed for a significant period of more than 5 years, is a 
cause of concern. Such delays are accompanied by significant cost overruns and in case 
of brownfield projects, cause a lot of discomfort and added traffic times to the existing 
traffic. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may establish a dedicated 

158 
 
mechanism to keep projects on track as far as possible, notice delays at the earliest and 
take necessary action to proactively tackle factors causing delays in any given project.  
(Para 68) 
 The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may assess the reasons 
behind all such delayed road projects across the country and time -bound remedial  
measures may be initiated at the earliest so as to avoid further delays in the completion 
of already delayed projects.  
(Para 68B) 
Land Acquisition Issues 
 The Committee observes that land acquisition issues are at the core of delays 
faced in road project s. The Committee takes note of the guidelines issued by the 
Ministry to streamline acquisition of land for NH projects in the country and 
recommends that the Ministry may ensure that these guidelines may be reviewed from 
time to time, incorporating suitabl e modifications to simplify the process of land 
acquisition and ironing out the various constraints faced in land acquisition.  
(Para 71) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take immediate steps to 
ensure that adequate manpower is present with the land acquisition units at the field 
level across the country. The alignment given for any given project should be finalized 
only after taking in inputs from all stakeholders and the local population, with due 
consideration to the future traffic project ions, environmental concerns etc. Changing 
the alignment at a later stage of the project can be a costly affair and should be avoided 
at all costs, through application of foresight.  
(Para 72) 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the present status of the implementation 
of the Land Value Capture Mechanism. This mechanism may help the Ministry in 
managing the huge increase in road project costs on account of a significant jump in 
land acquisition costs in the past several years. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may consider making 1the upfront contribution of State Governments flexible, 
fixing it on the basis of the financial ability of the State Government.  

159 
 
(Para 74) 
 The Committee feels that the Ministry may modify the land value capture 
mechanism in a way that the value captured by the State Government is, in part, shared 
with the previous owners of the land. A major reason for the hesitation of land -owners 
to part with their land is that the land is often their only source of livelihood. A 
mechanism may be worked out where an upfront payment is made to the land -owner 
and they are guaranteed a payment in the form of annuity for the long -term, financing 
the same through the land value captured by the State Government. The Committee 
believes tha t such a system would lower the frequency of land acquisition matters 
ending up in litigation, which cause huge delays to the projects, besides causing cost 
overruns.  
(Para 75) 
 The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Ministry to resolve land 
acquisition issues in coordination with State Governments. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may analyze the historical data from the PMIS, Pragati Portal and 
Bhoomi Rashi portal to figure out the presence of any bottlenecks or bureaucratic 
delays th at might be slowing down the land acquisition process. Steps may then be 
taken to further streamline the land acquisition process, which, in turn, would help 
keep the NH projects on track.  
(Para 77) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look int o reasons behind 
delays in sanction of L.A. estimates and address the same.  
(Para 80) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may sort out the issues faced by 
road contractors because of encumbrance on the land, once made available to them 
after acquisition. Further, the Ministry may urge upon the State Governments to carry 
out exercises to update their revenue maps periodically, in order to permit the Ministry 
to prepare more informed acquisition plans for its road projects. The Ministry may 
urge upon the State Governments to carry out exercises to update their revenue maps 
periodically, in order to permit the Ministry to prepare well -informed acquisition plans 
for its road projects.  

160 
 
(Para 82) 
 The Committee takes serious note of the lack of provision for de-notification of 
any land that might get identified and acquired for a road project but does not get 
utilized. While the Committee feels that such instances should be minimized, one cannot 
deny that there is still possibility for such occurrences bec ause of oversight or change in 
alignment. The Ministry may make the necessary changes in the legal provisions for 
land acquisition to rectify such mistakes. Provision for compensation amount for the 
period that the land was acquired may be incorporated so as to prevent any undue 
losses to the landowner for no fault of theirs.  
(Para 84) 
 With regard to upfront deposition of 50% cost of land acquisition by the State 
Government, the Committee reiterates its recommendation made at para 75 of this 
Report and re commends that the Ministry may frame a policy to accommodate State 
Governments that might not be financially able to deposit such large amounts upfront.  
(Para 85) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may evaluate the feasibility of 
construction of elevated highways in areas with high population density where 
acquisition of land would possibly be a long and tough task.  
(Para 87) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review its guideline which 
stipulates that the project implementation agen cies shall undertake additional land 
acquisition on one side of an existing road to the extent feasible for expansion of existing 
roads to next level of configurations, in light of the difficulties faced in such 
implementation in hilly areas.  
(Para 90) 
 The Committee agrees with the suggestion made by the Transport Department, 
Government of NCT of Delhi and recommends that the Ministry should assign a fixed 
time-frame for the different processes involved in land acquisition for a project. The 
Committee feels that doing so would help minimize bureaucratic delays and any delays 
happening in the process would be spotted quite early.  
(Para 92) 

161 
 
 The Committee takes note of the discrepancies pointed out by the Punjab PWD 
in the value of land determined at presen t based on registered sale deed/ collector rates 
and the actual market rate of the land. The Committee feels that such discrepancy, if 
present, would invariably cause dissastisfaction among the land owners and the ensuing 
delays on account of arbitration a nd legal procedures cost the public exchequer a lot of 
money due to project cost overruns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may review the accuracy of the provisions existing at present in determining 
the amount of compensation to be paid to land -owners, as compared to the actual 
market value of the land. If substantial differences are noticed in the compensation 
value and the market value in many instances, the Ministry may come up with a 
suitable mechanism for determination of a more fair value for the land to be acquired.  
(Para 94) 
Environment and Forest Clearance Issues 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change may make the online process for obtaining environmental and forest 
clearances for road projects, more user friendly.  
(Para 96) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the application 
process for obtaining the necessary environment and forest clearances is initiated as 
soon as the alignment of the project is fina lized, in order to avoid any undue delays in 
obtaining the permission.  
(Para 98) 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry may analyze the suggestions given by 
Mizoram PWD and if feasible, extend the implementation of the same to other States 
with high for est coverage. The Committee further recommends that delays faced in 
obtaining final forest clearance as well as tree cutting permissions may be looked into 
and resolved on a priority basis, to avoid delays in execution of road projects.  
(Para 103) 
The Committee feels that the MoEF&CC may coordinate with the various State 
Governments and ensure that the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority is 

162 
 
formed in the different States so as to permit MoEF&CC to focus on assessing the 
environmental impact of bi gger projects. This would help increase the pace at which 
road projects across the country are assessed in terms of their environmental impact.  
(Para 106) 
Delays in terms of financing of road projects 
 The Committee recommends the Ministry to work upon the different suggestions 
put forth by the financial institutions/banks for avoiding delays in road projects on 
account of delays in terms of financing.  
(Para 112) 
 The Committee feels that given the immense role played by good road 
connectivity in the econ omic growth of the country, the Ministry should request RBI to 
grant the Priority Sector tag to the road infrastructure sector in order to encourage 
financial institutions and banks to lend higher amounts to supplement the maintenance 
and growth of the NH network in the country.  
(Para 113) 
 The Committee recommends that in order to avoid delays in financing of road 
projects in case a consortium of banks is considering the grant of loans for a given 
project, RBI may look into defining a reasonable time limi t for the consortium to make 
its decisions regarding the financing of the road projects.  
(Para 114) 
Disputes Resolution Mechanism 
 The Committee takes note of the mechanism existing at present for arbitration 
and resolution of disputes. Disputes between t he concessionaire and the authority is one 
of the core reasons behind delays in road projects and having effective mechanisms in 
place to minimize the delay resolution time is crucial. The Committee desires the 
Ministry to thoroughly examine the efficacy o f the current arbitration and dispute 
resolution mechanism in settling disputes between the involved parties, helping avoid 
litigation processes to the maximum possible extent. Effective efforts may be made to 
address any bottlenecks causing delays in such arbitrations.  

163 
 
(Para 119) 
 The Committee notes that despite the best efforts at arbitration, many disputes 
between concessionaires and NHAI still end up in courts, which sometimes take years to 
finally settle the dispute. In light of this, the Committee r ecommends that amicable 
resolution should be the priority of the Ministry to the extent possible and the cost of 
taking the matter to courts should be considered both in terms of delays as well as cost 
overruns. The Committee desires that the Ministry may request fast-track hearing of its 
cases in courts, since delays in delivery of verdict in such cases directly take a toll on the 
public exchequer. Further, the Ministry may request the Government and the judiciary 
to empower a panel of retired judges havin g expertise in infrastructural litigations in 
order to enable quicker judgements in case of disputes with concessionaires, thereby 
helping minimize delays in execution of road projects.  
(Para 120) 
MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
 The Committee feels that  maintenance of the existing road network is an area 
which is not given enough attention to, by the Ministry. Maintenance of the existing 
NHs is essential not only from economic aspects, but also to reduce the number of road 
accidents that take place due t o potholes, poor quality of roads, damaged roads due to 
floods, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry make extensive 
use of network survey vehicles and latest technological innovations such as drones to 
regularly assess the quality of  the existing NH network in the country and to figure out 
the stretches that need to be worked upon. The maintenance requirements thus 
analyzed should be prioritized on the basis of potential safety hazards posed by the poor 
quality, the traffic volume on the stretch, and other relevant factors. The Committee 
believes that carrying out a task of such scale on the vast NH network in the country 
requires significant funds and recommends that the Ministry may request funds for the 
same in the coming financial years.  
(Para 122) 
 The Committee observes that special focus must be laid on high quality 
maintenance of roads in flood -prone regions. Specialized techniques may be used to 

164 
 
ensure that the maintenance work carried out in such regions is long lasting and t hat 
sufficient provisions for drainage are included in the project.  
(Para 123) 
 The Committee is distressed to note the poor feedback received by the Sukhad 
Yatra application on the Play Store for Android devices, where it is rated 2.7 stars out 
of a maxi mum possible 5 star user rating. Similarly, the app has received poor ratings 
on the App Store for iOS devices. The Committee feels that this depicts that the Sukhad 
Yatra app, although brilliant in concept and its scope of use, is failing to achieve its 
intended goal of allowing users to enter road quality related information and to report 
accidents and potholes on the highways. The Committee recommends that NHAI may 
work out an intuitive user interface for the app. The poor feedback received by the 
application from its users should be seriously looked into and addressed at the earliest. 
Further, once the application is improved and well -received by its users, NHAI should 
promote the usage of the application through social media as well as signages on the 
NHs.  
(Para 125) 
 The Committee may be briefed about the highlights of the data received by 
NHAI through the submission of information by the users of the Sukhad Yatra app, 
alongwith details regarding the number of road quality/pothole related issues raised  by 
the app users and the time taken by NHAI to address the same.  
(Para 126) 
LENDING ASPECTS OF ROAD SECTOR 
 The Committee takes note of the various initiatives taken by the Ministry to 
boost investment and lending in road sector.  
(Para 130) 
 The Committee agrees with the observation made by Canara Bank regarding the 
necessary skill sets for appraising credit proposal of infrastructural project being 
distinctly different from credit appraisal of other types of loans. The Committee 
recommends that the publ ic sector banks must ensure that only qualified people with 
experience in appraising infrastructural proposals should be allowed to make decisions 
in this regard.  

165 
 
(Para 133) 
 The Committee agrees with the apprehensions raised by Canara Bank regarding 
impact of Coronavirus pandemic on investments in State roads and rural roads on 
account of fund diversion to the health and social sectors. State roads and rural roads 
provide last-mile connectivity to crores of people in the country, besides being of great 
economic importance to countless industries requiring raw materials to be transported 
from small towns and villages. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may consider extending a one -time financial assistance to State Governments 
to help ensure that State roads and rural roads are maintained in motorable conditions.  
(Para 135) 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry may take remedial measures to address 
the apprehensions raised by the rating agency CRISIL regarding the debt of under -
construction HAM projects being at risk because of delays in execution.  
(Para 137) 
 The Committee takes note of the various measures taken by PNB to finance the 
concessionaires in road infrastructure sector,  
(Para 139) 
Challenges faced by lenders in financing road projects  
 The Committee takes note of the information furnished by SBI with regard to 
the various challenges faced by lenders in road sector, alongwith its proposed solutions 
to the same. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure transpar ency 
regarding the status of land acquisition for a given project, starting from its tendering 
stage, for public scrutiny as well as to help bidders and lenders be more aware of the 
progress being made in the same. The Committee agrees with SBI’s suggestio n to make 
provisions for automatically de-scoping the portion of land which is not handed over by 
the Ministry/NHAI to the concessionaire within a defined period of time.  
(Para 142) 
 The Committee recommends that NHAI may timely settle the amount it claim s 
to be due, to the lenders, in case the project goes to arbitration and dispute resolution, 
and not wait till the settlement process is over. Any additional amount that may be 

166 
 
needed to be paid, can be settled after the settlement process. This would help  free up 
lenders’ capital for financing other road projects, while lowering the adverse impact of 
long-drawn arbitration/settlement processes on the lenders.  
(Para 143) 
 The Committee believes that infrastructure lending poses a unique challenge to 
banks in terms of the heavy amounts that need to be sanctioned for a long duration of 
time, with the investment being subject to several risks that might hamper the 
successful execution of a given road project. Innovative financing methods such as take -
out financing can permit increased participation of banks since the duration of time for 
which the funds lent by the bank are locked up decreases significantly, thereby also 
reducing the risk faced by the banks in their investments made to the road 
infrastructure s ector. The Committee agrees with SBI’s suggestion and recommends 
that the Government may consider mandating institutions like NIIF and the upcoming 
Development Finance Institution announced in Budget Session, 2021 by the Hon’ble 
Finance Minister, to establ ish a fund for facilitating take -out financing for operational 
projects so as to create additional headroom for Banks to fund fresh projects. The 
Committee recommends that the necessary framework for take -out financing may be 
put in place. The Ministry may  also look into the creation of a special Stressed Asset 
Fund for road sector to fund the completion of stuck road projects, which might 
otherwise have limited takers.  
(Para 144) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may develop a suitable 
mechanism for providing single window clearance for all approvals required for 
executing a project, with timelines being fixed for taking decisions regarding such 
approvals, where possible, so as to minimize delays on account of obtaining necessary 
approvals.  
(Para 145) 
 The Committee desires that RBI may look into the feasibility of SBI’s suggestion 
to provide an additional 5% to 10% window to the existing group exposure limit of 25% 
of the Banks’ Total Capital Funds under its Large Exposure Framework limits. In t his 
regard, RBI may consider placing slightly increased exposure limits in case of business 
groups which are considerably large and are in financially sound condition, since the 

167 
 
existing limits might be too low, especially for smaller banks, which might no t have 
enough funds to diversify their long -term infrastructure investments beyond a certain 
point.  
(Para 146) 
The Committee recommends that in cases where arbitration is awarded in favor 
of concessionaire, the Ministry/NHAI may assess the soundness of it s claims and 
whether it is felt that these claims have reasonable chances for being considered to be 
valid by courts. The Ministry/NHAI should not make it an unwritten rule to challenge 
arbitration decisions in courts when these are not awarded in its favo r, and the possible 
resultant delays in the project on account of court proceedings may be duly considered 
before reaching upon a decision regarding whether to appeal the award in courts.  
(Para 147) 
 The Committee notes the issue pointed out by Central Ba nk regarding project 
delays on account of delay in obtaining commitment from lenders for financing a given 
road project. In this regard, the Committee recommends that provisions may be 
included in bidding requirements to ensure that only serious bidders wh o can raise the 
amount necessary for execution of the project, should it be awarded to them, are 
allowed to place a bid. This may be implemented by way of requirement of a certificate 
from an institution stating that they’d be willing to finance the 
concessionaire/contractor in case the project is awarded to them. The Committee feels 
that doing so would help eradicate delays caused by financially inept bidders from 
winning bids and causing delays later on when they are unable to get lenders to finance 
them to execute the project.  
(Para 150) 
 The Committee takes note of the apprehensions raised by the IDBI Bank 
regarding a lot of gap in the original project cost and actual cost. A reasonable 
assessment of the estimated project cost should be made by the auth ority. Provisions 
should be made to make necessary re -assessment of the project cost approved by the 
authority, in case substantial delays occur on account of reasons other than the 
concessionaire, factoring in present raw material costs, effect of inflati on etc.. The 
Committee agrees with the IDBI Bank’s suggestion that the bank funding should be 

168 
 
availed based on the cost approved by the authority and the difference, if any, should be 
funded by the promoter through equity upfront.  
(Para 153) 
 The Committee notes the observation of IDBI Bank regarding there being a lot 
of mismatch in the financial progress and actual progress of road projects. The 
Committee recommends that a mechanism may be put in place to ensure that the 
progress made in a project is asse ssed periodically and where possible, proof of the 
progress achieved so far may be recorded through drone shots or other technology. The 
information regarding the physical progress of the project may be uploaded on a public 
platform, so as to allow public scrutiny of the progress achieved, as well as to permit 
banks to release further funds based on the actual progress made in the project on 
ground.  
(Para 154) 
  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may coordinate with State 
Governments to help establ ish well -defined procedures for arbitration and settlement 
for the projects awarded by State Government Departments, Undertakings etc.  
(Para 155) 
 The Committee notes the very valid observations of IDBI Bank that in case of 
default by the Borrower, there is no fallback for the Banks, as there is no tangible 
security other than project cashflows, causing a high level risk of losing the amount 
Banks lend to Borrowers. Banks face this inherent problem of lack of tangible security 
while lending to road projects. The Committee recommends that an in -depth study may 
be made by the Ministry with regard to the possible solutions to the same. Having some 
sort of security to fall back on would solve a major pain -point faced by banks and 
financial institutions while le nding to the road sector, and allow them to make more 
credit available to fund the road infrastructure projects.  
(Para 156) 
 The Committee notes the issue mentioned by IDBI Bank regarding the 
challenges faced in monitoring utilization of Working Capital limits through Agency for 
Specialized Monitoring (ASM). The Committee recommends that the Indian Banks’ 
Association may make it mandatory for ASMs to have experienced Engineers on -board, 

169 
 
besides Chartered Accountants, so that the ASM has knowledge regarding  technical 
issues of road projects as well, which will substantially aid it in monitoring the 
utilization of working capital limits in road sector lending.  
(Para 157) 
 The Committee desires the Ministry to look into the creation of a dedicated 
dispute res olution body comprising of retired judges/ technical experts/ bankers 
exclusively to settle disputes pertaining to road infrastructure projects.  
(Para 158) 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry may look into solutions proposed by 
IFCI for resolving the funding constraints in the road infrastructure sector.  
(Para 161) 
 The Committee feels that lenders play a critical role in successful execution of 
PPP projects in the road sector. The Committee notes the apprehension of IIFCL 
regarding the lack of a tri partite agreement between the Concessioning Authority, the 
Concessionaire and the Lenders. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI 
should frame Tripartite Agreements for its PPP projects, so as to provide some 
protection to the lenders, clearly lis ting the rights and remedies available to all the 
parties involved in the agreement.  
(Para 163) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work on resolving the issues 
causing delays in remittance of termination payment. In case of disputes, the mini mum 
amount agreed upon by both the Concessioning Authority and the Concessionaire may 
be released immediately, so as to minimize the impact caused  by delays in arbitration 
processes on the lenders and the concessionaire.  
(Para 164) 
 The Committee desires  that the Ministry may put in place provisions to ensure 
that all necessary approvals and clearances for a given road project are obtained before 
the declaration of its Appointed Date, so as to eradicate the delays faced by 
concessionaires on account of delays in obtaining such approvals.  
(Para 165) 

170 
 
 The Committee recommends that NHAI may issue clarification regarding the 
fate of annuities in cases where Extension of Time (EOT) is issued in HAM projects 
facing delays.  
(Para 166) 
 The Committee takes stron g note of the observation made by IIFCL regarding 
large number of projects being awarded to a single developer with limited resources. 
The Committee feels that such carelessness on account of NHAI/Concessioning 
Authority while awarding road projects would inevitably lead to road projects getting 
delayed on account of the concessionaire’s inability to make simultaneous progress on 
multiple projects with limited resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a 
Central Database may be maintained by the M inistry to keep track of the various 
awards presently being carried out by a bidder. Alternatively, submission of such 
information may be made mandatory for the bidder. The database thus created by the 
Ministry may be updated as soon as a bid is awarded, so that the other bids made by the 
bidder reflect that they are already working on that project and an informed decision 
can be made regarding whether the bidder would be capable of working on another 
project. Clear limits may be defined for concessionaires  regarding the number/size of 
projects that can be awarded to a concessionaire, based on the resources viz. labor, 
machinery, financial strength etc. available with them.  
(Para 167) 
 The Committee recommends that the reports furnished to the Ministry by 
Independent Engineer (IE) should be made available online to the lenders involved in 
the project. This information would be crucial for the lender to make decision regarding 
the further release of funds for the road project.  
(Para 168) 
 The Committee takes  note of the important role played by IIFCL in financing 
road infrastructure sector projects and recommends that the Ministry may consider 
granting permission to IIFCL to invest in InvITs and project bonds and to assist NHAI 
and State Authorities in financing road projects.  
(Para 170) 

171 
 
 The Committee recommends that the  Ministry may thoroughly examine the 
issues mentioned by Indian Overseas Bank and take effective steps to address the same.  
(Para 175) 
 The Committee reiterates the recommendation it made i n para 153 of this 
Report and desires that steps may be taken to ensure that project cost is revised to 
factor in inflation as well as changed raw material costs, in case of project delays which 
are caused by reasons other than the concessionaire’s sub-optimal performance.  
(Para 177) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take appropriate steps to 
ensure training facilities to tackle the shortage of skilled manpower in road projects. 
Assessment may be made regarding the present shortfall in terms of human resources 
in road infrastructure sector and a detailed plan may be made to address the same.  
(Para 179) 
 The Committee desires the Ministry to look into the issue of delay in approval 
and release of funds in case of Change of Scope/ utility shift ing, as well as in delay 
caused in road projects due to delays in decision making at various levels. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may prescribe reasonable but fixed timelines 
for decision-making by the Concessioning Authority at different levels.  
(Para 180) 
 The Committee takes note of the issue faced by Union Bank wherein it has to 
rely on the data submitted by the company alone, at the time of assessment of credit 
limits. The Committee strongly recommends the creation of a well -maintained central 
database keeping track of the projects executed by different concessionaires across the 
country. The database may have important details like the present status of the current 
projects being executed by a concessionaire, the quality of their past wo rks, financial 
liabilities (if any) of the Concessionaire as per the Concessioning Authorities. The 
Committee feels that having such a database would not only help bankers make more 
informed decisions while lending in the road sector, but it would also hel p 
Concessioning Authorities to take a more nuanced approach while considering bids 
submitted by the concessionaire for any given road project.  
(Para 183) 

172 
 
 The Committee desires the Ministry to look into the delays being faced in 
achieving financial closur e in HAM projects and make suitable amendments to the 
MCA for the HAM projects, if necessary. The Committee further feels that the Ministry 
should review its current tender awarding methodologies and include safeguards to 
ensure that the number and size of  projects awarded to concessionaires are reasonable 
enough with their financial capabilities, present annual revenue etc.  
(Para 184) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may set up Infrastructure Debt 
Funds and consider providing some special tax b enefits to attract investment from the 
general public in the road sector.  
(Para 185) 
 The Committee takes note of the plethora of challenges faced by Banks/ 
Financial Institutions in the road sectors, as shared by the Banks/FIs and DFS. The 
Committee is o f the considered view that lenders play an integral role in allowing PPP 
projects in road sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
hold periodic meetings with the lenders to learn about the issues they are facing and 
address the s ame to the extent possible by making suitable amendments to the existing 
provisions. In this regard, an effective coordination mechanism may be established with 
the lenders, the concessionaires, RBI as well as the Ministry of Finance.  
(Para 189) 
  The Com mittee observes that many banks and financial institutions raised 
several issues regarding the present provisions for termination payment. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that NHAI may review its current provisions for 
termination payments in consulta tion with the concessionaires and the lenders, and 
work out a mechanism to assess a fair value to be paid in case of termination of a road 
project. Doing so would help reduce the number of cases that go to arbitration and 
litigation, thereby resulting in m inimization of delays on account of disputes arising out 
of termination payments.  
(Para 190) 

173 
 
NPAs in Road Sector 
 The Committee notes the exposure of SBI to the road sector and applauds the 
recent increase made by SBI in its internal exposure ceiling for road sector by Rs. 
24,500 crores. The data shared by SBI, however, points to the dwindling lending figures 
of the Banking Sector as a whole, wherein if one were to exclude SBI, the banking 
sector’s exposure to road sector has declined from Rs. 1,45,326 cro res in June, 2018 to 
Rs. 1,38,980 crores in June, 2020. The Committee feels that lending institutions play an 
indispensable role in financing the road infrastructure sector in the country and desires 
that the Ministry may take strong note of this. The Mini stry may address the issues 
faced by lenders in the road sector, many of which have been shared by them with the 
Committee, to ensure their support in funding the future growth of the road sector in 
the country.  
(Para 192) 
 The Committee notes that SBI’s stressed assets in road sector are about Rs. 4,077 
crores as on 30 th June, 2020, which is about 7% of the bank’s overall outstanding credit 
to the road sector. This is the best figure in terms of NPAs in road sector, as compared 
to the data regarding NPAs furnished to the Committee by the other banks/financial 
institutions. The Committee recommends that other banks/financial institutions should 
look into the methodologies followed by State Bank of India while extending loans to 
concessionaires in road infra structure sector, and apply the same in their own 
institution in order to bring their respective NPA levels down.  
(Para 193) 
 The Committee is alarmed by the high level of NPA in Central Bank of India’s 
road sector exposure, which has been at such highs e ven before the start of the COVID -
19 pandemic. The Committee feels that this might point to grant of loans without high 
quality in -depth analysis of the inherent risk in extending the loans, and should be 
looked into on priority basis by the bank so as to prevent this from snowballing into a 
bigger problem in the future.  
(Para 196) 
The Committee is concerned to note that 61% of the outstanding exposure of 
IFCI is NPA. The Committee is not convinced by IFCI’s justification that the figure 

174 
 
looks inflated due  to exposure to IL&FS road projects. The Committee 
recommends that RBI may look into the matter and consider issuing guidelines 
limiting the extent to which a financial institution/bank can lend the funds to a 
particular infrastructure company.  
(Para 203) 
 The Committee is happy to note that Covid -19 pandemic has not had any 
worsening impact on the NPAs in road sector. This points to the efficacy of the Covid-19 
relief measures initiated by RBI as well as the Ministry. Despite the minimal effect of 
COVID-19 on worsening the road infrastructure sector loan assets of the banks, 
however, the Committee notes that most public sector banks have been carrying a 
substantial percentage of NPA assets in the road sector since before the onset of the 
pandemic. The Committee feels that this is a cause of grave concern and would act as a 
deterrent to the banking sector from lending more funds to the road sector going 
forward. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may take serious 
notice of the issues and challenges faced by the financial institutions and take effective 
steps to address them to the extent possible, aiming for a desirable level of sharing of 
risks between the Ministry, the concessionaire and the lending institution.  
(Para 216) 
 The Committee feels that sector-wise exposure information, at least in respect of 
public sector banks, should be made available in the public domain to permit more 
transparency and public scrutiny. The Committee recommends that RBI must analyze 
the reasons behind subs tantial variations in the percentage of sub -standard assets of 
NPAs in different Public Sector financial institutions/banks and come up with stricter 
rules and regulations that must be followed while sanctioning long -term loans to the 
infrastructure sector.  
(Para 217) 
 The Committee further recommends that the financial institutions/banks with 
more than acceptable level of NPAs in the road sector should also undertake a study 
into the possible inefficacy of their existing mechanism to analyse the financial  
soundness as well as project execution capabilities of the concessionaire. The Committee 
strongly recommends that the financial institutions/banks should revisit their policies in 
this regard, while also having strong checks in place to ensure that there is no 

175 
 
connivance between the bank's officials responsible for assessing the loan proposals 
received from the concessionaire, and the concessionaire themselves.  
(Para 218) 
 It has come to the notice of the Committee that in certain cases, the loan sought 
by the concessionaire is against a substantially higher project cost, as compared to the 
Total Project Cost approved by NHAI for the project which already includes provisions 
for contractor’s/concessionaire’s margin and the financing cost for raising the am ount 
needed to execute the project as well. The Committee recommends that the banks 
should treat proposals with such higher estimated project cost with great caution and 
make its own in -depth study into the estimated project cost, or hire an independent 
third party consultant for this purpose. The Ministry/NHAI should communicate with 
the banks the procedure followed by them to arrive at the Total Project Cost for any 
given project. While sanctioning any loans for a project while considering estimated 
cost to be substantially higher than the Ministry/NHAI's approved TPC, the banks may 
record its reasons in writing regarding why they feel that the higher project cost, 
against which the loan is being sanctioned, is justified.  
(Para 219) 
 The Committee notes t he submission made by PNB that non -servicing of 
installments within 90 days renders the account NPA, which attracts additional 
provisioning on such sub -standard assets. The Committee recommends that RBI may 
look into the possibility of setting a higher lim it for long -term infrastructure projects, 
since unfortunately as for now, delays of several months is not too uncommon in 
infrastructure projects in India, often for no fault of the concessionaire.  
(Para 220) 
 The Committee feels that the banks should giv e due importance to a 
concessionaire's performance in similar projects in the past. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry, in coordination with State PWDs, may 
maintain a database of all road contractors and concessionaires with detail s regarding 
their performance in past projects, the quality of work etc. Such a database may be 
made public so as to make it easy for the financial institutions and banks to analyse the 
past performance of their prospective borrowers. The Committee believe s that doing so 

176 
 
would help prevent the banks from lending to poorly performing 
contractors/concessionaires.  
(Para 221) 
Loss of revenue due to construction of parallel roads 
 The Committee feels that the construction of roads parallel to an existing road 
stretch with toll plazas, points to lack of foresight and coordination between the 
Ministry and the State Governments. Construction of such parallel roads causes a loss 
of revenue to the concessionaire without any fault of their own. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should come up with guidelines that may be enforced 
across the country to avoid such construction to the maximum extent possible. In the 
event where construction of such parallel road is not avoidable, efforts may be taken to 
ensure tha t the concessionaire does not face losses on account of decrease in traffic 
volume for no fault of their own. This would act as a confidence building measure and 
would help attract higher bids for the Ministry/NHAI’s future plans for monetization of 
the existing road assets.  
(Para 228) 
 The Committee feels that the suggestion furnished by Indian Bank, regarding 
making the agency responsible for the construction of parallel road pay for the losses 
faced in revenue of the existing road, seems to be a feasible solution to this problem. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may implement this with 
introduction of appropriate rules/laws in order to deter construction of parallel roads, 
and in cases such thing is unavoidable, paying compensation to the concessionaire.  
(Para 229) 
Close monitoring of awarded road projects 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should break down big road 
projects into smaller stretches, making it optional for interested parties to choose the 
number of stretches  for which they are willing to bid upon. This would encourage 
smaller contractors to participate in the bidding process, while also not dissuading big 
players from bidding for the entire project.  

177 
 
(Para 232) 
 The Committee further desires that the Ministry  may incorporate provisions for 
more frequent quality checks in road projects that are sub -let by the main contractor, 
since the earning margin available with the sub -contractors in such cases is much 
thinner, making these projects more prone to lapses in quality of materials used as well 
as failure to follow established guidelines for construction.  
(Para 233) 
BHARATMALA PARIYOJANA 
 The Committee notes that significantly higher cost of land acquisition has been 
listed as the main reason by the Ministry for  the huge cost overruns in Bharatmala 
Pariyojana Phase -I. While the exact cost of land acquisition cannot be precisely 
estimated especially in such long -term projects, the Committee feels that the Ministry 
should factor in the average rate of growth of lan d prices in its estimates, alongwith the 
effect of inflation to arrive at more accurate project estimates, which, in turn, would 
allow the Ministry to be proactive in terms of managing its finances.  
(Para 240) 
 The Committee believes that the significant delays in the execution of Phase -I is 
also one of the main reasons behind the cost overruns. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry/NHAI may proactively monitor all road projects and any deviation from 
the targeted timeline for each project should be dealt with on an urgent basis in order to 
minimize the delays, and thus, the cost overruns.  
(Para 241) 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION 
 The Committee observes that in view of the strategic location of Arunachal 
Pradesh, good road connectivity is of crucial importance for the smooth movement of 
Forces guarding the border, on account of National Security. The Committee, therefore, 
desires that the Ministry may explore the possibility of taking up the SARDP-NE Phase-
B, along with SARDP-NE Phase-A. 
(Para 243A) 

178 
 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons furnished by the Ministry behind 
the huge delays in the completion of the road projects under SARDP -NE Phase A and 
Arunachal Pradesh package. The Committee feels that most of the rea sons behind the 
delays in the execution of the projects could have been preempted and proactive 
measures should have been taken to minimize the delays caused due to them. The 
Committee hopes that the present timeline for completion of the projects have bee n 
made realistically and is met without any further delays.  
(Para 245) 
 The Committee feels that construction of roads in difficult terrains such as 
North-East regions requires skilled contractors with prior experience of road 
construction in hilly regions. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure 
that due care is taken not to award the road projects to contractors who have a history 
of construction of below-par quality of roads.  
(Para 246) 
  The Committee further recommends that the Ministry  may allocate funds to 
carry out research for best construction techniques in the North -East regions, with 
focus on the hilly nature of the region as well as the frequent rains and floods. The 
Committee desires that NHIDCL may lay special focus on ensuring  sufficient provisions 
for road safety in the projects carried out in the region.  
(Para 247) 
SCHEME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF ROADS IN THE LEFT WING EXTREMISM 
AFFECTED (LWE) AREAS 
 The Committee takes note of the progress made in the various road projects in 
the LWE affected areas. The Committee believes that these road projects would have a 
highly positive effect on the developmental avenues of the LWE affected areas and 
hopes that the Ministry is able to complete the remaining length of these projects at the 
earliest.  
(Para 251) 
 

179 
 
RESEARCH AND TRAINING IN ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE SECTOR 
 The Committee is disappointed to note that despite having a dedicated NHAI 
division with an extensive mandate for carrying out research activities, no specific 
budget allocation has been made to the division during the last five years. The 
Committee feels that this points to the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry towards 
carrying out research activities in the road sector. The geographical diversity of the 
country, the often poorly-informed drivers and the large number of road accidents that 
take place on the National Highways are all crucially important matters that can be 
resolved by carrying out serious R&D activities regarding the same. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may ensure that sufficient funds are available 
with the SRD&Q Division of NHAI.  
(Para 255) 
Indian Roads Congress 
 The Committee takes note of the extensive role played by Indian Roads Congress 
in development of Standards, Specifications, Cod e of Practices, Guidelines, research -
based State of Art Reports, etc. on various aspects of road and bridges. The Committee 
is distressed to note the fund crunch being faced by Indian Roads Congress despite 
playing such an important role in research -led de velopment in the road sector in the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may urgently look 
into the budgetary requirements of this important organization so as to fuel research on 
important subjects pertaining to the road sector and to permit the framing of a single 
code for Highways, and for bridges across the nation.  
(Para 261) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may set up capacity building and 
skill development programmes for State Road Departments, consultants, contr actors, 
construction workers and equipment operators. This would ensure that guidelines 
framed by IRC are duly followed during construction of roads.  
(Para 262) 
 The Committee desires to be apprised as to whether the IRC’s documents are 
being followed by the Ministry in the flood -prone regions of the country. The frequent 

180 
 
damage caused by floods to NHs in such regions means that either the existing 
recommendations/guidelines in this regard are not being implemented, or the 
documentation in question needs t o be updated to develop more effective norms. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may take necessary action to work out this 
issue at the earliest, since connectivity is of utmost importance in flood-hit regions.  
(Para 265) 
Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 
 The Committee appreciates the training programmes conducted by IAHE for 
officers of the Ministry, NHAI, BRO, various State PWD departments as well as 
contractors and consultants. The Committee hopes that the curriculum of the training 
programmes is refreshed periodically to reflect the latest developments in the road 
infrastructure sector.  
(Para 268) 
 The Committee agrees with the suggestion made by IAHE and recommends that 
the Ministry may make it mandatory for all highway professionals in th e country to 
attend relevant training programmes at IAHE.  
(Para 270) 
ROAD SAFETY 
 The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry by means of identification 
and rectification of black spots on NHs across the country. The Committee appreciates 
the wor k done so far in this regard but feels that a large number of black spots still 
remain unidentified, given the extremely high number of road accidents that take place 
in India each year. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may conduct an 
extensive s tudy to identify as many bottlenecks as it can, and rectify the same at the 
earliest. Latest technology and data science tools may be employed in this process, in 
order to utilize the data gathered by the Ministry regarding road accidents, in order to 
identify black spots across the country. Topmost priority should be given to rectification 
of black spots, once identified. Preventive measures must be immediately taken at such 
black spots, till the time the rectification process can be completed.  

181 
 
(Para 272) 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the number of black spots identified on 
NHs across the country in the last five years, alongwith details regarding the number of 
black spots rectified each year. The Committee recommends that findings from the 
black spot identification and rectification process may be looked into as a whole, to gain 
insights into how to avoid the black spots in the future road projects of the Ministry. 
The Committee further desires that all the NH projects should be minutely examine d 
right from the DPR stage to their completion, eliminating geometrical design errors that 
compromise the safety of the road users.  
(Para 273) 
 The Committee recommends that the black spot identification and rectification 
process may be streamlined so as to remove delays in the decision -making process, by 
implementing provisions for delegation of powers to carry out rectification measures 
with due urgency.  
(Para 274) 
 The Committee is anguished to note that even after passing of 7 -10 years after 
identification of black spots during the period 2011-14, long-term rectification measures 
have been carried out only on 247 out of the 503 identified black spots i.e.  less than 
even 50%. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may make it 
mandatory for  both NHAI and State Departments concerned, to rectify black spots 
within a fixed time -frame. Delays in the rectification of black spots directly leads to 
more lethal road accidents continuing to happen at such spots, which cannot be 
permitted at any cost. The Committee also desires to know the status of the black spots 
identified by the Ministry/NHAI since 2018 and reasons for not updating the status of 
the same on the website.  
(Para 274B) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the co dal 
provisions prescribed to enhance road safety on highways should be periodically 
updated from time to time, to reflect international best practices in this regard.  
(Para 276) 

182 
 
 The Committee feels that the Ministry should lay much more emphasis on its 
road safety awareness initiatives. Social media may be utilized for this purpose. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry may, in coordination with Ministry of Education, 
introduce information pertaining to road safety, basic road etiquettes, action to be 
taken in case of an accident, etc. in school curriculum across the country.  
(Para 277) 
 The Committee feels that the number of ambulances, patrol vehicles, tow -away 
cranes available with the Ministry are not commensurate with the extensive size of the 
National Highway network in India. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may steadily increase this number to ensure that help is made available within a short 
and reasonable time of any accident taking place on the NHs.  
(Para 279) 
  The Committee feels that the knowledge that such a helpline number exists and 
should be called in case of an accident, is very limited among people and awareness 
drives must be carried out in the form of signages and billboards on National Highways, 
and through the usage of s ocial media, to ensure that NH users are aware of this 
emergency number. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may work 
on tying up this emergency number with the number 112, i.e. the Emergency Response 
Support System, since people cannot be e xpected to remember too many numbers, 
especially in high-panic situations such as road accidents.  
(Para 280A) 
  The Committee observes that driving habits in India need to be improved upon 
drastically and the most effective way to do is by way of training  people to drive better. 
Therefore, IDTRs and RDTCs should be present in every district of the country. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may chalk out a plan to create such training 
infrastructure across the country and thereafter, make it mandat ory to attend a driving 
training course of a sufficient duration in order to obtain a driving licence.  
(Para 282) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may reach out to the private 
sector with proposals to invest their CSR funds into road safety ini tiatives such as 
training of drivers, road safety awareness drives, developing infrastructure for quickly 

183 
 
reaching out to road accident victims etc., which will undoubtedly save many lives each 
year, across the country.  
(Para 285) 
 The Committee recommend s that the Ministry may implement the various 
suggestions made by Indian Roads Congress to make the NHs safer for people.  
(Para 287) 
 The Committee feels that the State -wise data available with the Ministry can be 
put to great use by analyzing the trend o f road accidents and death caused thereby, in 
the past few years. The Committee recommends that in case of such well -performing 
States, the Ministry may analyze the measures taken by the departments concerned of 
such States and to see how these compare wit h the States that are showing a consistent 
increase in the number of road accidents taking place each year.  
(Para 289) 
 The Committee agrees with the various suggestions put forth by the Transport 
Department, Assam and recommends that the Ministry may wor k to ensure that all the 
highways projects are in conformation with the guidelines of IRC and the Ministry 
itself. The Ministry may make concerted efforts to curb the menace of overloading and 
overspeeding on National Highways, since both pose a significan t risk to the safety of 
the commuters.  
(Para 292) 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Government of Gujarat and 
the Ministry, in order to bring down the number of road accidents by 39% in the year 
2019 as compared to the data of the year 20 12. The Committee hopes that the reduction 
seen in the deaths caused due to road accidents in the State is commensurate with the 
reduction in the number of accidents.  
(Para 294) 
 The Committee takes note of the reasons furnished by the Ports & Transport 
Department, Government of Gujarat, behind the road accidents. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may work in coordination with the State 
Governments to encourage stricter implementation of traffic laws, while working in 

184 
 
tandem to imp rove the quality of roads, both in terms of construction and design, in 
order to bring the number of accidents significantly down.  
(Para 295) 
 The Committee strongly recommends that special attention may be given to the 
design and implementation of approa ch roads and entry & exit ramps on highways, 
since poor design and construction of these stretches inevitably leads to road accidents.  
(Para 296) 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry may ensure that road safety audits are 
conducted across the entire N ational Highways stretch in the country, for projects 
executed by both the Ministry itself, as well as the State Government PWDs. The 
findings arrived upon by conducting such audits must be carefully analyzed and acted 
upon urgently.  
(Para 297) 
    The Committee notes the findings of the 2018 MoRTH Report shared by the 
Government of Goa and observes that the findings are direct evidence of the 
devastating effect road accidents have on lakhs of families in the country, often causing 
the death of the sole ea rning member of the family, very likely impacting the financial 
health of the family, besides the emotional trauma. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may enhance its focus on maintenance of the NHs in a 
good condition and implement road safety measures across the entire network, on a war 
footing. The Committee desires that the Ministry may form designated road safety wing 
at State level and RO level for immediate redressal of road safety related issues, as 
suggested by the Government of Goa.  
(Para 299) 
     The Committee desires to know the present status of the Bharat New Vehicle 
Safety Assessment Program (BNVSAP) for testing the safety performance of new 
vehicles in India, which was expected to be implemented several years ago. The 
Committee also may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry for introduction of 
safety standards and technologies in two -wheelers manufactured in the country, since a 
large number of the road accidents on Indian roads involve two-wheelers.  
(Para 299A) 

185 
 
    The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Government of Karnataka 
to reduce the number of road accidents in the State and hopes that the black spots 
identified by Karnataka PWD are rectified as soon as possible.  
(Para 301) 
    The Committee ta kes note of the various steps taken by the Transport 
Department, Government of Tripura to reduce the number of road accidents in the 
State.  
(Para 304) 
    The Committee notes that the Mizoram PWD is facing issues in attracting bids 
for carrying out indepe ndent road safety audits in the State  audit for suggesting 
rectification measures for black spots identified by the Ministry. The Committee 
strongly feels that rectification of black spots cannot be delayed because of lack of 
interest in bidding for this p urpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry/NHAI may step up to help Mizoram PWD through its expertise in rectification 
of black spots on the NHs. If the reason for the lack of interest in bidding for the 
projects is ascertained to be th e small scale of the overall project, the Ministry may 
invite bids to conduct such an audit in multiple North-Eastern States together.  
(Para 307) 
The Committee agrees with the suggestion of PWD, Government of Mizoram 
regarding making specific budgetary provisions for conducting road safety audits in the 
project cost itself. Any new NH project implemented by the Ministry/State PWDs 
should be duly audited in terms of road safety before opening it to the public and time -
bound plan must be made for conducting road safety audits to cover the existing NH 
network as well.  
(Para 308) 
 The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by Department of Transport, 
Government of Punjab to enhance road safety on the road network in the State and 
hopes that it makes opt imal utilization of the Road Safety Fund available with it, for 
resolution of road safety related issues.  
(Para 312) 

186 
 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the fund crunch 
faced by State Departments in execution of road safety related p rojects and to consider 
developing an incentive based funding scheme wherein a part of the funds spent by the 
State Government on road safety projects and activities for State roads, may be 
reimbursed by the Ministry.  
(Para 313) 
CHAR DHAM PARIYOJANA 
 The Committee feels that the Char Dham Pariyojana is of immense importance 
because of the pilgrimage tourism aspects of the region. Completing this project at the 
earliest should thus be accorded high priority by the Ministry.  
(Para 316) 
 The Committee notes the delays caused in the project on account of the petitions 
filed by NGOs in the NGT and Supreme Court. The Committee desires to be apprised 
of the progress made in this regard.  
(Para 317) 
 The Committee further recommends that the region being highly se nsitive in 
ecological terms, the Ministry must undertake every possible measure to minimize the 
environmental impact caused by its projects in such regions. If need be, consultants 
specializing in the same may be hired for the purpose of minimizing the adverse impacts 
of the projects on environment. This would help address the issues raised by the NGOs 
regarding such projects as well.  
(Para 318) 
IMPACT OF CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC ON ROAD TRANSPORT SECTOR 
 The Committee appreciates the various steps taken by th e Ministry to help the 
road construction industry cope with the adverse impact of the Coronavirus pandemic. 
The Committee is happy to note that despite the pandemic and the ensuing lockdown in 
the Financial Year 2020 -21, the Ministry managed to achieve an impressive pace of 
construction of 37 kilometers highways per day. The Committee hopes that the Ministry 
takes necessary action to keep up this pace of construction and minimizes delays in its 
road projects in the coming years to ensure optimal utilization of allocated funds.  

187 
 
(Para 322) 
COORDINATION OF THE MINISTRY WITH STATE GOVERNMENTS 
 The Committee takes note of the training programmes conducted by IAHE for 
officers from State Governments. The Committee recommends that the NHAI may 
proactively extend its technical expertise to the State Government departments, to help 
them utilize their funds in a better way, while ensuring a better state of construction 
and maintenance for the State Highways, as well as the National Highways network 
maintained by State PWDs.  
(Para 324) 
 The Committee observes that State Highways and local roads play a significant 
role in the economic growth of our country and thus, need allocation of sufficient funds 
for their maintenance. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may  seriously 
consider IRC’s suggestion to provide financial assistance to State Governments for the 
maintenance of Highways and roads under their control, from the CRF fund.  
(Para 326) 
 The Committee agrees with the suggestions put forth regarding the need for the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to have a coordination mechanism with the 
Tourism Departments of State Governments. Tourism can give impetus to economic 
growth of any region. Excellent road connectivity to existing tourist attractions as we ll 
as potential tourist sites is a prerequisite for the same. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may hold periodic meetings with the Ministry of 
Tourism as well as State Tourism Departments, and devise a time-bound Master Plan to 
enhance road connectivity to tourist places across the country, in order to bolster both 
domestic and foreign tourism. 
(Para 329) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider Kerala PWD’s 
suggestion to permit State PWDs to grant extension of time for  delays in completion of 
project in case of delay due to reasons other than from Contractor, if it is felt that 
delegating such a power would allow road projects executed by State PWDs to be 
executed more smoothly with lower delays due to paperwork.  

188 
 
(Para 332) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that clearances, 
release of funds and award of contract work for NH projects in NE regions are mindful 
of the short working season in the region. Procedural delays should not hamper the 
timely completion of projects in North-Eastern region.  
(Para 336) 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry may look into the observations made by 
Mizoram PWD regarding unwillingness of the Ministry to invest large amounts in 
projects in the North East and having l imited understanding of the problems faced in 
the actual work. Coordination mechanism with the State Government of Mizoram may 
be strengthened so as to resolve the issues being faced by it in execution of road projects 
in the State.  
(Para 337) 
 The Commit tee recommends that the Ministry may look into possibilities for 
upgradation of NHs in Delhi that may help the region to tackle the issues of traffic and 
pollution.  
(Para 339) 
 The Committee takes note of the status of the ongoing road projects in Andhra 
Pradesh and desires that the Ministry may analyze the need of upgradation of suitable 
State Highways in Andhra Pradesh into National Highways.  
(Para 342) 
 The Committee recommends that NHAI may ensure that urgent necessary action 
is taken to reduce the ac cidents taking place on the Rajahmundry Bypass. NHAI may 
also assess the need for addition of another lane on the flyover constructed at Benz 
Circle, Vijayawada.  
(Para 343) 
 The Committee takes stock of the ongoing road projects in the State of 
Maharashtra. The Committee desires that the Ministry may take effective steps in close 
coordination with PWD and MSRDC, to resolve the issues causing delay in the 
execution of road projects in Maharashtra.  

189 
 
(Para 346) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may reconsider its provisions 
regarding first payment being made to contractors only after 25% completion of a 
project, in case of large size projects.  
(Para 348) 
  The Committee notes the status of the ongoing projects in the UT of J&K and 
Ladakh. The Commit tee may recommends that the Ministry may lay special focus on 
road safety aspects of projects in the region, giving due significance to minimizing the 
ecological impact caused by the NH projects in the ecologically sensitive region.  
(Para 350) 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Issues faced in transport of heavy goods on National Highways 
 The Committee strongly feels that overloaded vehicles not only cause severe 
damage to the roads, but also pose a significant safety risk to other vehicles plying on 
the road. The Committee s trongly recommends that the Ministry may take immediate 
measures to install weigh -in motion system at all its toll plazas across the country to 
detect vehicles which are carrying more weight than their prescribed limits. Hefty fines 
should be charged on ve hicles not abiding by the limits. The usage of weigh -in motion 
system to issue automated challans/ penalty would eliminate the possible collusion of 
corrupt officials with the heavy vehicle owners. The Ministry further recommends that 
the Ministry may consider charging toll on the basis of tonnage of the vehicles.  
(Para 352) 
 The Committee takes note of the various issues faced by heavy vehicle owners/ 
transporters. The Committee feels that the installation of weigh -in motion systems at 
toll plazas on National Highways across the country would be very helpful in saving the 
truck drivers from harassment and illicit demands from corrupt officials.  
(Para 354) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work on development of 
eateries, toilets, rest house etc. on National Highways, to allow truck drivers more 

190 
 
comfort while travelling long distances. This would also help them be more 
concentrated while driving and would thus lead to lesser road accidents.  
(Para 355) 
Standardization of construction equipments used for road development 
 The Committee believes that the usage of modern machinery for construction 
can lead to improved road quality, while saving time as well. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may look into the feasibility of the suggestion  made by 
ICEMA to specify the details of mechanization to be used in the execution of a road 
project, in the road construction contract. A decision may be taken in this regard with 
due consideration to the benefits of prescribing such a mandate and the fin ancial ability 
of the road contractors in India to purchase/rent such machinery.  
(Para 357) 
Promotion of usage of electric vehicles 
 The Committee notes from the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry that the 
total number of registered vehicles in India  is 29.57 crores, according to the provisional 
data for the year 2019, with a CAGR of 9.91 percent for the years 2009 to 2019. The 
percentage of electric vehicles in the country thus comes out to be somewhere around 
0.17 percent of the total vehicles plyin g in the country. The Committee is disappointed 
to note the very slow adoption of electric vehicles in India, with several countries across 
the world already having share of electric cars in double digits. The Committee desires 
that concrete measures are t aken by the Ministry to enact policies to aid much faster 
growth of adoption of electric vehicles in the country. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry, in coordination with Ministry of Power and automobile manufacturers 
may come up with a time -bound plan to create a robust vehicle charging infrastructure 
across the entire National Highways network in the country. Such infrastructure is 
critical to give a boost to the adoption of electric vehicles in the country, which would 
lead to considerable enviro nmental benefits and help resolve the issue of pollution to 
some extent.  
(Para 359) 

191 
 
 Further, the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may exempt 
electric vehicles from registration charges and toll tax. Financial incentives are 
necessary to create a spurt in the adoption of electric vehicles in the country, which, in 
turn, will increase the pace at which infrastructure is being created for the shift to such 
vehicles. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake an in -depth 
analysis of the policies adopted by countries across the world which have succeeded in 
enabling mass adoption of the electric vehicles in the country, and come with an 
effective time -bound plan with well -defined targets for electric vehicle adoption in 
India.  
(Para 360) 
GPS based tolling 
 The Committee appreciates the initiatives being taken by the Ministry with 
regard to the introduction GPS based tolling in the country, which will remove the 
need for physical tolling infrastructure on ground. The Committee hopes that 
implementing this country -wide would eliminate the delays faced by people at toll 
booths and thus would shorten the journey times on National Highways, while 
saving fuel as well. The Committee recommends that the fee collection system may 
be designed in such a way so as to link the fee deduction with the bank account of 
the vehicle owner, so as to remove the need for frequent recharge of FASTags. This 
would be of great help to people who are not well versed with technology to 
recharge their FASTags online themselves.  
(Para 363) 
Re-habilitation of project affected people 
 The Committee takes note of the mechanism in place to facilitate the 
rehabilitation of people who have to let go of their land for the development of road 
projects. The Committee obser ves that the land is the only source of income for many 
people in India and desires that the Ministry may come up with solutions to provide 
sustained source of income to the people who were solely dependent on their land for 
their livelihood. Land value capture mechanism may be employed to capture value from 
the land nearby National Highways and a part of the same may be shared with the 

192 
 
previous landowners. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may look 
into the feasibility of employing the pro ject-affected people to operate/provide roadside 
facilities such as rest house/rooms, eateries, etc.  
(Para 369) 
Implementation of more stringent Pollution Checks 
 The Committee takes note of media reports pointing to falsification of 
emission data at emis sion testing centers for issuance of Pollution -Under-Control 
Certificates to vehicles. This poses a serious threat to the environment and air, thus 
having a direct detrimental effect on public health. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may devise ways to prevent such cases. Feasibility of making video 
recording of the emission tests mandatory for issuance of PUC certificates may be 
evaluated. The Ministry may implement provisions to ensure that the emission 
testing equipments used by the testing cen ters are evaluated from time to time to 
check their accuracy of emission data.  
(Para 370) 
Planting of trees by NHAI 
 The Committee strongly recommends that it must be ensured that the 
saplings planted by NHAI are looked after in their formative years and that the 
land be regularly watered and looked after.  Suitable provisions may be introduced 
to ensure that the trees planted are of a suitable specific height and are looked after 
well, once planted.  The Committee desires to know the existing mechanism in t his 
regard, alongwith the reasons the same is failing at present.  
(Para 372) 
Ensuring elimination of hindrances on waterways 
 The Committee feels that the development of waterways across the country 
will bring significant benefits to the Tourism sector as  well as the Shipping sector. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that strict guidelines may be framed and 
implemented by the Ministry across the country to ensure suitable clearance for 
boats and/or ships, keeping in mind the present as well as future sc ope for 

193 
 
waterways – both National waterways and other inland waterways, while building 
road bridges over water bodies. In this regard, the Ministry should work in close 
coordination with the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways and the concerned 
Department of the State Government. 
(Para 374) 
Allocation of funds under CRIF 
 The Committee is of the view that the existing mechanism of bank of 
sanctions is causing a visible lack of clarity between the State Government 
Departments concerned and the Ministry o f Road Transport & Highways, 
regarding the amount that the State is yet to be awarded. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may look into the issue and come up with suitable 
guidelines to ensure that there is no confusion among the State Government 
Departments and the Ministry, regarding the share of funds to be received by the 
State, in any particular year, after factoring in the Bank of Sanctions. 
(Para 376) 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

194 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 4 th November, 2019 in Committee 
Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.  
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
4. Shri Derek O'Brien 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Anto Antony 
7.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
8.  Shri Tapir Gao  
9.  Shri Rahul Kaswan  
10.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
11.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
12.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
14.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
18.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
 Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
 Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer 
Witnesses 
11:00 A.M. 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 

195 
 
1. Shri Sanjeev Ranjan Secretary  
2. Shri I.K. Pandey DG(RD) & Spl. Secretary 
3. Shri Y. Balakrishna Additional Director General 
4. Shri Babni Lal Economic Adviser 
5. Shri Kamlesh Chaturvedi Joint Secretary  
6. Sh. Abhay Damle Joint Secretary  
7. Shri Priyank Bharti Joint Secretary  
8. Shri Sudip Chaudhary Chief Engineer 
9. Shri U.C. Katara Chief Engineer 
National Highways and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (NHIDCL) 
10. Shri V.K. Rajawat Director 
11. Shri W. Blah Executive Director 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
informed the Members that the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transpo rt and Highways has been 
invited to apprise the Committee on the role of Highways in Nation Building as the Committee had 
selected the subject for detailed discussion. *  *  *1 
Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
3.  The Cha irman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and 
other senior officials from the Ministry and National Highways Authority of India to the meeting. 
He mentioned about the Global Standards on Road and Highway formation and sought to know the 
ranking of India in global platforms. He also sought clarifications about the accidents taking place 
at night time; issue of land acquisition; and efficiency of workforce at stalled and live projects. The 
Chairman then requested the Secretary to make a presentation on the subject. 
4. In his presentation, the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways apprised the 
Committee about the Organizational Structure of NHAI and the details regarding the length of road 
networks in India and stated th at out of 47,745 km awarded, 34,942 km had been completed and 
448 projects covering 24,466 km are still under implementation. He mentioned about the category -
wise key components of Bharatmala Pariyojana alongwith the current financial status and status of 
funding. He also apprised the Committee of various innovative financial models like Asset 
Recycling and InVIT Model to raise additional funds. He dwelt upon the facts and figures of 
                                                 
1 * Relates to other matters 

196 
 
FASTag at various toll plazas. He also highlighted the challenges like hig h circle rates, grading 
system in State and support from State Government in land acquisition. To tackle such challenges, 
initiatives like Bhoomi Rashi portal and Value Capture Mechanism were focused upon. 
5. While emphasizing the role of NHAI, he mentione d about the root causes for delay in 148 
projects out of 448 under implementation alongwith the steps taken to address the issue of delay. 
He touched upon the modification in contract documents and deployment of technology to 
improve the efficiency of Detailed Project Planning. He also shared the standards set by the Indian 
Road Congress and its partnerships with premium academic Institutions. He concluded his 
presentation by mentioning the steps being taken to strengthen road safety by removal of black 
spots, conducting mandatory audits, providing provision of crossing facilities, stringent fines under 
the Motor Vehicle Act, 2019 and by running awareness campaigns.   
6.  Members of the Committee raised queries relating to the completion of various stalled a nd 
live projects; removal of black spots; utilization of funds; and State -wise categorization of roads 
under Bharatmala Programme. Some of the queries were replied to by the Secretary. The Chairman 
then directed the Secretary to send written replies to the  queries which remained unanswered, 
within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8. The meeting adjourned at 1:36 P.M. 
  

197 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 7 th October, 2020 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
3. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Margani Bharat 
5. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
6. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
9.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
10.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
11. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
12. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses  
   MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
1.   Shri Giridhar Aramane Secretary 
2.   Shri I.K. Pandey Director General (RD) & Spl. Secretary 
3.   Shri Ravi Prasad Additional Director General 
4.   Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh Joint Secretary 
5.   Shri Priyank Bharti Joint Secretary 
6.   Shri Sudip Chaudhary Chief Engineer 
7.   Shri O.P. Srivastava Chief Engineer 


198 
 
  
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (NHAI) 
8.   Shri Sukhbir Singh Sandhu Chairman 
9.   Shri Alok Member 
10.   Shri R.K. Pandey Member 
11.   Shri Mahabir Singh Member 
12.   Shri Manoj Kumar Member 
  
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
LIMITED (NHIDCL) 
13.   Shri Keshav Kumar Pathak Managing Director 
14.   Shri W. Blah Executive Director 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He 
informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways on the subject ‘Impact of Coronavirus pandemic on Road Transport 
sector’. 
2.         Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and other senior officials from the Ministry to the  meeting. The Secretary briefed the 
Committee about the measures the Ministry had taken to enforce the COVID guidelines and stated 
that advisories were issued to all the State Governments to ensure sanitization of public transport 
vehicles and compliance o f social distancing measures as per the Health Ministry guidelines. He 
further informed the Committee that control centres and war rooms were established by NHAI, 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NHIDCL and all the concerned agencies to provide 
necessary assistance on the National Highways. 
3.         The Secretary elucidated upon the various measures taken by the Ministry to ensure that 
NH users did not face problems while traveling, by extending the validity of documents required as 
per the Motor Vehicles Act till 31 st December, 2020. He mentioned about the special drive for 
distribution of food items and   shoes to migrant laborers on Toll Plazas, and thermal scanning and 
distribution of face masks and sanitizers to drivers etc. He added that the M inistry ensured that 
there was no shortage of essential commodities throughout the country during the 21 days of 
lockdown as well as after that period. With regard to progress of the work in terms of projects 
awarded and construction of roads, he informed the Committee that the number of works awarded 
this year is much higher than the previous year and that the construction of road projects is just 650 
kilometers short in comparison to last year, despite losing about two months of working period. 

199 
 
6.         The Secretary further apprised the Committee that Rs. 10,000 crores was released by NHAI 
to contractors so as to allow liquidity and that payments for the works being done was ensured on 
monthly basis, which are, among other measures carried out by the Mi nistry to ensure that the 
contractors and the construction of the road projects did not suffer. Regarding financial allocation 
to the Ministry, he stated that the Ministry has enough money available and that the Ministry has 
been allowed to spend more than the monthly limit fixed by the Ministry of Finance. 
7.         The Chairman, NHAI elaborated upon the launch of the project management software 
‘Data Lake’ and stated that the lockdown period was utilized to train all their employees for usage 
of this new ly introduced software. He further informed the Committee that NHAI has set up a 
Centre of Excellence with IIT, Delhi for utilizing the data generated from usage of FASTags. The 
Managing Director, NHIDCL threw light on the steps taken by NHIDCL to ensure l iquidity for the 
contractors by releasing hard cash in the form of retention money and advances against bank 
guarantees. He stated that the construction, this year from April to September, has been 300 
kilometers despite the lockdown and that it was only 60 kilometers last year. 
7.         Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
8.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.         The meeting adjourned at 12:04 P.M. 
  

200 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 13th October, 2020 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Margani Bharat 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
13. Shri Dushyant Singh 
14. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director  
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Witnesses 
 
 
I. MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
1. Shri Giridhar Aramane Secretary 

 
201 
 
2. Shri I.K. Pandey Director General (RD) & Spl. Secretary 
3. Shri Ravi Prasad Additional Director General 
4. Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Priyank Bharti Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Sudip Chaudhury Chief Engineer 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (NHAI) 
7. Shri Sukhbir Singh Sandhu Chairman 
8. Shri Alok Member 
9. Shri R.K. Pandey Member 
10. Shri Mahabir Singh Member 
11. Shri Manoj Kumar Member 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS & INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION LIMITED (NHIDCL) 
12. Shri Keshav Kumar Pathak Managing Director 
13. Shri V.K. Rajawat Director (Technical) 
14. Shri W. Blah Executive Director 
 
 
II.   *                                                                 *                                                               * 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the me eting of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the 
Secretary, Ministry  of Road Transport and Highways on the subject ‘Impact of 
Coronavirus pandemic on Road  Transport sector’ and to continue the deliberations of 
the Committee on the same, since the discussions  of the Committee in its meeting 
held on 7th October, 2020 had remained inconclusive. 
 
3. Before taking up the agenda, the Chairman drew the attention of the Committee 
to the  fact that it is presently, inter-alia, examining the subject ‘Role of Highways in 
Nation Building’. Since the development of highways needs several issues, like land 
acquisition, obtaining clearances, etc. to be addressed at the local level, State 
Governments are major  stakeholders in developing the country's road network. The 
views/suggestions of State Governments on various issues related to the subject would 
therefore be of great help to the  Committee in understanding various issues involved 
in the execution of highway projects and coordination between the Central and State 
Governments. The Committee, therefore,  decided to call for written views/suggestions 

 
202 
 
of State Governments and hear their officials on  the ‘Role of Highways  in Nation 
Building’. Accordingly, the Committee authorized the  Chairman to obtain necessary  
orders  from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in this regard. 
I. Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways and other senior officials from the Ministry to the meeting. The Secretary 
briefed the Committee about the measures that were taken by the Ministry with regard 
to providing relief to COVID affected people. He stated that the Ministry ensured that 
wherever possible, transport facility was provided to the migrants to take them to the 
nearest railway station or  bus stand to help them reach their destination and that food 
and other essential needs of theirs were taken care of. 
5. The Secretary briefed the Committee that larg e number of works were taken up 
to provide employment in districts which were designated by the Government of India 
as those affected by influx of migrant workers. He further informed the Committee that 
the Ministry had made arrangements to declare force majeure for three to six months to 
compensate the concessionaires for the loss of revenue and also compensated wherever 
they had incurred  direct loss. He stated that the Ministry started payment of bills on 
monthly basis instead of milestones and that NHAI also extended working capital loans 
to concessionaires and contractors so that  contractors do not  suffer due  to lack of 
working capital. 
6. The Secretary informed the Committee that 4200 kilometers of road projects 
have been completed so far, which is just 40 0-500 kilometers short of the length 
constructed in the  same period last year. He assured the Committee that the Ministry 
would achieve the targets  set for the FY 2020 -21 without any let up on the work being 
done. He further assured that the Ministry is taking all necessary measures to ensure that 
COVID related precautions are taken  to protect the common public as well as the 
employees of the Ministry. He went on to inform the Committee about the extension of 
relief measures which were given to the contract ors, by another three months, till 31st 
December, 2020 so as to maintain the pace of work. 
7. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied 
to by the Secretary. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which  
remained unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
II. *    *     * 
 

 
203 
 
8. *     *     * 
9. *     *     * 
10. *     *     * 
11. *     *     * 
12. *     *     * 
13. *     *     * 
14. *     *     * 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
16. The meeting adjourned at 4:55 P.M. 
 
  

 
204 
 
IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 7
th January, 2021 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
4. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Tapir Gao 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Prince Raj 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional 
Director Ms. Catherine John L., 
Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses 
 
INDIAN ROAD CONGRESS (IRC) 
 
1. Shri C.P. Joshi President 
2. Shri H.R. Raheja Senior Vice President 
3. Shri S.K. Nirmal Secretary General 
4. Shri R.V. Patil Deputy Director (Technical) 
 
INDIAN ACADEMY OF HIGHWAY ENGINEERS (IAHE) 
5. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Director 

 
205 
 
6. Dr. Sanjay Wakchaure Additional Director 
7. Shri Dinesh Sharma Joint Director 
 
INDIAN CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURERS' ASSOCIATION 
(ICEMA) 
8. Ms. Seema Gupta Secretary General 
9. Shri Jaswinder Bakshi Sr. Vice President- Commercial Finance 
10. Shri Manish Handa Vice President 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee and extended warm New Year greetings to them and their families. He  
informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear stakeholders on the  
subject 'Role of Highways in Nation Building'. 
3. The Chairman welcomed Shri C.P. Joshi, President, India n Roads Congress; Shri  
Sanjeev Kumar, Director, Indian Academy of Highway Engineers; and Shri Jaswinder  
Bakshi, Senior Vice President, Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturer’s 
Association alongwith other senior representatives of their respective organ izations to the 
meeting of the Committee. 
4. Shri C.P. Joshi, President, Indian Roads Congress informed the Committee that 
Indian Roads Congress (IRC) is tasked with  the preparation of framework of standards,  
codes, specifications, guidelines and manuals for construction of various types of  roads, 
including National Highways. While briefing the Committee about the functioning of IRC, 
he stated that IRC collaborates  with international organizations and gives accreditation to 
new products or technologies that ar e brought to India. He  mentioned that IRC has signed 
Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with various  institutions including IITs, NITs, 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research - Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) 
etc. for carrying out their research work. He informed the Committee that IRC is in need of 
a lot of budgetary supplement to carry out future research programmes, which includes an 
agenda set by the Council of IRC to work out a  single highway code and bridge code  for 
the entire nation. 
5. Further elaborating on the lack of funds being faced by IRC, Shri S.K. Nirmal 
informed the Committee that IRC is lacking in research because research projects at  IITs 
and Nits are not finding any funding. He went on to state that IRC is not getting  any 
funding from the Government and that even the salary of the staff is being paid out of 
the sale of the publications of IRC. 
6. Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Director, Indian Academy of Highway Engineers  began his  
deposition by briefing the Committee about the functioning and  activities of Indian  
Academy of Highway Engineers (IAHE). He informed the Committee that IAHE 
organizes training for the highway sector engineers and professionals of Central and  State 
Government Public Sector Undertakings, to help them develop managerial  skills and 
professional ability to plan, design, construct and maintain an efficient economic  highway 

 
206 
 
system. He stated that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has  sanctioned Rs. 
48.71 crores for developing Centre for Advanced Transportation Technology & System 
(CATTS) for capacity building and technology transfer. He  concluded his deposition by 
informing the Committee that IAHE has created a pool of 116 Road Safety Auditors and is 
helping the Indian Road Congress for improvement in the IRC guidelines. 
7. Shri Jaswinder Bakshi, Senior  Vice President, Indian Construction Equipment 
Manufacturer’s Association informed the Committee that ICEMA is an association of  70 
construction equipment manufacturers in India which works for the betterment of  the 
industry. He flagged the issue of low level of mechanization in India, which is  characterized 
by low expenditure of about 5 dollars on construction equipment per  thousand dollars of 
investment in infrastructure in India, as compared to about 20 -40 dollars expen diture per 
thousand dollars in developed countries. He suggested that the  kind of equipment which 
should be used should be included in the road construction  contracts which will help in 
terms of improving quality of roads constructed. He  proposed the estab lishment of 
construction equipment component manufacturing parks  across India so as to minimize the 
import of components, thereby, making Atmanirbhar Bharat mission of the Government of 
India a success. 
8. Shri Jaswinder Bakshi emphasized upon the need to hav e a strong rental and leasing  
market in India for construction equipment. He stated that the Government should  
institutionalize a bank focused on long term roads and other infrastructure projects. He  
suggested incorporation of guidelines for infrastructure companies to use skilled operators 
for construction equipments since the same would lead to improved speed  and quality of 
work, besides adding to the safety of the workmen. He further requested  the Government to 
formulate a Production Linked Incentive (PL I) scheme for the  construction equipment 
industry to attract investment in the country for development of strong component 
manfucaturing companies. He concluded his deposition by requesting the Government to 
regulate prices of steel so as to limit the increase in input costs of the  construction 
equipment sector. 
9. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by  
the stakeholders. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which  
remained unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11. The meeting adjourned at 5:05 P.M.  
 
 
 
  

 
207 
 
X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Friday, the 8 th January, 2 021 in Committee 
Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
4. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11. Shri Prince Raj 
12. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
13. Shri Dushyant Singh 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
 Witnesses   
  
STATE BANK OF INDIA 
  
1. Shri Dinesh Khara Chairman 
2. Shri Radhakrishnan V.S. Deputy Managing Director, Commercial Client 
Group 
3. Shri Gulshan Malik Chief General Manager 
  
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK 
4. Shri CH. S.S. Mallkarjuna Rao Managing Director & Chief Executive Officer (MD & 
CEO) 
5. Shri Chander Khurana Chief General Manager 


 
208 
 
6. Shri Nasim Ahmed Chief General Manager 
  
UNION BANK OF INDIA 
7. Shri Raj Kiran Rai G. MD & CEO 
  
CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA 
8. Shri Pallav Mohapatra MD & CEO 
9. Shri Himansh P. Kala Manager (PR) 
    
INDIAN OVERSEAS BANK 
  
10. Shri Partha Pratim Sengupta MD & CEO 
11. Shri S.S. Narang Chief Regional Manager 
12. Shri Anthony Giri PRO 
  
INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL) 
  
13. Shri P.R. Jaishankar MD 
14. Shri Gaurav Kumar General Manager 
15. Shri S. Siva Kumar Chief General Manager 
  
CANARA BANK 
16. Shri Santanu Kumar 
Majumdar 
General Manager 
17. Shri Hem Chand Senior Manager 
  
IDBI BANK 
18. Shri  Rajiv Sharma Chief General Manager 
19. Shri Suneel Babu Gollapalli General Manager 
20. Shri Ramesh Sachdeva Deputy General Manager 
  
INDIAN BANK 
21 Shri Vikas Kumar Field General Manager 
22. Shri N.K. Sharma Deputy General Manager 
23. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Rana Senior Manager & PRO 
24. Shri Kishore Kumar Meena Assistant Manager & Protocol Officer 
  
IFCI LIMITED 
  
25. Shri Sunil Kumar Bansal Deputy Managing Director & In-Charge 


 
209 
 
26. Shri Sachikanta Mishra Chief General Manager 
27. Shri Vijay Pal General Manager 
28. Shri Vinod Kumar Makhija Deputy General Manager 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear various banks 
and financial institutions on lending aspects of road sector and hospitality sector. 
3. The Chairman welcomed Shri Dinesh Khara, Chairman, State Bank of India (SBI); 
Shri CH. S.S. Mallkarjuna Rao, MD & CEO, Punjab National Bank (PNB); Shri Raj 
Kiran Rai G., MD & CEO, Union Bank of India; Shri Pallav Mohapatra, MD & CEO, 
Central Bank of India; Shri Partha Pratim Sengupta, MD & CEO, Indian Overseas 
Bank; Shri P.R. Jaishankar, Managing Director, India Infrastructure Finance 
Company Limited (IIFCL); Shri Santanu Kumar Majumdar, Genera l Manager, 
Canara Bank; Shri Rajiv Sharma, Chief General Manager, IDBI Bank; Shri Vikas 
Kumar, Field General Manager, Indian Bank; Shri Sunil Kumar Bansal, Deputy MD 
& In-Charge, IFCI Limited; and other senior officials of the respective banks/financial 
institutions to the meeting of the Committee. 
4. Chairman, State Bank of India began his deposition by informing the Committee that 
despite challenges due to the outbreak of the Coronavirus pandemic, about 6,764 
kilometers of National Highway (NH) projects have  been awarded in the first 8 
months of the ongoing financial year as compared to 3,211 km during last year. He 
stated that about 40 -45 percent of these projects have been awarded through Hybrid 
Annuity Model (HAM) while about 55 -60 percent of the projects have been allocated 
under the EPC route. He highlighted the issue of land acquisition in road projects 
which leads to cost and time overruns and suggested de -scoping construction work in 
case some particular land piece is not made available for a project. He opined that a 
development financial institution should be established for supporting the road 
infrastructure sector. On the issue of stuck road projects, he suggested that if the value 
of the work done or 90 percent of the debt due, whichever is less, c an be made 
available, it would help all the involved parties. 
5. MD & CEO, Punjab National Bank stated that the road sector has been doing well 
especially after the implementation of HAM Model. He threw light upon several 
issues in the road sector which need to be addressed including delay in land 
acquisition and obtaining requisite regulatory approvals even after the introduction of 
single window concept. He highlighted the issue of revenue generation from tolling 
not being as per the traffic vertical study e stimates. He stated that inconsistency in 
policy over long periods of time impacts the cash flows in long term road 
infrastructure loans and stressed upon the need for the development of a financial 
institution focussed on long -term infrastructure lending in the country. He further 
suggested that NHAI should make the payment based on the investment done in a 
project, if the project gets stuck prior to Provisional Commercial Operation Date 
(PCOD) and Commercial Operation Date (COD) so that banker’s money doe s not get 

 
210 
 
adversely impacted and the project can move forward effectively after substitution 
takes place. 
6. *     *     *‡ 
7. MD & CEO, Central Bank of India suggested that the regulatory guidelines for risk 
weight for the infrastructure sector should be revisi ted. He informed the Committee 
that in case of certain road projects carried out through the HAM model, the 
construction of roads parallel to the constructed highway causes traffic diversion and 
impacts the toll revenue of the project which has to be borne  by the concessionaire 
which is NHAI and State Road Departments. He raised his concerns regarding the 
provision for appeal against the award for arbitration in case of disputes since the 
same leads to lenders’ money getting stuck. *  *  * 
8. MD & CEO, Union B ank of India appreciated the introduction of HAM model and 
informed the Committee as to how it has helped the road sector. He stated that the 
projects financed by the bank in the last 3-4 years are getting executed on time and the 
17 percent Non -Performing Assets in the road sector are because of legacy accounts 
where there were issues such as environmental and land acquisition issues. He opined 
that the participation of only banks will not meet the requirements for investment in 
infrastructure planned by t he Government under National Infrastructure Pipeline in 
the period 2020 -25 and suggested bringing in bond market and the development of 
financial institutions for this purpose. He further suggested that banks and financial 
institutions should be made membe rs of the Project Monitoring Committee which is 
formed for problematic projects so that the Government can understand the problem 
from a financer’s perspective and work out solutions. 
9. MD & CEO, Indian Overseas Bank (IOB) informed the Committee that IOB is one of 
the few banks which is under Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) framework and is 
struggling hard to come out of it. He informed that IOB has around 28.45 percent of 
NPAs in road sector and around 33.6 percent of NPAs in the hospitality sector. He 
suggested that there should be a consistency in the policy for infrastructure projects 
and once the creditors or bankers have lent based on certain terms and conditions, it 
should not be changed till the accounts are fully liquidated. He further added that 
many cases are unnecessarily stuck up in arbitration, wherein in many cases, the issue 
is that the promoters have not done the maintenance as per the agreement. He 
suggested that a certain percentage should be cut from the funds from the annuity or 
from the tol ls and put up in some escrow account to avoid such problems in the 
future. 
10. With regard to the hospitality sector, he informed the Committee that IOB is going for 
a deep restructuring as per the Covid parameters stated by the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI). He  added that the ratios stipulated by the Kamath Committee Report on 
                                                 
‡ * Relates to other matters 

 
211 
 
Resolution Framework for Covid -19 related Stress are too strict for the hospitality 
industry to maintain and opined that the industry requires long gestation period to 
revive. He stated th at there are certain regulatory issues which are creating adverse 
impact on the banks and opined that sorting out regulatory issues, policy issues and 
making certain changes in the concession agreement etc. will encourage the banks to 
finance the road and hospitality sectors. 
11. MD & CEO, IIFCL briefed the Committee about the functioning of India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) and stated that IIFCL’s financial 
assistance has led to the development of around 28,000 kilometers of road as a 
consortium partner. He informed the Committee that IIFCL is one of the largest 
lenders to HAM projects with disbursement of around Rs. 10,000 crores to around 60 
projects of NHAI. He suggested that the recommendations of the Kelkar Committee 
Report on Revisiting  and Revitalizing the PPP Model of Infrastructure Development 
addresses most of the problems troubling the road sector at present and therefore, 
should be implemented. He opined that NHAI plays the role of both the decider and 
the implementer and that as s uggested by the Kelkar Committee, an independent 
regulator is needed to redress the disputes arising out of project execution and 
implementation. He pointed out NHAI’s conflict of interest in case of termination 
payments which leads to termination payments of more than Rs. 40,000-50,000 crores 
amount of banks and IIFCL getting stuck up in the short -term wherein the conflict is 
that NHAI decides on the default, the structure and the standard operating procedure 
which in turn leads to a lot of delays and cases going for arbitration. He suggested that 
the termination payment mechanism should be out of NHAI. He stressed upon the 
immediate requirement for extension of RBI permission to finance Infrastructure 
Investment Trusts (InvITs) to Non -Banking Financial Com panies (NBFCs) and 
Infrastructure Finance Companies (IFCs) so that IIFCL can also lend to InvITs. He 
suggested that the RBI should relook its restriction on refinancing from an 
international sense and stressed upon the need for a relay type of refinancing setup so 
as to allow longer amortization periods with periodic refinancing in between. 
12. Deputy Managing Director, IFCI Limited began his deposition by stating that 
Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) such as IFCI Limited and IIFCL need to be 
supported by the Government especially keeping in view the planned financing of Rs. 
111 lakh crore by 2024 -25. He also pointed out the need for refinancing scheme for 
long-term infrastructure projects. He opined that the digitization efforts of the 
Government, specif ically the Bhoomi Rashi portal for land acquisition and 
PARIVESH portal for environmental clearances would help smoothen the processes 
for construction of roads. 
13. Chief General Manager, IDBI Bank informed the Committee that IDBI Bank has 
exposure in 36 road  sector accounts, aggregating Rs. 7,911 crores. He further stated 
that 15 accounts among these are NPA with principal outstanding of Rs. 5,719 crores. 
He opined that reasons for accounts turning NPA include liquidity issues of 

 
212 
 
developers and contractors and other issues like gap between original project cost and 
actual cost, delays in commencement of commercial operations, interest during 
construction period, preoperative expenses etc. He suggested that intervention of local 
authorities should be reduced an d that non -performing contractors should be 
substituted in a quick manner. He further suggested that extensions should be granted 
quickly in case delays take place for reasons beyond control of a contractor. He 
further highlighted the issue of State Govern ments not adopting the guidelines of 
NITI Aayog which state that once arbitrator decides on amount, 75 percent has to be 
paid on submission of Arbitration Bank Guarantee (BG). He was of the view that all 
departments and agencies should be advised not to en cash Bank Guarantees till a 
resolution is arrived at in case of stalled projects. 
14. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by 
the stakeholders. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which 
remained unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
16. The meeting adjourned at 1:55 P.M. 
  

 
213 
 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the  19th January, 2021 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
3. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Tapir Gao 
5. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
6. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
7. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
9. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11. Shri Prince Raj 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
14. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses   
  
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
1. Sh. Giridhar Aramane                                     Secretary 
2. Sh. I.K. Pandey                                               DG (RD) & SS 
3. Sh. Y. Balakrishna                                          Addl. DG 
4. Sh. S.K. Nirmal                                               Addl. DG 
5. Sh. Amit Kumar Ghosh                                  Joint Secretary 
6. Sh. Sudip Chaudhary                                      Chief Engineer 
7. Sh. Ashwani Kumar                                        Chief Engineer 
8. Sh. K.C. Sharma                                             Superintending Engineer 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 

 
214 
 
9. Sh. Sukhbir Singh Sandhu                              Chairman 
10. Sh. Alok                                                         Member (Admn.) 
11. Sh. Manoj Kumar                                           Member (Projects) 
12. Sh. Amarendra Kumar                                   Chief General Manager (Tech.) 
13. Sh. B.M. Rao                                                 Chief General Manager (Finance) 
14. Sh. Sanjay Verma                                          General Manager (Finance) 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
1. Sh. Pankaj Jain                                                Additional Secretary 
2. Sh. Lalit Kumar Chandel                               Economic Advisor 
3. Ms. Anindita Sinharay                                   Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the Secretary, 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) on (i) Lending aspects of road 
sector; (ii) Review of issues discussed by the Multi Member Consultative Committee 
headed by him, which was appointed with the aim to evolve ways for increasing the 
use of alternate environment friendly fuel to achieve fuel efficiency and reduction of 
carbon emissions in order to meet the goals of Mission 2030 of Government of India; 
(iii) Role of Highways in Nation Building; (iv) Issues raised by the Committee in its 
meetings held on 23 rd October, 2019; 4 th November, 2019; 7 th October, 2020; and 
13th October, 2020; and to h ear the Additional Secretary, Department of Financial 
Services (DFS), Ministry of Finance on the lending aspects of road sector and 
hospitality sector. 
3. The Chairman then welcomed Shri Giridhar Aramane, Secretary, MoRTH; and Shri 
Pankaj Jain, Additional Sec retary, DFS, Ministry of Finance alongwith other senior 
officials of the respective Ministry/Department to the meeting of the 
Committee.                                                                 
4. Secretary, MoRTH informed the Committee about the final ization of model 
concession agreements (MCAs) for Build Operate Transfer (Toll), Hybrid Annuity 
Model (HAM) and Toll Operate Transfer (TOT) model. He informed the Committee 
that the Ministry has also finalized and approved the concession agreement and 
implementation agreement for the Delhi -Mumbai Expressway Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV).  He further stated that the Ministry has changed the provisions in the 
HAM MCA and benchmarked the interest rates to the average of the top five banks’ 
MCLR. 
5. With regard to  the lending aspects of the road sector, the Secretary stated that road 
sector is the second largest component of National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) with 
around 18 percent of the envisaged investment in NIP. He informed the Committee 
that NHAI is one o f the largest borrowers in the road sector and has an outstanding 
debt of around Rs. 2.84 lakh crores as on date and that Rs. 39,000 crores have been 
borrowed in the ongoing financial year, against a target of Rs. 65,000 crores. He 

 
215 
 
stated that the changed MCAs have reduced the risk, especially during the 
construction phase in both HAM as well as BOT projects. He informed the 
Committee that NHAI is targeting to borrow around Rs. 4.35 lakh crores till 2024 -25. 
He briefed the Committee about the approval of In vIT model through which Rs. 
5,000-6,000 crores is being raised this year and a much higher amount will be raised 
in coming years. 
6. On the issue of direct lending to the private sector, he informed the Committee that 
HAM model has gained traction over the la st 5 years and that around 122 HAM 
projects have completed financial closure mobilizing Rs. 56,000 crores so far. He 
opined that the major risk aspect in road sector funding is the project preparedness, 
including land acquisition, environment clearance and  forest clearance. He further 
stated that the recent amendments in MCAs ensure that utility shifting is combined 
with the project execution so that the contractor building the road is also responsible 
for utility shifting and completes it on time. He appri sed the Committee that the 
Ministry of Finance has amended the provisions for the performance guarantee and 
additional security required for the projects, reducing it from 5 percent to 3 percent   
and doing away with additional performance guarantee in case  of lower bids. He 
suggested that giving priority funding tag to the infrastructure sector will improve 
road sector lending. He further suggested more active monitoring of projects by 
lenders to ensure better execution of the same. 
7. While briefing the Committee about the coordination mechanism between Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways and DFS, he informed the Committee that MoRTH is 
in regular consultation with the Ministry of Finance, which has conducted reviews on 
almost monthly basis. He further inf ormed the Committee that there is a regular 
review by the Cabinet Secretary and the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) to ensure that 
infrastructure lending picks up pace and NIP does not suffer for want of funding. On 
the work done by the Multi-Member Committee appointed to look into the sustainable 
alternative fuels and efficient fuel mechanisms to be set up in the transport sector, he 
informed the Committee that though the Committee has not met so far, all the 
Members of the Committee were called twice by the  Cabinet Secretary for 
consultation in this regard wherein a decision has been taken to go for 20% ethanol 
blending in petrol from this year and that a draft notification has been issued for the 
safety standards of 20% blending. 
8. Additional Secretary, DFS, Ministry of Finance began his deposition by informing the 
Committee that the Ministry of Finance and MoRTH work very closely and that 
NHAI has gone step -by-step to remove all the pain points highlighted by the banks. 
While applauding the adoption of HAM mo del, he informed the Committee that 
HAM has reduced the traffic risk in road projects and that the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways has addressed some minor points in HAM, such as the 
interest rates on annuities and the number of milestones in a par ticular project. He 
highlighted several issues that still persist, such as that of certain developers reaching 

 
216 
 
exposure limits within individual banks and certain developers struggling to bring in 
equity necessary to start a project. While raising the issu es being faced on the lending 
side on account of impact of Covid, he informed the Committee that RBI permitted a 
moratorium of six months on repayment of loans and announced restructuring, 
thereby, allowing developers whose projects have got stalled to restructure their loans. 
He apprised the Committee that the Ministry of Finance has introduced the 
Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) 1.0 and 2.0, under which the 
Ministry had given 20 percent extra credit for loans up to Rs. 50 crores (under 
ECLGS 1.0) and up to Rs. 500 crores (under ECLGS 2.0). On lending aspects of 
tourism sector, he informed the Committee that the impact of Coronavirus has hit 
hospitality sector projects much more severely than the road projects. He stressed 
upon the need to so rt out problems being faced by the tourism sector, in addition to 
the moratorium, one time restructuring as well as ECLGS schemes of the 
Government. 
9. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by 
the Secretary, Ministry o f Road Transport and Highways and Additional Secretary, 
DFS. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11. The meeting adjourned at 5:06 P.M. 
 
  

 
217 
 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 24 th June, 2021 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Margani Bharat 
9. Shri Tapir Gao 
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
11. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
12. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
13. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Smt. Mala Roy 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
19. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
20. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      
Dr. Shikha Darbai, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses  
 I          *     *     *§ 
                                                 
§ * Relates to other matters 

 
218 
 
II         Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
1. Shri Giridhar Aramane                        Secretary 
2. Shri I.K. Pandey                                 Director General (Road Development) 
and  ………………………………………Special Secretary 
3. Shri Y. Balakrishna                             Additional Director General 
4. Shri S. K. Nirmal                                 Additional Director General 
5. Shri P. V. V. S. Ravi Prasad               Additional Director General 
6. Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh                     Joint Secretary 
7. Shri Mahmood Ahmed                       Joint Secretary 
8. Shri Sudip Chaudhury                                    Chief Engineer 
9. Shri Rahul Gupta                                Chief Engineer 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
10. Dr. Sukhbir Singh Sandhu                  Chairman 
11. Shri Alok                                             Member 
12. Shri R. K. Pandey                               Member 
13. Shri Mahabir Singh                             Member 
National Highways and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (NHIDCL) 
14. Shri Keshav Kumar Pathak                 Managing Director 
15. Shri V. K. Rajawat                              Director (Technical) 
16. Shri W. Blah                                        Executive Director 
2.        At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
*      *     ***    
He also informed that in the afternoon session, the Committee would hear the Secretary, 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways on the subject ‘Role of Highways in Nation 
Building’ .  
I.          Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
3.         *     *     * 
4.         *     *     * 
5.         *     *     * 
6.         *     *     * 
7.         *     *     * 
8.         *     *     * 
                                                 
** * Relates to other matters 

 
219 
 
9.         *     *     * 
10.         *     *     *†† 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
(The Committee re-assembled after lunch break) 
II.        Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
11. The Chairman welcomed Shri Giridhar Aramane, Secretary, Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways; and other senior officials of the Ministry and its organizations to 
the meeting of the Committee. 
12. The Secretary began his depositi on by informing the Committee about the impact of 
Covid-19 pandemic on the Ministry and the measures taken by the Ministry to counter the 
same. He stated that the average toll collection in May, 2021 had reduced to 65% of the pre -
Covid levels but the same has started recovering in June, 2021. He apprised the Committee 
that the Ministry has provided relief to 1.1 lakh migrant labourers and has set up vaccination 
camps and health camps at all the project locations. He further stated that the Ministry has 
extended the validity of documents related to Motor Vehicles Act like fitness certificate, 
licenses, etc. He went on to inform that the Ministry facilitated the transportation of oxygen 
across the country by providing 582 tankers to various State Governments. 
13. On the topic of changes made in the Model Concession Agreement (MCAs) to 
improve private participation in road sector, the Secretary informed that the changes have 
been carried out to provide Ease of Doing Business for the concessionaires and to promote 
domestic contract system under Atmanirbhar Bharat. He further informed that the number of 
milestone payments has been increased from 5 to 10, so as to reduce the problem faced by the 
contractors regarding working capital. He stated that under HAM model, the interest provided 
to the contractor was earlier linked to the bank rate, which does not move much despite huge 
changes in the MCLR of banks and that to remedy the situation, the Ministry has now linked 
the interest to be provided to the contractors under H AM, to the average of MCLR of five 
major banks in the country. He further informed the Committee that the Ministry has waived 
the bid security to various project bid auction processes and the eligibility criteria has been 
revised to ensure that the contrac tors having the necessary capacity get contracts without 
having to form joint ventures with foreign companies just to meet the eligibility criteria. He 
stated that the package sizes have been reduced which would increase the competition in 
bidding and reduce the bid premium. 
14. With regard to electronic toll collection (ETC), the Secretary informed the Committee 
that in January last year, the ETC was around 45 -55 percent, but by the end of the year, it 
reached 96 -97 percent of the total collection, using FASTa gs. He informed that 13 State 
Governments have also integrated their toll plazas into the ETC FASTag system of the 
Government of India and that 138 State Government toll plazas are now operating on 
                                                 
†† * Relates to other matters 

 
220 
 
FASTag basis. He further stated that the GPS -based tolling system and Automatic Number 
Plate Recognition System (ANPR) are being piloted in the country. He dwelt upon the need 
to resolve certain legal issues before the transition to GPS-based tolling system can be made. 
15. Briefing the Committee regarding the steps taken by the Ministry for resolution of 
disputes between contractors and the agencies, the Secretary apprised the Committee about 
the constitution of Independent Settlement Advisory Committee, Conciliation Committee of 
Independent Experts to settle the dis putes, preferably within a period of 5 -6 months. He 
stated that due to the initiatives taken by the Ministry, 75 claims out of 177 have been 
resolved till the end of the Financial Year 2021 with settlement of Rs. 5,498 crores against a 
claim of Rs. 15,688 crores. He informed the Committee that the Ministry has made it a rule 
that for all Greenfield corridors, the State Governments will have to bear a part of the 
expenditure of land acquisition. 
16. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by 
the stakeholders. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which 
remained unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
17. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
18. The meeting adjourned at 4:32 P.M. 
  

 
221 
 
XXI 
TWENTY FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 4:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 20 th July, 2021 in Committee Room 
- 3, First Floor, Block-B, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Manshingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Anto Antony 
9. Shri Margani Bharat 
10. Shri Tapir Gao 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
13. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
14. Shri Prince Raj 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  

 
222 
 
2.        At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members  that the agenda of the meeting was to adopt and 
consider the draft Reports of the Committee on *  *  * and on 
the subject ‘Role of Highways in Nation Building’ and sought their views on both the 
draft Reports. 
3.      The Committee, thereafter, considered  the draft Reports and after a brief 
deliberation, adopted the same with some changes. 
4.       *      *     *‡‡ 
5.       *      *     * 
6.       *      *     * 
7.       *      *     * 
8.        The Committee further decided to present/lay the Report of the  Committee on the 
subject 'Role of Highways in Nation Building’ to both the Houses of Parliament on 
28th July, 2021. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman 
and in his absence, Shri K.C. Venugopal, M.P. to present the Report in Rajya Sabha.  Shri 
Rahul Kaswan, M.P. and in his absence, Shri K. Muraleedharan, M.P. was authorized to 
lay the above mentioned Report on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
9.         The meeting adjourned at 4:50 P.M. 
  
 
  
                                                 
‡‡ * Relates to other matters 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
223 
 
ANNEXURE-A 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways Press Release dated 6th July, 2020 
  


 
224 
 
ANNEXURE-B 
 
India’s Foreign Exchange Reserves as on June 11, 2021§§ 
 
  
                                                 
§§ Source: Reserve Bank of India - Weekly Statistical Supplement (rbi.org.in) 


 
225 
 
ANNEXURE-C 
Road projects with delay of more than 5 years 
S. 
No. 
State Name Name of Project 
Origina
l Cost 
 ( ₹ in 
crs) 
Revised 
cost (₹ in 
cr) 
Total 
Length 
 ( in 
km) 
Delayed 
Period 
(in Year) 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
Kudapa-Mydukur-Kurnool 1585 NA 188.752 7 
2 Six Laning of Nellore-Chilkaluripet 1535 NA 183.52 6 
3 
Assam 
Nalbari to Bijni(AS-7) 208 230 27.3 12 
4 
Construction of new 2- lane road with 
paved shoulders of Dhaleshwari Bypass 
from km. 0.00 - 3.500 of NH-154. 
SARDP-NE/NH-154/PWD/AS/2011-
12/187 
53.15 79.22 3.5 7 
5 
2 laning of  Goalpara- Solmari  road 
(Job No. SARDP-NE/Goalplara-
Solmari/ AS/PWD/2011-12/189) 
14.57 NA 7.9 6 
6 
Construction of proposed North 
Lakhimpur Bypass from existing km. 
338.924 to 349.213. Job No.-052-AS-
2011-12-099 
127.24 NA 12.514 5 
7 
Bihar 
 
Patna- Muzzaffarpur 671.3 2367 63 8 
8 Patna - Bakhtiarpur 574 574 50.6 6 
9 
4 Laning of Chappra-Hajipur(Approved 
Length 153 Km) 
575 1635 65 8 
10 
2 Laning of Muzaffarpur–
Sonbarsa(Approved Length 89 Km) 
511.54 1834 86 7 
11 
Bihar/ 
Uttar Pradesh 
Varanasi-Aurangabad 2848 2848 192.4 7 
12 Gujarat 
Gujarat/Maharashtra Border-Surat - 
Hazira Port  Section 
1509.1 NA 132.9 9 
13 
Gujarat/Mahar
ashtra 
Surat - Dahisar (Six lane) 1693.75 NA 239 9 
14 Haryana Delhi/Haryana Border  to Rohtak 486 NA 63.49 10 
15 
Haryana/ 
Punjab 
Panipat - Jalandhar  (Six lane) 2288 NA 291 9 

 
226 
 
S. 
No. 
State Name Name of Project 
Origina
l Cost 
 ( ₹ in 
crs) 
Revised 
cost (₹ in 
cr) 
Total 
Length 
 ( in 
km) 
Delayed 
Period 
(in Year) 
16 
Haryana/ 
Rajasthan 
Gurgaon - Kotputli - Jaipur (Six lane) 1673.7 NA 225.6 9 
17 
Haryana/Uttar 
Pradesh 
Delhi – Agra(Approved Length 180.3 
Km) 
1928.22 NA 179.5 5 
18 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Srinagar to Banihal 1100.7 NA 67.76 6 
19 
Jharkhand/We
st Bengal 
Six-laning of BarwaAdda-Panagarh 1665 1665 122.88 5 
20 Karnataka 
Kundapur-Surathkal& Mangalore-
KNT/Kerala Border 
671 1046.56 90 7 
21 Kerala 
Six lanning of Vadakkancherry - 
Thrissure section 
617 930  30 
 
7 
 
 
22 Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
Indore-Dewas(Approved Length 55 
Km) 
325 NA 45.05 4 
23 
Indore-Jhabua-Gujrat/MP (Approved 
Length 168) 
1175 NA 155.15 8  
24 
Madhya 
Pradesh/Mahar
ashtra 
4 Laning of Nagpur Betul 2498.76 NA 176.3 7 
25 
Maharashtra 
 
Pune – Satara(Approved Length 145) 1724.55 2540 140.35 7 
26 Nagpur - kondhali 168 NA 40.8 12 
27 Panvel-Indapur 942.69 1315 84 7 
28 
Odisha 
Six Laning of Chandikhol-Jagatpur-
Bhubaneswar(Approved Length 61 
Km) 
1047 NA 67 6.5 
29 
Widening to 2-lane and improvement of 
Chitrakonda-Janval-Papermetla Road 
(MDR-105) from Km 0/0 to 29/50 in 
Orissa under LWE scheme 
35.75 53.8 29.5 7  
30 
Widening to 2 lane and improvement in 
Km 0/0 to 45/535 of Govindapalli 
Salimi Mahupadar road including 
bridge across Chakabuka Nala in Km 
80.54 99.81 45.535 6  

 
227 
 
S. 
No. 
State Name Name of Project 
Origina
l Cost 
 ( ₹ in 
crs) 
Revised 
cost (₹ in 
cr) 
Total 
Length 
 ( in 
km) 
Delayed 
Period 
(in Year) 
45/0 in Malkangiri District under LWE 
Scheme 
31 
Widening to 2 lane and improvement 
Vijaywada Ranci route from Km 
377/700 to 471/900 (Berhmapur-
Taptapani-Rayagada road SH-17 from 
Km 67/000 to 150/100 and Koraput-
Laxmipur-Rayagada road SH-4 from 
Km 149/000 to 160/100 in Gajapati and 
Rayagada District. 
191.08 195.38 94.2 5  
32 
Chhatisgarh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chhatisgarh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
W/I SL to 2L of Chitalnar-Marigudam 
Road km 0 to 65.0 i/c 4MB & 87 CDs 
(existing 3 km WBM), (SH) 
78.11 NA 65.00 5.00 
33 
W/I SL to 2L of Antagarh-Bedma 
(Km.0 to 35.0) i/c 1MB & 36 CDs 
(existing  BT) ( MDR) 
52.38 NA 35.00 10.00 
34 
Widening and Strengtheningfrom Km.1 
to 28 of Sontarai Mainpat Road (MDR) 
31.64 NA 28.00 10.00 
35 
Widening to two lane and improvement 
from km. 0.00 to 52.400 of Nelasnar-
kodoli-gangaloor road 
73.08 NA 52.40 5.00 
36 
C/o 2L CC Pavement  of Kalgaon-
Koyelibeda (Km.6.0 to 22.6) i/c 5 MB 
& 18 CDs , (MDR) 
30.79 NA 16.60 10.00 
37 
W/I SL to 2L of  Bhanupratappur-
Pakhanjur-Bande-PV-109 km.27.0 to 
118.6 i/c 7 MB & 127 CDs (existing 
BT) , (SH) 
147.38 NA 91.60 9.00 
38 
W/I SL to 2L of Bijapur-Awapalli-
Jagargunda Road km 0 to 70.0 i/c 8 MB 
& 120 CDs (existing 21 km BT), (SH) 
166.51 NA 70.00 8.00 
39 
W/I SL to 2L of  Narayanpur-Palli-
Barsur (Km.176.6 to 219.6) i/c 16 MB 
& 45 CDs (existing BT) ,(SH) 
111.56 NA 43.00 8.00 
 
 
 
40 W/I SL to 2L  of Dornapal-Chintalnar- 116.88 NA 56.00 5.00 

 
228 
 
S. 
No. 
State Name Name of Project 
Origina
l Cost 
 ( ₹ in 
crs) 
Revised 
cost (₹ in 
cr) 
Total 
Length 
 ( in 
km) 
Delayed 
Period 
(in Year) 
 
 
 
 
Chhatisgarh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chhatisgarh 
Jagargunda Road Km 0 to 56(CC Pav.) 
i/c 9 MB & 101 CDs (existing 8 km 
BT), (SH) 
41 
W/I SL to 2L of Chhotedongar-Orchha 
(Km.0 to 31.0) i/c 4 MB & 66 CDs 
(existing 10 km BT & 21 KM BM) , 
(MDR) 
83.46 NA 31.00 5.00 
42 
W/I SL to 2L of Injaram-Bheji Road 
Km 0 to 20 i/c 26 CDs (existing 3 KM 
BT), (MDR) 
42.82 NA 20.00 5.00 
43 
W/I SL to 2L of Narayanpur-Sonpur-
Maroda (Km. 0 to 78.0) i/c 11 MB & 
189 CDs (existing  7 KMBT & 20 
KMWBM  & balance forest  ), (SH)  
Part-1 
123.82 NA 78.00 5.00 
44 
W/I SL to 2L of Palli-Barsur Km. 219.6 
to 258.0 i/c 17 MB & 80 CDs (existing  
9 KMBT & 6 KMWBM), (SH) 
54.25 NA 38.40 5.00 
45 
W/I SL to 2L of Km. 0 to 44.0 of Konta 
Golapalli road i/c 7 MB & 98 CDs 
(existing 34 km pagdandi),  (MDR) 
74.17 NA 44.00 5.00 
46 
W/I SL to 2L of Km. 20.0 to 47.8 of 
Bheji Chintaqupha road i/c 3 MB & 90 
CDs (existing 15 Km WBM) , (MDR) 
48.52 NA 27.80 5.00 
47 
Construction of 2 lane from km 0.00 to 
km 8.00 of Golapalli-Paidgudem road 
in the State of Chhattisgarh under LWE 
Scheme. 
11.09 NA 8.00 5.00 
48 
Construction of 2 lane from km 0.00 to 
km 12.00 of Kistaram -Paidgudem road 
in the State of Chhattisgarh under LWE 
Scheme. 
26.75 NA 12.00 5.00 
49 
Mizoram 
 
 
 
Widening to 2 lane, re-alignment and 
geometric improvement from Km 11/00 
to Km 114/618 of NH-44A in Mizoram 
under Phase A of SARDP-NE 
624.41 713.50(R1) 
992.67(R2) 
98.33 6 

 
229 
 
S. 
No. 
State Name Name of Project 
Origina
l Cost 
 ( ₹ in 
crs) 
Revised 
cost (₹ in 
cr) 
Total 
Length 
 ( in 
km) 
Delayed 
Period 
(in Year) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mizoram 
(Job No. SARDP-NE/NH-
44A/MZ/PWD/2010-1-169) 
50 
Construction of a new 2-lane Highway 
from km 0.00 (on NH-54 near 
Lawngtlai) to km 38.00 (Length=38.00 
Km) in Mizoram to support Kaladan 
Multi-Modal Transit Transport (Job No. 
SARDP-NE/State 
Road/MZ/PWD/2010-1/161)Project in 
Phase-A of SARDP-NE ( Package 
MM-I). 
195.04 253.12(R1) 
377.99(R2) 
34.59 6 
51 
Construction of a new 2-lane highway 
from km 38/00  to 71/00 in Mizoram to 
support Kaladan Multi Modal Transit 
Transport Project in Phase 'A' of 
SARDP-NE ( Package MM-II)(Job No. 
SARDP-NE/State 
Road/MZ/PWD/2010-1/159) 
186.96 207.05(R1) 
305.61(R2) 
322.24(R3) 
25.78 6 
52 
Construction of a new 2-lane highway 
in Mizoram to support Kaladan Multi 
Modal Transit Transport Project in 
Phase 'A' of SARDP-NE (Job No. 
SARDP-NE/State 
Road/MZ/PWD/2010-1/160) 
193.69 217.03(R1) 
327.92(R2) 
26.81 6 
53 
Sikkim 
Construction of 2 lane road fromTarku 
- Damthang- Namchi in South Sikkim 
166.27  
(Origina
l) 
203.26 
(Revised-I) 
359.92 
(Revised-
II) 
32.016 4.5 
54 
Construction of 2 lane Nayabazar 
Legship road in West Sikkim 
151.59 
(Origina
l) 
240.58  
(Revised-I) 
370.01 ) 
Revised-II) 
24.015 4.5 
55 
Construction of 2 lane road from Melli 
- Manpur- Namchi in South Sikkim 
182.28 
(Origina
l) 
269.14 
(Revised-I) 
369.64 
32.2 4.75 

 
230 
 
S. 
No. 
State Name Name of Project 
Origina
l Cost 
 ( ₹ in 
crs) 
Revised 
cost (₹ in 
cr) 
Total 
Length 
 ( in 
km) 
Delayed 
Period 
(in Year) 
(Revised-
II) 
56 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Two laning of Pasighat – Pangin Road 
(NH-13) for the stretch of Km 57.00 to 
Km 71.596 (Package-IV) 
53.54 137.5 14.6 8 
57 Punjab 
Four lanning of Ludhiyana- Talwandi 
section 
479 NA 78 7 
58 
Tamil Nadu 
 
Six Laning of Krishnagiri-walajhapet 
section 
1250 NA 148.3 
7 
 
59 Trichy - Karur 516 NA 79.7 
10 
 
60 
Tamil 
Nadu/Andhra 
Pradesh 
Tirupati -Tiruthani - Chennai(Approved 
Length 125.5 Km) 
571 NA 124.7 
7 
 
61 
Uttar Pradesh 
 
Ghaziabad-Aligarh (Approved Length 
106 ) 
1141 NA 126 7 
62 
2-Laning with PS Raibariely to 
Allahabad 
291.36 
499.93  
 
119 6 
63 
Widening with PS & Strng from 
Km.0.00 to 50.675 of NH-730A EPC 
MODE 
164.54 NA 50.67 5.6 
64 
West Bengal 
 
4 Laning of Brahampore-Faraka 998.79 998.79 103 8 
65 4 Laning of Faraka-Raiganj 1078.84 1078.84 103 8 
66 
6-Laning of Dhankuni-Khargpur 
Section 
1396.18 1396.18 111.4 7 
67 Krishnanagar - Berhampore 702.16 1154.5 78 7 
 
  

 
231 
 
ANNEXURE-D 
Delayed Projects (State-wise) and their Quantum 
S.No. State No. Length Cost ( ₹ in Cr) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 37 993.93 10389.4 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 32 877.69 6075.35 
3 Assam 31 716.14 9838.98 
4 Bihar 43 1537.67 22682.35 
5 Chhattisgarh 38 1762.29 10027.61 
6 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 1 7.54 18.52 
7 Daman and Diu 0 0 0 
8 Delhi 3 66.8 4894.5 
9 Goa 13 86.91 5044.41 
10 Gujarat 20 532.1 9088.99 
11 Haryana 11 398.13 2388.64 
12 Himachal Pradesh 27 303.77 7097.98 
13 Jammu and Kashmir 13 345.81 13888.47 
14 Jharkhand 18 508.47 3607.54 
15 Karnataka 45 1640.8 18033.92 
16 Kerala 18 397.28 4446.16 
17 Madhya Pradesh 45 1900.04 16153.37 
18 Maharashtra 176 6436.61 61683.61 
19 Manipur 11 159.68 822.45 
20 Meghalaya 3 0 46.59 
21 Mizoram 5 233.6 1220.35 
22 Nagaland 14 213.95 3287.25 

 
232 
 
23 Odisha 30 1604.72 14377.83 
24 Puducherry 2 1 39 
25 Punjab 24 612.76 9569.2 
26 Rajasthan 24 1231.96 9860.87 
27 Sikkim 10 163.45 1721.6 
28 Tamil Nadu 29 682.55 10991.77 
29 Telangana 28 977.71 6734.67 
30 Tripura 6 88.47 1066.36 
31 UT Ladakh 6 48.92 81.9 
32 Uttar Pradesh 33 1511.2 29091.66 
33 Uttarakhand 58 917.53 11976.15 
34 West Bengal 39 720.55 7603.47 
35 A & N Island 8 260.46 1522.35 
Total 888 27,665.3 3,15,373.3 
 
  

 
233 
 
ANNEXURE-E 
 
  


 
234 
 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
  


 
235 
 
ANNEXURE-F 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
4th November, 2019 
s 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
1.  Shri Sanjeev Ranjan Secretary  
2.  Shri I.K. Pandey DG(RD) & Spl. Secretary 
3.  Shri Y. Balakrishna Additional Director General 
4.  Shri Babni Lal Economic Adviser 
5.  Shri Kamlesh Chaturvedi Joint Secretary  
6.  Sh. Abhay Damle Joint Secretary  
7.  Shri Priyank Bharti Joint Secretary  
8.  Shri Sudip Chaudhary Chief Engineer 
9.  Shri U.C. Katara Chief Engineer 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION LIMITED (NHIDCL) 
10. Shri V.K. Rajawat Director 
11. Shri W. Blah Executive Director 
 
7th October, 2020 
 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
1.  Shri Giridhar Aramane Secretary 
2.  Shri I.K. Pandey Director General (RD) & Spl. Secretary 
3.  Shri Ravi Prasad Additional Director General 
4.  Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh Joint Secretary 
5.  Shri Priyank Bharti Joint Secretary 
6.  Shri Sudip Chaudhary Chief Engineer 
7.  Shri O.P. Srivastava Chief Engineer 
  
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (NHAI) 
8.   Shri Sukhbir Singh Sandhu Chairman 
9.   Shri Alok Member 

 
236 
 
10.   Shri R.K. Pandey Member 
11.   Shri Mahabir Singh Member 
12.   Shri Manoj Kumar Member 
  
NATIONAL HIGHWA YS AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION LIMITED (NHIDCL) 
13.   Shri Keshav Kumar Pathak Managing Director 
14.   Shri W. Blah Executive Director 
 
13th October, 2020 
 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
1. Shri Giridhar Aramane Secretary 
2. Shri I.K. Pandey Director General (RD) & 
Spl. Secretary 
3. Shri Ravi Prasad Additional Director 
General 
4. Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Priyank Bharti Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Sudip Chaudhury Chief Engineer 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (NHAI) 
7. Shri Sukhbir Singh Sandhu Chairman 
8. Shri Alok Member 
9. Shri R.K. Pandey Member 
10. Shri Mahabir Singh Member 
11. Shri Manoj Kumar Member 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS & INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION LIMITED (NHIDCL) 
12. Shri Keshav Kumar Pathak Managing Director 
13. Shri V.K. Rajawat Director (Technical) 
14. Shri W. Blah Executive Director 
 
7th January, 2021 
INDIAN ROAD CONGRESS (IRC) 
 
1. Shri C.P. Joshi President 
2. Shri H.R. Raheja Senior Vice President 
3. Shri S.K. Nirmal Secretary General 
4. Shri R.V. Patil Deputy Director (Technical) 
 
INDIAN ACADEMY OF HIGHWAY ENGINEERS (IAHE) 

 
237 
 
1. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Director 
2. Dr. Sanjay Wakchaure Additional Director 
3. Shri Dinesh Sharma Joint Director 
 
INDIAN CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURERS' ASSOCIATION 
(ICEMA) 
1. Ms. Seema Gupta Secretary General 
2. Shri Jaswinder Bakshi Sr. Vice President- Commercial Finance 
3. Shri Manish Handa Vice President 
 
 
8th January, 2021 
STATE BANK OF INDIA 
  
1. Shri Dinesh Khara Chairman 
2. Shri Radhakrishnan V.S. Deputy Managing Director, Commerc ial Client 
Group 
3. Shri Gulshan Malik Chief General Manager 
  
PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK 
4.     Shri CH. S.S. Mallkarjuna Rao Managing Director & Chief Executive Officer (MD & 
CEO) 
5.     Shri Chander Khurana Chief General Manager 
6.     Shri Nasim Ahmed Chief General Manager 
  
UNION BANK OF INDIA 
7. Shri Raj Kiran Rai G. MD & CEO 
  
CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA 
8. Shri Pallav Mohapatra MD & CEO 
9. Shri Himansh P. Kala Manager (PR) 
    
INDIAN OVERSEAS BANK 
  
10. Shri Partha Pratim Sengupta MD & CEO 
11. Shri S.S. Narang Chief Regional Manager 
12. Shri Anthony Giri PRO 
  
INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL) 
  
13. Shri P.R. Jaishankar MD 
14. Shri Gaurav Kumar General Manager 
15. Shri S. Siva Kumar Chief General Manager 
  
CANARA BANK 
16. Shri Santanu Kumar Majumdar General Manager 
17. Shri Hem Chand Senior Manager 
  
IDBI BANK 
18. Shri  Rajiv Sharma Chief General Manager 

 
238 
 
19. Shri Suneel Babu Gollapalli General Manager 
20. Shri Ramesh Sachdeva Deputy General Manager 
  
INDIAN BANK 
21 Shri Vikas Kumar Field General Manager 
22. Shri N.K. Sharma Deputy General Manager 
23. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Rana Senior Manager & PRO 
24. Shri Kishore Kumar Meena Assistant Manager & Protocol Officer 
  
IFCI LIMITED 
  
25. Shri Sunil Kumar Bansal Deputy Managing Director & In-Charge 
26. Shri Sachikanta Mishra Chief General Manager 
27. Shri Vijay Pal General Manager 
28. Shri Vinod Kumar Makhija Deputy General Manager 
 
19th January, 2021 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS 
1. Sh. Giridhar Aramane                                     Secretary 
2. Sh. I.K. Pandey                                               DG (RD) & SS 
3. Sh. Y. Balakrishna                                          Addl. DG 
4. Sh. S.K. Nirmal                                               Addl. DG 
5. Sh. Amit Kumar Ghosh                                  Joint Secretary 
6. Sh. Sudip Chaudhary                                      Chief Engineer 
7. Sh. Ashwani Kumar                                        Chief Engineer 
8. Sh. K.C. Sharma                                             Superintending Engineer 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
9. Sh. Sukhbir Singh Sandhu                              Chairman 
10. Sh. Alok                                                         Member (Admn.) 
11. Sh. Manoj Kumar                                           Member (Projects) 
12. Sh. Amarendra Kumar                                   Chief General Manager (Tech.) 
13. Sh. B.M. Rao                                                 Chief General Manager (Finance) 
14. Sh. Sanjay Verma                                          General Manager (Finance) 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
1. Sh. Pankaj Jain                                                Additional Secretary 
2. Sh. Lalit Kumar Chandel                               Economic Advisor 
3. Ms. Anindita Sinharay                                   Director 
 
24th June, 2021 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
1. Shri Giridhar Aramane                       Secretary 
2. Shri I.K. Pandey                                 Director General (Road Development)  
………………………………………and  Special Secretary 
3. Shri Y. Balakrishna                            Additional Director General 
4. Shri S. K. Nirmal                                Additional Director General 
5. Shri P. V. V. S. Ravi Prasad               Additional Director General 
6. Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh                     Joint Secretary 
7. Shri Mahmood Ahmed                       Joint Secretary 
8. Shri Sudip Chaudhury                        Chief Engineer 
9. Shri Rahul Gupta                                Chief Engineer 

 
239 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (NHAI) 
10. Dr. Sukhbir Singh Sandhu                  Chairman 
11. Shri Alok                                            Member 
12. Shri R. K. Pandey                               Member 
13. Shri Mahabir Singh                            Member 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION LIMITED (NHIDCL) 
14. Shri Keshav Kumar Pathak                 Managing Director 
15. Shri V. K. Rajawat                              Director (Technical) 
16. Shri W. Blah                                        Executive Director 
 
 
**** 