PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE   
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-07) OF DEPARTMENT OF
TOURISM
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 14TH MAY, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 14TH MAY, 2007)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
CONTENTS
PAGES
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 ............................................................................................
(i)
2. INTRODUCTION
 ...........................................................................................................................
(iii)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
 ......................................................................................................
1—21
4. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
 ………………..……
22—26
5. MINUTES …………………………………………...................................................................... 27—30
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
( 2006-2007 )
    1.    Shri Sitaram Yechury  —  Chairman
           RAJYA SABHA
    2.    Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
    3.    Shri S.S. Chandran
    4.    Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
    5.    Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
    6.    Shri Janardhana Poojary
    7.    Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
    8.    Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
    9.    Shri Shahid Siddiqui
   10.    Shri Shatrughan Sinha
           LOK SABHA
   11.    Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
   12.    Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
   13.    Shri Joachim Baxla
   14.    Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
   15.    Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
   16.    Shri Adhir Chowdhury
   17.    Dr. K. Dhanaraju
   18.    Shrimati Priya Dutt
   19.    Shri Dip Gogoi
   20.    Shri P. Karunakaran
   21.    Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
   22.    Dr. P.P. Koya
   23.    Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
   24.    Shri Samik Lahiri
   25.    Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
   26.    Shri Hemlal Murmu
   27.    Shri Madan Lal Sharma
   28.    Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
   29.    Shri Dushyant Singh
   30.    Shri Suraj Singh
 *31.    Shri Prahlad Joshi
           SECRETARIAT
           Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
           Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
           Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
           Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
* Nominated on 20.3.2007 in the vacancy caused due to demise of Shri Manbendra Shah.
       
INTRODUCTION
       I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred and
 Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Action  Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
 Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07)
 of Department of Tourism.
2.     The One Hundred and Fourth Report of the Department-related  Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 22nd May, 2006.
3.    The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Fourth
 Report were received from the Department of Tourism on the 21st September, 2006.
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 16th April, 2007.
        
NEW DELHI; SITARAM YECHURY
Chairman,
 
April 16, 2007
Chaitra 26, 1929 (Saka)
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
         Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
        
 
                                                                                                                                                                             .
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT
        This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
 recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) (Demand No.
 92) of the Department of Tourism, which was presented to the Parliament on 22nd May, 2006.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
2.     Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on 21st September, 2006 in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:-
              (i)      Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
                       Para Nos. 12, 18, 27, 32, 50, 51, 69, 70, 83, 89 and 97                                                    Total-11
              (ii)     Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies:
                       Para Nos. 41, 55, 57 and 58                                                                                            Total-4
              (iii)    Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
                       Para Nos. 8, 37 and 122                                                                                                  Total-3
              (iv)    Recommendations/ observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
                       Para Nos. 21, 26, 75, 78, 93, 103, 110 and 121                                                                 Total-8
3.     The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
4.     On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of the action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Department of Tourism. The recommendations of the Committee contained in the
 One Hundred and Fourth Report, action taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the
 Committee on each item of action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
APPROACH IN THE TENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN AND ANALYSIS OF THE ANNUAL PLAN 
 2006-07
(Recommendation at Para 8)
5.     The Committee notes that the plan allocation of Rs. 786 crore of Department of Tourism was not subjected
 to any reduction at RE stage during 2005-06. However, the Committee notes that during the year 2005-06, out of
 the budgeted allocation of Rs. 786 crore, the Department could spend Rs. 552.71 crore upto December, 2005 and
 the same was recouped to Rs. 772 crore by the end of the financial year 2005-06, which clearly indicates the poor
 fiscal management in the Department of Tourism. The Committee, disapproves the tendency of spending funds
 desperately towards the end of the financial year especially, in the months of February and March. The
 Committee expects that the maximum amount of plan outlay would be utilized suitably and substantially during
 the first five months of the financial year so that the Department will be in a position to make demand for more
 allocation of funds at RE stage for implementation of various projects/schemes for development of tourism
 infrastructure and promotion of tourism in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
 Department should evolve some mechanism of uniform utilization pattern throughout the year so as to avoid
 incurring expenditure at the fag end of the financial year.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6.     Out of the plan allocation of Rs.786.00 crore for the year 2005-06, almost 47 per cent was meant for
 Product/Infrastructure development for Destination and Circuits. The Department of Tourism grants CFA for
 implementation of tourism infrastructure development projects prioritized in consultation with the State/UT
 Governments. In addition, funds are also released for the on-going projects based on receipt of Utilization
 Certificates/Completion Certificates furnished by the concerned State/UT Governments. There is normally delay in
 getting the project proposals complete in all respects and also the UC/CC from the State/UT Governments resulting into
 less utilization of funds in the first three quarters of the financial year. The preparation of the detailed project proposals,
 feasibility reports and identification of land for the projects are time consuming process, however, in order to avoid this
 the concerned State/UT Governments have been requested to submit proposals well in time to have uniformity in
 expenditure throughout the year. In addition to the release of funds for infrastructure development projects, more
 expenditure are also being incurred for settlement of bills of field offices in India and abroad. However, the Department
 of Tourism has utilized 94.19 per cent of the budget allocation of the financial year 2005-06.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
7.     The Committee was not satisfied with the replies of the Department of Tourism for poor utilization of funds
 in the first three quarters of the financial year. The Committee feels that the reasons put-forth by the
 Department of Tourism are routine in nature and remedial measures may be taken in advance. The Committee
 therefore, recommends the Department of Tourism that some fool-proof method be devised for having
 uniformity in expenditure throughout the year and State/UT Governments may also be impressed upon for
 timely submission of project proposals and utilization certificates/completion certificates for release of funds
 through central financial assistance. The Committee is also surprised to note that the ATR have been furnished

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 to the Committee on 21st September, 2006 and yet it does not contain any information about actual number of
 project proposals received in time, how many are pending for consideration and how many
 utilization/completion certificates were issued thereon.
(Recommendation at Para 12)
8.     Taking into account the Actual Expenditure of 2002-03 to 2004-05 and Anticipated Expenditure of 2005-06
 and BE of 2006-07, the Department of Tourism has been allocated approximate 91 per cent of the total outlay of
 Rs.2900 crore for the Tenth Five Year Plan. The Committee notes that the outlay for the annual plan 2006-07 is
 Rs. 830 crore which is short by Rs. 259 crore of the total budgeted outlay of Rs. 2900 crore for the Tenth Plan.
 The committee is of the view that the plan outlay is insufficient to explore the tourism potential available in the
 country and the Department of Tourism has not been allocated the budgeted outlay judiciously. The Committee
 feels that the financial requirement of the Department of Tourism is much more and expects that the plan outlay
 of the Department would be increased in the coming years. The Committee expects that Department of Tourism
 will also be able to utilize the enhanced allocation for effective implementation of the schemes/programmes for
 development and promotion of tourism and also for creating world class and dependable tourism product and
 infrastructure required for sustained and structured growth of tourism. The Committee recommends that while
 revising allocations, due consideration should be given to the actual expenditure incurred in the past. This way,
 the Department of Tourism will be in a position to make demand for more allocation of funds at RE stage.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
9.     The Department of Tourism had requested the Planning Commission for an enhanced need based allocation of Rs.
 1410 crore for the year 2006-07. The Planning Commission has finally approved an allocation of Rs.830 crore for the
 tourism sector considering various factors and inter-se priority. It is expected that the enhanced allocation of funds for
 the year 2006-07 will be utilized for effective implementation of the schemes/programmes of the Department of
 Tourism which includes mainly development of tourism infrastructure to world class standard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
10.   The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the plan outlay of the Department of Tourism would be
 increased so that the vast tourism potential available in the country could be exploited optimally to create world
 class and dependable tourism product and infrastructure.
PRODUCT/INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
(a)    Major Destination and Circuits Development
(Recommendation at Para 18)
11.   The Committee is happy to note that Department of Tourism has been able to spend the entire amount
 available for development of infrastructure. The Committee is also happy to note that the Department of
 Tourism has finally decided to concentrate on major destinations and major circuits as was being stressed by the
 Committee for long. The Committee agrees with the Department that amount of Rs. 8 crore per circuit and Rs. 5
 crore per destination is insufficient and recommends that the amount should be increased to Rs. 50 crore as
 suggested by the Department of Tourism. The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism has modified
 the pattern of funding to enable all States for improving the existing products and developing new tourism
 products of world class standard. Now 100 per cent assistance is provided to State Governments/UTs for
 creation of infrastructure and other promotional projects and the State Governments have to provide mainly
 land and external infrastructure. The Committee is of the view that if India has to realise its enormous potential
 in tourism, then it must provide exclusive world-class tourism products and destination to compete successfully
 with other Asian tourism markets and the scope and reach of domestic tourism should also be broadened
 through the development of competitive destinations. The Committee also observes that arrival for foreign
 tourists is only 3.46 million, which is much less, in comparison to other countries in the world. The Committee,
 therefore, recommends the Department of Tourism to develop competitive destinations that match international
 standards in terms of price, quality and satisfy the national and international travellers. Aggressive marketing
 efforts and publicity should be given to these destinations in order to create a niche market for Indian tourism
 products as well as to attract more tourists to these destinations. The critical infrastructural gaps can be bridged
 by creating a tourism development fund for augmenting larger flow of funds for development of tourism
 infrastructure. The Committee also recommends the Department of Tourism to create awareness about the
 environment impacts of tourism with regard to the carrying capacity of tourist destinations.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
12.   As recommended by the Committee, the Department of Tourism is exploring the possibilities to increase the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 Foreign Tourist Traffic to India from the existing figures to 25 million in ten years time for which the work to prepare
 action plan has been entrusted to M/s. AC Nielsen ORG-MARG Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi. The Department of Tourism is
 concentrating on improvement/development of existing as well as new tourism infrastructure to world standard for
 which it is proposed to increase the central financial assistance to State/UT Governments to Rs.25 crore and Rs.50 crore
 for development of tourist destination and tourism circuits respectively.
13.   World class tourism infrastructure projects requires very large investment this may not be possible out of the
 budgetary resources of the Government of India alone. It is, therefore, proposed to promote large revenue generating
 projects for development of tourism infrastructure in public-private partnerships and in partnerships with other
 Government/Semi-Government agencies.
14.   For bridging the critical infrastructure gaps for the tourist infrastructure at the important destinations, the Ministry
 of Finance has already initiated schemes like Viability-Gap-Funding (VGF) which also include tourism projects.
 Aggressive marketing in the print and electronic media and also through internet campaigns has also been launched for
 augmenting the tourist traffic from the abroad market to India.
15.   The recommendations of the Committee is appreciative for creating awareness about the environmental
 impacts of tourism with regard to the carrying capacity of tourist destinations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
16.   The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is concentrating on improvement/ development of
 existing as well as new tourism products to world class standards for which the Government has proposed to
 increase the central financial assistance to State/Union Territory for development of tourism destinations and
 circuits in the country. The Committee is of the opinion that if the country has to improve its vast tourism
 potential to world class standard, it requires larger flow of funds for development of infrastructure both from
 Government and private sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to explore the
 possibilities for creating and promoting the tourism infrastructure projects in public-private partnership and
 approach the Ministry of Finance for releasing funds for bridging the infrastructure gap at important
 destinations besides resorting to aggressive marketing of tourism products through print and electronic media.
 World wide web campaigns should also be launched for augmenting incoming tourist traffic flow from abroad.
(Recommendation at Para 21)
17.   The Committee notes that the major constraint in the expansion of international tourist traffic to India is
 non-availability of adequate infrastructure including accessibility to tourist destinations and cultural/heritage
 sites. The Committee is deeply concerned over the poor road connectivity of tourist destinations and circuits and
 cultural heritage sites. The Committee notes that Department of Tourism is also seized with the matter and
 appreciates the efforts taken by Department of Tourism for improvement of better road connectivity to these
 sites. The Committee observes that many of the tourist destinations are away from the National Highways and
 lack road connectivity of desired standard. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Shipping, Road
 Transport and Highways must be impressed about the proper road connectivity of all important destinations
 and circuits. However, preference may be given to World Heritage Sites and Buddhist Circuits where most of
 the tourists in general and foreign tourists in particular, visit every year. In this regard the Committee agrees to
 the suggestions of the Department of Tourism for making available fund from Central Road Funds.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
18.   The matter has already been taken up with the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways to improve the
 connectivity to the important tourist destinations including World Heritage Sites, Buddhist Sites through Central Road
 Fund Scheme of the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
19.   The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is taking up the matter with the Ministry of Shipping,
 Road Transport & Highways for improving the connectivity to the important tourist destinations including
 World Heritage Sites, Buddhist Sites through Central Road Fund Scheme. The Committee recommends the
 Department of Tourism to pursue vigourously the matter with the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport &
 Highways. The Committee also desires the Department of Tourism to inform the Committee about the progress
 in the matter.
(Recommendation at Para 26)
20.   The Committee regrets to note that a large number of tourism projects sanctioned to State Governments/
 UTs by the Department of Tourism during the Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Five Year Plan are still incomplete.
 During Eight and Ninth Plans, 2526 projects were sanctioned and out of this only 1761 projects got completed
 and balance 765 projects remained incomplete for one reason or the others. The progress of work with regard to
 the Tenth Plan period is also not very satisfactory. Out of the 895 projects sanctioned, only 276 projects got

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 completed and there still remained a shortfall of 619 projects. The Committee is apprehensive that with this slow
 pace of work the Department of Tourism will not be able to achieve the physical and financial targets. The
 Committee is of the view that Department of Tourism has failed to activate the State Government machinery
 which have resulted in such a huge mismatch in terms of projections and achievements. The Committee feels
 that if these projects were not completed in a definite time frame, then, the entire taxpayers money will go waste.
 In this regard, the active participation and support of the state Government is essential for tourism to bloom and
 spread its numerous benefits among the host population. The Committee recommends the Department of
 Tourism to prioritize the projects and seek active support of the State Governments/UTs for the completion of
 the remaining tourism projects so as to avoid delay in the implementation of the projects as well as cost overrun.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
21.   The Department of Tourism has been requesting the State Governments to submit completion certificates for
 pending projects. However, out of the sanctioned projects of the Eighth and Ninth Plans, 1830 projects have been
 completed as on date. Similarly, 285 projects of the Tenth Plan have been completed. The numbers of the completed
 projects could further increase on receipt of the information regarding completion of the projects and receipt of the
 completion certificates from the State Governments.
22.   The State Governments were impressed upon the need for full utilization of the funds sanctioned. The State
 Governments were informed that no more funds would be released for the projects of Eighth Plan period which are now
 pending. These projects are to be completed by the respective State Governments. They were also informed that no
 funds would be released after 31.3.2006 for any pending projects of the Ninth plan.
23.   In order to seek active support of the State Governments/UTs for the completion of the remaining tourism projects
 so as to avoid delay in the implementation of the projects as well as cost overrun, all the State Governments have been
 apprised of the apprehensions of the Committee and also to complete the pending projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
24.   The Committee is constrained to note that out of the 2526 sanctioned projects during Eighth and Ninth Five
 Year Plan periods, only 1830 projects have been completed as on date. Similarly, out of the 895 sanctioned
 projects during the Tenth Five Year Plan only 285 projects have since been completed. The Committee feels that
 there is lack of co-ordination and monitoring of projects between the Department of Tourism and State/UT
 Governments and this needs to be strengthened and in the future corrective measures may be taken so that more
 and more sanctioned projects may be completed in time.
(Recommendation at Para 27)
25.   The Committee notes with dissatisfaction that Department of Tourism has not evolved effective system or
 planning to systematically anticipate the actual requirement of funds otherwise, the investments could have
 yielded commensurating results. The Committee feels that strict monitoring is crucial for timely completion of
 any project and recommends that the monitoring agency should play rather proactive role and do away with the
 procedural hurdles for timely completion of these pending projects so that the budgeted allocation is utilized
 optimally and utilization certificates are issued in time. The Committee directs the Department to inform the
 Committee about the progress in the matter.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
26.   The Department of Tourism was allocated Rs.2900.00 crore in the Tenth Five Year Plan, out of which Rs.2716
 crore has been allocated so far in various Annual Plan allocations by Ministry of Finance after taking into consideration
 various factors. 1830 projects have been completed, out of the sanctioned projects of the Eighth and Ninth Plans and
 285 projects of the Tenth Plan as on date. The numbers of the completed projects could further increase on receipt of
 the information regarding completion of the projects and receipt of the completion certificates from the State
 Governments.
27.   The Department of Tourism is extending financial assistance to State/UT Governments for development of tourism
 infrastructure which are generally one tourist circuit and two destinations, prioritized in consultation with them. The
 progress of implementation of the projects sanctioned are done by the Department at the level of Secretary (Tourism)
 and the same is also done at the level of the Secretary (Tourism) of the concerned State/UT Government from time to
 time. The domestic offices of Department of Tourism is also actively involved in the monitoring of these projects. The
 State Governments were informed that no more funds would be released for the projects of Eight Plan period which are
 now pending. These projects are to be completed by the respective State Governments. They were also informed that no
 funds would be released after 31.3.2006 for any pending projects of the Ninth plan. The Secretary (Tourism) has also
 impressed upon other implementing agencies like ITDC, CPWD, ASI etc. to be pro­active in completion of the
 respective projects well in time.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
28.   The Committee notes the reply and recommends the Department of Tourism to have close co-ordination
 with the implementing agencies viz., ITDC, CPWD, ASI etc., for timely completion of tourism projects. This way
 the Department of Tourism will not only achieve the physical and financial targets but also help in
 creation/improvement of tourism infrastructure.
(b)    Rural Tourism
(Recommendation at Para 32)
29.   The Committee notes that the concept of Rural Tourism is the new emerging area under
 product/infrastructure and destination development scheme and aim to promote village tourism to spread
 tourism and its social-economic benefits to rural and its remote geographic regions. The Committee feels that
 rural tourism need to be given impetus by earmarking funds for projects on the basis of a model plan for each
 State for the purpose and these villages should be taken up for priority development and linked with the
 restoration of heritage properties in the area. The Committee is of the opinion that this would provide boost to
 local performing arts and help conserve the local culture apart from preventing rural-urban migration. The
 Committee recommends that local people in the rural areas should be encouraged to participate in tourism
 related projects in order to provide employment opportunity and to increase the income level in the rural areas.
 The Committee also recommends that proper training should be imparted on improvement of environment,
 hygiene and sanitation etc. as coordinated effort to develop rural tourism infrastructure.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
30.   The creation of infrastructure in Rural areas having potential for tourism is being supported under the existing
 scheme of Product/Infrastructure Development for Destination and Circuit of Ministry of Tourism, while community
 participation and the capacity building including skill upgradation in such rural areas are being supported through GoI-
UNDP Endogenous Tourism Project and Scheme of Capacity Building for service providers.
31.   In this connection, the Ministry of Tourism has already identified 25 villages in consultation and interaction with
 the State/UT Governments for development as Rural Tourism sites during the year  2006-07 for spreading the attributes
 of Indian Art and Culture within and outside the country, thereby enabling the visitor to gain first hand experience of
 diverse art and craft skills at the various rural tourism sites and generating further tourist arrivals.
32.   The promotion of rural tourism can lead to increased tourist arrivals to rural sites and in the process can strengthen
 rural livelihoods including benefit to the youth, through income from visitor handling services apart from income
 through art and craft activities.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
33.   The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is making efforts to boost rural tourism
 infrastructure in the country. The Committee also notes that during 2006-07, the Department of Tourism has
 already identified 25 villages in consultation with the State/UT Governments for development of rural tourism
 sites in the country. The Committee expects that the promotion of rural tourism can lead to increased tourist
 arrivals to rural sites and in the process can strengthen rural livelihoods including benefit to the youth through
 income from visitor handling services apart from income through art and craft activities.
ASSISTANCE FOR LARGE REVENUE GENERATING PROJECTS
(Recommendation at Para 37)
34.   The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is providing support in the form of grant to Large
 Revenue Generating Projects through the financial institutions and tourism finance corporations. It also notes
 that 10 projects like Tourist Trains, Cruise Vessels, Cruise Terminals, Convention Centres, Golf Courses etc.
 have been sanctioned by the Department of Tourism under the scheme. The Committee expects that these
 projects would be completed within the stipulated time-frame though no target, therefore, have been
 communicated to the Committee. The Committee is constrained to note that only amount of Rs. 9.28 crore could
 be spent by the end of December, 2005. The Committee hopes that the Department will be able to utilize the
 amount of Rs. 30 crore allocated for the current year. However, the Committee feels that the allocation is
 meager when grants-in-aid for one project itself can go upto 50 crore. The Committee feels that there is a need
 for higher level of participation by the private sector in all the stages of the tourism development as the growth
 in tourism sector can only be achieved by major flow of investments coming in from private sector and public
 investments can act as a catalyst. The Committee recommends that private sector investment should be
 enhanced by removing the impediments to the growth of tourism and expediting policy support. The proposal
 for inclusion of special trains like “Palace on Wheels” and “Deccan Odyssey” should also be considered in
 collaboration with the concerned State Governments for improving the connectivity and urban infrastructure in
 Buddhist sites. The Committee also recommends that while identifying the projects under the public-private

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 participation, the strategy for removing regional imbalances should also be taken care of.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
35.   During the year 2005-06, the Department of Tourism did not receive suitable large revenue generating projects
 from the State/UT Governments. Only Rs.9.30 crore could be utilized in this regard and the balance funds available
 under this head were re-appropriated for development of tourism infrastructure. In the meantime, Expression of
 Interests were invited for Large revenue generating tourism projects which are to be implemented in public-private
 partnerships and once the guidelines are finalized, suitable projects will be considered for implementation.
36.   The Development of world class tourism infrastructure in the country, with the help of private sector participation
 is being actualized by attracting their techno-managerial efficiencies and investments under the scheme of Assistance to
 Large Revenue Generating Projects of the Ministry. The revision of the scheme is under consideration to ensure higher-
level participation of the private sector in tourism development in the country. Under the scope of the scheme, projects
 of tourist trains also qualify for assistance for which the State Governments/concerned agencies have to come forward
 with suitable projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
37.   The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is formulating the guidelines to ensure higher level of
 participation of the private sector in the development of tourism in the country. However, the Committee is
 constrained to note that the Department of Tourism could not utilize the allocation during the year 2006-07 for
 want of suitable large revenue generating projects from the State/UT Governments. The Committee
 recommends that the Department of Tourism should be more cautious while identifying and selecting the
 projects and in any case appropriation of allocation should not be done and State/UT Governments should be
 persuaded for coming forward with suitable project for sustained and structured tourism growth in the country.
CAPACITY BUILDING FOR SERVICE PROVIDERS
(Recommendation at Para 41)
38.   The Committee notes with dismay that there is a heavy shortfall in the utilization of funds allocated under
 the head “Capacity Building for Service Providers” and the Department of Tourism has not furnished any
 reasons for under utilization of funds. It appears to the Committee that while revising allocation, little
 consideration has been paid to the actual expenditure incurred in the past and expects the Department of
 Tourism to utilize the funds more judiciously during 2006-07. The Committee notes that the Capacity Building
 for Service Providers Scheme provides training through one to five day modules to persons who are working in
 unorganized sectors and who come into contact with a large number of tourists like those working in small
 hotels, dhabas, ticketing agents, travel agencies, police personnel etc. The Committee desires the Department of
 Tourism to prepare broad framework for the countrywide training programme to develop Human Resource and
 place them with important groups of service providers engaged in the tourism industry.      
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
39.   The ‘Capacity Building for Service Providers’ (CBSP) scheme was launched in 2002-03 and was initially aimed at
 imparting training of tourism awareness for 1-5 days only by limited Implementing Agencies in the Central/State
 Governments. The scheme lacked to meet the needs for skilled manpower of Travel and Hospitality Industry both in the
 organized and un-organized sector resulting in poor response both from industry and candidates. The Implementing
 Agencies identified in the scheme also left much to be desired due to their limited outreach.
40.   The Department agrees with the recommendation of the Committee to prepare broad framework for the
 countrywide training programme to develop skilled and basic service oriented human resource for tourism industry.
 With this very objective, the CBSP scheme has been modified and put into operation from 19.4.2006 incorporating the
 following new training programmes:
             (i)     3 months training programme for existing service providers.
             (ii)    Long duration training programme for freshers.
             (iii)   Special training programmes to ensure promotion of rural tourism for 3-6 months duration in the villages.
             (iv)   Training of Trainers Programmes for 15-30 days.
41.   The scope of Implementing Agencies has also been widened and for the first time the specialized Academic
 training Institutes in the Private Sector engaged in giving training in the hospitality sector have also been included to
 make the scheme an endeav or of public-private partnership.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
42.   The Committee notes that the Capacity Building for Service Providers scheme has been modified as per its
 recommendation and put into operation with the aim to prepare broad framework for the countrywide training
 programme to develop skilled and basic service oriented human resource for tourism industry.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
ASSISTANCE TO HOTEL MANAGEMENT AND OTHER INSTITUTES FOR HUMAN RESOURCE
 DEVELOPMENT
(Recommendation at Para 50)
43.   The Committee notes that hotel management and catering education programmes assumes high priority
 with a view to the modernization and expansion of the country’s hospitality industry and impressive tourism
 growth and diversification of tourism activities. The Committee is happy to note that as per its earlier
 recommendations, the Department of Tourism has proposed to set up four new IHM sat Dehradun,
 Jamshedpur, Kurukshetra and Raipur during the Tenth Plan. The Committee is of the view that human
 resources development efforts cannot depend indefinitely on Government funding in the wake of restructuring
 of the economy. A funding system should be set up to ensure continuation of activities and private sector could
 contribute more training efforts. The Committee observes that a majority of institutes operated by the
 Department of Tourism have attained self-sufficiency in meeting the revenue expenditure and therefore,
 recommends that as there is greater demand of professionally trained manpower in the sector to cater to the
 growing demand in the service sector, a good number of accredited institutes should be set up and the training
 course run by these institutes should be designed to suit the needs of various target groups also.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
44.   The Department is fully aware of the growing demand of skill/trained manpower of hospitality industry. In order to
 meet this demand, the Department is focusing on the following areas:-
             (i)     Up-gradation of existing institutes
             (ii)    Setting up of new institutes
             (iii)   Affiliation of private institutions
45.   The upgradation includes improvement/expansion of existing infrastructure comprising equipment, laboratories,
 training material etc. This is expected to raise standard of hospitality education and will lead to prepare the students
 with the needs of industry. On the other hand, the institutes will be able to increase their intake capacity.
46.   As the State Governments are major stake holders, they are being encouraged to send proposal for setting up of
 new institutes in their State. As a result of this, it is proposed to set up new institutes at the following locations:-
             (i)     Mohali, Punjab
             (ii)    Jammu, J&K
             (iii)   Daman & Diu
47.   As a major policy initiative, the Ministry has approved the proposal of National Council For Hotel Management
 and Catering Technology for the affiliation of private institutes to National Council For Hotel Management and
 Catering Technology courses. The National Council has also published scheme in the leading newspaper so that the
 private institutes may come forward for their affiliation with them. Under this scheme the degree to the students of
 private institutes will be provided from IGNOU. This single step is expected to send a strong message of Government’s
 intention to render support to the institutes of hospitality education in the private sector.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
48.   The Committee notes that with the growing demand of skilled/trained manpower in the hospitality industry,
 the Department of Tourism has proposed to set up three more Institutes of Hotel Management at Mohali,
 Jammu and Daman & Diu. The Committee also notes that the Department of Tourism has also approved the
 proposal for affiliation of private institutes to National Council For Hotel Management & Catering Technology
 courses. The Committee hopes that more and more private institutes will come forward for affiliation and
 contribute towards the training efforts in Human Resources Development.
(Recommendation at Para 51)
49.   The Committee notes that a number of private IHMs have emerged in the country to offer courses in hotel
 management and they have grown to play a significant part in country’s hotel management. However, the
 Committee is surprised to note that there is no guideline for affiliation of the private institutes of hotel
 management in the country due to which these institutes have varying standards and are lacking in training and
 other infrastructure facilities. The Committee recommends that the guidelines for affiliation of these privately
 managed institutes be notified at the earliest for achieving excellence in the tourism sector and the Department
 of Tourism should grant a statutory/deemed university status to National Council For Hotel Management and
 Catering Technology for better regulation, management, monitoring and coordination of public and private
 sectors in the hospitality education.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
50.   National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology under the Department of Tourism has already

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 announced its scheme of affiliation of existing Private Hospitality Institutes. The Scheme was notified in the National
 leading newspapers by the Council in 1st week of June, 2006, inviting applications for affiliation. This will be an
 ongoing activity on yearly basis. National Council shall encourage affiliated Institutes to update their quality standards
 as per norms which in turn will facilitate award of B.Sc. in Hospitality and Hotel Administration degree by IGNOU, till
 such a time the UGC confers deemed to be a University Status for National Council For Hotel Management and
 Catering Technology. National Council has already taken up the issue for Deemed to be University status with UGC
 and papers in that respect have been submitted for consideration of Review Committee set up by Ministry of Human
 Resource Development. National Council For Hotel Management and Catering Technology is hopeful in receiving
 positive response from UGC. The issue related to grant of statutory status for National Council For Hotel Management
 and Catering Technology is also under process in this Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
51.   The Committee notes that the guidelines for affiliation of the existing private managed hospitality institutes
 has been notified by the National Council For Hotel Management and Catering Technology and the matter to
 grant statutory/deemed university status to National Council For Hotel Management and Catering Technology
 is under consideration of UGC. The Committee therefore, recommends the Department of Tourism to pursue
 vigorously the matter for grant of statutory status to National Council For Hotel Management & Catering
 Technology with the Ministry of Human Resource Development for having uniform standards in training and
 other infrastructure facilities.
DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING HOSPITALITY
(Recommendation at Para 55)                                                                                                    
52.   The Committee is unhappy with the poor performance of Department of Tourism with regard to low
 utilization of approved outlays for the domestic tourism and publicity. Out of the total allocation of Rs.230 crore
 for the Tenth Plan, the Department of Tourism could spend Rs.71.88 crore upto December, 2005 leaving thereby
 a huge shortfall in the utilization pattern. The Committee is of the view that the Department of Tourism has full
 responsibility to ensure proper utilisation of the approved outlay and recommends that the Department of
 Tourism should take all corrective measures based upon the actual requirements for maximum utilization of
 budgeted amount during 2006-07.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
53.   The concern of the Committee has been noted. In this context it is stated that since the centralized campaigns and
 the domestic tourism campaigns can be implemented only after selection of agencies through a transparent process,
 certain delays have taken place. Further, the actual expenditure can be incurred only on completion of the campaigns
 which during the year 2005-06 culminated in March 2006. Since advance payments are not entertained for promotional
 campaigns, the expenditure cannot be booked before the actual implementation of the project. Efforts are being made
 during the current year to overcome this problem by starting the selection process early and phasing out of the
 expenditure.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
54.   The Committee notes that that the Department of Tourism is making efforts for overcoming the problem of
 low utilization of approved outlays for the domestic tourism and publicity by starting the early selection process
 of the advertising agencies and the phasing out of the expenditure for maximum utilization of budgeted amount.
(Recommendation at Para 57)
55.   The Committee notes due to increase in income level and emergence of the dynamic urban middle class, the
 potential of domestic tourism has grown substantially. In the country, for every international tourist there are 80
 domestic tourists but surprisingly there is no precise estimate of the domestic tourist traffic in the country.
 During the year 2004, an estimated 367 million domestic tourists travelled the country showing a positive growth
 rate of about 19 per cent as compared to 309 million in the year 2003. The Committee is of the view that the
 domestic tourism is the foundation of a viable and sustainable tourism industry and much of the growth of
 global tourism has been generated by the domestic tourism. The Committee observes that the potential for
 domestic tourism is massive and required focused approach in all arena especially on creation of tourism
 infrastructure and promoting amenities and facilities including marketing support for the budget tourists
 segment. The Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to evolve some mechanism for precise
 estimation of the domestic tourist traffic in the country and provide strong support to tourism sector for
 creation of large infrastructure besides launching mass tourism awareness campaign and publicity material
 especially focusing the newly created tourists destinations and circuits. This is imperative in view of the fact that
 domestic tourists have started looking at their own country with renewed interests.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
56.   The collection of State level domestic tourism statistics is the responsibility of the States/UT Governments
 concerned. The Ministry of Tourism provides technical and methodological guidance on the collection of tourism
 statistics to the States. In order to improve the precision in the estimates of domestic tourism, it has been decided to
 organize periodical training programmes in data collection strategies for building the capacity of the State Tourism
 Departments. It is also proposed to recommend to the Planning Commission to strengthen the statistical machinery in
 the States during the Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007-2012 through a Plan Scheme. Further, at the national level, the
 Ministry of Tourism will conduct Domestic Tourism Surveys every five years, through household approach to estimate
 the size of domestic tourism in the country along with various other characteristics, such as, tourist profile, the
 perceptions, expenditure pattern, etc. The Committee’s recommendation regarding providing strong support to tourism
 sector for creation of infrastructure and launching of campaigns and production of publicity material has been noted.
(Recommendation at Para 58)
57.   The Committee also recommends that as the variety of fairs and festivals are a powerful tools for
 showcasing the Indian culture for the tourists and generates income and employment and these events are
 viewed with interest and curiosity by domestic and foreign tourists, the Department of Tourism must support
 and lay special attention on domestic publicity and marketing of these products.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
58.   The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Ministry of Tourism provides financial assistance to the
 States to promote and showcase their tourism products as well as their craft and culture through these fairs and
 festivals.
OVERSEAS PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKETING DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE
(Recommendation at Para 69)                                                                                                    
59.   The Committee notes that though allocation for overseas promotion and publicity has been enhanced
 considerably during the year 2005-06, still there is a significant gap between the expenditure of the Government
 of India and the world average expenditure. The Committee opined that promotion and marketing is an
 important component of tourism development and needs to be undertaken along with the consumer profiles and
 product characteristics. The Department of Tourism through its 13 India tourism offices overseas, endeavour to
 position India as a preferred tourism and business destination and to increase India’s share of the global tourism
 market. The Committee recommends that Department of Tourism should develop and implement cost effective
 marketing strategies based on market research and analysis in each of the tourist generating countries to
 position India as a global brand and reinforce ‘Incredible India’ campaign as a unique and preferred tourist
 destination.                                                                                                                                  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
60.   It is true that the allocation for overseas promotion and publicity has been enhanced but it is much less compared to
 the large amount spent by other countries all over the world for promotion of tourism to their respective countries. India
 tourism offices overseas plan their marketing and promotional activities on the basis of available market intelligence
 gathered through various sources. Promotional/Marketing strategies are based on market trends, consumer profile, and
 forecast made available by professional agencies like WTO and WTTC. The overseas offices prepare their market
 strategies by adopting parameters applicable to a particular market and project India accordingly.
61.   Ministry of Tourism, through its 13 India tourism offices overseas undertakes the following cost effective
 promotional activities:-
             •       Advertising in the Print and Electronic and interactive Media
             •       Participation in Fairs and Exhibitions
             •       Organising Seminars, Workshops and Road Shows
             •       Organising promotions with leading Departmental Stores
             •       Organising/Sponsoring India Evenings
             •       Organising/Participating in Buyer-Seller meet
             •       Organising Food and Cultural Festivals
             •       Inviting media personalities, tour operators and opinion makers under the Department’s Hospitality
 Programme

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
             •       Printing of Brochures and Collaterals
             •       Dissemination of information through internet and across the counter
             •       Brochure Support/Joint Advertising with Travel Agent/Tour Operators
             •       Organising Print Media and TV Interviews
             •       Market Research and collection of market intelligence data
             •       Public relations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
62.   The Committee notes that India Tourism offices overseas prepare their marketing and promotional
 activities on the basis of the feedback received from the market and project India accordingly. However, the
 Committee is constrained to note that though the allocation for overseas promotion and publicity has been
 enhanced considerably but it is much less if compared to amount spent by other countries. The Committee
 recommends the Department of Tourism to approach the Planning Commission for increase in allocation under
 the head, so that there is no let in efforts to project India as a preferred tourism and business destination and to
 increase India’s share of the total global tourism market.
(Recommendation at Para 70)
63.   The Committee notes that international tourism is still relatively concentrated in the industrialized countries
 of Europe, the America and Asia and Pacific. However, with rising levels of disposable income, many emerging
 economies have shown fast growth particularly in Central Europe, North-East and South-East Asia and Middle-
East. The Committee is of the view that with the enhancement of budget of India tourism offices overseas,
 aggressive promotional activities should be carried out in emerging markets like China, Korea, Taiwan, etc. The
 Committee recommends that promotional activities should be identified in tourists generating overseas markets
 to increase the visibility of Indian tourism products and to promote India as a tourist destination in emerging
 markets, particularly East Asia and South-East Asia.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
64.   A series of promotional activities have been undertaken by the Ministry of Tourism, through its overseas offices,
 for increasing the visibility of Indian tourism products and to promote India as a tourist destination in the emerging
 markets of East Asia and South-East Asia. These include advertising in the print and electronic media, outdoor
 advertising at prominent locations, subways, trains, buses and taxis, participation in fairs and exhibitions, organising
 seminars, workshops and road shows, publication of brochures and collaterals, joint advertisement support, and inviting
 media personalities, tour operators and opinion makers to visit the country under the Hospitality Programme of the
 Ministry.
65.   Some of the main promotional activities undertaken in Asian and South-East Asian countries during 2005-06
 include:—
             (i)     “Incredible India” Road Shows organized in Japan, Korea and Cambodia in October 2005, with
 participation of a high level Delegation from India led by the Minister of State for Tourism.
             (ii)    Participation in approximately 25 International Travel Fairs/Exhibitions in East Asia and South-East Asia,
 during 2005-06, for showcasing the Indian Tourism products and increasing brand awareness of India as a
 destination.
             (iii)   An Integrated Campaign for Promotion of Buddhist Sites, titled “Come to India - Walk with the Buddha”
 launched in the South-East Asian Market in March 2005 for a period of 5 months. The components in the
 Campaign included advertisements in print, electronic and web media in the South East Asian Market.
 Publicity material on Buddhist sites, such as brochure, map folder, etc. were also been produced in
 English, Japanese, Korean, Chinese and Thai languages for distribution in the respective market.
             (iv)   The Ministry of Tourism has invited journalists, photographers, T.V. teams, travel agents, tour operators,
 etc. from East Asian and South East Asian countries on Familiarisation Tours to India to effectively
 project India as an attractive multi-dimensional tourist destination offering a vast range of attractions.
 These invited guests have been able to get first hand information/knowledge of the Indian tourism product
 and the facilities/services available, during their familiarization tours on the Ministry of Tourism’s
 hospitality, thereby enabling them to effectively promote India as a tourist destination in the East Asian
 and South East Asian countries.
66.   Such promotional activities will be continued during 2006-07 in East Asian and South East Asian countries, as well

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 as in other emerging markets including Russia, South America, Israel, etc.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
67.   The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is making series of promotional activities through its
 overseas offices for increasing the visibility of Indian tourism products and to promote India as a tourist
 destination in the emerging tourism markets of East Asia and South East Asia. The Committee recommends that
 these promotional activities should continue to be carried out in tourists generating overseas markets to
 showcase and effectively promote the unique and competitive Indian tourism products and destinations in the
 new emerging global markets.
NATIONAL TOURISM PROMOTION BOARD
(Recommendation at Para 75)
68.   The Committee notes that Department of Tourism being the nodal agency for development of tourism in the
 country requires close coordination and interaction with various Ministries/Departments, State Governments
 and private sector players for integration of policies and to mobilize the State Governments and private sector
 for development of unique and competitive tourism products and destinations. The Committee feels that the
 Department of Tourism has tended to concentrate largely on its role as a promoter of tourism and generator of
 foreign exchange earnings and paying less attention to inter sectoral policy coordination. The Committee
 observes that though the Government has established several forums/mechanism for inter institutional
 coordination and the Department of Tourism is also seized with matter of setting up of National Tourism
 Promotion Board, the tourism is still at the appalling state of coordination. The Committee desires the
 Department of Tourism to redefine and expand its role and work toward inter-sectoral convergence and policy
 integration. This could be achieved through creation of National Tourism Promotion Board for better
 coordination with all agencies/Stakeholders. In this regard the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation
 contained in 95th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendation/ observation of the
 Committee contained in its 87th report on Demands for Grants 2005-06 of Ministry of Tourism, which inter-alia
 States as under:-
‘The Committee agrees with the Ministry that setting up of the National Tourism Promotion Board
 which would amalgamate the various aspects/departments is a Herculean task. But the establishment of
 an autonomous institution like this is all the more important for this precise reason. As regards the
 synergising/coordination of the various department and administrative nitty-gritty is concerned, studies
 should be made on the basis of model countries that have already formed Tourism Promotion Board.
 Further, the Committee recommends that participation of the private sector should be elicited by taking
 up the matter at the forums like Chamber of Commerce and Industry, FICCI, Tourist Associations,
 etc’.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
69.   The Ministry of Tourism has sought the views of major industry associations namely, ASSOCHAM, FICCI, CII,
 FHRAI, TAAI, PHD Chamber of Commerce, IATO, HAI and ITTA. Views of majority of the Industry Associations
 have been received and are being examined. The Ministry is also studying the models of the Tourism Boards of a few
 countries in India’s neighbourhood. Further decision on the issue of setting up of the Board would be taken after
 considering the views of the Industry Associations and examining the pros and cons of setting up of such a Board in the
 Indian federal set up.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
70.   The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is considering the views of major industry
 associations and studying the models of the Tourism Boards of a few countries in the neighbourhood such as Sri
 Lanka and Singapore etc. for establishment of National Tourism Promotion Board in the country. The
 Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to firm up an early decision for formation of National
 Tourism Promotion Board for better coordination and close interactions with all agencies and stakeholders for
 development and structured growth of tourism in the country.
UNIFORMITY AND RATIONALIZATION OF TAXES ON TRANSPORT AND HOSPITALITY SECTOR
(Recommendation at Para 78)
71.   The Committee notes with serious concern that a multiplicity of taxes exist in the tourism sector and the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 quantum of taxes also varies from place to place. The Committee feels that high and multitude of Central and
 State taxes create hurdles in packaging of tourism product and makes the product expensive as well. The
 Committee feels that there is a need for introduction of new incentives to increase tourism expenditure, volume
 and promotion of investment in the industry. The Committee desires that attempt should be made to reduce the
 heavy and multiple taxes that reduce the competitiveness of the our tourism product and recommends that taxes
 like expenditure tax, service tax, customs duty and taxation of Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and luxury tax at
 State level should be rationalized and reduced for end customer to make the destination competitive and some
 uniformity in taxes on tourist transport should be adopted to facilitate free flow of tourist traffic across the State
 borders.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
72.   The issue of uniformity and rationalization of the tax structure in the tourism sector has been taken up by the
 Ministry of Tourism at various forums so that taxes could be rationalized and a consensus can be evolved on the subject
 in order to give a further boost to Tourism and promote India as a “Value for Money” destination.
73.   As a step forward to rationalize State taxes on Tourist Transport, the Department of Road Transport and Highways
 has agreed in principle to allocate a separate series for the tourist vehicles in India, which are owned and operated by
 the tourist transport operators, recognized by Ministry of Tourism, Government of India. In order to distinguish tourist
 vehicles from others, the letters ‘TV’ would be reserved for use as the registration number for tourist vehicles only.
74.   The Ministry of Tourism has been constantly taking up with the Northern States to consider evolving a Zonal
 Tourist Permit in the Northern Region which envisages the payment of the taxes in the Home State and the share of
 each State would be deposited in separate designated bank accounts so as to ensure the there is no loss of revenue to the
 State. This model also suggests displaying of the appropriate labels with Tourism logos on the vehicles for easy and
 quick identification at border points. The Minister of Tourism & Culture has written to the Chief Ministers of the
 Northern States to consider introducing this scheme as soon as possible. In case the model is accepted by the Northern
 States and proves to be success it could be replicated by the other zones.
75.   Since the Domestic Air Tariff is quite high in India as compared to other South East Asian countries the State
 Governments also been requested to reduce the tax on Air Turbine Fuel (ATF) in an effort to reduce the air fares.
76.   Similarly, the Ministry of Finance has also been requested to review and rationalize the Service Tax on tourism
 services.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
77.   The Committee appreciates the move of the Department of Tourism in furthering the issue of uniformity
 and rationalization of the tax structure in the tourism sector at various forums and evolving a consensus on
 taxation on transport and hospitality sector for promoting India as a value for money destination. The
 Committee notes that with a view to rationalize the State taxes on tourist transport, the Department of Road,
 Transport and Highways has agreed in principle to allocate a separate series for the tourist vehicles in India,
 which are owned and operated by the tourist transport operators, recognized by Ministry of Tourism. The
 Committee also notes that the Department of Tourism is taking up the matter with the Northern States for
 evolving consensus on a zonal tourist permit in the Northern Region which envisages the payment of the taxes in
 the Home State and the share of each State would be deposited in separate designated bank accounts so as to
 ensure that there is no loss of revenue to the State. The Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to
 take up the matter for rationalization of taxes like expenditure tax, customs tax, service tax and luxury tax with
 the Ministry of Finance and intimate the Committee about the progress in the matter.
SHORTAGE OF HOTEL ACCOMMODATION
(Recommendation at Para 83)
78.   The Committee is concerned over the shortage of hotel accommodation in all categories particularly the
 budget hotels, which does not auger well at time when more and more foreign tourists are coming to Indian
 particularly at the time when the Commonwealth Games is scheduled to be held in New Delhi in 2010. The
 Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is augmenting the hotel room capacity commensurating with
 the growth in the tourism sector. The Department of Tourism has taken up the matter for creation of
 infrastructure with the State Governments and other land owning agencies like Ministry of Civil Aviation,
 Railway and DDA etc. Issues like, creation of land banks, allocation of hotel sites on revenue sharing basis and
 provision of additional FSI/FAR and a capital subsidy scheme as an incentive for accommodation infrastructure
 in budget hotel are also on offing. The Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to take step to
 ensure that more budget hotels are set up by making sites available on Central Government land in order to

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 maintain country’s competitiveness as a tourist destination and facilitate identification of hotel sites and their
 allocation by State Governments to the deserving entrepreneurs with facilities for speedy single window
 clearance through various Government agencies.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
79.   In order to augment the hotel room capacity in the country and also especially in the budget sector, Ministry of
 Tourism has recently introduced schemes for the approval of Guest Houses and Bed & Breakfast Establishments.
 Ministry of Tourism is in regular touch with the land owning agencies and the State Governments to identify more sites
 for the construction of hotels create land banks and also adopt a single window clearance for hotel projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
80.   The Committee notes that the shortage of hotel accommodation remains vital area of concern and in order
 to augment of hotel room capacity especially in the budget sector, the Department of Tourism has recently
 introduced schemes for the approval of Guest Houses and Bed and Breakfast Establishments. The Committee
 feels that with skyrocketing prices of land, there is huge gap in demand and supply of hotel room
 accommodation and recommends the Department of Tourism to take up the matter for construction of hotels
 and creation of land banks with the State Governments and other agencies so that more rooms could be added
 up at an affordable price in budget hotel segment.
APPROVAL AND CLASSIFICATION OF HOTELS
(Recommendation at Para 89)
81.   The Committee notes that the approval and classification of hotels under the star system from one to 5 star
 deluxe and heritage is being done by the Department of Tourism for the suitability and standardizing the service
 for international tourists. The Committee observes that mandatory norms have been laid down for the purpose
 and there are 1934 approved hotels with 103973 rooms in the country till the end of December, 2005 and
 classification of 50 number of hotels with 5125 room is pending with the Department. The Committee feels the
 hotel accommodation remain a vital area of concern and pendency in the classification of hotels is not desirable.
 The Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to speed up the process of classification/reclassification
 of hotels at an early date. The Committee also recommends that India will host 12th Commonwealth Games in
 Delhi in the year 2010 and accordingly the Department should play a proactive role in meeting extra demand for
 good quality hotel rooms.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
82.   Approval and classification of hotels is an on going process for the Ministry of Tourism and every effort is being
 made to decrease the pendency of the same. Till the end of June 2006, 35 hotels with a total of 2735 rooms are yet to be
 classified. MOT is playing a proactive role in augmenting the increase of rooms in the accommodation sector and is in
 constant interaction with the State Governments of the NCR region to identify more sites for hotels to meet the demand
 of rooms during the forthcoming Commonwealth Games.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
83.   The Committee notes that approval and classification of hotels is an on going process and the Department of
 Tourism is making efforts to reduce the pendency for approval and classification of hotels besides augmenting
 the increase of rooms in the accommodation sector and to identify more sites for hotels to meet the increased
 demand for rooms during the forthcoming Commonwealth Games. The Committee desires the Department of
 Tourism to speed up the process of approval and classification of hotels and create suitable infrastructure to
 keep pace with the growth of tourism.
CRUISE TOURISM
(Recommendation at Para 93)
84.   The Committee notes that the Government has constituted a high powered steering group to formulate
 cruise shipping policy in the country and a draft policy paper on development of cruise shipping is under
 finalization. The Committee also notes that five major ports Mumbai, Mormugao, New Mangalore, Kochi and
 Tuticorin have been identified for development of infrastructure and other related facilities for the growth and
 expansion of cruise tourism in the country and the Department of Tourism is also in the process of making
 publicity material and marketing India as a cruise destination. The Committee recommends that besides the
 ports on West Coast, the Department of Tourism should identify ports on the East coast in the country including
 Andaman and Nicobar Islands for development of major cruise destination, which also have exotic appeal.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
85.   The matter is under consideration by the Ministry of Shipping.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
86.   The Committee notes that the cruise shipping policy on development of cruise shipping is under finalization
 of the Department of Shipping. The Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to pursue the matter
 with the Department of Shipping for finalization of cruise shipping policy in the country and development of the
 infrastructure facilities for the growth and expansion of the cruise tourism both on the ports located at the
 Eastern and Western coast in the country.
MEDICAL TOURISM
(Recommendation at Para 97)
87.   The Committee notes that medical tourism is a newly emerging area with a high potential for growth. The
 Committee observes that the health tourism is not season specific and the average length of stay of a person
 coming as health tourist is generally long depending upon the medical procedure. The Committee notes that the
 Government has introduced medical visa to facilitate foreign tourists coming to India for medical treatment. The
 Committee hopes that low cost of medical treatment, high level of expertise and varied system of medicines of
 India are factors that can lead to a boost in health tourism in the country.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
88.   On Tourism Ministry’s request, Ministry of Home Affairs has introduced a new category of “Medical Visa” (‘M’-
Visa), which can be given for specific purpose to foreign tourists coming to India for medical treatment. The initial
 period for such visa may be upto a period of one year or the period of treatment whichever is less, which can be
 extended for a further period upto one year by the State Government/FRROs on the production of a medical certificate
 from the concerned specialized hospitals in the country and can be further extended by Ministry of Home Affairs only
 on the recommendation of the State Government/FRROs supported by appropriate medical documents. Co-terminus
 with the patient ‘MX’ Visa is granted to spouse or blood relations of the patient coming to India for medical treatment.
89.   For providing easy access of medical aid to the visiting tourists include  preparation of a guide on select Indian
 cities and corresponding hospitals, and a guide on suggested uniform price-band for different specialty services for
 Indian hospitals by Indian Healthcare Federation, a Non-Governmental Organization affiliated to the Confederation of
 Indian Industry for promoting Health Tourism. Medical and health facilities available in India have been promoted at
 various international platforms such as World Travel Mart, London and ITB Berlin etc. for medical tourists.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
90.   The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has introduced a new category of medical visa for
 specific purpose to foreign tourists coming to India for medical treatment and the period of visa may vary
 depending upon the medical procedure. The Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to draw
 special packages for medical tourists and provide more concessions to the tourists coming for medical treatment
 in India.
BEACH TOURISM
(Recommendation at Para 103)
91.   The Committee notes that the concept of Beach Tourism is fast emerging and growing in the country. The
 Committee observe that for development of beach tourism, the Department of Tourism has extended the
 financial support to a number of sites on the west coast of India and a study for an integrated sustainable
 development of coastal tourism in the States of West Bengal, Orissa and Andhra Pradesh has already been
 undertaken and a comprehensive coastal tourism policy for these States is under consideration. The Committee
 feels that development of beach tourism along the coastal lines of the country will certainly give impetus to the
 cruise tourism and recommends the Department of tourism to identify and develop more beaches both on the
 West and East coast in the country with active participation by private sector and due publicity should be given
 for developing these beaches as a major tourist attraction.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
92.   Ministry of Tourism extends financial assistance for tourism infrastructure development of specified tourism
 projects including projects related to each tourism, tourist spots of States/Union Territories and procurement of cruise
 vessels, boats etc. for promotion of beach and cruise tourism. Ministry of Tourism has also given No Objection
 Certificate to two private operators to operate their cruise vessels for the purpose of cruise tourism promotion along the
 Indian coast.
93.   In addition to above, a High Power Steering Group has been constituted to formulate Cruise Shipping policy for the
 country. On the recommendations of this Steering Group, a Working Group has been constituted by Department of
 Shipping for identification of Ports having cruise tourism potential along the East and West Coast of India.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
94.   The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is extending financial assistance for tourism
 infrastructure development including projects related to beach tourism, tourist spots of States/Union Territories
 and procurement of cruise vessels, boats etc. for promotion of beach and cruise tourism and two private
 operators are operating their cruise vessels for the purpose of cruise tourism promotion along the Indian coast.
 The Committee notes with dissatisfaction that the High Power Steering Group which was constituted to
 formulate cruise shipping policy for the country resulted nothing in concrete but led to the formation of another
 Working Group only. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to impress upon the
 Department of Shipping for finalization of the cruise shipping policy for integrated and sustainable development
 of coastal tourism in the country.
ADVENTURE TOURISM
(Recommendation at Para 110)
95.   The Committee notes that geographical diversity of our country provides opportunities for out door and
 adventure sports activities for all tastes and interests and every level of experience. The Committee also notes
 that major adventure tourism activities range from trekking and skiing in the Himalayas, river rafting along the
 Ganges, water sports in Goa, trout fishing in Himachal Pradesh and U.P., Heli skiing in Himachal Pradesh and
 wind surfing, scuba diving and yatching in the Andaman and Lakshadweep Island. The Committee feels that
 there is need for regulation and promotion in the country of adventure tourism products. The Committee
 therefore, recommends the Department of Tourism to better regulate the adventure tourism products, specially
 the mountain based and water sports adventure activities amongst the youth and introduce the minimum
 standards of safety and conservation for tour operators.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
96.   The suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee is welcomed. There are a vast number of adventure sports activities
 being conducted in the country. In order to ensure safety of participants in such activities the need had been felt to lay
 down the minimum acceptable standards in terms of equipment and human resources. Draft guidelines on Adventure
 Sports/Tourism related activities which have the greatest volumes in terms of participation have also been circulated to
 all States/UT Governments by the Ministry of Tourism to ensure that minimum standards of safety and consideration
 are followed by tour operators while promoting these activities.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
97.   The Committees notes that draft guidelines on Adventure Sports/Tourism related activities have been
 circulated to all the States/UT Governments by the Department of Tourism. The Committee recommends the
 Department of Tourism that while finalizing the guidelines due attention will be given to the safety of
 participants besides laying down the minimum acceptable standards in terms of equipment and human
 resources.
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION
(Recommendation at Para 121)
98.   The Committee notes the efforts taken by the Department of Tourism for promotion of tourism in the
 North-Eastern States. It also notes that a nation wide special campaign ‘paradise unexplored’ has also been
 launched for promoting and marketing of various tourism products in the North Eastern region. However, the
 Committee is constrained to note that inspite of the concerted efforts of Department of Tourism the flow of
 tourist traffic to these regions are marginal and is being largely hampered by Restricted Area Permit, Protected
 Area Permit and Inner Line Permit and lack of suitable infrastructure and other related facilities and amenities
 in various tourists places in the region. The Committee observes that inspite of incurring a lot of expenditure for
 development of tourism in North-East region no perceptible improvement is seen in the ground situation and
 Department of Tourism has to put lot of efforts to fully explore the tourism potential in the Region. Further, the
 revenue earned from tourism are not estimated by the States. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
 Department of Tourism to prioritize the projects in consultation with the State Government for upgradation and
 creation of infrastructure and destinations in the Region besides addressing the major issues for the growth and
 development of tourism in the Region like mandatory permit system, law and order situation and lack of private
 investment etc. This way, the Department of Tourism will be able to bring the North Eastern Region in the
 mainstream of national development agenda.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
99.   The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The projects for the North-East are prioritized in the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 beginning of the year in consultation with the State Governments keeping in view the requirements of infrastructure
 and tourist flow to the area. The Ministry has been promoting the North East through specific publicity campaigns and
 has also taken up the issue of permits with the Ministry of Home Affairs.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
100. The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is giving priority to the projects for the North-East
 region in consultation with the State Governments keeping in view the requirements of infrastructure and
 tourist flow to the area and is giving publicity to the North-East through specific campaigns. The Committee
 recommends the Department of Tourism to address the major issues like mandatory permit system, law and
 order situation and lack of private investment etc. for the growth and development of tourism in the region.
(Recommendation at Para 122)
101. The Committee also recommends the Department of Tourism to keep an account of the revenue earned
 from tourism in these States as it will give economic benefits of tourism in the form of its contribution to Gross
 Domestic Products (GDP) and employment.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
102. Tourism being an amalgam of a variety of economic activities such as Hotels and Restaurants, Air
 Road/Rail/Water Transport, Entertainment services, services of Travel Agencies/Transport Operators, etc., the
 estimation of the economic benefits of tourism in terms of its contribution to the GDP and employment is based on the
 methodology of Tourism Satellite Accounts recommended by the World Tourism Organization (WTO). In India,
 Tourism Satellite Accounts (TSA) have been prepared for the country as a whole for the first time for the year 2002-03
 through a study commissioned by the Ministry of Tourism. Development of TSA is a complicated process. The WTO
 has been considering preparation of TSA at Regional Level for some time but no methodology could be evolved by
 them so far. Issue has been discussed by them at various international conferences and workshops without much
 success. Further, development of TSA is linked with the system of National Accounting at the National Level and
 system of State Income at the State Level. As such till such time a firm methodology is available for development of
 TSA at Regional Level, it may not be possible to develop the TSA for States.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
103. The Committee understands the problem of the Department of Tourism in estimation of the economic
 benefits of tourism in terms of its contribution to the GDP and employment on the basis of Tourism Satellite
 Accounting System and recommends the Department of Tourism to carry on its efforts to evolve a methodology
 for Tourism Satellite Accounts at regional level for keeping an account of the revenue earned from tourism in
 that State.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  —  AT A GLANCE
        The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.                                (Para 3)
APPROACH IN THE TENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN AND ANALYSIS OF THE ANNUAL PLAN 
 2006-07
        The Committee was not satisfied with the replies of the Department of Tourism for poor utilization of funds
 in the first three quarters of the financial year. The Committee feels that the reasons put-forth by the
 Department of Tourism are routine in nature and remedial measures may be taken in advance. The Committee
 therefore, recommends the Department of Tourism that some fool proof method be devised for having
 uniformity in expenditure throughout the year and State/UT Governments may also be impressed upon for
 timely submission of project proposals and utilization certificates/completion certificates for release of funds
 through central financial assistance. The Committee is also surprised to note that the ATR have been furnished
 to the Committee on 21st September 2006 and yet it does not contain any information about actual number of
 project proposals received in time, how many are pending for consideration and how many
 utilization/completion certificates were issued thereon.
        The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the plan outlay of the Department of Tourism would be
 increased so that the vast tourism potential available in the country could be exploited optimally to create world
 class and dependable tourism product and infrastructure.                                                                      
                                                                                                                                            (Paras 7 and 10)
PRODUCT/INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
(a)    Major Destination and Circuit Development
        The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is concentrating on improvement/ development of
 existing as well as new tourism products to world-class standards for which the Government has proposed to
 increase the Central financial assistance to State/ Union Territory for development of tourism destinations and
 circuits in the country. The Committee is of the opinion that if the country has to improve its vast tourism
 potential to world class standard, it requires larger flow of funds for development of infrastructure both from
 Government and private sector. The Committee therefore, recommends the Government to explore the
 possibilities for creating and promoting the tourism infrastructure projects in public-private partnership and
 approach the Ministry of Finance for releasing funds for bridging the infrastructure gap at important
 destinations besides resorting to aggressive marketing of tourism products through print and electronic media.
 World wide web campaigns should also be launched for augmenting incoming tourist traffic flow from abroad.
        The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is taking up the matter with the Ministry of Shipping,
 Road Transport and Highways for improving the connectivity to the important tourist destinations including
 World Heritage Sites, Buddhist Sites through Central Road Fund Scheme. The Committee recommends the
 Department of Tourism to pursue vigourously the matter with the Ministry of Shipping, Road, Transport and
 Highways. The Committee also desires the Department of Tourism to inform the Committee about the progress
 in the matter.
        The Committee is constrained to note that out of the 2526 sanctioned projects during Eight and Ninth Five
 Year Plan periods only 1830 projects have been completed as on date. Similarly, out of the 895 sanctioned
 projects during the Tenth Five Year Plan only 285 projects have since been completed. The Committee feels that
 there is lack of co-ordination and monitoring of projects between the Department of Tourism and State/UT
 Governments and this needs to be strengthened and in the future corrective measures may be taken so that more
 and more sanctioned projects may be completed in time.
        The Committee notes the reply and recommends the Department of Tourism to have close co-ordination
 with the implementing agencies viz., ITDC, CPWD, ASI etc., for timely completion of tourism projects. This way
 the Department of Tourism will not only achieve the physical and financial targets but also help in
 creation/improvement of tourism infrastructure.
                                                                                                                              (Paras 16, 19, 24 and 28)
(b)    Rural Tourism
        The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is making efforts to boost rural tourism
 infrastructure in the country. The Committee also notes that during 2006-07, the Department of Tourism has
 already identified 25 villages in consultation with the State/UT Governments for development of rural tourism
 sites in the country. The Committee expects that the promotion of rural tourism can lead to increased tourist
 arrivals to rural sites and in the process can strengthen rural livelihoods including benefit to the youth through
 income from visitor handling services apart from income through art and craft activities.                                     

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 (Para 33)
ASSISTANCE FOR LARGE REVENUE GENERATING PROJECTS
        The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is formulating the guidelines to ensure higher level of
 participation of the private sector in the development of tourism in the country. However, the Committee is
 constrained to note that the Department of Tourism could not utilize the allocation during the year 2006-07 for
 want of suitable large revenue generating projects from the State/UT Governments. The Committee
 recommends that the Department of Tourism should be more cautious while identifying and selecting the
 projects and in any case appropriation of allocation should not be done and State/UT Governments should be
 persuaded for coming forward with suitable project for sustained and structured tourism growth in the country.
 (Para 37)
CAPACITY BUILDING FOR SERVICE PROVIDERS
        The Committee notes that the Capacity Building for Service Providers scheme has been modified as per its
 recommendation and put into operation with the aim to prepare broad framework for the countrywide training
 programme to develop skilled and basic service oriented human resource for tourism industry.        
                                                                                                                                                       (Para 42)
ASSISTANCE TO HOTEL MANAGEMENT AND OTHER INSTITUTES FOR HUMAN RESOURCE
 DEVELOPMENT
        The Committee notes that with the growing demand of skilled/trained manpower in the hospitality industry,
 the Department of Tourism has proposed to set up three more Institutes of Hotel Management at Mohali,
 Jammu and Daman & Diu. The Committee also notes that the Department of Tourism has also approved the
 proposal for affiliation of private institutes to National Council For Hotel Management & Catering Technology
 courses. The Committee hopes that more and more private institutes will come forward for affiliation and
 contribute towards the training efforts in Human Resources Development.
        The Committee notes that the guidelines for affiliation of the existing private managed hospitality institutes
 has been notified by the National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology and the matter to
 grant statutory/deemed university status to National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology is
 under consideration of UGC. The Committee therefore, recommends the Department of Tourism to pursue
 vigorously the matter for grant of statutory status to National Council for Hotel Management & Catering
 Technology with the Ministry of Human Resource Development for having uniform standards in training and
 other infrastructure facilities.                                                                                         (Paras 48 and 51)
DOMESTIC PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING HOSPITALITY
        The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is making efforts for overcoming the problem of low
 utilization of approved outlays for the domestic tourism and publicity by starting the early selection process of
 the advertising agencies and the phasing out of the expenditure for maximum utilization of budgeted
 amount.        (Para 54)
OVERSEAS PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY INCLUDING MARKING DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE
        The Committee notes that India Tourism offices overseas prepare their marketing and promotional
 activities on the basis of the feedback received from the market and project India accordingly. However, the
 Committee is constrained to note that though the allocation for overseas promotion and publicity has been
 enhanced considerably but it is much less if compared to amount spent by other countries. The Committee
 recommends the Department of Tourism to approach the Planning Commission for increase in allocation under
 the head, so that there is no let in efforts to project India as a preferred tourism and business destination and to
 increase India’s share of the total global tourism market.
        The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is making series of promotional activities through its
 overseas offices for increasing the visibility of Indian tourism products and to promote India as a tourist
 destination in the emerging tourism markets of East Asia and South East Asia. The Committee recommends that
 these promotional activities should continue to be carried out in tourists generating overseas markets to
 showcase and effectively promote the unique and competitive Indian tourism products and destinations in the
 new emerging global markets.                                                                                        (Paras 62 and 67)
NATIONAL TOURISM PROMOTION BOARD
        The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is considering the views of major industry

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 associations and studying the models of the Tourism Boards of a few countries in the neighbourhood such as Sri
 Lanka and Singapore etc. for establishment of National Tourism Promotion Board in the country. The
 Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to firm up an early decision for formation of National
 Tourism Promotion Board for better coordination and close interactions with all agencies and stakeholders for
 development and structured growth of tourism in the country.                                                  (Para 70)
UNIFORMITY AND RATIONALIZATION OF TAXES ON TRANSPORT AND HOSPITALITY SECTOR
        The Committee appreciates the move of the Department of Tourism in furthering the issue of uniformity
 and rationalization of the tax structure in the tourism sector at various forums and evolving a consensus on
 taxation on transport and hospitality sector for promoting India as a value for money destination. The
 Committee notes that with a view to rationalize the State taxes on tourist transport, the Department of Road,
 Transport and Highways has agreed in principle to allocate a separate series for the tourist vehicles in India,
 which are owned and operated by the tourist transport operators, recognized by Ministry of Tourism. The
 Committee also notes that the Department of Tourism is taking up the matter with the Northern States for
 evolving consensus on a zonal tourist permit in the Northern Region which envisages the payment of the taxes in
 the Home State and the share of each State would be deposited in separate designated bank accounts so as to
 ensure that there is no loss of revenue to the State. The Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to
 take up the matter for rationalization of taxes like expenditure tax, customs tax, service tax and luxury tax with
 the Ministry of Finance and intimate the Committee about the progress in the
 matter.                                                 (Para 77)
SHORTAGE OF HOTEL ACCOMMODATION
        The Committee notes that the shortage of hotel accommodation remains vital area of concern and in order
 to augment of hotel room capacity especially in the budget sector, the Department of Tourism has recently
 introduced schemes for the approval of Guest Houses and Bed and Breakfast Establishments. The Committee
 feels that with skyrocketing prices of land, there is huge gap in demand and supply of hotel room
 accommodation and recommends the Department of Tourism to take up the matter for construction of hotels
 and creation of land banks with the State Governments and other agencies so that more rooms could be added
 up at an affordable price in budget hotel segment.                                                                                                    
 (Para 80)
APPROVAL AND CLASSIFICATION OF HOTELS
        The Committee notes that approval and classification of hotels is an on going process and the Department of
 Tourism is making efforts to reduce the pendency for approval and classification of hotels besides augmenting
 the increase of rooms in the accommodation sector and to identify more sites for hotels to meet the increased
 demand for rooms during the forthcoming Commonwealth Games. The Committee desires the Department of
 Tourism to speed up the process of approval and classification of hotels and create suitable infrastructure to
 keep pace with the growth of tourism.                                                                                         (Para 83)
CRUISE TOURISM
        The Committee notes that the cruise shipping policy on development of cruise shipping is under finalization
 of the Department of Shipping. The Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to pursue the matter
 with the Department of Shipping for finalization of cruise shipping policy in the country and development of the
 infrastructure facilities for the growth and expansion of the cruise tourism both on the ports located at the
 Eastern and Western coast in the country.                                                                                 (Para 86)
MEDICAL TOURISM
        The Committee notes that the Ministry of Home Affairs has introduced a new category of medical visa for
 specific purpose to foreign tourists coming to India for medical treatment and the period of visa may vary
 depending upon the medical procedure. The Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to draw
 special packages for medical tourists and provide more concessions to the tourists coming for medical treatment
 in India.                                                                                                                                             (Para 90)
BEACH TOURISM
        The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is extending financial assistance for tourism
 infrastructure development including projects related to beach tourism, tourist spots of States/Union Territories
 and procurement of cruise vessels, boats etc. for promotion of beach and cruise tourism and two private
 operators are operating their cruise vessels for the purpose of cruise tourism promotion along the Indian coast.
 The Committee notes with dissatisfaction that the High Power Steering Group which was constituted to
 formulate cruise shipping policy for the country resulted nothing in concrete but led to the formation of another
 Working Group only. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Department of Tourism to impress upon the
 Department of Shipping for finalization of the cruise shipping policy for integrated and sustainable development

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
 of coastal tourism in the country.                                                                                                                 (Para 94)
ADVENTURE TOURISM
        The Committees notes that draft guidelines on Adventure Sports/Tourism related activities have been
 circulated to all the State/UT Governments by the Department of Tourism. The Committee recommends the
 Department of Tourism that while finalizing the guidelines due attention will be given to the safety of
 participants besides laying down the minimum acceptable standards in terms of equipment and human
 resources.   (Para 97)
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION
        The Committee notes that the Department of Tourism is giving priority to the projects for the North-East
 region in consultation with the State Governments keeping in view the requirements of infrastructure and
 tourist flow to the area and is giving publicity to the North-East through specific campaigns. The Committee
 recommends the Department of Tourism to address the major issues like mandatory permit system, law and
 order situation and lack of private investment etc. for the growth and development of tourism in the region.
        The Committee understands the problem of the Department of Tourism in estimation of the economic
 benefits of tourism in terms of its contribution to the GDP and employment on the basis of Tourism Satellite
 Accounting System and recommends the Department of Tourism to carry on its efforts to evolve a methodology
 for Tourism Satellite Accounts at regional level for keeping an account of the revenue earned from tourism in
 that State.                                                                                                                   (Paras 100 and 103)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
        The Committee met at 3.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 16th April, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
        MEMBERS PRESENT
   1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury  —  Chairman
        RAJYA SABHA
   2.  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/113.htm[28-08-2018 13:23:58]
   3.  Shri S.S. Chandran
   4.  Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
   5.  Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
   6.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha
        LOK SABHA
   7.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
   8.  Shri Joachim Baxla
   9.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
 10.  Shri N.S. V. Chitthan
 11.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
 12.  Shri P. Karunakaran
 13.  Dr. P.P. Koya
 14.  Shri Samik Lahiri
 15.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
 16.  Shri Dushyant Singh
 17.  Shri Suraj Singh
 18.  Shri Prahlad Joshi
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Shamsher Singh, Joint Secretary
        Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
        Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
        Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.     The Committee considered the following six draft Reports:
             (i)     Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Second Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road Transport
 and Highways;
             (ii)    Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Third Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Culture;
             (iii)   Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism;
             (iv)   Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Department of Shipping; and
             (v)    Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in
 its One Hundred and Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation.
        After some discussion the Committee adopted all the six Reports with minor modifications. The Committee also
 authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of the said reports to the Parliament during the
 current session.
3.     The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again on 17th April, 2007 at 3.00 P.M.