 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
 July, 2021/  Ashadha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
 
REPORT NO. 
292
_ 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT  
The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
(Amendment) Bill, 2021 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd July, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd July, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT  
The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India  
(Amendment) Bill, 2021 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 22nd July, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 22nd July, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
            July, 2021/ Ashadha, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  


 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS                (iii) 
4. REPORT                                 1 - 4 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   5 
    6. MINUTES        6 - 12 
7.   ANNEXURES         13 - 14 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
7. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
9. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12. Shri Margani Bharat   
13. Shri Tapir Gao 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
20. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22. Shri Prince Raj 
23. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24. Shrimati Mala Roy 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
 Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
(i) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred  Ninety Second Report of the  Committee on The Airports 
Economic Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2021*. 
2. The Bill was introduced i n the Lok Sabha on the 24 th March, 2021. In pursuance of 
rules relating to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the  Hon‟ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Bill to the Committee on the 26 th April, 2021 for 
examination and report within three months.  
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers of the  Ministry 
of Civil Aviation at its meeting held on the 24th June, 2021.  
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill in its meeting 
held on 20th July, 2021. 
5. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation for the assistance and inputs provided during deliberations on the 
provisions of the Bill.  
 
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
July 20, 2021                                                            Department-related Parliamentary Standing        
29 Ashadha, 1943 (Saka)                                 Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________ 
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated  26th March, 2021. 
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II  No. 60783, dated  3rd May, 2021. 
 
(ii) 

 
 
Acronyms 
 
AERA  : Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 
Mppa : Million passengers per annum 
AAI : Airports Authority of India  
PPP : Public Private Partnership  
MoCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on  24th March, 2021.  Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in 
consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha referred this Bill on 26th April, 2021 to the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
for consideration, examination and report within three months.  
2.  In the background note furnished by the Ministry on the Bill, it has been stated that 
pursuant to the opening of the airport sector to private players in 2006, a need was felt to put in 
place an independent regulator for determining tariffs  for the aeronautical services. 
Accordingly, AERA Act was enacted in 2008  and an independent economic regulator, i.e., 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) was established in 2009 for determining the 
tariff for aeronautical services rendered at major airports. AERA follows cost plus philosophy 
for determining the tariff at major airports. The initial Benchmark passenger throughput to 
qualify as major airport was 1.5 million passenger per annum (mppa), which was amended in 
2019 to make it as 3.5 mppa. At present, there are 24 major airports  for which tariffs are 
determined by AERA. In respect of non- major airports of Airports Authority of India (AAI), 
Ministry of Civil Aviation approves the charges for aeronautical services. 
Need for amendment to AERA Act 
3. AAI has awarded six airports for operations, management and development under 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) in 2019. Further, AAI Board in its 190 th Meeting held on 
5.9.2019 has approved leasing of another six airports namely, Bhubaneshwar, Varanasi, 
Amritsar, Raipur, Indore and Trichy for undertaking operations, management and 
development through PPP. A  suggestion has been made to club each of these airports with 
nearby smaller airports for the purpose of joint development. The clubbing/pairing of 
smaller/non-profitable airports with profitable  airports, as a package to bidders/investors for 
next phase of PPP of airports would ensure integrated development of smaller and non -
profitable airports with profitable airports. Further, smaller  airports would also be developed 
faster through professional efficiency of private operators. At present, tariffs for aeronautical 
services of major airports are determined by AERA on a standalone basis and there is no 
provision in the AERA Act for tariff determination for clubbed/paired airports. 
Proposed amendment 
4. The existing provisions of the AERA Act provides for the determination of tariffs for 
aeronautical services in case of a „major airport‟ i.e., a single airport on standalone basis. The 

2 
 
existing law does not provide for determination of tariff for a group of airports together. 
Therefore, an amendment has been proposed to insert an enabling provision in the AERA Act for 
tariff determination of a „group of airports‟ by way of amending the definition of „ major 
airport‟. 
Justification and implication 
5. If tariff for smaller airports is determined on standalone basis, the tariff will be 
unreasonably high. Therefore, an enabling provision for AERA to determine tariff for a group 
of airports is proposed by amending the definition  of major airports. It would help encourage 
development of smaller airports. Those airports where currently the traffic potential is low 
and are loss making are not expected to attract reasonable competitive bids. The intention of 
the Government is to develop not only the high traffic volume profitable  airports, but also the 
low traffic volume non-profitable airports. This approach would help in development of more 
number of airports through the PPP  route thus, expanding the air connectivity to relatively 
remote and far- flung areas. The proposed amendment will encourage development of smaller 
airports along with the bigger airports under PPP mode. The revenue earned by AAI from these 
airports will be utilized for development of airports in Tier -II and Tier -III cities. Moreover, 
there is no financial implication to the Central Government. 
6. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism 
and Culture took up the consideration of the Bill in its meeting held on 24 th June, 2021. The 
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) made a presentation on the Bill during the 
meeting. He traced the background of the Bill and narrated the reasons for the proposed 
amendment in the principal Act. 
7. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, while deposing before the Committee, 
reiterated the fact that the existing provisions of t he AERA Act provides for the 
determination of tariffs for aeronautical services in case of a „major airport‟ i.e., a single 
airport on standalone basis. The existing law does not envisage determination of tariff for a 
group of airports. An enabling provisi on for AERA to determine the tariff for a „group of 
airports‟ is proposed by way of amending the definition of „major airport‟.  
8. He further informed the Committee that AERA Act was enacted in 2008 and that an 
independent economic regulator, i.e., AERA w as established in 2009 for determining the 
tariffs for aeronautical services at Major Airports. 
9. As per Section 13 of the Act, AERA, inter alia, has been mandated to determine the 
tariff for the aeronautical services rendered at major airports;  the amount of the development 

3 
 
fees including User Development Fee; and the amount of the passengers service fee levied 
under Rule 88 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 made under the Aircraft Act, 1934. 
10. AERA is also mandated to monitor the set performance standards re lating to quality, 
continuity and reliability of services at major airports.  
11. Regarding tariff determination at major airports, the Secretary apprised the 
Committee that AERA determines the tariffs for airports having passenger throughput of 3.5 
Million passengers per annum (mppa) or as notified by the Central Government. 
11.1. As on date, AERA determines tariffs for 24 airports, out of which 20 airports have 
mppa of 3.5 or above and 4 airports viz., Varanasi, Trichy, Amritsar, Raipur have been 
notified by the Central Government. 
12. As regards the tariff determination at non -major airports, the Secretary stated that t he 
non-major airports belong to the Airports Authority of India (AAI) and that AAI submits the 
proposed rate card to MoCA for aeronautical  services rendered at its non -major airports. He 
further stated that MoCA approves the aeronautical charges submitted by AAI with 
modifications, if any. 
13. While highlighting the need for amendment to AERA Act, the Secretary stated that 
AAI has awarded si x airports under Public Private Partnership (PPP) in 2019. Decision has 
been taken to club/pair smaller/non -profitable airports with profitable airports, as a package 
to bidders/investors under the Asset Monetization Plan for next phase of PPP of Airports.  
Presently, tariffs for aeronautical services of major airports are determined by AERA on a 
standalone basis. At present, there is no  provision in the AERA Act for t ariff determination 
for clubbed/paired airports. 
14. The Secretary, while elaborating upon the advantages of clubbing/ pairing of airports, 
stated that it would facilitate development of both high traffic volume & low traffic volume   
airports together in a holistic manner; and that smaller airports would be developed faster 
through professional efficiency of privatization. It would also create scale of operations, 
making it an attractive proposition and elicit better response from bidders/investors. Pairing 
of airports is expected to enhance negotiation capacity of airport operators with the airl ines 
for commercialization and route optimization and generation of non -aero revenue and lead to 
improved connectivity to the smaller cities and nearby areas realizing the goal of Atma 
Nirbhar Bharat. 
14.1. The Secretary, while deposing before the Committee, stated thus:- 
“…What is proposed is to club these small airports which are not viable with 
the viable airports.  Both put together will become a viable entity, and, then, it 

4 
 
will be possible for any private partner to bid for the combination of airports .  
Both put together will become viable; otherwise, these small airports will 
never get into PPP mode.  AERA Act is so designed that it can determine for 
standalone airports.  We do not have provisions for determining tariff for 
combination of airports.  S o, this amendment is only a simple amendment 
which says that AERA can also determine tariff for a group of airports…” 
15. While explaining the justification and implication of the Bill, the Secretary stated that 
if tariff for smaller airports is determined  on standalone basis, the tariff will be unreasonably 
high. Therefore, an enabling provision for AERA to determine tariff for a group of airports is 
proposed by amending the definition of major airports. Help encourage development of 
smaller airports. Ther e are no financial implications to the Central Government. Additional 
investment for development of smaller airport would increase economic activity  and create 
additional jobs.  
16. Further, the Secretary clarified that the tariff as already determined by AERA for 
Indore, Srinagar, Coimbatore, Vishakhapatnam and Nagpur  Airports, shall continue to be 
applicable for the current control period even though those are not 'major airports' under the 
increased passenger threshold. Afterwards, the tariff determinati on shall take place based on 
the passenger throughput criteria as amended in AERA Act, 2019.  
17. The Committee realizes the huge demand for more airports in the country. The 
Committee recognizes the fact that it is not feasible for AAI to meet the investm ent 
requirements to develop and maintain all the airports in the country. The Committee 
appreciates the inevitable need for Public Private Partnership in the development and 
maintenance of smaller and unprofitable airports.  
18. In view of the above, the C ommittee appreciates the reasons furnished by the 
Ministry for introducing the instant Bill, since the proposed change in the definition of 
the term ‘major airport’ to include a ‘group of airports’ would, in effect, enable 
simultaneous development of small er and unprofitable airports, alongwith the major 
airports, in an integrated way. The Committee is of the view that the Bill is needed to 
address the significant and continuous investment requirements in the airport 
infrastructure for upgradation/ expansio n of capacity and modernization of processes 
and systems in an equitable manner to ensure that the growth in air traffic is managed 
efficiently. Therefore, the Committee adopts the Bill without any changes.   
19. Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title are adopted without changes. 
*** 

5 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
 The Committee realizes the huge demand for more airports in the country. The 
Committee recognizes the fact that it is not feasible for AAI to meet the investment 
requirements to dev elop and maintain all the airports in the country. The Committee 
appreciates the inevitable need for Public Private Partnership in the development and 
maintenance of smaller and unprofitable airports.  
(Para 17) 
 
 In view of the above, the Committee apprec iates the reasons furnished by the 
Ministry for introducing the instant Bill, since the proposed change in the definition of 
the term ‘major airport’ to include a ‘group of airports’ would, in effect, enable 
simultaneous development of smaller and unprofit able airports, alongwith the major 
airports, in an integrated way. The Committee is of the view that the Bill is needed to 
address the significant and continuous investment requirements in the airport 
infrastructure for upgradation/ expansion of capacity a nd modernization of processes 
and systems in an equitable manner to ensure that the growth in air traffic is managed 
efficiently. Therefore, the Committee adopts the Bill without any changes.   
(Para 18) 
 
 Clause 1, Enacting Formula and Title are adopted without changes. 
(Para 19) 
  

6 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

7 
 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 24 th June, 2021 in Committee 
Room „A‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
  
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Margani Bharat 
9. Shri Tapir Gao 
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
11. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
12. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
13. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Smt. Mala Roy 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
19. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
20. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      
Dr. Shikha Darbai, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses  
 I          Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1 Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary 
2 Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra Joint Secretary 
3 Ms. Usha Padhee Joint Secretary 
4 Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary 

8 
 
5 Shri Amber Dubey Joint Secretary 
6 Shri Angshumali Rastogi Joint Secretary (Parliament) 
      
Air India 
  Shri Rajiv Bansal CMD 
  
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
  Shri Arun Kumar        Director General 
  
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
  Shri Jaideep Prasad Joint Director General 
  
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
  Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General 
  
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
  Col. Manu Sooden Secretary 
      
Airports Authority of India 
1 Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Ops.) 
2 Shri A.K. Pathak Member (Planning) 
  
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
  Shri Rajmal Khoiwal   CSTE 
  
II         *     *     *. 
2.        At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
*      *     * . He informed the Members that „The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of 
India (Amendment) Bill, 2021‟ has been referred to the Committee for exa mination and 
report within three months  i.e., by 25 th July, 2021. He apprised the Members that the agenda 
of the meeting was to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Bill and * *  *.  
I.          Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
3.         The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and other senior 
officials from the Ministry and its organizations to the meeting. 
4.         The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, while deposing before the Committee, 
stated that the existing provisions of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
Act, 2008 provides for the determination of tariffs for aeronautical services in case of a 
„major airport‟ i.e., a single airport on standalone basis and that the existing law does not 
envisage determination of tariff for a group of airports. He informed the Committee that an 

9 
 
enabling provision for Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) to determine the 
tariff for a „group of airports‟ is proposed through the Bill, by way of amending the definition 
of „major airport‟ in the Act. 
5.         He apprised the Committee that AERA Act was enacted in 2008 and that an 
independent economic regulator,  i.e., AERA was established in 2009 for determining the 
tariffs for aeronautical services at major airports. As per Section 13 of the Act, AERA has 
been mandated to determine the tariff for the aeronautical services rendered at major airports; 
the amount of the development fees including User Development Fee; and th e amount of the 
passengers service fee levied under Rule 88 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937 made under the 
Aircraft Act, 1934. Also, AERA is mandated to monitor the set performance standards 
relating to quality, continuity and reliability of services at major airports. 
6.         Regarding tariff determination at major airports, the Secretary apprised the 
Committee that AERA determines the tariffs for airports having passenger throughput of 3.5 
Million passengers per annum (mppa) or as notified by the Central G overnment. As on date, 
AERA determines tariffs for 24 airports, out of which 20 airports have mppa of 3.5 or above 
and 4 airports  viz., Varanasi, Trichy, Amritsar, Raipur have been notified by the Central 
Government. As regards the tariff determination at non-major airports, he stated that the non-
major airports belong to the Airports Authority of India (AAI) and that AAI submits the 
proposed rate card to the Ministry of Civil Aviation for aeronautical services rendered at its 
non-major airports. He further  stated that the Ministry approves the aeronautical charges 
submitted by AAI with modifications, if any. 
7.         While highlighting the need for amendment to the AERA Act, the Secretary stated 
that AAI has awarded six airports under Public Private Partn ership (PPP) in 2019 and that 
decision has been taken to club/pair smaller/non-profitable airports with profitable airports, as 
a package to bidders/investors under the Asset Monetization Plan for the next phase of PPP 
of airports. He clarified that presen tly, tariffs for aeronautical services of major airports are 
determined by AERA on a standalone basis and that at present, there is no provision in the 
AERA Act for Tariff determination for clubbed/paired airports. 
8.         The Secretary, while elaborating upon the advantages of Clubbing/ Pairing of airports, 
stated that it would facilitate development of both high traffic volume and low traffic volume 
airports together in a holistic manner and that smaller airports would be developed faster 
through profe ssional efficiency of privatization. It would also create scale of operations, 
making it an attractive proposition and elicit better response from bidders/investors. He 
elaborated that pairing of airports is expected to enhance negotiation capacity of airp ort 

10 
 
operators with the airlines for commercialization and route optimization and generation of 
non-aero revenue and lead to improved connectivity to the smaller cities and nearby areas 
realizing the goal of Atma Nirbhar Bharat. 
9.         While explaining the justification and implication of the Bill, the Secretary stated that 
if tariff for smaller airports is determined on standalone basis, the tariff will be unreasonably 
high. Therefore, an enabling provision for AERA to determine tariff for a group of ai rports is 
proposed by amending the definition of major airports, which would help encourage 
development of smaller airports. He further stated that there are no financial implications to 
the Central Government. 
10.       Members of the Committee raised var ious queries, some of which were replied to by 
the Secretary. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
(The Committee re-assembled after lunch break) 
II *    *    *. 
11. *    *    *. 
12.       *    *    *. 
13.       *    *    *. 
14.       *    *    *. 
15.       *    *    *. 
16. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by 
the stakeholders. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which 
remained unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
17. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
18. The meeting adjourned at 4:32 P.M. 
  
 New Delhi,                                                                                                           P. Narayanan 
24th June, 2021                                                                                                              Director 
 
 

11 
 
XXI 
TWENTY FIRST  MEETING 
The Committee met at 4:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 20 th July, 2021 in Committee Room 
- 3, First Floor, Block-B, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Manshingh 
6. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Anto Antony 
9. Shri Margani Bharat 
10. Shri Tapir Gao 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
13. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
14. Shri Prince Raj 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
2.        At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to adopt and  

12 
 
consider the draft Reports of the Committee on „The Airports Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2021‟ and   *       *       *. 
3.      The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft Reports and after a brief 
deliberation, adopted the same with some changes. 
4.       The Committee then decided to present/lay the Report of the Committee on „The 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2021‟ to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 22 nd July, 2021. The Committee, a ccordingly, authorized Shri 
T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and in his absence, Shri Tiruchi Siva, M.P. to present the 
Report in Rajya Sabha.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Chhedi Paswan, M.P. was authorized to lay the above mentioned R eport on the Table of 
Lok Sabha. 
5.        *     *     *. 
6.        *     *     *. 
7.        *     *     *. 
8.        *     *     *. 
9.         The meeting adjourned at 4:50 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                               P. Narayanan 
20th July, 2021                                                                                             Director 
  
 
  

13 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
  

14 
 
24th June, 2021 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
11:00 A.M. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1 Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola Secretary 
2 Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra Joint Secretary 
3 Ms. Usha Padhee Joint Secretary 
4 Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary 
5 Shri Amber Dubey Joint Secretary 
6 Shri Angshumali Rastogi Joint Secretary (Parliament) 
   Air India 
1 Shri Rajiv Bansal CMD 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
1 Shri Arun Kumar  Director General 
 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
1 Shri Jaideep Prasad Joint Director General 
 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
1 Shri Aurobindo Handa Director General 
 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
1 Col. Manu Sooden Secretary 
   
Airports Authority of India 
1 Shri I.N. Murthy Member (Ops.) 
2 Shri A.K. Pathak Member (Planning) 
 
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
1 Shri Rajmal Khoiwal  CSTE 
 