 
 
   
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
294
_ 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT  
Development and Conservation of Museums and 
Archaeological sites - Challenges and Opportunities 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th July , 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th July, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT  
 
Development and Conservation of Museums and 
Archaeological Sites - Challenges and Opportunities 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th July, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th July, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 


 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iv) 
3. ACRONYMS                (v)-(vi) 
4. REPORT                                 1-76 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   77-109 
    6. MINUTES        110-119 
 7. ANNEXURES        120-135 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. *Kumaru Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
 10. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 11. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
12.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
13.  Shri Anto Antony 
14.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
15.  Shri Tapir Gao  
16.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
17.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
18.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
19.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
20.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
21.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
22.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
23.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
24.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
25.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
26.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
27.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
28.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
30.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
31.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
_________________________________________________________  
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020  
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd April, 2020 and re-nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd  
July, 2020  
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 

ii 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. *Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
10. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat   
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
________________________________________________________  
*Shri Raj Babbar ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020  
**Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020  

iii 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Fourth Report on 'Development and Conservati on 
of Museums and Archaeological sites - Challenges and Opportunities'. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of Culture, Archaeological 
Survey of India and State Government of Andhra Pradesh on the subject at Visakhapatnam 
on 7th January, 2020. The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of Culture, 
Archaeological Survey of India and State Government of Maharashtra on the subject at 
Mumbai on 9th January, 2020. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of 
Culture; Joint Director General, Archaeological Survey of India ; and Additional Director 
General, National Museum  on 14th October, 2020. The Committee heard the views of the 
Secretary, Ministry of Culture; Director General, Archaeological Survey of India ; and Joint 
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs on 28th January, 2021 . The Committee also received 
written views on the subject from Aga Khan Trust for Culture, Prof. Himanshu Prabha Ray, 
Prof. Nayanjyot Lahiri, Dr. Rakesh Tewari and INTACH. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Culture; 
Ministry of Home Affairs; Archaeological Survey of India; National Museum;  and State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra; and other stakeholders for placing before 
the Committee, the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for 
clarifying the points raised by the Members.  
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meetin g held on the                     
25th June, 2021.   
 
 
 (T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
June 25 , 2021                                                          Department-related Parliamentary Standing      
4 Ashadha, 1943 (Saka)                                    Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
ACRONYMS 
ACC Appointments Committee of the Cabinet 
ADG Additional Director General 
AKTC Aga Khan Trust for Culture 
AN Afternoon 
AP Andhra Pradesh 
AR Augmented reality 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ATN Action Taken Note 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General  
CCTV Closed-circuit television 
C-DAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CMS Collection Management System 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DG Director General 
DMCS Development of Museums and Cultural Spaces 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
FN Forenoon 
FY Financial year 
GOI Government of India 
GPS Global Positioning System 
HD High-definition 
HIA Heritage Impact Assessment 
HRD Human Resource Development 
IGNCA Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts 
IIHC Indian Institute of Heritage and Conservation 
INTACH Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
LIDAR Light Detection and Ranging 
MNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
NCSM National Council of Science Museum 
NEERI National Environment Engineering Research Institute 
NGMA National Gallery of Modern Art 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
  

vi 
 
NMA National Monuments Authority 
NMMA National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
NRLC National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural 
Property 
PPP Public Private Partnerships 
QR Quick Response 
RFID Radio Frequency Identification 
RSC Regional Science Centre 
SIS Security and Intelligence Services (India) Limited 
TDR Transfer of development rights 
UK United Kingdom 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
UT Union Territory  
VMH Victoria Memorial Hall 
VR Virtual Reality  
WHS World Heritage Site 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 The Indus Valley Civilization is known to be one of the most anc ient civilizations in the 
world. The period following the Indus Valley Civilization saw India develop  rich and diverse  
culture and heritage across its length and breadth . It is thus no surprise that the glorious history 
of India is witnessed in the large number of archaeological monuments and sites in the country . 
The same is also showcased in the museums present across India , both public and private . 
Development and conservation of the vast Indian cultural heritage present in its Museums and 
archaeological sites is necessary for not only economic growth of the country, but also for 
preservation of its unique identity in the world. 
2. Taking note of  the pivotal role played by the Museums, archaeological sites and 
monuments of India in preserving the cultural heritage of the country, as well as in bolstering the 
tourism sector and thus the Indian economy , the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the subject ‘Development and 
Conservation of Museums and Archaeological Sites - Challenges and Opportunities’ for 
examination. In this connection, the Committee heard the views of representatives of Ministry of 
Culture, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) and State Government of  Andhra Pradesh in its 
meeting held at Visakhapatnam on 7 th January, 2020; and representatives of Ministry of Culture, 
ASI and State Government of Maharashtra at Mumbai on 9 th January, 2020. The Committee had 
its first deliberation with the Secretary, Ministry of Culture on this subject on 14th October, 2020 
and later on specific subject 'Preservation, Protection and Funding  of Museums and 
Archaeological Sites' on 28th January, 2021. 
3. The Committee sought written views and opinions from various experts/stakeholders on 
the following points/issues: 
a) The present state of development and conservation of museums and   archaeological sites 
in the country; 
b) The issues/challenges being faced by museums and archaeological sites at present such as 
lack of funding and human resources, air pollution, encroachment, scarcity of artisans, 
vandalism, conservation and preservation practices, the proposed solutions to tackle these 
issues, etc.; 

2 
 
c) Strategies to capitalize on the different opportunities presented by development and 
conservation of museums and archaeological sites in respect of promotion of tourism and 
business, involvement of communities, etc.; 
d) Legislative amendments/ new legislations, if any, needed to better develop and preserve 
the museums and archaeological sites; and 
e) Strategies to preserve those monuments/sites which are presently not under the protection 
of any agency, whether Government or private, in the best possible way. 
 
4.  DEVELOPMENT AND CONSERVATION OF MUSEUMS: CHALLENGES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES 
4.1 Museums are a repository of a nation’s culture as they connect the past with the present 
and the future. Museums conserve collections of artefacts and other objects of artistic, cultural, 
historical, or scientific importance and make them available for public viewing through exhibits 
that may be permanent or temporary. Today, Museums around the world are moving to a more 
entrepreneurial and visitor -focused model. Digital advancement has provided new opportunities 
of reaching to wider and diverse audiences and offering multi -dimensional experiences. 
Museums are building new ways of audience engagement, developing res ponsive digital 
infrastructures which are more aligned to currently available skill sets. The strengthening of the 
Museum movement across the country is thereby an important activity covered under the ambit 
of the Ministry of Culture. 
4.2  Several importan t museums and institutes such as the National Museum, New 
Delhi; National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi; National Museum Institute of History of Art, 
Conservation & Museology, New Delhi; Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad; Victoria Memorial 
Hall, Kolkata; Ind ian Museum, Kolkata; National Council of Science Museums; Allahabad 
Museum; and National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property, Lucknow 
function as autonomous organizations under the Ministry of Culture. 
4.3  In its background note,  the Ministry, has broadly listed the following challenges being 
faced by Indian Museums: 
 i. Innovation and Design                  vi. Disconnect between academia and Museums 

3 
 
 ii. Human resources                           vii. Funding 
 iii. Lack of autonomy         viii.  Conservation and Preservation Practices 
iv. Management issues                        ix. Security 
v.  Audience engagement 
4.4  The Ministry has informed the Committee that in order to address various challenges and 
bring Museums under the administrative control of Ministry of Culture at par with international 
Museums, a study of best practices was made in October 2018. Accordingly, Ministry issued a 
list of deliverables to the Museums under its administrative control and advised  them to take 
stock and adopt and execute these deliverables for improvement and upliftment of 
facilities/infrastructure. The Museums are working on the following deliverables:- 
i. Management of Museum space as per international standards for public and non -public 
area. 
ii. Development of world class storage facility with atmospheric control such as heat, 
temperature, humidity, dust, light etc. along with firefighting in the storage and display 
areas. 
iii. Display of at least 10% of total artefacts. 
iv. Follow internationa l standards and norms for galleries text, interpretation, lighting, 
showcases, signages, labelling, marking, display room wall colour etc. 
v. Introduce new technologies to make the collections accessible, explorable and enjoyable 
not just for those who visit the Museums, but for everyone (mobile apps and e -Museum 
etc.) 
vi. Update websites as dynamic websites in the nature of virtual Museums to show user 
friendly 360 view of galleries/exhibitions. 
vii. Introduce latest technology such as 3 -D holographic projections, sim ulated   images, 
virtual reality and augmented reality. 
viii. Enhance visitor facilities on par with international standards. 
ix. Implement IT based collection management system (CMS) to record and retrieve 
documented information easily about Museum collection. 
x. Organize HRD training & expose personnel to international standards.   
4.5 The Committee observes that the Museums of any given country exhibit the richness 
of its culture, giving the visitors a sneak peek into the cultural heritage and history of the 

4 
 
nation, besides being a major attraction for tourists, both domestic and foreign. In view of 
the significant role played by Museums in showcasing the art and culture of the country, 
the Committee desires that a comprehensive action plan needs to  be devised to bring a 
modern look and feel to the Museums, and it should be ensured that the collections 
available are periodically rotated to provide a refreshing experience for visitors. The 
Committee desires the Ministry to put up a monitoring mechanism in place to make sure 
that the deliverables are achieved by all the Museums within a strict timeline. 
4.6 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry for the upg radation of 
the security infrastructure, Reception Halls, Auditorium etc., with the latest technology. 
and desires that the betterment of the Galleries may be completed at all the Museums 
within a fixed timeframe. The Committee strongly recommends that the Museums in India 
should be adequately equipped with conservation labs, storage facilities, written and 
graphic records, documentation facilities, modern photography techniques etc. 
4.7 On the present state of deve lopment and conservation of museums and archaeological 
sites in the country, Professor Himanshu Prabha Ray, former Chairperson, National Monuments 
Authority, in her written note furnished to the Committee, stated that the present state is 
unsatisfactory an d that there is potential for tremendous upgradation both in terms of 
development of museums in the country as well as the protection of archaeological sites in India. 
4.8 Professor Nayanjot Lahiri, Professor of History, Ashoka University  and former Member, 
Delhi Urban Art Commission , in her written note furnished to the Committee, stated that the 
present state of monuments and museums in the country is worrisome and should be a matter of 
urgent concern for all citizens. She informed the Committee that CAG reports have revealed that 
there were no uniform benchmarks for the acquisition of art objects and antiquities in 
government-controlled museums and that there was no system in any of the institutions to 
identify damage to objects and to prioritize their co nservation. She stated that at the National 
Museum  of India, at the time of the CAG scrutiny, one -third of its twenty -two galleries were 
closed, some like the Manuscript Gallery for as long as eight years. The Art Purchase Committee 
of the Museum had been  defunct for years and an enquiry in 2010 -11 showed that the last 
purchase of art objects was done in 1997. There were also, at that point in time, major safety 
issues there. The alarm system and the CCTV in the Coin Gallery were not working from 2007 

5 
 
till 2011 even while regular maintenance charges were being paid for them! Not surprisingly, 
there had been 156 cases of theft/loss of art objects with 122 in the Anthropology Department 
and 33 relating to coins. 
4.9 Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH), in its written note 
furnished to the Committee, observed that compared to a few Central and State -run museums 
which are state -of-the-art and of international standards, a vast majority of museums reflect a 
poor state of conservation and development. It suggested that a  survey report may be 
commissioned at the earliest to present the actual status and improvement strategies for the same. 
4.10 The Committee notes the general view of the  experts/stakeholders that the present 
state of museums under the Ministry leaves much to be desired. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may prepare action plans in consultation with the best 
experts in this field, for each  museum for the short -term as well  as the long -term, and 
monitor the progress made to follow these plans. 
4.11  Challenges:- 
(i)  Innovation and Design 
4.11.1 On the challenge faced by Indian Museums in terms of innovation and design, the 
Ministry has stated that innovation in Museum promotion is needed, not only by incorporating 
additional galleries and display space but also keeping in view curatorial and visitor 
enhancement needs. Restoration work is usually focused on structural needs leaving out crucial 
elements of planning and design which are key technical requirements of a Museum. Often, 
curatorial requirements were looked at after structural work was completed. However, 
refurbishment, renovation and expansion are very much a part of planning. 
4.11.2  INTACH, in its written note, stated that majority of the museums lack in practice 
of a comprehensive Museum Policy, including acquisition, storage, display, exhibitions, 
management of visitors etc. 
4.11.3 The Committee observes that Indian Museums in general need to work a lot on their 
presentation, design and marketing . Doing so would help the Museums to attract not only 

6 
 
art/history aficionados but also other visitors which will help in increasing the revenue of 
the Museums. This increased revenue  can be used to  spur innovation and improve design 
standards across the Museums. Experiences and good practices  from Museums, both 
Indian and international, excelling in terms of innovation and design should be utilized for 
improving the same in Museums where it is lacking. 
4.11.4  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should come up with a robust 
monitoring mechanism to ensure that a comprehensive Museum Policy is in place and is 
put to implementation at each of the museum under it. 
4.11.5 The Committee feels that once internal resources are raised, it would be easy for the 
Ministry to approach the Finance Ministry to supplement its efforts to complete any 
undertaken projects. 
 (ii)  Human Resources 
4.11.6 Human Resources is another bottleneck f aced by the Museums. The Ministry has stated 
that m any Museums lack skilled professionals  as the  existing staff  don't posses expertise and 
skills to efficiently manage collections and educate visitors. 
4.11.7 The Ministry has informed the Committee that  considering the shortage of Human 
Resources within Museums and in the heritage sector, a Central Institute, namely the Indian 
Institute of Heritage is being set up by the Development of Museums and Cultural Spaces 
(DMCS) under the Ministry of Culture with  the mandate to develop Human Resources in 
Museology and other disciplines. This Central Institute will inter alia , provide avenues for 
advanced research and education, evolve research advanced approaches for preserving and 
managing India’s rich tangible h eritage besides creating skilled human resources. The Institute 
aimed after post graduate degrees, Ph.D., Diploma and Certificate courses. Digital outreach shall 
also be offered. 
4.11.8 The Committee was further informed that in order to resolve the issue of lack of expertise 
and skills among Museum staff, the Ministry issued a list of following deliverables to the 
Museums to improve/ uplift the Museums to bring them at par with international best Museums: 
i. Organization of HRD training and exposure of personnel to international standards. 

7 
 
ii. Encouraging exchanges of best practices through visits. Facilitation of studies, research 
to bring out better publications.   
iii. Utilizing visiting fellows to unravel treasures within Museums. Publ ishing of world -
class books and catalogues.  
iv. Collaboration with national and international institutions to enhance their capacities. 
Engaging specialized professionals on contract/tenure basis. 
v. Conducting short training, certificate courses and in -service training courses for mid -
career up-gradation of Museum professionals. 
vi. Developing mechanisms for sharing knowledge /information among curators (who are 
attending international fellowship programs) on modern practices to improve  
galleries/exhibitions.  
4.11.9 The Ministry has mentioned that the following universities/institutions conduct Masters 
& PhD programs in Museology: 
i. National Museum Institute of History of Art, Conservation and Museology, MoC, 
New Delhi. 
ii. Rabindra Bharati University, Kolkata. 
iii. University of Calcutta, Kolkata. 
iv. The Maharaja Sayajirao University, Baroda. 
v. Banaras Hindi University, Varanasi. 
vi. Jiwaji University, Gwalior, MP 
vii. Institute of Archaeology of ASI 
4.11.10 The Committee believes that tackling the issue of dearth of human resources 
requires long -term planning and  solutions beyond the availability of budget. The 
Committee takes cognizance of the list of deliverables issued by the Ministry to address the 
issue of lack of human resources  and role envisaged for  the upcoming Indian Institute of 
Heritage and Conservation (IIHC)  in solving this issue . The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to formulate, in advance, its document indicating  the present as well as future 
human resource need s of the Indian Museums secto r for consideration the IIHC . The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry may develop plans for establishing 
regional centres of IIHC in the future, to enable interested youth to pursue their interest in 
museology and cultural heritage preservation. 

8 
 
4.11.11 INTACH observed that lack of trained professionals, either by way of vacant 
posts or adequate competency, has resulted in the inappropriate conservation of collections and 
undesirable development of museums.  It further pointed out the lack of trained and qualified 
personnel for museum curatorship and management. Also, there are many positions which have 
been lying vacant for years in almost all museums resulting in overburdening of existing staff or 
management of scientific conservation laboratories under the hands of curators who are not 
qualified to administer such specialised work. INTACH submitted that objects on display and 
storage suffer mostly due to improper handling. For example: a 2nd Cent. BC Yakshi statue and a 
3rd Cent. BC Mauryan lion, at the oldest museum of India in Kolkata, were damaged in the past 
due to careless handling by inadequately trained museum workers.  It was suggested that training 
programmes should be organized for curators and staff of the museum, geared towards collection 
management, display, storage, emergency evacuation, response and responsibilities during a 
disaster, etc. 
4.11.12  Professor H.P. Ray, in her written note, raised the critical issue of lack of trained 
manpower to take on leadership roles in curating interesting displays in museums.  She suggested 
that an inter -disciplinary team of specialists, archaeologists, curators and exhibition designers 
need to be engaged. 
4.11.13 The Committee notes that there is an urgent ne ed for carrying out extensive 
training programmes for the museum staff working across the country. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may enhance the budgetary allocation for this purpose and 
ensure that the museum staff is well -trained and sensiti zed regarding the cultural 
importance of the antiquities under their care. The training programmes may be 
conducted by renowned experts from the field in an engaging manner.  
(iii)  Conservation and Preservation Practices 
4.11.14 Utilization of the best known conservation and preservation practices play pivotal 
role in maintaining and preserving the quality and essence of the artefacts of a Museum. The 
Ministry informed the Committee that India being a tropical country, fluctuating  environmental 
conditions like extremely hot or cold weather, relative humidity, light levels and contaminants 
are main challenges. Pollution has also been mentioned as a big challenge for Museums, though 
preventive steps have been taken to curtail the damage caused.   

9 
 
4.11.15 The Committee feels that a lot needs to be done in terms of implementing the 
best possible conservation and preservation practices in our Museums. The Committee 
recommends that the Museums should be encouraged to study the efficacy of age -old 
traditional conservation practices and modify them suitably in order to ensure that all the 
Museum artefacts stay in the best possible state. Collaborations with international 
institutions with respec t to  training and capacity building exercises should be held 
periodically for the Museum staff. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to 
ensure that the curricula of the academic institutions imparting knowledge of conservation 
practices in India, including the upcoming IIHC, includes the global best practices for 
conservation and preservation of historic artefacts. 
4.11.16 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may devise a policy to 
ensure periodical review the state of  artefacts of the Museums and, on a case -to-case basis, 
do away with those which are beyond the point of salvaging by way of donating them to 
academic institutions or by auctioning them to collectors. Th is would also help the  
Museums to focus on the artefacts which are in good shape and preserve them in best 
possible way for years to come. The Committee would also like  the Ministry to encourage 
the Museums under its ambit to collaborate with State Government owned Museums from 
time to time to share their preservation expertise with them.  
4.11.17 INTACH, in its written note, stated that it is an issue that multiple agencies are 
responsible for the ownership and management of museums, since all museums across the 
country are not under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Culture. INTACH opined that this results 
in a lack of coordinated, integrated and consistent approach to conservation and development. 
4.11.18 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take the necessary steps 
to ensure that a coordinated, integrated and consistent approach to conservation and 
development of museums is followed across the various museums functioning under it. 
(iv)  Audience Engagement 
4.11.19 The Ministry informed the Committee that  audience management in Museums is 
a challenge in the absence of proper guides, guidebooks and audio systems.  Museums worldwide 
have progressively adopted new technologies for enhancing visitors’ experiences, reaching wider 

10 
 
audiences and improving internal efficiency. Some of the areas which have w itnessed major 
technological changes are Museum display systems, object digitization, 3D scanning, Virtual 
Tours, and AR/VR. 
4.11.20 INTACH, in its written note, submitted that several museums do not provide for 
universal access and interactive engagement of the visitors. INTACH opined that most of the 
museums are static and un -interactive and that appropriate steps need to be taken for making 
museums interesting for people to co me and spend time. It suggested that guided tours for 
visitors should be promoted in museums and that volunteer programmes may also be developed 
to involve local people, researchers, students, retired persons and so forth. INTACH further 
proposed that a rating system or awards for museums could be introduced by Government as an 
incentive for undertaking the abovementioned activities.  
4.11.21  The Committee feels that audience engagement is one of the most crucial 
challenges faced by the Indian Museums. The Committee is of the view that the Museum 
administrators need to make optimum use of the available funds to spur engagement, 
interest and curiosity among the visitors  as part of its audience engagement activities . The 
Committee would like  the Museums to strive to develop certain galleries as Augmented 
Reality/ Virtual Reality powered galleries for showcasing immersive stories of the past to 
the visitors. The Committee further recommends that the Museums should optimally 
utilize social media and target hyperlocal marketing to drive visitors to the Museums. 
Guided tours should be promoted in museums for both domestic and international visitors. 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may come up with a rating system 
for all the museums under it, wherein museums are rated based on several parameters – 
with audience engagement being one of the important parameters. This would encourage 
the museum staff to perform better. 
4.11.22 The Committee urges upon the Ministry to tie up with both domestic as well 
as international Museums to exchange and loan artefacts on rotational basis, so as to have 
fresh attractions from time to time. The Committee is of the view that the Museums should 
ensure that their entire collection of artefacts is displayed to the audience by 
implementation of a well thought -out, pre-planned rotation schedule, physically as well as 
on the Museum websites, and also by giving advertisements both in print and  electronic 

11 
 
media, which will also help to increase the overall footfall . This would also enable visitors 
to know beforehand what to expect from their visit, and provide them an overall improved 
visitor experience. 
4.11.23 The Ministry, in its written subm ission apprised the Committee about the 
installation of QR code based mechanism to allow interactivity in two of its Museums - National 
Museum, Delhi; Victoria Memorial, Kolkata. The Committee notes that QR codes provide 
link to a web page which will displ ay an online map of the Museum so that visitors do not 
have trouble reaching any particular section of the Museum, showcasing the detailed 
history of the artefacts and interesting facts about the Museum.  The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to introduce Q R codes in all its Museums for an interactive 
experience which would especially appeal to young visitors. Making wifi available in every 
Museum would be crucial for ensuring an enriching experience for the visitors.  
 (v)  Funding 
4.11.24 Barely any progre ss can be made towards development  and conservation of 
Museums if sufficient funds for the same are not available with the Ministry and its subordinate 
organizations. Apprising the Committee about the challenge on account of shortage of funds, the 
Ministry informed that funds constraint deters up -gradation of Museum infrastructure, use of 
technology and proper maintenance of collections. 
4.11.25 During its Study Visit to Visakhapatnam in January, 2020, the representatives of 
the Ministry emphasized on need  of funding and systematic efforts to improve the display and 
collection management at Site Museums in India. 
4.11.26 Apart from  the budgetary allocation,  the museums generate  revenue as per the 
following details:-  
(A) National Museum: 
Various sources of sundry revenues of National Museum are entry tickets, audio guide rental, 
selling of books & publications, souvenir sales, Auditorium Booking etc.  Revenue so 
generated, though, is deposited to Consolidated Fund of India, but not ploughed back to it.  
(B) National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi 

12 
 
Sundry revenues of NGMA include gallery entry ticket, sales from publications, fee for 
publishing images from NGMA repository by outside publishers or individual books, camera 
fee inside the gallery and registration fee from educational programs. 
(C) National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property: 
Besides funding from the Ministry, NRLC is engaged in conservation of art objects belonging 
to different Museums and organization in the cou ntry by its scheme of Field Conservation 
Projects and earning a little revenue by way of charging 10% Fee of the total project cost. 
(D) Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad 
Apart from its Grants in Aid received from the Ministry  the Salar Jung Museum earns revenue 
from sale of admission tickets, sale of photography tickets, lease of vehicle  parking, rents of 
building areas for shops, cafeteria, canteen, etc., sale of books, souvenirs and publications. 
(E) Indian Museum, Kolkata 
The Museum generates revenues through user charges from the visitors as entry fees, charges 
from organizations for use of the Museum’s auditorium and exhibition halls on daily charge 
basis, selling publications, replicas and souvenirs, receiving fee against the usage of still an d 
movie cameras, scholastic and commercial fee from allowing use of the photographs of the 
Museum’s artefacts and also by providing Museum spaces for cultural activities. 
(F) Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata  
The source of income is from visitors entry ticketing, souvenirs, publications etc. 
(G) National Council of Science Museum, Kolkata 
NCSM generates revenues through user charges from the visitors as entry fees, parking fees, 
rental charges for use of the Council’s  auditorium and exhibition halls, license  fees from 
agencies for providing cafeteria service, souvenirs  shops, sponsorships and consultancy charges 
for undertaking projects etc., besides receiving fund from the Ministry. 
Science City, Kolkata, a constituent unit of NCSM is a self -sustaining unit.   For operation and 
management no funds are provided to Science City, Kolkata by the Ministry. Science City, 
Kolkata generates internal revenue from various user charges to meet i ts requirement for the 
entire recurring expenditure including salary of the employees (who are basically employees of 

13 
 
NCSM).  During 2019 -20 Science City earned a revenue of Rs. 2171.26 lakhs(approx.), while 
NCSM and its units other than Science City, Kolkata generated Rs. 3450.00 lakhs (approx.).  
(H)  Allahabad Museum, Prayagraj 
The source of income in the Allahabad Museum is from visitors ticketing, selling of plaster of 
paris mould, souvenirs, publications etc. 
(I) Archeological Survey of India 
The source of revenue for Archaeological Site Museums are entry tickets, sale 
of   Publication, photography, filming, souvenir shop, etc. The Revenue earned is deposited   in 
the consolidated fund of GOI. 
4.11.27 INTACH, in its written note, observed that most of the museums depend on 
funding from the Central or State governments for their conservation, development and 
management, including day -to-day operations and that there is no provision in the Museum 
Grant Scheme, or otherwise for a Government Museum,  to receive assistance through Corporate 
Social Responsibility. INTACH further added that currently, there is no effective revenue model 
for museums, and the only source of income is from the ticket sales. Some revenue does come 
from merchandise sales but all income goes into a common kitty, and is not spent on well -
performing museums. INTACH opined that Public-Private Partnership should be encouraged for 
funding of museums. 
4.11.28  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work on developing an 
effective revenue model for the museums and employ innovative means  like donation 
drives, seeking CSR funds  and sponsorships etc.  to raise funds for the development, 
maintenance and upgradation of Museums. Visitors may also be enc ouraged to share their 
Museum experience on social media to generate interest among  their peers which will 
result in increased footfall, thereby earning the Museums extra revenue. 
4.11.29 The Committee further recommends that efforts may be made to encourage 
voluntary donations for the purpose of development and conservation of the Museum and 
its artefacts. This can be done by making the tickets pay -as-you-wish, setting a minimum 
price that needs to be paid for an entry ticket and suggesting a higher amount  to help the 
Museums generate funds for its operations.  An option may also be provided to interested 

14 
 
people to contribute towards the maintenance of any given artefact for a certain time 
period. The possibilit y of providing special tours of Museums before and after public 
hours, by charging higher ticket prices may also be explored.  The Committee suggests that 
Museums across India should look into the issue of charging higher fees to foreign 
nationals and analyzing the possible impact of lowering the same o n the footfall received 
and revenue generated by the Museums, targeting the maximization of both the footfall 
and the revenue. 
4.11.30 INTACH, in its written note, observed that Government museums make up about 
90% of the approximately 1000 museums in India and that there is limited, or no, encouragement 
for partnership with private individuals or organizations for setting up, development and 
functioning of museums.  
4.11.31 The Committee is of the view that Museums may be encouraged to enter into 
partnerships with the private sector to sponsor their exhibitions, and also  through 
contribution under Corporate Social Responsibility. The Committee understands that the 
condition of Indian Museums can be improved to a large extent if sufficient funds are made 
available. The Committee would also like the Ministry to look into the administration, 
functioning and revenue models of successful international Museums in developing 
countries and emulate the best practices with modifications suiting to the Indian context. 
4.11.32 In reply to a query regarding support provided to the Museums owned by State 
Government, the Ministry informed that it does not provide regular grant to the State Museum as 
State Museums come under the administrative control of State Govt. However, the Ministry 
operates the Museum Grant Scheme under which financial assistance is provided to State Govt. 
for setting up new Museums and development of existing Museums. A total of 25 state Museums 
have been supported during last 5 years. The total amount supported to these Museums is Rs. 
72.51 crores. The details are at Annexure-A. 
4.11.33 During its study visit to Visakhapatnam in January 2020, the representative of the 
State Government of An dhra Pradesh submitted that the Museums in the State suffer from 
budget constraints and insufficient staff strength . They emphasized the  need for organizing 
training programmes for employees, and suggested for introduction of PPP model in case of 

15 
 
Museum maintenance and management. During Committee's visit to Mumbai,  the representative 
of the State Government of Maharashtra  apprised that the State Government has requested for 
special grant of Rs. 600 crores for consideration of the 15 th Finance Commission  for the  
proposed State level Museums at New Mumbai and Nagpur . Further, a special grant of Rs. 100 
crore has also been sought for preservation, conservation and restoration of State 
protected/Centrally protected monuments depicting inspirational life of Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj. 
4.11.34  The Committee  feels that the sum of Rs. 72.51 crores provided by the 
Ministry  to State Museums across the country under the Museum Grant Scheme from FY 
2015-16 to FY 2019 -20, is a paltry amount  covering only a few Museums while a large 
number of museums are still craving  for such an assistance.  The Committee desires the  
Ministry to allocate more fund s to the State Governments for the purpose of development 
of State Museums and encourage all the States to come up with proposals to upgrade the 
Museums under their control under the Museum Grant Scheme. The Committee also calls 
upon the Ministry to come up with a list of deliverables for the State Museums to provide 
better experience to the visitors across the country. 
4.11.35 The Committee observes that out of the abovementioned grant of Rs. 72.51 crores  
under the Museum Grant Scheme from FY 2015 -16 to FY 2019 -20, Rs. 35 crores i.e. 48% 
of the total amount , has been allocated to just 2 States – Nagaland and Andhra Pradesh. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take steps to ensure equitable 
allocation of the financial aid to State Governments under the Museum Grants scheme. 
The Committee desires  the Ministry to ask a ll States to submit their proposal for this 
scheme and ensure that at least one Museum gets this grant in each State.  The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry may allocate some funds to National Museums with 
the specific purpose to lend technical and conservational assistance to State controlled 
Museums, when needed. 
(vi) Safety and security of Museum artefacts 
4.11.36 The Ministry has furnished the following information regarding the state of 
security of artefacts at National Museums under the Ministry:- 

16 
 
(A) National Museum:  
Since 1990s, the security of artefacts at the Museum  has been entrusted to CISF. CISF is 
currently deployed on round the clock basis. A full-fledged CCTV system with dedicated control 
room is also operational for 24X7 real time monitoring of the vulnerable places of the Museum. 
In addition, SOPs are in place for handling of Museum objects within Museum premises and 
from/to another Museum. The Museum has also introduced RF-ID based security tagging system 
for objects given on loan to other Institutions.  
(B) National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi 
NGMA has engaged a Security Agency sponsored by the Director General Re -Settlement, 
Ministry of Defence, R.  K. Puram, New Delhi to provide round the clock security cover by 
deployment of Ex -servicemen Security Guards since 1st August, 2018.  NGMA is working 
towards providing CISF security cover to the Museum. 
A full-fledged CCTV system with dedicated control roo m is also operational for 24X7 real time 
monitoring of the vulnerable places of the gallery. In addition, SOPs are in place for handling of 
gallery objects within gallery premises and from/to other Museums. NGMA has also introduced 
RFID based security tagg ing system for objects given on loan to other Institutions.  Upgradation 
of security for internal and external movement and safe storage of artefacts is also being worked 
upon.  
 (C) Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad 
Safety and security of the Museum artifacts i ncluding the visitor’s security is the primary 
concern of the Museum.  Every National Museum has its own security measures or arrangements 
to meet any unforeseen incidents such as fire, accident, burglary or vandalism.  
As a National Museum, the Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad is fitted with the latest security 
equipment and has around 100 CISF security personnel posted in the Museum as its main 
security force. The Security arrangements at the Museum are at four levels: First, there is an 
outer periphery, built with pucca walls and barbed wire. The second level caters the  manual 
checking by CISF personnel using electronic devices such as hand held metal detectors, wireless 
systems and baggage checking scanners. At the third level , CCTV cameras are installed at all 
important cardinal points and all galleries which are monitored regularly by trained security staff. 
There are also fire -fighting equipment, smoke detectors, and hydrant system. The fourth level is 

17 
 
managed by the Museum staff, who have been trained in the safeguarding of Museum objects 
and in the protection of Museum. 
In addition, an exclusive Fire station also existed in the Museum premises managed by 
Telangana State Govt.The Museum has taken measures to keep the building safe from shor t-
circuits and lightning strikes.  Security arrangements for detecting any explosives exist in the 
Museum. 
(D) Indian Museum, Kolkata 
In Indian Museum, security of the entire premises is presently under the control of Central 
Industrial Security Force (CISF). The Museum building has 431 CCTV cameras to enable 
electronic surveillance of the entire premises. In addition to ensure security of objects in st ore, 
SOPs have been devised to ensure maximum security to stored objects. 
(E) Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata  
The VMH has been the first Museum in eastern India to deploy the CISF  to take care of the 
Museum security since January 2018, in compliance with the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India. This has bolstered the security system very significantly. 
(F) National Council of Science Museum, Kolkata   
In NCSM,  security of the entire premises is taken care of by outsourced agencies.  CCTV 
monitoring systems and Metal detectors are adequately used to ensure security to exhibits and 
science centre visitors. 
(G)  Allahabad Museum, Prayagraj 
A three-tier security system is available in the Allahabad Museum i.e. private security, armed  
police and CCTV cameras. The matter of deploying the CISF personnel in the Museum is under 
consideration. 
(H) Archeological Survey of India 
Security and safety aspects of ASI Site Museums have been upgraded from time-time in all 
Archaeological Site Museums as per 14 Museum reform points. Gadgets like CCTV/ night 
vision HD cameras, infrared cameras, metal door detector, hand-held metal detector, burglar 
alarm, etc. have been   installed in the Archaeological Site. Apart from manual frisking, CISF 
and Private Security has also been deployed in Museums for Security purpose. 

18 
 
4.11.37 The Committee  takes note of several media reports pointing out theft of 
antiquities and artefacts, involving the participation of organized international mafia, This, 
according to the Committee is a major cause of concern in safeguarding the artefacts in our 
country. The Committee underlines the need of  security of artefacts deployed at the 
different National Museums across the country to ensure the safety of our valuable 
antiquities and artefacts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
come up with a set of rules to ensure certain level of safety and security across all the 
National Museums. Needless to mention, i nstallation of CCTV systems, armed personnel, 
burglar alarm systems, etc.  in the museums  are must and therefore  the budgetary 
requirements, alongwith provisions thereof within  strict timeline be made for compliance 
of security requirements. The Committee recommends the Ministry to explore the usage of 
blockchain technology for digital cataloguing of Museum artefacts, so as to maintain 
permanent, unalterable records of the artefacts . The Committee hopes that this would also  
deter the possible connivance of the Museum staff with organized art smuggling groups. 
4.11.38  INTACH, in its written note, observed that at many of the museums, there 
is a lack of Disaster Management Plans for the building, collections as well as the visitors.  
INTACH pointed out the lack of preve ntive conservation measures: environmental monitoring, 
light levels, proper storage and innovative display. It further stated that not enough attention is 
paid to fire safety audits, earthquake resistance measures and security concerns/ theft. 
4.11.39  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take urgent 
measures to ensure that an effective disaster management plan is in place across all the 
museums to ensure the physical safety of the precious antiquities in times of natural 
calamities. 
(vii)  Vacancies existing in Museums 
4.11.40 The Ministry informed the Committee that t here are 9 Museums under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Culture. Out of them, 3 are subordinate organizations of 
the Ministry. These are 
 National Museum, New Delhi 

19 
 
 National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA) head office: Jaipur House, Delhi. Two 
branches located at Mahatma Gandhi Road, Mumbai and Palace Road, Bengaluru. 
 National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property (NRLC), Lucknow 
The other organizations are autonomous organizations run and managed by Board of Trustees or 
Societies. These Museums are  
 Allahabad Museum  
 Indian Museum, Kolkata 
 Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad 
 Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata 
 National Council of Science Museums (NCSM), Kolkata 
 National Museum Institute, New Delhi. 
4.11.41 The Ministry has stated that insofar as autonomous organizations are concerned, 
the post of head of the organizations are filled up by the Ministry itself except Allahabad Museum 
and Victoria Memorial Hall as these posts are at the level of Director having Grade Pay of Rs. 
8700/-. However, in respect of Subordinate Offices, the Ministry  takes action for filling up the 
posts having the Grade Pay 7600/- and above. The details of these posts are placed at Annexure-B. 
4.11.42 The Committee is anguished to note that several key positions are lying 
vacant for a long time in the various Museums. The Committee wonders as to how the 
Museums can function properly without key personnel in position to manage them. The 
Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry to take urgent steps to fill the existing vacancies 
under the various Museums at the earliest. 
4.12 Opportunities:- 
(i)  Digitization of Museums 
4.12.1 The Ministry has submitted that enhancing the Museum sector being an important part of 
nation-building has the potential to become a high -revenue sector. Museums are hotspots for 
cultural tourism. Under an initiative by the Ministry, nationa l Museums across the country are 
using JATAN: Virtual Museum Builder, a software designed and developed by the Centre for 
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) as the standard software for all Museums under 

20 
 
the purview of the Ministry. 10 Museums, under the administrative control of the Ministry, are 
using this software. As on 30.9.2020, a  total of 2,72,355 objects have been digitized and 
uploaded on the web site museumsofindia.gov.in.  This digital engagement enables the Museums 
to promote culture and heritage to global audiences through digital channels. Museums can 
engage diverse audiences in the backdrop massive growth of the internet, increased mobile usage 
via smart phones and tablets and the prevalence of social media. Museums are now taking 
initiatives to engage with their communities by organising outreach programs. 
4.12.2 The Committee appreciates the meticulous work done by several national Museums 
across the country in setting up of virtual galleries and digitization of the artefacts present 
in the Museums, along with the relevant details for these items  which would serve not only 
research scholars of historical artefacts, but also the art -loving community. The digitized 
artefacts would ensure permanent record of artefacts  which in turn would help  in keeping 
a check on pilfer age of Museum artefacts.  The Committee recommends that the software 
may be introduced  across the national Museums on priority. The Committee further 
recommends the Ministr y to provide assistance to  the State Government Museums for 
implementing the JATAN software.  
(ii) Addressing the dearth of Human Resources in Museology 
4.12.3 The dearth of human resources faced by the Indian Museums is a stark pointer to the 
absence of Museums management and museology in the Indian education system. The Ministry 
has stated that Museums are generally not part of the curriculum of the educational system across 
India. There are very few universities and art colleges in the country offering courses on 
conservation, museology and art history.  Considering the shortage of Human Resources within 
Museums and the heritage sector and the need for dedicated and scientific conservation of 
tangible relics, there is an exigent need for a Central Institute with mandate to develop Human 
Resources in the disciplines of Archaeology, Museology, Conservation, Archival Studies, Art 
History and Management. The Government in its Budget 2020-21 has announced setting up of a 
Central Institute which will provide infinite avenues for advanced research and education in the 
domain of Cultural Heritage. In this regard, the scope of current National Museum Institute 
(which is already a registered autonomous Society with a status of Deemed to be University) will 
be enlarged and its nomenclature changed to ‘Indian Institute of Heritage’ (IIH). This will be an 

21 
 
umbrella Institute to offer various courses in History of Art, Conservation, Museology, Archival 
Studies, Archaeology, Preventive Conservation, Epigraphy & Numis matics, Manuscriptology, 
etc. currently being conducted by different organizations under the Ministry i.e. National 
Museum Institute, Institute of Archaeology, National Archives of India, IGNCA, NRLC etc. 
Digital outreach shall also be offered. The Memoran dum of Association, Bye Laws and 
Regulations for IIH have been prepared  and necessary approvals are being obtained. Estimates 
for the establishment of IIH, targets and timelines are also being worked out. 
4.12.4 The Committee feels that the issue of shortage of human resources in the field of 
museology in the country can only be resolved by long -term planning and introducing 
students to this field at a young age. Accordingly, the Committee  recommends that the 
Ministry may  request the Ministry of Human Resource Development to include an 
introductory course on museology in the curriculum  at the senior secondary school level. 
The Committee further recommends that  schools should be persuaded by the Ministry to 
arrange at least one  Museum visit per year for students at every level.  Such visits should  
include a brief behind -the-curtains overview of the process of conservation of Museum 
artefacts and Museum curation. Doing so would instill a sense of respect for our rich 
cultural heritage and the efforts that go behind preserving the same, stimulate the curiosity 
of students , and encourage them to pick up careers in the field of museology and 
conservation of historical artefacts. The Committee observes that the establishment of the 
Indian Institute of Heritage is a step in the right direction and will help tackle the issue of 
dearth of human resources in the field of museology in a significant way.  The Ministry 
should hire curators who have exposure in international best standards of  Museum 
curation. 
(iii) Expanding National Council of Science Museums across all States  
4.12.5  The Committee feels that Science Museums are the gateway to the domains of both 
Science as well as Museums for school kids in India.  They help develop scientific temper 
among the upcoming generations of the country. The Committee observes that the present 
network of the National Council of School Museums† leaves a lot of scope for expanding the 
                                                 
† Source: https://ncsm.gov.in/network-2/ 

22 
 
presence of the Regional Level Centres of the NCSM throughout the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should establish Regional Level 
Centres of the NCSM in all the States, so as to ensure school kids from all over the State get 
a chance to visit these Centres and help develop a scientific outlook in their lives. 
(iv) Developing ASI Site Museums across the country 
4.12.6  INTACH suggested that s ite museums/ open air museums should be designed and 
developed near monuments and archaeological sites for a unique and informative experience of a 
site.  
4.12.7 Aga Khan Trust for Culture (AKTC) observed that ASI has over 40 site museums which 
hold a unique collection of antiquity and that at several of these site museu ms, the exhibition has 
not changed these were established. AKTC suggested that for each site museum, a scientific 
assessment should be carried out which should be aimed at listing immediate, short term, 
medium term and long term actions to bring available knowledge, technology and equipment to 
each of the site museums.  It further opined that specialist consultants should be hired in the 
process of creation of development plans for the site museums; risk assessment should be done 
for each site museum to ensure the safety of antiquities; souvenir shops, cafes with local 
cuisines, auditoriums for film shows etc. should be developed and volunteers should be sought 
from local community to achieve financial sustainability at these site museums. AKTC further 
observed that the number of site museums existing in the country is to o low and more such site 
museums should be developed at monuments having associated collections of antiquity, archival 
material and oral history. 
4.12.8 The Committee feels that development of site museums at more ASI sites across the 
country would serve a s another attraction for tourists, while helping preserve the site -
related antiquities by employing museum staff dedicated to the purpose. The Committee 
recommends that ASI may chalk out a plan for development of more site museums at sites 
with high footfa ll and work out a revenue generation plan to support their maintenance 
costs. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture may pursue 
the Ministry of Finance to allocate the funds generated by museums and monuments to the 

23 
 
Ministry itself, so as to boost the development and conservation of museums and historical 
sites across the country. 
4.13 Miscellaneous 
4.13.1 The Secretary, Ministry of Culture  during his deposing before the Committee  mentioned 
that the Ministry is engaged with re-development plans of the iconic Museums and the 
cultural spaces identified by the Ministry. Necessary steps are being taken  to modernize 
and upgrade the Museum facilities at the Victoria Memorial Museum, National Museum 
of India, Delhi and Salar Jung Museum. The Ministry is deliberating to modernize and 
upgrade the Museum facilities there, re -curate, re -design the displays and intervention 
with regard to lighting and technology to make it more modern, engaging and interactive, 
in line with the international best practices. 
4.13.2 The Committee appreciates the steps being taken by the Ministry to modernize and 
upgrade the Museum facilities at various Museums under its administrative control. 
4.13.3 The Committee takes note that a Museum of the World is planned in the National 
Library, Kolkata and desires that it may be finalized soon. 
4.13.4 The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that the Bentony Castle is being taken up 
under the Museum Grant Scheme, to come up with a city Museum. 
4.13.5 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry, in coordination with the State 
Government of Tripura , has plans to create a State Gallery of Modern Art at  
Pushpabanta Palace at Agartala, besides funding and guiding them  in the matter of 
curation. 
4.13.6 The Secretary, shared with the Committee that the Galleries on Indian revolutionaries 
being proposed in Victoria Memorial Hall at Kolkata, would be named as Biplabi Bharat.  
However, no timeframe for establishing these Galleries were given.  
4.13.7 As regards  the steps taken  to improve the National Museum at Delhi, the Secretary 
informed that an international collection, namely the Central Asian collection of 8 th 
century A.D., related to Buddha, with 13,000 artefacts and antiquities is proposed to be 

24 
 
displayed in about 15,000 square feets of area, the project comprise Galleries which are at 
present available in the National Museum. 
4.13.8 The Committee was informed by the Secretary that the old structure in Delhi, between 
National Museum and Vigyan Bhawan, which earlier housed the ASI offices, has been 
completely renovated and that a Buddha Gallery is planned to be set up there. 
4.13.9 The Committee is constrained to note that only 300 -400 painting s out of the 
collection of 17,000 paintin gs, are  presently being showcased in the National 
Museum at Delhi. The Committee desires to be  increased progressively to showcase 
at least 25% of the paintings. 
4.13.10 The Committee takes note of the Sindhu Valley Civilization Gallery proposed 
to be taken up in the National Museum, Delhi, with the collaboration of ASI. The 
Committee welcomes the initiative taken by the Ministry to bring the artefacts and 
antiquities, whi ch ASI has excavated from various sites of Rakhigarhi, Sanauli, 
Lothal, Kalobangan etc.. The Committee applauds the initiative taken up by the 
Ministry to set up a Jewellery Gallery at the National Museum in Delhi. 
4.13.11 The Committee welcomes the  innovative initiatives taken to set up new 
Galleries in Indian Museum and other Museums and hopes that these initiatives 
would fructify in near future. 
4.13.12 The Committee underlines the need for development of the Museum and old 
manuscripts at the Gagron Fort at Jhalawar, Kolvi Buddhist Caves, Jain temples at 
Ujjain and Kota, and Fort of Shahabad  and desires that the old manuscripts are 
available via audio, video etc. 
4.13.13 The Ministry, in its written reply, informed t he Committee about the following 
proposals received from Kerala Government for financial assistance under Museum Grant 
Scheme and SPoCS:- 
SPoCS  

25 
 
NCSM, Kolkata: Regional Science Centre (RSC), Kottayam in Kerala is being set up by 
NCSM under Scheme for Promo tion of Culture of Science (SPoCS), approved by the 
Ministry of Culture on request of the Kerala government. Works for setting up of the 
Science Centre is in advanced stage and the centre is expected to be ready by March, 
2021.  
Museum Grant Scheme 
 


26 
 
4.13.14 The Committee desires that the work at all these museums may be completed 
at the earliest. 
4.13.15 One Member of the Committee pointed out the need for converting the 
Padmanabhapuram Palace in Kerala, to a National Museum.  
4.13.16 The Committee de sires that the Ministry may look into this aspect and 
furnish its reply thereon, in its ATN. 
 

27 
 
5. ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES 
5.1  Like Museums, archaeological sites and monuments not only play a pivotal role in 
furthering the tourism prospects of India, but also act as a treasure trove of our rich and diverse 
cultural heritage. India is home to a huge number of archaeological sites and monuments. 
Archaeological Survey of India shoulders the responsibility for maintenance, conservation and 
environmental development of 3692 Centrally protected monuments. Besides this, ASI also 
performs other important activities such as exploration and excavation, epigraphical research and 
publication, conducting survey of temples and buildings, implementing the Antiquities and Art 
Treasure Act, 1972, imparting training in archaeo logy, chemical treatment and preservation of 
monuments and antiquities, environmental development in and around monuments/sites and 
development and maintenance of Archaeological Museums.  
5.2 The protected monuments include prehistoric rock -shelters, Neoli thic sites, Megalithic 
burials, rock-cut caves, stupas, temples, churches, synagogues, mosques, tombs, palaces, forts, 
bathing ghats, tanks, water reservoirs, bridges, pillars, inscriptions,  mounds, kosminars, 
excavated sites, etc.  Further, the State Gov ernments and Union Territories have also declared 
the monuments/sites of State importance under their respective Acts.   
5.3 The protection, preservation and conservation of the Centrally Protected Monuments is 
looked after by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI ). The organization headed by the 
Director General. ASI is engaged in protection, preservation and conservation of 3692 centrally 
protected monuments including 38 World Heritage Monuments and 50 site Museums, spread all 
over India and the excavat ions of historical sites in the country in terms of Ancient Monuments 
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958. ASI is also administering the Antiquities and 
Art Treasures Act, 1972 and Indian Treasure Trove Act, 1878. ASI has 36 Circles which are 
headed by Superintending Archaeologist, besides 1 Mini Circles (Leh) located in the various 
States and Union Territories and 5 Regional Directorates (located at Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, 
Bangalore, and Bhopal) through which ASI carries out its activities. Besi des, there are 6 
Excavation Branches, 2 Temple Survey Projects, 1 Building Survey Project, 1 Prehistory Branch, 
1 Science Branch, 2 Epigraphy Branches (one for Sanskrit and Dravidian at Mysore and the 
other for Arabic and Persian at Nagpur), and 1 Horticul ture Branch having 4 Divisions at Agra, 

28 
 
Delhi, Mysore and Bhubaneswar and Pt. Deendayal Upadhyay Institute of Archaeology to impart 
training in Archaeology stationed at Knowledge Park, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh. 
5.4 Archaeological sites and monuments across India - whether Centrally protected, State 
Government protected or the ones which are under the care of neither – face a myriad of 
challenges which need to be tackled in order to ensure that they survive the harsh environmental 
and human impact which continuously deteriorates their condition. 
5.5 While deposing before the Committee, the Secretary stated that some of the conservation 
problems or challenges that ASI faces include regular preventive maintenance, nature  and 
technique of construction, kind of material to be used, issues of structural stability, climatic 
factors, biological and botanical factors, age of monuments, encroachment, pollution, quarrying 
and natural disasters and the usual problem of urbanisatio n.  Some other challenges are the 
visitor behaviour in terms of vandalism, lack of support from local authorities, shortage of 
adequate skilled manpower, lack of funds, etc. 
5.6  Challenges:- 
(i) Conservation Problems 
5.6.1 Elaborating upon the problems faced in conservation of archaeological sites and 
monuments, the Ministry informed that while the significant ones have been protected by the 
Central or State Governments the ones which are of lesser importance are under the care of none.  
In fact, it is this category of the monuments which is threatened of their very existence.  
However, of late, the local bodies have also started taking interest in their protection, 
preservation and development.  But still, a lot needs to be done for the protection and 
preservation of this class of the monuments considering that these are parts of our rich cultural 
tradition and heritage. 
5.6.2 In reply to a query  about the mechanism for conservation of monuments,  raised by the 
Committee on th e policy issue , the Ministry informed that ASI has  a well defined policy for 
conservation of   protected monuments  including the adoption of t he international  practices 
recognized by UNESCO for conservation and preservation work of the monuments.  Traditional 

29 
 
methods, materials and techniques are preferred  for conservation work of monuments, however, 
the modern techniques and methods are also applied wherever necessary. 
5.6.3  The Ministry, in its background note , highlighted factors relevant to the problems related 
to the conservation of the monuments/sites viz.: i) preventive maintenance, ii) nature and 
technique of construction, iii) material used, iv) structural stability, v) Climatic factors, vi) 
Biological and botanical factors, vii) age of the monuments viii) man -made causes - 
encroachments, pollution, quarrying, etc., ix) natural disaster, etc.. The conservation programs of 
all the CPMs, the structural conservation, chemical preservation and environmental works are 
taken up depending on these factors. 
5.6.4  The Committee takes note of the various problems faced by the Ministry/ASI with 
regard to the conservation of the monuments/sites , and recommends that the Ministry 
should be proactive in solving these problems since these form a formidable threat to the 
maintenance and conservation of the archaeological monuments and sites. Given the  
budgetary constraints , care should be taken to ensure optimum utilization of funds and 
working out innovative, cost-effective solutions to meet the challenges r elated to 
conservation of the archaeological sites. 
5.6.5 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may devise a well -defined 
plan to ensure at least a bare minimum level of protection and conservation of  monuments 
outside the protection of both Central and State Governments , to encourage  local 
municipal bodies and local population. The Committee further recommends that ASI may 
develop a mechanism to share its technical expertise in conservation with conce rned State 
Government Departments as well as local bodies  by way of training and capacity building 
programmes. 
5.6.6  INTACH observed that the conservation, development and management of 
UNESCO World Heritage Sites is comparatively better than other monume nts, and that the key 
reason for the same is the existence of conservation and management plans for them, which 
many other sites do not have. It suggested that ASI should ASI should consider preparation of 
‘Comprehensive Conservation, Management and Mainte nance Plans’ with strategic PPP 
partnerships for a certain number of sites every year. In this regard, AKTC also mentioned that 

30 
 
over 70 years after independence, ASI is yet to write out or commission a list of specifications 
for conservation works to be undertaken in India, because of which, the CPWD specifications are 
followed – which are not meant for conservation works. AKTC suggested that ASI needs to 
engage specialists to prepare a list of specifications for conservation works, and update it 
regularly. It was further opined that no conservation funding should be provided to any site 
without the availability of a conservation plan that should include architectural drawings, 
condition assessment, photographic record, statement of significance, names and q ualification of 
those responsible – including external consultants. 
5.6.7  AKTC, in its written note, observed that ASI had notified a revised national 
policy for conservation in 2014, but years later, the policy is hardly known, even within the ASI 
staff at circle level. It suggested that urgent steps need to be taken to disseminate the policy, hold 
workshops and discussions regarding the policy both within the ASI and with officials of State 
Governments. AKTC recommended that Site Inspection Notes should be made mandatory 
following each site inspection by an officer at any monument wherein the state of conservation, 
significant elements at the site, requirement for conservation works/ studies etc. should be 
recorded. It was further suggested that a ‘Site I nspection Register’ should be maintained for all 
the Centrally protected monuments.  
5.6.8  The Committee recommends that ASI may work out detailed Conservation 
and Management Plans for all the Centrally protected monuments on an urgent basis. A 
Site Inspection Register may also be maintained for each of the monuments and steps may 
be taken to disseminate knowledge about the national policy for conservation among the 
ASI staff, officials of State Governments, as well as other agencies involved in carrying o ut 
conservation works at archaeological monuments across the country. 
(ii)  Urbanization around Centrally Protected Monuments 
5.6.9  Expansion of cities, human habitation and infrastructure development pose a serious 
challenge before heritage managers in maintaining the authenticity and integrity of Monuments. 
5.6.10 The Committee desires the Ministry to coordinate with all infrastructure Ministries 
and Departments to ensure compliance of the prohibited area and regulated area limits 
prescribed under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 

31 
 
at the DPR stages of projects planned in the vic inity of all Centrally protected monuments. 
The Committee recommends that extensive research may be conducted to explore ways 
and means to protect our archaeological sites and monuments from  the ill-effects of severe 
air pollution in urban centres. 
(iii)  Encroachment and Vandalism 
5.6.11  Encroachment in and around the monuments and archeological sites has been one of th e 
most debated issues d uring deliberations of the Committee. T he Ministry, in its written 
submission, has informed that the encroachments in the protected monuments and protected 
areas are removed as per the provisions contained in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological 
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and Rules, 1959 framed thereunder. Superintending Archaeologists 
are authorised to issue show  cause notices under the provisions of Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 1958  and Rules 1959 followed by a direction to the 
District Collector/Magistrate by Central Government to remove such encroachment under 
section 19 (2) of th e Act and Rule 38 (2). In order to contain the encroachments and removing 
them, the Superintending Archaeologist in charge of the Circles have been vested with the 
powers of an Estate Officer to issue eviction notices/orders to the encroachers under Public  
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.  Further, assistance in such cases is 
also sought from the respective State Government/district administration and where there are no 
fruitful results actions are initiated against the encroachers b y filing cases in the court of law.  In 
addition to the regular watch and ward staff, private security personnel, State police guards and 
CISF have also been deployed for the safety and security of selected monuments. The Ministry 
of Culture has also requested the State Governments to form coordination Committee comprising 
State and Archaeological Survey of India officials to solve the problem. 
5.6.12  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the efficacy of the 
powers it presently has to deal with encroachments in and around monuments and propose 
suitable amendments to the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 
1958 and Rules 1959, and Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 
with a view to adequately empower the Estate Officer for tackling the issue of 
encroachment of Centrally protected monuments . In the event  of non -cooperation from 
local law enf orcement agencies in dealing with encroachment around monuments, the 

32 
 
matter may be taken up at higher levels on priority basis to evolve the much needed 
accountability mechanism for the same. Awareness drives may carried out on social media 
to create a sen se of belonging among the local populace  so that they remain  more vigilant 
towards protecting our monuments and heritage from malevolent elements of the society. 
5.6.13 The Committee is of the view that boundary wall is a bare minimum security 
requirement and helps clearly demarcate the limits of the archaeological site. It, therefore, 
desires the Ministry to target the construction of boundary walls around all Centrally 
Protected Monuments in the country within a fixed time line.  The Committee believes that 
doing so would have a noticeable preventive effect on encroachment of monuments across 
the country. 
5.6.14 The Committee recommends that a dedicated cell be set up under ASI with mandate 
to identify , monitor and follow up action on the  incidents of encroachment of Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country. The cell may seek active participation of local 
communities residing near the CPMs and encourage them to report any such i ncidents to 
the Ministry at the earliest. 
5.6.15 The Committee urges upon the Ministry to strive towards prevention of vandalism 
and encroachment at archaeological sites and monuments fraught with safety and security 
problems, particularly those in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir, Chhatisgarh, North -
Eastern States etc., in close coordination with local law and order authorities.  The 
Committee desires the Ministry to take necessary actions to ensure that strict penal 
provisions are in place to deter incidents of vandalism and defacing of monuments.  
5.6.16 The Committee takes serious note of the growing incidents of demolition of several 
temples of immense cultural importance by anti -social elements in certain States. The 
Committee is of the firm view that such i ncidents should be prevented at any cost and 
exhorts the Ministry to ensure a foolproof mechanism to arrest such incidents and protect 
our cherished cultural heritage. The Committee underlines the need for an infallible 
procedure prescribing close coordina tion amongst the Ministry of Culture, Ministry of 
Home Affairs and the State Governments.  

33 
 
5.6.17 DG, ASI informed the Committee that  ASI has done an extensive assessment of security 
requirements for all the Centrally -protected monuments.  ASI has actually  made out an entire 
sheet of currently what is the security deployment and what ideally should be there in respect of 
each monument.  She stated that  the idea is, if ASI can't get to hundred per cent, at least it can 
get 50 per cent or 60 per cent.  ASI protects the monuments by three methods. In two major 
monuments, Red Fort and Taj, the CISF protects these monuments. Other monuments are under 
protection by SIS, a private agency hired for a three -year period. ASI has the home guards who 
have come in. 
5.6.18  The Committee is happy to note that ASI is working on a Security Policy for all the 
Centrally Protected Monuments. The Committee recommends that the Security Policy may 
be formulated and implemented at the earliest. 
5.6.19 AKTC observed that a majorit y of sites rely on security provided by a private security 
service and opined that in hiring the private security guards, the ASI should insist on a 
preliminary training in visitor interaction and control. This would help make the security guards 
significantly more effective. It further suggested that CCTV networks should be mandatory at all 
Centrally protected monuments. 
5.6.20 The Committee recommends that ASI may undertake a physical security audit for 
all the monuments under its ambit and estimate the f inancial requirements for installing 
CCTV security systems at all the monuments and sites under its control. Thereafter, a plan 
may be devised to install such systems at the earliest so as to deter and punish vandals. 
 (iv)  Lack of funds 
5.6.21 The Ministry, in its background note, has succinctly stated that the f unds available with 
ASI for maintenance and management of 3692 Monuments are insufficient.  In reply to a query 
regarding impact of loss of revenue incurred by ASI due to decrease in footfall  on account of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the Ministry mentioned that the revenue earned due to ticketing of visitors 
is credited to the Consolidated Fund of India  and there may not be much impact o n maintenance 
of monuments due to no influx of visitors during lock down.  The maintenance of monuments is 
carried out through allocated budget.  

34 
 
5.6.22 During the Committee's visit to Mumbai in January, 2020, t he representative of ASI 
which elucidated upon the funds allocated by Govern ments – both Central and State 
Government, specifically mentioned the requirement of additional allocation of Rs. 7.50 crores. 
He mentioned that no funding has been received from Corporate Social Responsibility yet for the 
restoration and preservation of monuments. 
5.6.23 Dr. Rakesh Tewari, former Director General, ASI, in his written note furnished to the 
Committee, observed that the problem of encroachment and vandalism of heritage sites is 
multiplying day-by-day because of the rapidly increasing populati on and shortage of land. He 
suggested that additional funding and human resources are needed to tackle this problem. 
5.6.24 The Committee recommends that ASI may introduce pay -as-you-wish ticketing at 
all ticketed monuments across the country , while still keeping certain minimum amount as 
fee. Informing visitors about the developmental work they could fuel at the archaeological 
sites with their donations will certainly drive many people to contribute to the same.  The 
Committee also suggests the Ministry to consider introduction of special tours at 
archaeological sites and monuments before and after regular hours, charging a higher f ee 
for a more isolated and somb re experience at the monuments.  Further, ASI should forge 
partnerships in the form of sponsorship and CSR contributions, with the private sector. 
5.6.25  The Committee is of the view that adequate funds allocation  to the Ministry will not 
only help develop and preserve the rich cultural  heritage of India, but also act as an 
investment for propelling the growth of tourism sector in India. The present budget 
allocation to the Ministry , in the opinion of the Committee , is insufficient for  developing 
and conserv ing Museums and archaeological  sites and falls short  to meet the financial 
needs of India’s cultural heritage. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should make a strong case for higher fund allocation  and would also  urge the 
Ministry of Finance to be considerate to preserve our rich cultural heritage.  
5.6.26 AKTC opined that the Adopt -a-Heritage project launched by Ministry of Tourism in 
close collaboration with Ministry of Culture and ASI, should be expanded to include 
conservation works. It further suggested that the volume of available CSR funds can be a 
potential game -changer for conservation in India and that ASI should prepare or commission 

35 
 
project proposals that could be attractive for corporate to fund. AKTC opined that when CSR are 
utilized for implementing projects under the ‘Adopt -a-Heritage’ scheme,  revenue generation 
should not be permitted for the corporate partner. AKTC further submitted that in projects such 
as archaeological excavations and desilting historical step -wells/tanks/wells, almost 100% of the 
costs are for unskilled craftsmen and that  ASI should identify projects that can be carried out in 
rural areas with MNREGA funds. 
5.6.27 The Committee feels that given the limited budget available with ASI, it is 
imperative to ensure that schemes such as Adopt -a-Heritage are implemented in way to 
maximize their impact on the state of maintenance and conservation of the heritage sites. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Culture may coordinate with 
the Ministry of Tourism and expand the scheme to permit the conservation works b y 
private organizations, under close supervision of the ASI. 
 
 (v) Human Resources at ASI  
5.6.28 In its written reply, the Ministry has furnished the following details regarding the 
sanctioned strength, persons in position and vacancies in respect of regular employees in ASI: 
(As on 01.04.2020) 
Category Sanctioned Strength Filled Vacant 
Group A 233 137 96 
Group B 
Gazetted 
141 122 19 
Group B 
Non 
Gazetted 
703 444 259 
Group C 1197 829 368 
MTS 6152 4452 1700 

36 
 
Total 8426 5984 2442 
5.6.29  The Committee is dismayed to note that almost 29 percent of the sanctioned staff 
strength of ASI is lying vacant. Given the large number (3692) of monuments under the 
protection of ASI and the support ASI provide s to archaeological departments of State 
Governments, even the sanctioned staff strength seems inadequate. The Committee is of the 
view that  continuing vacancies reflects the lack of intent on part of ASI to fulfill its 
mandate to protect and preserve the archaeological monuments across the country.  The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to take immediate steps to ensure the recruitment of 
the required personnel in Archaeological Survey of India. The Committee would also like  
the Ministry to look into the reasons for such large number of  vacancies in ASI and take 
corrective measures to overcome the shortage of staff. 
5.6.30 Dr. Rakesh Tewari , in his written note, informed the Committee that considering the 
number of archaeological heritage sites protected by the Center and State Governmen ts, the 
strength of conservation experts, engineers and scientists is not proportionate. He opined that 
more posts of expert staff is required from the lowest to highest levels (from conservation 
assistants to the Director/Deputy Director level, as the cas e may be). He further suggested that 
creation of post of a Director (Conservation) in each of ASI’s five zones may be considered. 
5.6.31 Professor H.P. Ray suggested that Archaeology should be recognized as a separate cadre. 
5.6.32 INTACH suggested that separate cadres should be set up for heritage planning, 
conservation and management disciplines, at ASI, PWDs, SDAs, Development Authorities, 
Municipal Corporation etc. with dedicated heritage professionals. It opined that a critical mass of 
trained conservation professionals is willing and available to work in different parts of the 
country but the Recruitment Rules and Policies do not allow full -time employment of these 
professionals. It was suggested that Recruitment Rules should be  revised and updated for the 
engagement of heritage professionals in full-time employment. Through lateral entry, contractual 
or regular basis. 

37 
 
5.6.33 AKTC proposed that each of ASI’s five administrative zones should have one active 
model conservation effo rt that demonstrates established conservation philosophy, high levels of 
documentation and research, an inter -disciplinary approach which serves as an opportunity for 
mid-career training of conservation practitioners both within the ASI and State Governments. 
5.6.34  AKTC opined that it is n either possible nor cost -effective to employ the number of 
experts required to ensure the conservation effort is well informed. It suggested that the ASI 
needs to actively seek expertise on a consultancy basis for each conservation effort. 
5.6.35 AKTC observed that at most ASI Circles, the officials are only from among 
archaeologists, engineers and horticulturists. It suggested that concerted efforts need to be made 
to ensure that the ASI officials are  from a diverse professional background – such as 
conservation architects, historians, archivists, designers, engineers, archaeologists, 
horticulturists, landscape architects, heritage management professionals, administrators, 
conservators, curators, craftsmen, lawyers etc. 
5.6.36 The Committee agrees with the view that efforts must be made to ensure that ASI 
officials are from a diverse professional background, since the same would allow ASI to 
take more well -informed decisions regarding the development and con servation of 
archaeological sites.  The Committee recommends that ASI may take steps to gauge the 
need for creation of posts of officials of diverse expertise and if needed, to seek expertise on 
a consultancy basis so as to ensure optimal utilization of the  constrained budgets available 
with ASI for carrying out conservation works.  
(vi) Scarcity of Artisans 
5.6.37 During its Study Visit to Visakhapatnam in January, 202 0, the Committee was informed 
that there is scarcity of artisans possessing the skill required for working on the monuments, 
which is posing difficulty in achieving desired results in the conservation measures of ASI. 
Underlining the need for human resource development, the representative o f Ministry of Culture 
advocated active promotion of traditional skills in various mediums such as stone, stucco, word 
carving, glass painting etc. 

38 
 
5.6.38 INTACH suggested that new artisans should be trained by master artisans/ craftsman so 
as to ensure that the continuity of traditional knowledge, craftsmanship and skills is not broken. 
5.6.39 The Committee recommends the Ministry to organize training camps and short -
term courses to enhance the competencies of artisans required for working on the 
monuments. Master artisans/craftsman may be employed to pass on their skills to young 
artisans at these training camps and courses.  The Committee sees no reasons as to why 
people would not be interested in attending such training camps/ courses as long as they 
are aptly incentivized and enough employment opportunities are created . The Committee 
desires the Ministry to work on this aspect so that our valuable monuments do not suffer 
damages because of lack of artisans. 
5.7  Opportunities:- 
(i)   Promotion of Tourism and Business 
5.7.1 Tourism sector needs to grow at a considerate pace so as to provide employment 
opportunities to India’s burgeoning working class. Besides, more tourists at any given place also 
help increase in revenue and profitability for local businesses. Thus, conservation of our cultural 
heritage is intricately linked to tapping all these opportunities. 
5.7.2  Dr. Rakesh Tewari, in his written note, suggested that in order to promote 
business involvement of communities, ‘Home Stay’ and souvenir shops of local art and craft 
should be encouraged in a considerable way. 
5.7.3  INTACH observed that tourism promotion also  requires the surrounding areas of 
monuments and sites to be developed and managed with good infrastructure, safe and clean 
environments and other facilities and that people/ communities can be engaged to play a crucial 
and meaningful role in the same. 
5.7.4  AKTC suggested that several monuments have attached/associated garden spaces 
which should be developed based on archival research and an understanding of traditional garden 
design for the site, with the support of academic institutes, professional bodi es etc. AKTC 

39 
 
submitted that the garden restoration of Humayun’s Tomb led to a 1000% increase in visitor 
numbers.  
5.7.5  Dr. Rakesh Tewari suggested that open areas within the protected, restricted and 
regulated areas of heritage sites should be developed as green areas with appropriate flora 
suitable in terms of nature and period of the sites and monuments. As an example, he suggested 
that only the native flora mentioned in Buddhist literature regarding Buddhist sites should be 
planted at such sites. He fu rther submitted that specific research inputs would be required from 
the horticulture branch of the ASI and other appropriate institutions in this regard. 
5.7.6  AKTC suggested that interpretation centers should be built at every historical site 
in the country which attracts significant footfall and has land available for building such facility. 
It further suggested that ASI should have a consistency in design of s ignage across the country 
and that the signage needs to be designed with experts – with the design being contemporary, 
simple to construct and vandal -proof. The signage text should be precise, limited to key aspects 
of the monument and written by someone t rained in creative writing since most visitors do not 
read long essays that are often seen at national monuments. 
5.7.7  AKTC opined that stringent steps need to be taken for waste management at 
national monuments to ensure the presence of functional dustb ins which are easy to use and easy 
to clean and should be designed to be recognizable with a consistent design across the country. 
Dry and wet waste segregation should be mandatory. 
5.7.8  AKTC observed that India’s national monuments have the potential to generate an 
incredible volume of domestic and international tourism. At present, many individual 
monuments across the world, experience greater visitor numbers than international visitors to all 
of India. This must be remedied. Apart from building state -of-art and well -designed 
infrastructure at ASI sites, there is need for either greater collaboration with the Ministry of 
Tourism or placing of visitor managers at each of the popular monuments. 
5.7.9  The Committee is of  the view that developing garden spa ces present ly 
associated with monuments, having souvenir shops, interpretation centers , well -designed 
signage, good waste management techniques and engaging the local community to play a 
bigger role in development of archaeological sites, would provide a much better experience 

40 
 
to tourists visiting these sites and would certainly help in tap ping the vast potential of 
increasing the tourism prospects and revenue generated by these sites. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry/ ASI may take concrete steps in this regard, in 
close coordination with the Ministry of Tourism. 
5.7.10 The Committee feels that the re should be greater synergy between the Ministry of 
Culture and Ministry of Tourism to collectively work on policies/initiatives aiming to 
strengthen capacities of tourist guides , develop basic facilities for tourists at touri st spots, 
organize special events and exhibitions to attract tourists  etc. The Committee is of the view 
that the combined expertise of both the Ministries  would go a long way in supplementing 
each other’s initiatives and  also result in better experience for the tourists visiting the 
Museums and archaeological sites in India. 
(ii)  Model conservation process 
5.7.11 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should come up with a model 
conservation process for archaeological arte facts and sites across the country. This would 
not only bring consistency in the process followed by both Centrally protected and State 
protected monuments but also act as a benchmark for the private contractors hired by 
ASI/ State Government departments for carrying out conservation works. 
(iii)  Increased focus on scientific research based conservation 
5.7.12  Dr. Rakesh Tewari, in his written note, observed that India’s historical sites and 
monuments are located in varied geo -climatic regions and thus need very well considered 
conservation strategy. He suggested that every aspect, such as building material, mortar, local 
architectural tradition etc., of select monuments and sites should be scientifically studied in order 
to develop specific models for e very region and period. He opined that detailed conservation 
projects with short-term and long-term targets are a must for every archaeological heritage site. 
5.7.13  AKTC submitted that on numerous occasions, the work of the Science Branch has 
not been ba sed on a scientific approach and in fact accelerated decay or even loss. AKTC cited 
an example from 1995 -96, when the gilded Copper finial of Humayun’s Tomb was cleaned. In 
the ASI annual report it is recorded that the ‘brass finial was cleaned with sulfur ic acid’. This 

41 
 
action, undertaken without any prior scientific examination of the material (the finial was made 
out of copper -gold) would have led to significant loss of the gold leaf on the finial and 
deterioration of the copper. Many such examples abound . AKTC suggested that it should be 
mandatory for the Science Branch to accumulate all international research on historical materials 
and to disseminate the summary of the same to all officers. Furthermore, it should also be 
mandatory to precede any work – using chemicals or any modern materials - at any national 
monument with a documentation of the scientific investigation and a prior writing of a 
conservation plan. In addition to its own research programme, the Science Branch should make 
significant effort  to keep abreast with developments in material sciences in both national and 
international institutes – forging collaborative programmes. AKTC further opined that the  
activities of the Science Branch are  often not in consultation or coordinated with conser vation 
work undertaken by the respective circles. Not only does this result in the Circle’s priorities not 
being met but also conservation works required as a follow -up of actions such as chemical 
cleaning is not undertaken immediately. Officers of the Science Branch must be embedded in the 
Circle or Zone to ensure they work in tandem with the Conservation Assistants. 
5.7.14  AKTC observed that India has often been criticized for low level of 
documentation available for national sites. It suggested that mod ern technology such as 
photogrammetry and 3D laser scanning should be employed to provide extremely accurate 
documentation of national monuments and that a systematic photo documentation of all national 
monuments should be done on a periodic bas is which sh ould also be accessible to scholars 
worldwide through the ASI website. 
5.7.15  The Committee is concerned to note the apprehensions of the 
experts/stakeholders regarding the focus laid by ASI on carrying out scientific research for 
the conservation processes followed by it across the country. The Committee recommends 
that ASI may rev iew the functioning of its Science Branch, provide it with better funding 
and ensure that all the conservation processes employed at the Centrally protected 
monuments are backed by well -documented scientific research. The Committee further 
recommends that modern technology such as photogrammetry, 3D laser scanning, 
blockchain technology etc. may be explored and utilized, wherever possible, to improve the 
documentation of the monuments since quality documentation at present would allow 

42 
 
quality scientific research in the coming future. The documentation should be made freely 
available on the internet, so as to encourage the scholar community to study the 
monuments and contribute to their conservation. 
(iii)  Involvement of Communities 
5.7.16 Given the resource  constraints faced by a developing economy such as India , the 
availability of funds for the Culture and Heritage sector is often much below the required 
amounts. This makes it all the more important to seek the cooperation of the civil society in 
general a nd local communities in specific , in protecting and preserving our shared cultural 
heritage.  
5.7.17 The background note furnished by the Ministry lists promotion of business by 
training local archaeologists and specialists in conservation and site managem ent as an 
opportunity. The Committee may be apprised of the steps that have been taken by the 
Ministry in this regard. 
5.7.18 In her written note, Professor H.P. Ray observed that attempts at raising public awareness 
through exhibitions/ local agencies/ teachers/ heritage specialists about archaeological sites are 
few and inadequate for a country the size of India. 
5.7.19  Professor Nayanjot Lahiri opined that there should be a sense of ownership at the 
highest echelons of government and across all sectio ns of society to improve the quality and 
direction of communication about the importance of protection. She suggested that a ‘ Virasat 
Bachao’ initiative should be evolved around heritage, much of which is unprotected, on lines of 
the ‘Swachh Bharat Mission’. She opined that the best way to preserve sites and monuments is 
by creating public awareness making people realize that what exists in the vicinity of where they 
live and worship, is part of their own pasts. She proposed that a certain percentage of mar ks can 
be in history courses at school for knowledge of locality -level monuments and sites as a part of 
history courses in schools. 
5.7.20 Professor Nayanjot Lahiri, in her written note, suggested the creation of a powerful body 
vested with overall conservation responsibilities on the lines of a National Heritage Commission. 
She advocated that such a body should be integrally engaged with government departments in 

43 
 
relation to the archaeological aspects of monuments and sites, and that the ultimate responsibility 
for ensuring that respectable standards of conservation are maintained should rest with this body. 
5.7.21 Elaborating further about the role of the National Heritage Commission she proposed, 
Professor Nayanjot Lahiri opined that the regulatory framew ork of the Commission should be 
decentralized and that it should evolve ways of institutionally integrating municipalities and 
village panchayats, in heritage conservation and management work. She opined that a system in 
which community groups work as heri tage managers in partnership with the State, is likely to 
produce positive results and urged that ‘ Virasat Suraksha Samitis ’ be created to encourage the 
participation of those living in the vicinity of heritage monuments.  She further suggested that 
village and district -level repositories should be created, where local material is displayed and 
conserved. 
5.7.22 AKTC suggested that any conservation effort that is non -routine should be mentioned on 
the ASI website as well as physically at the site to inform the interested members of the public 
and independent experts of the proposed action, which will allow the conservation efforts to 
possibly benefit from members of the local public/ independent experts. It further opined that 
ASI should actively seek indepe ndent peer review prior to undertaking any major works.  AKTC 
submitted that the monument sites should be open to the local community and that certain 
discount should be provided to the local community for allowing entry to the monument through 
the issuance  of annual entry passes. Doing so would inculcate a sense of connect and 
responsibility for the site among the local community. AKTC further suggested that the number 
of such passes issued at each site should be limited in number.  It was proposed that ASI should 
seek local volunteers for service at national monuments and site museums and provide economic 
opportunities for the needy among the local  communities by way of kiosks and such.  Steps need 
to be taken to enhance the possibilities of elder and other i nterested citizens volunteering at 
important heritage sites to assist the guards with visitor management. Across the world, 
museums and sites are manned by volunteers to ensure that the site is safeguarded and allowing 
the volunteers a meaningful and enriching experience. 
5.7.23  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take steps to 
institutionally integrate municipalities and village panchayats in heritage conservation and 

44 
 
management work, and if needed, a separate body may be created to regulate th e 
framework for the same. 
5.7.24  The Committee agrees with the view that making information regarding 
conservation efforts being undertaken by ASI, available on its website as well as physically 
at the monument would allow the participation of experts and  local communities. Further, 
there should be  a provision to allow members from the local community to have unlimited 
access to the heritage site in their vicinity at a discounted price and to also allow them to set 
up kiosks and souvenir shops as such. Do ing so within a defined limit, would help inculcate 
a sense of responsibility and belongingness to the monuments among the local community, 
which will go a long way in safeguarding the monuments for the generations to come. 
5.7.25 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture may approach the 
Ministry of Education to consider the inclusion of knowledge of local archaeological 
monuments and sites in the assessment of history courses in school. A thorough 
understanding of the historical and cultural s ignificance of historical sites at a young age 
would go a long way in developing a sense of respect and responsibility for the same among 
the citizens. 
5.7.26 AKTC suggested that ASI should appoint a Director, Partnerships in order to have 
partnerships with: 
a) Universities (National & International) 
b) Resident Welfare Associations/ Gram Sabha/ Panchayats 
c) Departments of Archaeology of State Governments 
d) Equivalent agencies in other countries 
5.7.27 The Committee feels that having a dedicated senior personnel for forging 
partnerships with universities, local bodies, State Governments as well as Archaeology 
Departments of foreign countries would help laying an enhanced focus on benefitting from 
the knowledge and participation of these entities. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that ASI may create a special unit dedicated to this task, headed by a senior ranking 
officer. 

45 
 
5.7.28 The Committee recommends the Ministry to run ad campaigns akin to the Ati thi 
Devo Bhava – Incredible India ad campaign, to make communities more aware, proud and 
protective of the cultural heritage in their vicinity. A feeling of ownership, responsibility 
and pride would also help in bringing down the instances of vandalism at archaeological 
sites and monuments. The Committee recommends that social media campaigns may be 
utilized for the same.  
5.7.29 The Committee urges upon ASI to showcase local craftsmanship at its 
archaeological sites and monuments, in order to build a connect with the local community 
as well as to provide them with a platform to show case their talent. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministr y may strive to organize events/ competitions/ social media 
drives to spur civil society engagement for conserving our archaeological cultural heritage. 
(iv)  Training the communities for the purpose of developing local guides 
5.7.30  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may develop regional training 
centers at places where there are  several archaeological sites and Museums. Besides, the 
Ministry may also arrange language classes for local shopkeepers and vendors in areas 
with high tourist influx. By resorting to this, the local businesses will prosper  and will also 
make tourists more secured and comfortable. 
 (v)  Setting standards for archival research:  
5.7.31 AKTC, in its written note, stated that ASI holds an incredible collection of photo 
archives, maps, plans, records, site inspection notes, field reports from archaeological 
excavations, amongst other valuable records and highlighted the need for the following: 
a) Temperature and Humidity Control: 
In most circles, the archival records mentioned above are not stored in appropriate 
cases/ containers leading to their rapid deterioration. It is essential that all archival 
materials be treated as antiquity and stored in cases that meet international 
standards of storage for fragile paper, photographs, paintings, etc. 
b) Digitization & Catalogue: 

46 
 
To ensure no valuable records are lost, every photograph, plan, map, site 
inspection note, record of conservation works carried out should be scientifically 
digitized on an urgent basis. 
c) Policy: 
Unlike routine administration tasks of the Government of India, the ASI is 
responsible for valuable national monuments. As such any action of the ASI 
impacts the future of our national heritage. Unlike other government departments 
where files / records are destroyed after a certain time period, say 10 years, all 
records of the ASI must be stored in perpetuity and available to scholars. 
5.7.32 The Committee further recommends that ASI must ensure that proper procedures 
are followed in storage an d maintenance of all archival records pertaining to the Centrally 
protected monuments. Documentation related to conservation works carried out at 
monuments should be preserved carefully, possibly in coordination with the National 
Archives of India, since t he information would be helpful in taking informed decisions 
regarding conservation of the monuments in the future.  
5.7.33  The Committee  feels that the Ministry should vigorously pursue digitization of 
archaeological artefacts so as to create a central d atabase of the same for research and 
archival purposes. Such a central database would also permit academicians and scholars in 
the upcoming IIHC and other such institutions, not only in India but internationally as 
well, to learn about our cultural heritage in detail without needing physical access. 
(vi) Revamping the digital presence of archaeological sites/ monuments: 
5.7.34  Internet has become a gateway for discovery of information regarding all aspects of life. 
A large amount of domestic as well as for eign trips are now planned after researching 
information online about places to visit, things to do, the feedback given by visitors who have 
already visited a particular place etc.  
5.7.35 While elaborating upon the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry w ith respect to e -
ticketing and upgradation of websites, the Secretary informed the Committee that steps have 
been taken with respect to the same. 

47 
 
5.7.36 The Committee observes that most websites of the Ministry of Culture – especially 
indiaculture.nic.in, asi.nic.in and asimustsee.nic.in, look quite outdated and non -intuitive. 
The Committee thus feels the need for having  information on archaeological sites  and 
monuments through a one -stop, modern, easy -to-read, multi -platform solution for 
enthusiasts of Indian culture and heritage,  and it  is long overdue. The Committee , 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may revamp its digital presence and come up 
with such a user-oriented solution. 
5.7.37  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should closely coordinate with the 
Ministry of Tourism and provide the facility of booking tickets for the archaeological sites/ 
monuments and Museums on the Incredible India application and website  as well . The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Culture may work with the Ministry 
of Tourism to highlight its cultural events and programmes through the Incredible India 
application and web port al too, since information regarding the same would be of 
significant interest to tourists visiting a certain place. Ministry of Culture may also prepare 
a database of important State -controlled Museums and archaeological sites and coordinate 
with the Ministry of Tourism to ensure that they are also highlighted as tourist attractions  
on the Incredible India web portal and smartphone application.   
(vii) Inclusion of Monuments in UNESCO World Heritage Sites List 
5.7.38  AKTC, in its written submission, notes that UNESCO’s World Heritage Programme is 
one of the most influential heritage programmes in the world today. Almost every country is 
signatory to the World Heritage convention. A designation on the World Heritage lis t leads to 
international awareness for the site leading to increased tourist numbers. Designation also leads 
to a sense of pride amongst the local community. India has one of the largest number of sites on 
the UNESCO World Heritage List yet several problems plague the process in India, including:  
a) World Heritage Sites not impacting the local economy or helping improve the 
quality of life for local communities. 
b) State of conservation of most World Heritage Sites being poor. 
c) Nominations to UNESCO scrapping thr ough only after active diplomacy to 
overcome reservations on either the state of conservation or the quality of the 
nomination dossier.  

48 
 
5.7.39 For the World Heritage nomination process to have the desirable impact, AKTC 
suggested the following: 
a) Planning ahead: 
ASI should establish multi -disciplinary teams at each site on the tentative list at least 5 
years in advance of the nomination, to ensure that the criteria established by UNESCO 
including internationally accepted standards of documentation, research, understanding of 
the site’s significance,  is met. AKTC opined that outsourcing  the nomination dossier to 
external (or internal) part -time consultants needs to be stopped. This results in a wasted 
opportunity as the knowledge that could be created by a fu ll time inter-disciplinary team, 
even if on 3 year consultancy, is not possible with consultants engaged for short periods 
of time and undertaking several other assignments while attempting to complete a serious 
exercise to international standards. 
b) Strategising: 
Several categories of buildings are over-represented on the UNESCO list. Others, such as 
Industrial Heritage or serial nominations, are under -represented and thus have a greater 
chance of being accepted. It is important for the Ministry of Culture/ ASI to review the 
tentative list and to prioritize under -represented categories, serial nominations, cross -
border nominations. 
c) Advisory Committee: 
The Ministry of Culture established an Advisory Committee on World Heritage Matters, 
which continues to exist  but lacks staff. This has led to fewer consultation and lack of 
required additional support. The Ministry/ ASI need to consider a more effective World 
Heritage Division that not only reviews future nomination but also actively monitors the 
state of conservation at sites already designated on the World Heritage List. 
d) Undertake required conservation: 
On a priority basis, the conservation plan for each World Heritage Site should be 
prepared and a five-year plan for undertaking conservation measures be implemented. 
e) NMA Byelaws: 
Preparation of Byelaws for sites on the World Heritage List as well as those on the 
tentative World Heritage List should be prioritized. 
f) Ensure legal and managerial framework is in place: 

49 
 
In addition to the NMA bye -laws, for several Worl d Heritage Sites an overarching legal 
and managerial framework needs to e established. This is especially true for the urban 
sites and historic cities – Jaipur, Mumbai, Ahmedabad – now on the UNESCO list 
g) Minor boundary modifications: 
UNESCO now limits nomi nations to only one per country. This severely limits the 
possibilities of India eventually having the maximum number of World Heritage Sites in 
the World. The limit of one nomination per year does not include ‘Minor Boundary 
Modifications’. This allowed 1 2 additional monuments to be included within the 
expanded Humayun’s Tomb World Heritage Site in 2016. ASI needs to review each of 
the designated World Heritage Sites, to explore possibilities of preparing minor boundary 
modifications and including additional monuments within the expanded Site. 
5.7.40 The Committee takes note of the extensive suggestions given by the stakeholder with 
regard to UNESCO World Heritage Site  (WHS) nominations. The Committee may be 
apprised of the efficacy of the Advisory Committe e set up by the Ministry in this regard. 
The Ministry may take all necessary steps to ensure that a well -thought-out strategy is 
evolved and implemented to maximize the chances of nomination of more monuments and 
sites to the UNESCO World Heritage Site lis t. Inclusion of more monuments by way of 
minor boundary modifications of the existing WHS may also be explored. 
5.7.41 The Committee further recommends that the National Monuments Authority may 
prioritize the preparation of Heritage Byelaws for the monumen ts which are either already 
in the UNESCO WHS list or are in the tentative WHS list.  
5.7.42 In its reply (placed at Annexure -C) given on 8 th March, 2021 to Lok Sabha Unstarred 
Question No. 2102, the Ministry informed that at present, India has 38 World Heritage 
properties, out of which, 22 are under the protection of ASI. The Ministry further stated that at 
present, India has 42 sites listed under Tentative List which is a pre-requisite condition for 
inscription as World Heritage Site. ‘Dholavira: A Hara ppan City’ has been submitted for 
nomination of World Heritage Site in 2019 -2020. Nomination dossiers of ‘Santiniketan, India’ 
and ‘Sacred Ensemble of Hoysalas’ have been submitted to UNESCO for the year 2021 -22 
cycle.  

50 
 
5.7.43 During the Study Visit of the Committee to Visakhapatnam in January, 2020, on the issue 
of absence of any Andhra Pradesh monuments in the UNESCO World Heritage Sites list, the 
representative of ASI informed the Committee that Lepakshi has been included in the tentative 
list, which is the first step towards inclusion of any site in the UNESCO World Heritage Sites 
list. The Committee was informed that the Rock Art at Kethavaram Caves, which dates back to 
the Palaeolithic age, is set to get a facelift this year with plan for approaching U NESCO for its 
inclusion in its World Heritage Sites list. 
5.7.44 During his deposition before the Committee in its meeting held on 14 th October, 2020, 
the Secretary informed the Committee that after declaration of six World Heritage Properties by 
the UNESC O, such as Nalanda, the historic city of Ahmedabad, the Victorian and Art Deco 
Ensemble of Mumbai, Jaipur, the ASI has helped in preparing the dossier and submission.  
Similarly, dossiers submitted to the UNESCO are: Ramappa Temple, Dholavira and some of t he 
recent excavations which the ASI has undertaken is Rithi Ranjhana in Maharashtra; Bijnore in 
Rajasthan; Sanauli in UP; Vadnagar in Gujarat; Gottiprolu in AP; and, Asuragarh in Odisha. 
5.7.45 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should closely coor dinate with the 
concerned State Departments and assist them in the protection of State -protected 
sites/monuments, especially in cases wherein there are plans to include the sites/monuments 
in the World Heritage Sites list. The Ministry should be proactive in offering help to State 
Governments for preparation of dossier that is sent to UNESCO for inclusion of State 
protected sites/monuments. 
(viii) Preparation of database of archaeological sites/monuments 
5.7.46 The Committee sought a list of monuments under  the protection of State Government. 
The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that such information is not available. 
5.7.47 Some Members of the Committee drew attention to the remote areas of the country, 
where there are many places of a rchaeological value such as Ganiyapala and Nisingnath in 
Odisha, where there are very ancient statues of Buddha. They also stressed upon the need to 
identify and explore areas such as Nuapada, where there are traces of Nagaraj Monastery ; 
Ranipur Jharial in  Bolangir, Brihadiswara, Parashurameshvara, Megheswar, Brahmeswara, and 
Rani Gumpha, Khandagiri, Udayagiri,  and Rairakhol -Naktideul, Odisha. They brought to the 

51 
 
notice of the Committee that there is a leaning temple in Huma, which is on the bank of 
Mahanadi in Odisha. They opined that the activities of ASI should be enlarged to cover many 
undiscovered areas of historical importance, in the country and that epigraphic studies of ancient 
and historical texts found in such places, should be started. 
5.7.48 The Committee is surprised to note that the Ministry of Culture does not maintain a 
central database of monuments under the control of State Governments. The Committee 
wonders how the Ministry can decide upon whether a certain monument/site should be 
included in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments, if it does not have any information 
regarding the monuments present in the country. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may collect this information from all State/UT Governments , alongwith 
information regarding encroachment of such monuments/sites,  and compile a Central 
Database of Monuments/Sites that exist in the country. This will present a thorough picture 
of the state of the historical monuments across the country and help the Ministry in its 
policy decisions in the future.  
5.7.49 The Committee further recommends that important historical monuments and sites 
such as Rama Temple at Peddathumbalam village, Adoni Taluka; Kethavaram Rock Arts 
and Belum Caves in Kurnool etc., be included in the list of Centrally Protected 
Monuments, given their historical significance. Steps may be taken to improve the 
connectivity of such important monuments and sites so as to increase the footfall to these 
monuments. 
5.7.50 AKTC observed that in 2007, the National Mission of Monuments & Antiquities was 
established by the Minister of Culture with the objective of creating an inventory of heritage 
buildings across India as well as antiquity – even in private collections. In 2007, it was aimed at 
listing 500,000 heritage buildings. More recently, INTACH has estimated 11,00,000 heritage 
buildings in India. In UK, 650,000 heritage buildings are recorded. AKTC opined that the the 
Mission has failed to achieve its stated objectives, possibly due to the  complicated formats 
prepared for the mapping and lack of established partnerships for primary survey. To resolve the 
same, AKTC suggested that ASI should reach out to students of architecture and history 
programmes across the country – making it compulsor y for first year students to undertake a 
mandatory field survey for two weeks to identify, photograph, record GPS coordinates and make 

52 
 
note of basic architectural features of condition of heritage buildings. AKTC suggested that use 
of GPS and blockchain technology to ensure that heritage buildings are not recorded twice. 
5.7.51 Dr. Rakesh Tewari, in his written note, stated that ancient monuments and sites which 
have not been declared of national importance or state importance, come under the concurrent 
list and that the responsibility to take steps for the protection of this category of monuments and 
sites lies on both the Central and State Governments. He opined that the ancient monuments in 
this category require proper rules, regulations and guidelines  for better upkeep since at present, 
they are mostly neglected and are in need of serious attention at both the Central and State levels. 
He suggested that a list of all such monuments and sites which have not been declared as of 
National importance or Sta te importance, needs to be maintained in every district with the help 
of an expert committee constituted for this purpose. Responsibilities for their protection, upkeep, 
conservation etc. and formulation of appropriate rules and regulations may be entruste d to the 
respective Development Authorities, Municipalities, Nagar Palikas and Gram Panchayats. He 
opined that a suitable corpus may be created for this purpose, with sufficient funding from the 
Central and State Governments. 
5.7.52 Professor H.P. Ray, in her written note, opined that technology should be used for 
preparation of database of archaeological sites as a strategy to preserve those monuments/ sites 
which are presently not under the protection of any agency. In this regard, she made the 
following suggestions:  
a. New technology like Photogrammetry & 3D Laser scanning should be used for 
documentation, surveys, excavation and conservation works.  
b. LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) and Drone Surveys to document 
monuments and sites  
c. Collaboration with Fo reign Universities for introduction of latest techniques in 
exploration and excavations should be undertaken, as also in documentation of 
museum collections. 
5.7.53 Professor Nayanjot Lahiri opined that the Central Government and State Governments 
should have a sense of the scale of India’s unprotected sites  and monuments. She submitted that 
the records of the erstwhile National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities  noted some 

53 
 
500,000 unprotected sites and suggested that these are best protected through pu blic initiatives 
that are done at the level of village panchayats and municipalities but which are given directions 
by a national body. 
5.7.54 INTACH observed that the current list of protected monuments and sites includes is of 
the British India period. A  nation-wide survey should be taken up for identification and 
documentation of new sites to be included in the list. 
5.7.55 The Committee further notes that there are many monuments across the country 
which are not under any sort of protection, whether Central/State or private protection. 
This clearly suggests that a large number of monuments of cultural and historical 
significance are unexplored as of yet and suffer irreparable damage with each passing day. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry/ASI may conduct an extensive survey to 
identify such monuments across the country, add them to the Central Database of 
Monuments/Sites that exist in the country, categorize them, and come up with ways to at 
least provide a bare minimum level of security to the same, in coordination with the local 
municipal bodies and local residents. 
5.7.56 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons for the 
inability of National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities to complete its task of creation 
of a National Register on Built Heritage & Sites as well as on Antiquities. The Committee is 
concerned to note that in the absence  of such a Central database, many monuments would 
go missing without any knowledge of them having existed in the first place. Concrete 
measures must be taken to ensure that a database is prepared at the earliest and that the 
list thus prepared is categoriz ed into the different levels of protection that must be 
extended to them.  
5.7.57 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may assess the financial 
requirements for carrying out such an exercise across the nation and request the Ministry 
of Finance to gr ant special allocation for the same. ASI/NMMA should supervise this 
process with the Department of Archaeology of State Governments and develop a 
mechanism to seek the participation of local municipal bodies, local communities, history 
and archaeology students and the likes. A specialized software may be prepared to capture 

54 
 
important details such as photos and location of the sites/antiquities and it must have 
provisions to avoid duplicacy in the database. The use of latest technologies such as 3D 
Laser Scanning, LiDAR, photogrammetry etc. may be made in sync with the blockchain 
technology to ensure that tamper -proof records of the undocumented precious historical 
heritage are created. 
(ix) Drafting Excavation and Exploration Policy 
5.7.58 Professor H.P. Ray  suggested taking the following steps to capitalize on the different 
opportunities presented by development and conservation of museums and archaeological sites: 
a. Draft of Excavation and Exploration Policy to be finalized and adopted after 
public discussion within six months period. 
b. Archaeological Survey of India Vision Plan for thematic priortisation of 
exploration and excavation to be framed and implemented. 
c. Use of scientific methodologies and development of laboratories for post -
excavation analysis. Colla boration to be established with concerned laboratories 
within six months.  
d. Publication of Excavation Reports to be completed within six months period 
e. Re-exposing and putting the excavated sites in public domain with interpretation 
centre to showcase to visitors. 
5.7.59 INTACH opined that currently, archaeological explorations and excavations are 
undertaken primarily by the ASI, or a few select universities and institutes and suggested that 
this field should be opened up to include more educational instituti ons and professionals, with 
the engagement of local communities and civic society groups. 
5.7.60 Professor Nayanjot Lahiri stated that exploration and excavation are important 
responsibilities of the ASI, yet as per the 2013 CAG Report titled ‘Performance Audit of 
Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities’, ASI was spending less than 1% 
on such work. She further noted that about a century ago, British India allocated 5% of the 
archaeological budget for such activities. 

55 
 
5.7.61 The Committee recommends that a Draft Excavation and Exploration Policy may 
be framed at the earliest and inputs may be taken from the experts in this field in this 
regard. The Committee further recommends that ASI may consider opening up the field of 
excavation to more  educational institutions and professionals and seek the engagement of 
local communities and civil society groups. The Committee is concerned to note that only a 
minuscule part of the budget available with the ASI is allocated for exploration and 
excavation. Further, the Ministry may take steps to ensure enhanced allocation for the 
purpose of excavation and exploration. 
5.8 MISCELLANEOUS 
5.8.1 The Committee is pleased to note the renovation of Red Fort, which consists of 
British Barracks of olden times  has been taken up by the Ministry. The Committee takes 
special note of the installation of permanent exhibition on Netaji, the rebellion of 1857, and 
paintings, at the Red Fort. 
5.8.2 The Committee feels that preparation of Heritage by -laws for all the monumen ts 
across the country forms a crucial part of the protection of monuments envisaged by the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) 
Act, 2010. In this regard, the Committee may be briefed about the roadblocks being faced 
by the National Monuments Authority, the proposed solutions to the same and the timeline 
being targeted for laying the Heritage by-laws for all the monuments. 
5.8.3 The Secretary, while elucidating upon the projects taken by the Ministry around  
pilgrimages, flagged the Kashi Vishwanath Mandir Corridor, where while this corridor was 
being cleared of encroachments from the Mandir through the Manikarnika Ghat, more than 4 - 
beautiful temples were found. He further stated that the Ministry has taken u p the task of 
documenting those temples and also intangible cultural heritage. He also deposed before the 
Committee that the Ministry is trying to create a Museum in old structures at the pilgrimage 
route which starts from Sonprayag and Gaurikund till the Kedarnath Mandir. He further briefed 
the Committee about creating Museums in remote border areas and about a project in Ladakh, 
where the documentation is currently being done about the cultural heritage in 17 villages, 

56 
 
Museum corners are being established , traditional Ladakhi house and community centres are 
being selected for Museum in a couple of villages near Chushul. 
5.8.4 The Committee appreciates the progress made by the Ministry in projects around 
pilgrimages, remote border areas and the Ladakh region. 
5.8.5 While deposing before the Committee, the Secretary stated that in Kolkata, there is a 13 
acre property known as the Old River Mint, which is right next to the Old Howrah Bridge and 
that it has 5 building, which will be restored by the Ministr y. The Ministry of Finance in the 
Department of Economic Affairs and Ministry of Culture is coming together to develop this as a 
cultural space for various diversified cultural activities. 
5.8.6 The Committee is pleased to note that the old Jaipur House, w hich is next to the India 
Gate, and which was crumbling, has been restored completely.  
5.8.7 One Member of the Committee voiced concern about media reports that the original 
work was being distorted  in the name of maintenance and repairing work of the Lord 
Jagannath Temple. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary 
steps to allay such fears. 
5.8.8 One Member of the Committee raised the vital query as to whether the Ministry has a 
programme for converting sculpture sheds into regul ar Museums. The Ministry, in its written 
reply furnished to the Committee in this regard, has stated that so far, there is no programme for 
converting sculpture sheds into regular Museums considering constraints of funds and 
manpower. 
5.8.9 The Committee i s constrained to note that the constraints of manpower and funds, 
quite often play spoilsport in the proper upgradation and development of sculpture sheds 
into Museums. 
5.8.10 One important issue that was raised during the deliberations of the Committee wa s the 
need for underwater archaeological exploration, being given the much needed priority. The need 
for reviving underwater archaeological sites in Maharashtra, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Odisha 
was highlighted during the meeting of the Committee. The Committee is disappointed to note 
that the Underwater Wing of ASI is defunct since a decade. 

57 
 
5.8.10A One of the Members of the Committee applauded the joint effort by ASI and the 
State Government of Maharashtra for the conservation of Raigad Fort and stated that  scientific 
methodologies are being implemented in the conservation process taking place at the Fort. 
5.8.10B The Committee commends the coordinated efforts being made by ASI and 
the State Government of Maharashtra to carry out conservation of Raigad Fort.  India is 
home to a large number of historic forts which are unique in the terms of their history as 
well as their cultural significance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may 
replicate such joint efforts with other State Governments to ensure that the historic forts as 
well as other archaeological sites are developed for tourism purposes.  
5.8.11 The Committee is dismayed to note that even though funds are available with ASI, 
proper work is not being done at Raigarh project, which is  also funded by the State 
Government, as per the guidelines of ASI. The Committee emphasizes the need to speed up 
the work being done at the Raigarh Fort, which is also called as the ‘Gibraltar of the East’. 
5.8.12  One Member of the Committee accentuated the need to give due attention to various 
places of cultural and heritage importance in Rajahmundry, Telangana, such as the Havelock 
Bridge.  
5.8.13 The Committee recognizes the need for developing such places/sites into tourist 
spots. The Committee desires the Ministry to take note of the need to allocate funds for the 
Damerla Rama Rao Art Gallery in Rajahmundry, which has pieces of art which are 
centuries old. 
5.8.14 One Member of the Committee raised the issue of c racks being caused in Yaganti 
Temple, due to blasting for mining.  The Committee emphasizes upon the need for ASI to 
work in tandem with  the concerned State Government s to ensure that archaeological sites 
and historical structures are maintained and preserved in good condition. 
5.8.15 The issue of encroachments and commercialization activities in the close vicinity of 
temples/religious monuments was also discussed by the Committee.  
5.8.16 The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the provisions of the 
concerned legislation in this regard, are enforced strictly. 

58 
 
5.8.17 Dr. Rakesh Tewari, in his written note, opined that the increasing inflow of visitors to 
archaeological heritage sites as well as pollution is having a negative impact on  such sites. He 
suggested that the number of visitors at heritage sites should be regulated on the basis of 
scientific studies on sustainability. He further opined that sustainable upkeep of the monuments 
should be the primary consideration instead of incr easing the income by encouraging tourism at 
such sites. 
5.8.18 Too many visitors at an historical site can have negative effects on its physical 
characteristics and integrity, as well as the ecological characteristics of the associated 
spaces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may conduct a detailed study into 
the negative impact of high tourist activity at Centrally protected monuments that attract 
high footfall. The study may explore solutions to minimize such negative impact and to 
figure out a number of visitors that can be allowed at the site while ensuring there is no 
lasting damage caused to the monument and the associated spaces. 
5.8.19 AKTC suggested that in line with the recommendations contained in the UNESCO 
Operating Guidelines, a St atement of Significance should be written out for each monument of 
national importance and form part of the signage / web information on the structure. It was 
opined that doing so would also help the staff responsible of the site to be aware of the cultura l 
significance of the monuments, especially when the staff might be from a different part of the 
country. 
5.8.20 The Committee feels that having a Statement of Significance for each Centrally 
protected monument would go a long way in making ASI staff as well as tourists more 
aware and appreciative of its cultural and historical significance. The information may also 
be uploaded on the ASI website so as to benefit scholars as well as tourists who might be 
researching before planning a trip to the place. 
5.8.21   AKTC further observed that ticket counters, toilets, site interpretation counters, 
publication counters etc. are often built without any architectural design inputs, thus disfiguring 
the historic character of the site. It was suggested that any faci lity being built at any national 
monument should be designed by a registered architect and a review committee on the lines of 
‘Delhi Urban Arts Commission’ to review any de sign prior to its construction. AKTC submitted 

59 
 
that car parking facility in the imme diate vicinity of the monuments can disfigure its historic 
character and thus, the same should be carefully placed and designed in consultation with a 
conservation architect. 
5.8.22  The Committee feels that visitors should experience the heritage sites in  the 
purest possible form, and thus, utmost care should be taken to ensure that any structures 
built to provide facilities at such sites are in sync with the historic character of the site  and 
do not disfigure its view and aura . The Committee, therefore, r ecommends that signage, 
ticket counters, toilets, interpretation counters etc. , should be designed in consideration of 
the site in question, and approved by an expert committee comprising archaeologists and 
heritage architects. 
5.8.23  AKTC suggested that pricing of tickets for young foreign nationals should be 
reduced to allow them by means of a ‘student pass’ to allow easy and cheap access to India’s 
national monuments. It also suggested that weekly international visitor passes should be made 
available to foreign tourists to entice them to visit more historical sites. 
5.8.24  The Committee recommends that ASI may experiment with the ticket 
pricing for both domestic as well as international tourists, with the aim to maximizing the 
revenue generated by such visits as well as allowing the maximum feasible number of 
people to enjoy visiting the site. As a part of this attempt, ASI may consider granting 
special discount to young international tourists as well as offering weekly passes to both 
foreign and domesti c travelers to entice them to visit and appreciate more historical sites 
during their trip. 
5.8.25  AKTC informed the Committee that for a private development project in the 
vicinity of Golconda fort, 54 luxury villas have been approved by NMA on the basis  of a 
Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA) commissioned by the developer from a private consultant. In 
view of the archaeology on the site and the connect with the State protected Qutb Shahi tombs, 
this development will severely compromise chances for World He ritage nomination for the 
Golconda Fort. In view of this example, AKTC opined that the HIA required for approval of 
large development projects should be conducted by a specialist NGO/ academic institute and not 
by the developer themselves. For this purpose, AKTC surmised that the developer may be asked 

60 
 
to submit a fee alongwith the application, which may be used to commission a HIA independent 
of the developer.  
5.8.26  The Committee is deeply concerned to note the observations made by Aga 
Khan Trust for Cu lture regarding approval granted by NMA on the basis of HIA 
commissioned by the developer itself. The Committee recommends that necessary 
provisions may be put in place to ensure that the HIA required for approval of 
development projects should be conducte d by a specialist NGO or academic institute, who 
is not associated with the developer itself. 
5.8.27  AKTC suggested that a detailed assessment report should be prepared by an inter -
disciplinary team for all national monuments, within a ten -year period and  that similar 
assessment exercise should be carried out every 5 years for each monument. It further proposed 
that each monument should be visited at least monthly by the concerned Conservation Assistant 
and site inspection notes should be prepared. 
5.8.28  The Committee recommends that a robust mechanism may be put in place to 
ensure that detailed assessment exercise is conducted for all Centrally protected 
monuments periodically. The assessment may be utilized to come up with short -term and 
long-term action plans for development and conservation of the sites.  
5.8.29  Citing its experience in revival of over a dozen wells in the Sunder Nursery – 
Humayun’s Tomb area having a significant impact on the water table within the local precinct, 
AKTC suggested that historical Baolis, Tanks and Wells existing across the country should be 
revived to address the scarcity of water in the country. AKTC submitted that conservation of 
baolis coupled with landscape works at the Qutb Shahi Tombs, Golconda, Hyderabad 
demonstrates that millions of liters of rainwater can be collected in ea ch rainy season and used 
for the remained for the year.  AKTC opined that ASI should prioritize NREGA funds for 
reviving water structures since desilting of baolis, wells and tanks requires unskilled labor. 
5.8.30  The Committee recommends that ASI may work on the revival of historical 
water bodies across the country. Besides helping in collecting rainwater during rainy 
season, the revived water bodies will act as a tourist attraction as well. The Committee 
urges upon ASI to explore partnering with the Ministry of Jal Shakti in this regard. 

61 
 
5.8.31  AKTC observed that less than 10% of the monuments in the Centrally protected 
monuments have been added to this list since 1947. It suggested that ASI should update list wit h 
the intention of removing structures that have been lost and adding structures that are clearly of 
national importance but protected locally by State Governments or not protected at all. Each 
circle of the ASI should be entrusted with taking up this acti vity in consultation with local 
stakeholders or local historians. AKTC further submitted that while the Act allows buildings 
older than 100 years to be protected as buildings of national importance, not a single 20 th century 
building is yet protected as a national monument – not even India Gate. Together with 20 th 
century heritage, there are no residential structures, vernacular secular or industrial heritage sites 
that are considered to be of national importance. 
5.8.32 The Committee is surprised to note t hat less than 10% of monuments in the 
Centrally Protected Monuments list have been added to the list since 1947. The Committee 
feels that given the size of our country as well as its rich historical heritage, many more 
monuments should be under the protect ion of ASI. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Ministry may thoroughly consider important State -protected 
monuments as well as monuments outside the protection of both Central and State 
Governments, for inclusion in the list of Centrall y Protected Monuments. 20 th Century 
buildings of historical significance may also be considered for inclusion in the CPM list 
during this exercise. 
5.8.33  AKTC opined that well illuminated monuments significantly enhance the heritage 
character of the urban environment. It should be mandatory to ensure that prominently located 
monuments be illuminated for a few hours every night. However, care should be taken that there 
is no  daytime penalty for night -time benefit. Daytime visitors should not have to experience 
bulky light fixtures placed on prominent portions of the monuments. Illumination should be 
planned with experts and be subtle, highlighting the prominent aspects of the  monuments rather 
than floodlighting the structure.  
5.8.34  AKTC suggested that efforts should be made by ASI to ensure that differently -
abled visitors are able to experience and enjoy India’s national monuments. The efforts should 
include barrier free pa thways, installation of stair lifts, specialized exhibitions, placing of site 
models for touch, audio/ braille signage. 

62 
 
5.8.35  The Committee recommends that ASI may take necessary steps to ensure 
well-planned illumination of historical monuments, wherever feasible, since the same would 
act as a major attraction for night -time tourism. The Committee further recommends that 
urgent steps may be taken to ensure that the ASI monuments are easily accessible by 
differently-abled visitors. 
5.8.36 Professor Nayanjo t Lahiri, in her written note, mentioned about the several problems 
highlighted by the CAG Report titled ‘Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of 
Monuments and Antiquities’ tabled in 2013 in Parliament, major of them being lack of a reliable 
database of monuments, missing monuments, neglect of Centrally protected monuments, low 
expenditure on exploration and excavation, encroachment etc. 
5.8.37  The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to 
address the problems pointed out in the above-mentioned CAG Report. 
 
  

63 
 
6.  ISSUES COMMON TO MUSEUMS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND 
MONUMENTS 
 
6.1 Partnering with  the private sector for development and conservation of Museums 
and archaeological sites 
6.1.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that there is no ban on Museums for partnerships 
with private individuals/ organizations. On experimental basis,  Archaeological   Survey of India 
has awarded work to the Delhi Art Gallery through open e-tendering system, for holding an 
exhibition on ‘Indian Art’ in L5 Colonial building at Red Fort. 
6.1.2 In view of the fund crunch faced by the Ministry of Culture for development and 
conservation of Museums and archaeological sites/monuments across the country, the 
Committee feels that it is imperative for the Ministry to seek the participation of private 
sector in order to have the necessary investment needed to make our Museums and 
archaeological sites/monuments at par with international standards, while ensuring the 
employment of best possible preservation practices to keep our cultural heritage safe and 
preserved for the future generations. The Ministry may come up with possible schemes to 
partner with the private sector in development and conservation of our cultural heritage 
via PPP mode, test these on a pilot basis and roll out the successful ones on large scale. 
6.1.3 The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has come up with the idea of 
identifying some start-ups, who will then incubate the idea and then put it out for main-
streaming of investment, in respect of iconic heritage structures identified in the country, 
by the Ministry. The Committee appreciates the proposal mooted by the Ministry to create 
a Section 8 company which will actually monitor and execute all these projects and it will 
be self-sustaining.  No money will be provided by  the Government.  The company, for the 
purpose of viability gap funding,  will take some money from the Central Go vernment 
which the Ministry already has for schematic assistance to the Museums. 
6.1.4  AKTC stated that w ith over 3000 national monuments in urgent need for 
conservation, landscape restoration, creation of facilities, interpretation, research, nomination to 
the World Heritage List, it is imperative for the ASI to establish a system where it would be 

64 
 
routine for specialist private agencies to undertake conservation works on national monuments 
under ASI supervision. Private entities such as specialist NGO’s/  Academic institutes or even 
corporates would require engaging specialist staff – such as those retired from ASI service – to 
undertake these works and seek written approval at significant stages of the works. It was further 
submitted that internationally,  agencies such as English Heritage/ Historic Scotland undertake 
only a minimum percentage of conservation works in -house but instead engage specialists to 
plan, implement all conservation/ landscape restoration works. In -fact 55% of all architectural 
services in the UK are for historic building conservation. 
6.1.5 The Committee suggests that the maintenance of various archaeological sites and 
monuments be outsourced to private agencies and in order to attract funds from such 
individuals/agencies, an incentive, such as display boards in the name of such individual 
agency at the sites, may be provided. 
6.2 Effect of pollution on Museum artefacts and Archaeological Sites 
6.2.1 Over the last decade, air pollution has increasingly become a threat not only to  the health 
of people but also of our cultural heritage,  especially in the winter season  in North India . A 
concerted effort is thus needed from Ministry to ensure that no lasting damage happens to our 
invaluable Museum artefacts and archaeological sites and monuments. 
6.2.2 Apprising the Committee about the ste ps taken for preserving artefacts, by the Museums 
under its administrative control, the Ministry furnished the following details:- 
(A) National Museum 
The  Museum has commissioned centrally air -conditioned facility for its storage and display 
systems. This system ensures prevention of dust ingress to vulnerable objects (paintings, 
manuscripts, textiles, organic objects etc.). In addition, all such objects are encas ed in glass 
showcases or glass frames for safety and preventing ingress of pollutants.  The in -house 
conservation laboratories periodically examine and carry out necessary conservation work 
arising of dust and other pollutants. 
(B) National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi 

65 
 
A collection storage is maintained in -house and wherever restoration is required, it is also 
performed in-house apart from regular check for temperature and humidity.  
(C) Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad: 
It has an in -house conservation unit to carry out preventive and curative measures to 
minimize impact of pollution on Museum objects. Following are the stepwise measures taken 
at different levels: 
 Premises: Door mats are placed at the entrance gate to avoid dust in the galleries. There 
are plantations around the Museum to prevent dust. 
 Building: Air curtains are installed at entrance and other places to avoid dust. 
 Galleries: Air Purifiers, Air Curtains and De -humidifiers have been placed in Miniature 
Gallery, Textile Gallery & Manuscript  Gallery. Out of 38 galleries 26 galleries are 
provided with air conditioners. 
 Showcases: Activated carbon sheets are installed inside showcases to absorb volatile 
organic contain in Miniature painting gallery. 
 Artefacts: Protective coating applied on metal objects to mitigate pollution effect on 
objects. 
 The Salar Jung  Museum is utilizing the services of National Environment Engineering 
Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur, for pollution assessment inside and outside the 
Museum. 
 
(D) Indian Museum, Kolkata 
Since the Museum is situated in the heart of the city, the Museum objects are susceptible to 
dust & air pollution. The objects in the stores are kept either in almirahs or cup -boards, 
properly wrapped, to prevent access of dust and pollutants. The objec ts in the galleries are 
attended by the Conservation Unit team and gallery staff regularly to provide appropriate 
treatment. The conservation team is supervised by a well -known conservator engaged by 
Indian Museum. Conservation team regularly examines the art objects and takes adequate 
action for treatment of the artefacts.  
Indian Museum has also in March 2020 awarded work to CPWD for air conditioning of the 
exhibition halls to ensure controlled temperature and humidity. As part of this work, air 

66 
 
curtains shall be installed at all entry/exit doors which is expected to further reduce dust 
pollution. 
(E) Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata  
The VMH has earned the ‘Cleanest Monument in India’ award in 2015. It has cleaned its 
iconic marble exterior with organic materials like multanimitti, made the campus a 
completely plastics-free zone and used a garbage composting machine to compost its orga nic 
waste and use it as landfill and manure in the gardens. The environmental system in the 
VMH has thus defied the pollution prevailing otherwise in the city. 
(F) National Council of Science Museum, Kolkata 
The Museum does not  units do not have archaeolog ical and historical artefacts. However, 
exhibits including old technological artifacts are regularly maintained and kept in working 
condition through standard upkeep procedure and regular maintenance. 
(G) Allahabad Museum, Prayagraj 
The Museum has  an independent conservation laboratory to conserve the Museum’s 
artefacts. All artefacts are being regularly conserved by the lab experts from time to time. 
(H) Archeological Survey of India 
Archaeological Survey of   India has its own Science Branch which in coordination with 
archaeological officer undertakes preventive measures and scientific preservation 
of antiquities displayed   and in Reserve Collection of  Archaeological Site   Museums. 
6.2.3  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may conduct researches to devise 
technological solutions to curb the ill -effects of air pollution on our cultural heritage. 
Different effects of the pollutants lingering in the air  on different types of surfaces and 
materials should be studied and the solutions devise d to prevent or minimize the same 
should be shared with State Government archaeology departments and Museums as well.  
The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should seek higher budgetary 
allocation to fund researches since the process of conser vation of monuments and artefacts 
is as much science as it is an art. 

67 
 
6.3 Re-examination and updation of Acts and Laws pertaining to Museums and 
Archaeological Sites 
6.3.1  Professor Nayanjot Lahiri, in her written note furnished to the Committee, opined 
that heritage laws should be re -examined and made more realistic and transparent, so as to be 
enforceable. She quoted the observations of the archaeologist Dilip Chakrabarti on the draconian 
nature of Antiquities and Art Treasures Act of 1972 as follows: 
“It is draconian in the sense that it virtually makes the possession of an antiquity by a 
god-fearing Indian a criminal offence. The onus of registering everything with the 
government and that too in triplicate, with three copies of photographs and within a very 
short time-frame lies entirely with the individual. In a country with limited literacy the 
effectiveness of such a piece of legislation can easily be imagined!” 
6.3.2  Professor Lahiri further suggested undertaking legislative changes so as to set up 
a National Heritage Commission with the idea of putting in place a more decentralized 
conservation/preservation policy and an enabling legislation to make it mandatory to have local 
‘Virasat Suraksha Samitis ’ to encourage the participation of municipalities and village 
panchayats in heritage conservation and management work. 
6.3.3  The Committee urges upon the Ministry to review the heritage laws in light 
of contemporary times and come up with suitable amendments, wherever necessary, to 
ensure that they are more realistic, transparent and do not cause unnecessary 
inconvenience to bona fide  citizens. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry 
may come up with a legislative framework to enable and encourage the participation of 
municipalities and village panchayats in heritage conservation and management, especially 
in case of monuments that are not included in the list of Centrally protected/ State 
protected monuments. 
6.3.4  Dr. Tewari stated that more and more open areas around the muse ums and 
archaeological sites, wherever available, may be taken under the extended protected area to 
develop them from the archaeological perspective and that in specific cases, as per the 
importance and requirements of the sites, surrounding areas may also  be considered for 
acquisition for this purpose even if they are presently occupied. He suggested that if need be, 

68 
 
appropriate amendments may be made in the existing legislations or new legislations may be 
passed in this regard. 
6.3.5  INTACH, in its written note, opined that Indian Museums Act of 1910 needs to be 
relooked into and revised, as per the modern rules of museums.  
6.3.6  INTACH stated that the strict prohibitory and regulatory provisions imposed by 
India’s Statutory Acts to protect archaeologic al sites, serve as barriers for peoples’ involvement 
in the conservation and development of these sites. It also raised the issue of delays in 
preparation of heritage bylaws for many Centrally protected monuments.  In this regard, AKTC 
suggested that a timeline should be drawn up for preparation of byelaws for all sites. 
6.3.7  On the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment 
and Validation) Act, 2010, INTACH stated that the Act needs to be made relevant to the needs 
and aspirations o f 21 st century ‘New India’. It opined that a complete prohibition in the 100 -
meter area is a matter of concern and that heritage policy and legislation needs to be developed 
so as to integrate conservation, protection and development.  AKTC opined that inst ead of 
ensuring a blanket prohibitive  zone, design guidelines for new buildings or renovations in zones 
around national monuments should be strictly enforced and the prohibited zones should be 
limited to areas where view corridors to the monument are compromised. 
6.3.8  AKTC opined that the Rules as framed at present are punitive and a legacy of 
colonial rule. Rather than focusing on enhancing the heritage character in the immediate setting 
of a monument - through urban design, façade improvements, improved  street design – the law 
enforces a 100 meter zone where even house repairs are prohibitive. 
6.3.9  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake an exhaustive 
review of the Indian Museum Act, 1910 and the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological 
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and come up with suitable amendments, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Law & Justice. The Committee further recommends that the blanket ban 
on construction works within the prohibited area of 100 meters around the monument, 
should be reviewed in consultation with experts and stakeholders, and suitable 
amendments may be proposed to ensure a balance between developmental works and 
heritage conservation. It should be ensured that prohibitions are still in place against 

69 
 
works that might impact the view corridors to the monument or where such works may be 
of detrimental effect to the structural integrity of the monument. 
6.3.10  INTACH further suggested the following new legislations/ laws / rules  to better 
develop museums and archaeological sites: 
a) National and State -level Tourism Policies need to be developed in order to address the 
issues and potentials of cultural tourism. These policies will need to be linked with 
National Conservation Policy, Town and Country Planning Acts, World Heritage 
Convention, International Charters and so forth. 
b) Conservation Plans should be prepared for buffer zones, which should be integrated with 
the town planning process such as Master Plans/ Development Plans in con formity the 
local planning byelaws and heritage conservation norms. The local authorities should be 
involved in the process. 
c) Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA) to be made a legal instrument and essential 
requirement for the approval of all major development projects, particularly those around 
protected monuments and sites and listed historic buildings. Heritage Conservation 
Committees must be empowered to ask for HIAs as part of the approval process. 
d) A new legislation to be introduced for a legal protection o f listed historic buildings and 
sites. It is to be called ‘Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas Act’, and it should be 
part of the Planning and Development processes at State and City level. 
e) Aspects like Development Exemptions, Compensations, Transfer of Development Rights 
(TDRs), Repair Grants and Infill Developments should be included in the Planning and 
Taxation legislations. 
f) National Commission for Heritage Sites Bill, 2009 May be considered to be revived with 
appropriate amendments. 
g) Setting up of independent professional councils or bodies for Archaeology, Conservation 
and Museums. These bodies to be run and managed by elected members from the specific 
professional communities. 
h) The Town and Country Planning organization of the Government of India has  drafted a 
model bill to amend the State Town and Country Planning Acts. However, no provision 
has been made in the draft bill in respect of safeguards against the demolition of an old 

70 
 
historic building or levelling up of an ancient mound for development p urposes. This 
aspect needs to be carefully examined in the model bill. 
6.3.11  AKTC observed that as a legacy of colonial rule, many of our monuments are not 
easily accessible for use. Even in remote areas where these structures are often the only limited 
infrastructure available to the local community. It suggested that National Policy should 
encourage transformation and reuse as an alternate to demolish and rebuild. This has been 
successful across Europe, in countries such as UK – with a heritage building stock – in excess of 
650000 – reuse of structures for modern use utilizes over 50% of all architectural services. 
6.3.12  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up with the 
necessary legislative framework to ensure that conservation plans are  in place at all 
Centrally protected monuments  and for making  Heritage Impact Assessment compulsory 
for major development projects . The Committee urges upon the Ministry to revise its 
National Policy to encourage transformation and reuse as an alternate to  demolish and 
rebuild, since the same would allow many more historical sites to be preserved in a better 
shape instead of them disappearing or getting demolished over time. 
6.4 Weekly/ Biweekly cultural evenings at Museums/ Centrally protected monuments 
6.4.1 Museums as well as archaeological sites are often not seen as a place of tourist attraction 
by the local population. Driving the local people to visit their nearby monuments and Museums 
would not only result in a growth in revenue but also acquaint the m with the history of the 
city/town they love in, thus inculcating a feeling of pride as well as responsibility to keep them 
safe and clean. 
6.4.2  AKTC suggested that monuments that do not attract a large number of visitors 
and those which have no associa ted cultural/religious sensitivity should used as venues for 
cultural programme with the twin objectives of promoting the associated intangible heritage as 
well as increasing visitor numbers to such sites. 
6.4.3 The Committee recommends that the Ministry s hould organize weekly / biweekly 
cultural programmes  such as lectures, traditional dance and music programmes, film 
screenings, book discussions, traditional art melas etc. at Museums and archaeological 

71 
 
sites, in close coordination with the Ministry of Tourism and concerned departments of 
State Governments. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Culture’s database of local 
artistes would be of immense help towards this initiative and  would give a boost to both  
domestic and foreign tourism. Organizing p articipative programmes from time to time 
would also tend to mak e Museums/ sites visits a fun and learning experience for the 
visitors. The Ministry should tap its pool of artistes and local talent in such programmes.  
The same should be advertised through social media in order to reach out to the target 
audience in a cost -effective manner.  Due caution must be exercised by the Ministry to 
ensure that any events organized at a Museum or an archaeological site are not in any way 
detrimental to the site or any artefacts. 
6.5  Taking action on feedback from visitors 
6.5.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may set up a robust mechanism to 
collect feedback from domestic as well as foreign tourists who visit a Museum or 
archaeological site/monument. Technology may be utilized to permit the tourists to easily 
leave their feedback regarding the experience they had in their visit to a Museum/ 
archaeological monument. Working on first hand feedback from the visitors will lead the 
Ministry into improving tourist experience in the future, while also leaving a positive 
imprint about Indian culture and heritage among those who visit. 
6.6 Review of the tendering process for awarding conservation contracts 
6.6.1 It has come to t he not ice of the Committee that in some cases, the  projects are 
awarded to such contractors who have little to no experience in the field of conservation, 
who later hire sub-consultants and end up doing more harm than good, to the monuments/ 
artefacts involved. In light of this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may 
thoroughly review the tendering process it adopts for awarding conservation contracts of 
archaeological sites/monuments and Museum artefacts and to have provisions in place to 
ensure that tenders are not awarded to the lowest bidder, but to a contractor who has 
considerable experience and expertise in the required skillset. 

72 
 
6.7 Lending assistance to  important State Protected Archaeological Monuments and  
Museums 
6.7.1  The Committee e nquired from the Ministry of Culture regarding the action taken to 
enable the State Governments/U Ts to take up sustained conservation, preservation and 
environmental development of their protected monuments/archaeological sites. In response, the 
Committee was informed by the Ministry that t he State Government is responsible for 
preservation and environmental development of monuments protected by them.   However, if 
technical support is required by any State Government for preservation and conservation of 
monuments, technical support is provided to them as and when such request is made. The 
Committee was further informed that the State Governments/UTs are rendered technical advice 
by the ASI on conservation related matters, wherever such requests are received.   In addition, 
ASI also takes up conservation works of monuments belonging to State Governments/UTs on 
receiving their request for execution of works on Deposit Works basis. 
6.7.2 DG, ASI while deposing before the Committee, stated thus:- 
“The procedure for protection is again very clearly laid out in the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958.  ASI issues a 
preliminary notification and consults the State Government because the State 
Governments also may, in parallel, take up tha t monument. So, to ensure that 
there is no duplication, the State Governments are consulted.  There is no need for 
permission from the State Government.  ASI consults the State Government and 
then issues a preliminary notification.  After 60 days, if nothi ng comes up, ASI 
takes it up for final protection.” 
6.7.3  The Committee observes that the development and preservation of archaeological 
sites and Museums often does not run high in the priorities of State Governments. This 
often leads to neglect, and thus irreparable damage  is caused  to the State protected 
archaeological monuments as well as Museum artefacts. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should have a mechanism in place to identify instances of gross neglect of 
maintenance and preservatio n of important archaeological sites and Museums and prod 
the State Government Department concerned to take action to rectify the same. In cases of 
exigent needs, ASI may proactively provide technical assistance to such monuments and 
Museums. The Committee suggests that the Ministry may, from time to time, consider the 

73 
 
inclusion of the State protected archaeological monuments and Museums which are more 
than 100 years old, in the list of Centrally protected monuments and National Museums. 
The Committee furthe r recommends that the Ministry  may lend assistance to State 
Governments to enable introduction of online ticketing to archaeological sites and 
Museums under their purview.  
6.8 Coordination with different Ministries and State Governments 
6.8.1 During its visit to Visakhapatnam in January, 2020, it was suggested by ASI that the 
Andhra Pradesh Government should permit the operation of boat services to Nagarjunakonda 
Museum from Telangana side. The representative of the State Government of Andhra P radesh 
informed that the State Department of Archaeology and Museums which was formed in 1960 
and is, inter alia , tasked with the development, preservation and maintenance of 279 State -
protected monuments, 14 State Museums, and conducts explorations and ex cavations at 
archaeological sites. The Committee was apprised of the usage of  advanced technologies by the 
State Government at various Museums and monuments and the upgradation works being carried 
out therein. Further, the representative of the State Gove rnment of Andhra Pradesh apprised 
about the proposed construction of international standard Museums at 13 new places, with a 
tentative cost of Rs. 159 crores, underlined the need for a tough law against defacement of 
statues, monuments etc. and the need fo r installation of CCTVs for the same. Shortage of funds 
is one of the issues being faced for fencing of monuments for which a separate monuments grant 
should be set up.  
6.8.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should strictly ensure that there is 
close co -ordination between/amongst the Ministry of Culture and the concerned State 
Departments. The Committee desires the Ministry to come up with well-defined procedures 
to allow the State Departments to seek guidance and technical expertise from the var ious 
organizations under the Ministry.  Regular meetings may be held with the concerned 
officials of the State Governments, at least once in 3 months, and the Report thereon, 
should be submitted to the Central Government and also to this Committee.  The 
Committee should be updated periodically about the outcome thereof. The Committee also 
recommends that if the Ministry feels that any Amendment of the concerned legislation is 

74 
 
needed, the Ministry may ensure that the Amendment is fructified, by piloting a Bill  in this 
regard.  
6.8.3 The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in Para 114 of its 289 th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Culture and strongly recommends the 
Ministry to coordinate with the Ministry of Railways; Road Transport and Highways and 
concerned State Departments to make necessary improvements in rail and road 
connectivity at important Museums and archaeological sites/monuments in the country. 
6.9 Allocation of funds generated from Museums and ASI, to the Ministry of Culture 
6.9.1  Professor H.P. Ray, in her written note, suggested that the revenue generated from 
sale of tickets, etc. at archaeological sites and museums should be ploughed back into their 
development, rather than being deposited into a central pool. 
6.9.2  INTACH also raised the issue of income generated by museums being transferred 
to a common fund instead of being spent on well-performing museums. 
6.9.3 The Committee notes that at present, the revenue generated by the Museums and 
Archaeological Sites/Monuments under the Ministry of Culture, by way of sale of entry 
tickets etc., is deposited to Consolidated Fund of India . Given the scarcity of funds 
available with the Ministry of Culture, the Committee strongly recommends that the 
Ministry may request that the revenue so generated should be allocated to the Ministry 
itself for the purpose of deve lopment and conservation of Museums and archaeological 
sites/monuments. This would also encourage the autonomous organizations under the 
Ministry of Culture to come up with innovative ways of revenue generation and result in 
better development and upkeep of the cultural heritage of the country. 
6.10 Lowering the fees charged for filming at Centrally Protected Monuments 
6.10.1 The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in Para 1 24 of its 289 th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Cultu re that  the prices charged by the 
Ministry for filming at archaeological sites/monuments and Museums, outside the period 
notified in the ASI notification mentioned above, are very high. Films and videos featuring 
the archaeological monuments and Museums showcase the richness of our cultural heritage 

75 
 
to both domestic and foreign viewers alike and act as a free tool for publicity of the 
monuments and Museums, thus propelling their tourism prospects. In light of this, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry to opt for a pay-as-you-wish payment model, wherein 
the filming company seeking the permission can pay the amount that it can afford to pay. 
The Ministry may also ensure that there are no delays in grant of permission for filming at 
the monuments while putting  in place enough safeguards to ensure that the filming 
activities do not cause any harm to the monuments and/or the archaeological artefacts. 
6.11 Hiring well trained professional staff for maintenance of archaeological sites and 
Museums 
6.11.1 One Member of the Committee underscored the imminent need for the infusion of 
professionalism into the identification, maintenance, and preservation of archaeological sites and 
in the maintenance of Museums. The Committee endorses this view and strongly 
recommends that the Ministry should give due attention to ensure that professionally 
trained people are engaged in all such activities. The Committee urges the Ministry to give 
emphasis to branding and social media presence.  
6.12 Measures to compensate private owners of listed historic buildings to conserve them 
in the face of the rising land values 
6.12.1 AKTC suggested that for the hardships faced by owners of properties in the immediate 
vicinity of the heritage monuments – no incentives are offered. Incen tives could be tax relief, 
Transferable Development rights, permission to change land-use, amongst other possibilities. 
6.12.2 INTACH made the following suggestions in this regard: 
a) Transfer of development rights (TDR) for the restriction on development in a heritage 
area.  
b) Matching / repairs grants for listed heritage properties, particularly in the private sector.  
c) Bank loans at low interest rates and soft loans from public sector b anks should be 
available. 

76 
 
d) Property tax relaxation for properties within prohibited / regulated / buffer areas, and Tax 
Incentives on repairs and renovation grants to local authorities and private heritage 
property owners for urgent repairs. 
e) Heritage awareness programmes, practical training workshops, capacity building events 
etc. may be offered. 
f) Heritage Awards to be conferred to the owners in recognition of their conservation, 
maintenance and upkeep of their heritage properties. 
6.12.3 The Committee agrees with the view that private owners of listed historic buildings 
as well as people having residential property properties within prohibited/ regulated/ 
buffer areas should be provided with certain compensation/ incentives to encourage their 
participation in  the conservation and protection of the historical sites. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that wherever feasible, the Ministry may act on the suggestions 
made by INTACH in this regard. 
  

77 
 
                                                                                                                                         
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT GLANCE 
DEVELOPMENT AND CONSERVATION OF MUSEUMS: CHALLENGES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES 
The Committee observes that the Museums of any given country exhibit the  richness of its 
culture, giving the visitors a sneak peek into the cultural heritage and history of the nation, 
besides being a major attraction for tourists, both domestic and foreign. In view of the 
significant role played by Museums in showcasing the a rt and culture of the country, the 
Committee desires that a comprehensive action plan needs to be devised to bring a modern 
look and feel to the Museums, and  it should be  ensured that the collections available are 
periodically rotated to provide a refreshi ng experience for visitors. The Committee desires 
the Ministry to put up a monitoring mechanism in place to make sure that the deliverables 
are achieved by all the Museums within a strict timeline. 
(Para 4.5) 
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry for the upgradation of the 
security infrastructure, Reception Halls, Auditorium etc., with the latest technology. and 
desires that the betterment of the Galleries may be completed at all the Museums within a 
fixed timeframe. The Committee stro ngly recommends that the Museums in India should 
be adequately equipped with conservation labs, storage facilities, written and graphic 
records, documentation facilities, modern photography techniques etc.  
(Para 4.6) 
The Committee notes the general view o f the experts/stakeholders that the present state of 
museums under the Ministry leaves much to be desired. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may prepare action plans in consultation with the best 
experts in this field, for each  museum for the short -term as well as the long -term, and 
monitor the progress made to follow these plans.  
(Para 4.10) 
Challenges:- 
(i)  Innovation and Design 

78 
 
 
The Committee observes that Indian Museums in general need to work a lot on their 
presentation, design and marketing. Doing so would help the Museums to attract not only 
art/history aficionados but also other visitors which will help in increasing the revenue of 
the Museums. This increased revenue can be used to spur innovation and improve design 
standards across the Museums. Experiences and good practices from Museums, both 
Indian and international, excelling in terms of innovation and design should be utilized for 
improving the same in Museums where it is lacking.  
(Para 4.11.3) 
The Committee recommends th at the Ministry should come up with a robust monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that a comprehensive Museum Policy is in place and is put to 
implementation at each of the museum under it.  
(Para 4.11.4) 
The Committee feels that once internal resources are raised, it would be easy for the 
Ministry to approach the Finance Ministry to supplement its efforts to complete any 
undertaken projects.  
(Para 4.11.5) 
(ii)  Human Resources 
The Committee believes that tackling the issue of dearth of human resources requi res long-
term planning and solutions beyond the availability of budget. The Committee takes 
cognizance of the list of deliverables issued by the Ministry to address the issue of lack of 
human resources and role envisaged for the upcoming Indian Institute o f Heritage and 
Conservation (IIHC) in solving this issue. The Committee recommends the Ministry to 
formulate, in advance, its document indicating the present as well as future human 
resource needs of the Indian Museums sector for consideration the IIHC. Th e Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry may develop plans for establishing regional centres 
of IIHC in the future, to enable interested youth to pursue their interest in museology and 
cultural heritage preservation.  
(Para 4.11.10) 

79 
 
The Committee n otes that there is an urgent need for carrying out extensive training 
programmes for the museum staff working across the country. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may enhance the budgetary allocation for this purpose and 
ensure that the museum st aff is well -trained and sensitized regarding the cultural 
importance of the antiquities under their care. The training programmes may be 
conducted by renowned experts from the field in an engaging manner.  
(Para 4.11.13) 
(iii)  Conservation and Preservation Practices 
 
The Committee feels that a lot needs to be done in terms of implementing the best possible 
conservation and preservation practices in our Museums. The Committee recommends 
that the Museums should be encouraged to study the efficacy of age -old traditional 
conservation practices and modify them suitably in order to ensure that all the Museum 
artefacts stay in the best possible state. Collaborations with international institutions with 
respect to training and capacity building exercises should be held periodically for the 
Museum staff. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to ensure that the 
curricula of the academic institutions imparting knowledge of conservation practices in 
India, including the upcoming IIHC, includes the global best practices for conservation and 
preservation of historic artefacts.  
(Para 4.11.15) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may devise a policy to ensure 
periodical review the state of artefacts of the Museums and, on a case -to-case basis, do 
away with those which are beyond the point of salvaging by way of donating them to 
academic institutions or by auctioning them to collectors. This would also help the 
Museums to focus on the artefacts which are in good shape and preserve them in best 
possible way for years to come. The Committee would also like the Ministry to encourage 
the Museums under its ambit to collaborate with State Government owned Museums from 
time to time to share their preservation expertise with them.  
(Para 4.11.16) 

80 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take the necessary steps to ensure that 
a coordinated, integrated and consistent approach to conservation and development of 
museums is followed across the various museums functioning under it. 
(Para 4.11.18) 
(iv)  Audience Engagement 
 
The Committee feels that audience engagement is one of the most crucial challenges faced 
by the Indian Museums. The Committee is of the view that the Museum administrators 
need to make the optimum use of available funds to spur engagement, int erest and 
curiosity among the visitors as part of its audience engagement activities. The Committee 
would like the Museums to strive to develop certain galleries as Augmented Reality/ 
Virtual Reality powered galleries for showcasing immersive stories of th e past to the 
visitors. The Committee further recommends that the Museums should optimally utilize 
social media and target hyperlocal marketing to drive visitors to the Museums. Guided 
tours should be promoted in museums for both domestic and international  visitors. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry may come up with a rating system for all 
the museums under it, wherein museums are rated based on several parameters – with 
audience engagement being one of the important parameters. This would encourage the 
museum staff to perform better.  
(Para 4.11.21) 
The Committee urges upon the Ministry to tie up with both domestic as well as 
international Museums to exchange and loan artefacts on rotational basis, so as to have 
fresh attractions from time to time. The Committee is of the view that the Museums should 
ensure that their entire collection of artefacts is displayed to the audience by 
implementation of a well thought -out, pre-planned rotation schedule, physically as well as 
on the Museum websites , and also by giving advertisements both in print and electronic 
media, which will also help to increase the overall footfall. This would also enable visitors 
to know beforehand what to expect from their visit, and provide them an overall improved 
visitor experience.  

81 
 
(Para 4.11.22) 
The Committee notes that QR codes provide link to a web page which will display an 
online map of the Museum so that visitors do not have trouble reaching any particular 
section of the Museum, showcasing the detailed history of the artefacts and interesting facts 
about the Museum. The Committee recommends the Ministry to introduce QR codes in all 
its Museums for an interactive experience which would especially appeal to young visitors. 
Making wifi available in every Museum would b e crucial for ensuring an enriching 
experience for the visitors.  
(Para 4.11.23) 
(v)  Funding 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may work on developing an effective 
revenue model for the museums and employ innovative means like donation drives, seeking 
CSR funds and sponsorships etc. to raise funds for the development, maintenance and 
upgradation of Museums. Visitors may also be encouraged to share their Museum 
experience on social media to generate interest among their peers which will result in  
increased footfall, thereby earning the Museums extra revenue.  
(Para 4.11.28) 
The Committee further recommends that efforts may be made to encourage voluntary 
donations for the purpose of development and conservation of the Museum and its 
artefacts. This can be done by making the tickets pay-as-you-wish, setting a minimum price 
that needs to be paid for an entry ticket and suggesting a higher amount to help the 
Museums generate funds for its operations. An option may also be provided to interested 
people to contribute towards the maintenance of any given artefact for a certain time 
period. The possibility of providing special tours of Museums before and after public 
hours, by charging higher ticket prices may also be explored. The Committee suggests that 
Museums across India should look into the issue of charging higher fees to foreign 
nationals and analyzing the possible impact of lowering the same on the footfall received 

82 
 
and revenue generated by the Museums, targeting the maximization of both the footfal l 
and the revenue.  
(Para 4.11.29) 
The Committee is of the view that Museums may be encouraged to enter into partnerships 
with the private sector to sponsor their exhibitions, and also through contribution under 
Corporate Social Responsibility. The Committ ee understands that the condition of Indian 
Museums can be improved to a large extent if sufficient funds are made available. The 
Committee would also like the Ministry to look into the administration, functioning and 
revenue models of successful internati onal Museums in developing countries and emulate 
the best practices with modifications suiting to the Indian context.  
(Para 4.11.31) 
 The Committee feels that the sum of Rs. 72.51 crores provided by the Ministry  to State 
Museums across the country under the Museum Grant Scheme from FY 2015 -16 to FY 
2019-20, is a paltry amount covering only a few Museums while a large number of 
museums are still craving for such an assistance. The Committee desires the Ministry to 
allocate more funds to the State Governmen ts for the purpose of development of State 
Museums and encourage all the States to come up with proposals to upgrade the Museums 
under their control under the Museum Grant Scheme. The Committee also calls upon the 
Ministry to come up with a list of deliver ables for the State Museums to provide better 
experience to the visitors across the country.  
(Para 4.11.34) 
The Committee observes that out of the abovementioned grant of Rs. 72.51 crores under 
the Museum Grant Scheme from FY 2015 -16 to FY 2019 -20, Rs. 35  crores i.e. 48% of the 
total amount, has been allocated to just 2 States – Nagaland and Andhra Pradesh. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take steps to ensure equitable allocation 
of the financial aid to State Governments under the Museum Grants scheme. The 
Committee desires the Ministry to ask all States to submit their proposal for this scheme 
and ensure that at least one Museum gets this grant in each State. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry may allocate some funds to Na tional Museums with the 

83 
 
specific purpose to lend technical and conservational assistance to State controlled 
Museums, when needed.  
(Para 4.11.35) 
(vi) Safety and security of Museum artefacts 
 
The Committee takes note of several media reports pointing out theft of antiquities and 
artefacts, involving the participation of organized international mafia, This, according to 
the Committee is a major cause of concern in safeguarding the artefacts in our country. 
The Committee underline s the need of security of artefacts deployed at the different 
National Museums across the country to ensure the safety of our valuable antiquities and 
artefacts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may come up with a set 
of rules to ensur e certain level of safety and security across all the National Museums. 
Needless to mention, installation of CCTV systems, armed personnel, burglar alarm 
systems, etc. in the museums are must and therefore the budgetary requirements, 
alongwith provisions t hereof within strict timeline be made for compliance of security 
requirements. The Committee recommends the Ministry to explore the usage of blockchain 
technology for digital cataloguing of Museum artefacts, so as to maintain permanent, 
unalterable records of the artefacts. The Committee hopes that this would also deter the 
possible connivance of the Museum staff with organized art smuggling groups.  
(Para 4.11.37) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take urgent measures to ensure that an 
effective disaster management plan is in place across all the museums to ensure the 
physical safety of the precious antiquities in times of natural calamities.  
(Para 4.11.39) 
(vii)  Vacancies existing in Museums 
 
The Committee is anguished to note that several k ey positions are lying vacant for a long 
time in the various Museums. The Committee wonders as to how the Museums can 
function properly without key personnel in position to manage them. The Committee, 

84 
 
therefore, urges the Ministry to take urgent steps to f ill the existing vacancies under the 
various Museums at the earliest.  
(Para 4.11.42) 
Opportunities:- 
(i)  Digitization of Museums 
 
The Committee appreciates the meticulous work done by several national Museums across 
the country in setting up of virtual galleries and digitization of the artefacts present in the 
Museums, along with the relevant details for these items which would serve not only 
research scholars of historical artefacts, but also the art -loving community. The digitized 
artefacts would ensure permanent record of artefacts which in turn would help in keeping 
a check on pilferage of Museum artefacts.   The Committee recommends that the software 
may be introduced across the national Museums on priority. The Committee further 
recommends the Minist ry to provide assistance to the State Government Museums for 
implementing the JATAN software.  
(Para 4.12.2) 
(ii) Addressing the dearth of Human Resources in Museology 
 
The Committee feels that the issue of shortage of human resources in the field of museology 
in the country can only be resolved by long -term planning and introducing students to this 
field at a young age. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Mini stry may 
request the Ministry of Human Resource Development to include an introductory course 
on museology in the curriculum at the senior secondary school level. The Committee 
further recommends that schools should be persuaded by the Ministry to arrange at least 
one Museum visit per year for students at every level. Such visits should include a brief 
behind-the-curtains overview of the process of conservation of Museum artefacts and 
Museum curation. Doing so would instill a sense of respect for our rich c ultural heritage 
and the efforts that go behind preserving the same , stimulate the curiosity of students, and 

85 
 
encourage them to pick up careers in the field of museology and conservation of historical 
artefacts. The Committee observes that the establishment  of the Indian Institute of 
Heritage is a step in the right direction and will help tackle the issue of dearth of human 
resources in the field of museology in a significant way.  The Ministry should hire curators 
who have exposure in international best standards of Museum curation.  
(Para 4.12.4) 
(iii) Expanding National Council of Science Museums across all States  
 
The Committee feels that Science Museums are the gateway to the domains of both Science 
as well as Museums for school kids in India. They help develop scientific temper among the 
upcoming generations of the country. The Committee observes that the present network of 
the National Council of School Museums ‡ leaves a lot of scope for expanding the presence 
of the Regional Level Centres of the NCSM t hroughout the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should establish Regional Level Centres of the 
NCSM in all the States, so as to ensure school kids from all over the State get a chance to 
visit these Centres and help develop a scientific outlook in their lives.  
(Para 4.12.5) 
(iv) Developing ASI Site Museums across the country 
 
The Committee feels that development of site museums at more ASI sites across the 
country would serve as another attraction for tourists, while helping p reserve the site -
related antiquities by employing museum staff dedicated to the purpose. The Committee 
recommends that ASI may chalk out a plan for development of more site museums at sites 
with high footfall and work out a revenue generation plan to suppo rt their maintenance 
costs. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture may pursue 
the Ministry of Finance to allocate the funds generated by museums and monuments to the 
Ministry itself, so as to boost the development and conserv ation of museums and historical 
sites across the country.  
                                                 
‡ Source: https://ncsm.gov.in/network-2/ 

86 
 
(Para 4.12.8) 
Miscellaneous 
 
The Committee appreciates the steps being taken by the Ministry to modernize and 
upgrade the Museum facilities at various Museums under its administrative control.  
(Para 4.13.2) 
The Committee takes note that a Museum of the World is planned in the National Library, 
Kolkata and desires that it may be finalized soon.  
(Para 4.13.3) 
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry, in coordination with the State 
Government of Tripura, has plans to create a State Gallery of Modern Art at Pushpabanta 
Palace at Agartala, besides funding and guiding them in the matter of curation.  
(Para 4.13.5) 
The Committee is constrained to note that only 300 -400 paintings out of the collection of 
17,000 paintings, are presently being showcased in the National Museum at Delhi. The 
Committee desires to be increased progressively to showcase at least 25% of the paintings.  
(Para 4.13.9) 
The Committee takes note of the Sindhu Valley Civilization Gallery proposed to be taken 
up in the National Museum, Delhi, with the collaboration of ASI. The Committee welcomes 
the initiative taken by the Ministry to bring the artefacts and antiquities, which ASI has 
excavated from various sites  of Rakhigarhi, Sanauli, Lothal, Kalobangan etc.. The 
Committee applauds the initiative taken up by the Ministry to set up a Jewellery Gallery at 
the National Museum in Delhi.  
(Para 4.13.10) 
The Committee welcomes the innovative initiatives taken to set u p new Galleries in Indian 
Museum and other Museums and hopes that these initiatives would fructify in near future.  
(Para 4.13.11) 

87 
 
The Committee underlines the need for development of the Museum and old manuscripts 
at the Gagron Fort at Jhalawar, Kolvi Bud dhist Caves, Jain temples at Ujjain and Kota, 
and Fort of Shahabad and desires that the old manuscripts are available via audio, video 
etc.  
(Para 4.13.12) 
The Committee desires that the work at all these museums may be completed at the 
earliest.  
(Para 4.13.14) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may look into this aspect and furnish its reply 
thereon, in its ATN.  
(Para 4.13.16) 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES 
Challenges:- 
(i) Conservation Problems 
 
The Committee takes note of the various problems faced by the Ministry/ASI with regard 
to the conservation of the monuments/sites, and recommends that the Ministry should be 
proactive in solving these problems since these form a formidable threat to the 
maintenance and conservation of the archaeological monuments and  sites. Given the 
budgetary constraints , care should be taken to ensure optimum utilization of funds and 
working out innovative, cost -effective solutions to meet the challenges related to 
conservation of the archaeological sites.  
(Para 5.6.4) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may devise a well -defined plan to 
ensure at least a bare minimum level of protection and conservation of monuments outside 
the protection of both Central and State Governments, to encourage local municipal bodies 

88 
 
and local population. The Committee further recommends that ASI may develop a 
mechanism to share its technical expertise in conservation with concerned State 
Government Departments as well as local bodies by way of training and capacity building 
programmes.  
(Para 5.6.5) 
The Committee recommends that ASI may work out detailed Conservation and 
Management Plans for all the Centrally protected monuments on an urgent basis. A Site 
Inspection Register may also be maintained for each of the monuments and steps may be  
taken to disseminate knowledge about the national policy for conservation among the ASI 
staff, officials of State Governments, as well as other agencies involved in carrying out 
conservation works at archaeological monuments across the country.  
(Para 5.6.8) 
(ii)  Urbanization around Centrally Protected Monuments 
The Committee desires the Ministry to coordinate with all infrastructure Ministries and 
Departments to ensure compliance of the prohibited area and regulated area limits 
prescribed under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 
at the DPR stages of projects planned in the vicinity of all Centrally protected monuments. 
The Committee recommends that extensive research may be conducted to explore ways 
and means to prot ect our archaeological sites and monuments from the ill -effects of severe 
air pollution in urban centres.  
(Para 5.6.10) 
(iii)  Encroachment and Vandalism 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the efficacy of the powers it 
presently has to  deal with encroachments in and around monuments and propose suitable 
amendments to the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 1958 
and Rules 1959, and  Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 with 
a view to adequa tely empower the Estate Officer for tackling the issue of encroachment of 
Centrally protected monuments. In the event of non -cooperation from local law 
enforcement agencies in dealing with encroachment around monuments, the matter may be 

89 
 
taken up at higher  levels on priority basis to evolve the much needed accountability 
mechanism for the same. Awareness drives may carried out on social media to create a 
sense of belonging among the local populace so that they remain more vigilant towards 
protecting our monuments and heritage from malevolent elements of the society.  
(Para 5.6.12) 
The Committee is of the view that boundary wall is a bare minimum security requirement 
and helps clearly demarcate the limits of the archaeological site. It, therefore, desires the  
Ministry to target the construction of boundary walls around all Centrally Protected 
Monuments in the country within a fixed time line. The Committee believes that doing so 
would have a noticeable preventive effect on encroachment of monuments across the 
country.  
(Para 5.6.13) 
The Committee recommends that a dedicated cell be set up under ASI with mandate to 
identify, monitor and follow up action on the incidents of encroachment of Centrally 
Protected Monuments across the country. The cell may seek active  participation of local 
communities residing near the CPMs and encourage them to report any such incidents to 
the Ministry at the earliest.  
(Para 5.6.14) 
The Committee urges upon the Ministry to strive towards prevention of vandalism and 
encroachment at a rchaeological sites and monuments fraught with safety and security 
problems, particularly those in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir, Chhatisgarh, North -
Eastern States etc., in close coordination with local law and order authorities. The 
Committee desires the Mi nistry to take necessary actions to ensure that strict penal 
provisions are in place to deter incidents of vandalism and defacing of monuments.  
(Para 5.6.15) 
The Committee takes serious note of the growing incidents of demolition of several temples 
of immense cultural importance by anti-social elements in certain States. The Committee is 
of the firm view that such incidents should be prevented at any cost and exhorts the 
Ministry to ensure a foolproof mechanism to arrest such incidents and protect our 

90 
 
cherished cultural heritage. The Committee underlines the need for an infallible procedure 
prescribing close coordination amongst the Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Home Affairs 
and the State Governments.  
(Para 5.6.16) 
The Committee is happy to note that AS I is working on a Security Policy for all the 
Centrally Protected Monuments. The Committee recommends that the Security Policy may 
be formulated and implemented at the earliest.  
(Para 5.6.18) 
The Committee recommends that ASI may undertake a physical secu rity audit for all the 
monuments under its ambit and estimate the financial requirements for installing CCTV 
security systems at all the monuments and sites under its control. Thereafter, a plan may 
be devised to install such systems at the earliest so as to deter and punish vandals.  
(Para 5.6.20) 
(iv)  Lack of funds 
The Committee recommends that ASI may introduce pay -as-you-wish ticketing at all 
ticketed monuments across the country, while still keeping certain minimum amount as fee. 
Informing visitors about the developmental work they could fuel at the archaeological  sites 
with their donations will certainly drive many people to contribute to the same. The 
Committee also suggests the Ministry to consider introduction of special tours at 
archaeological sites and monuments before and after regular hours, charging a high er fee 
for a more isolated and sombre experience at the monuments. Further, ASI should forge 
partnerships in the form of sponsorship and CSR contributions, with the private sector.  
(Para 5.6.24) 
The Committee is of the view that adequate funds allocation to the Ministry will not only 
help develop and preserve the rich cultural heritage of India, but also act as an investment 
for propelling the growth of tourism sector in India. The present budget allocation to the 
Ministry, in the opinion of the Committee , is insufficient for developing and conserving 
Museums and archaeological sites and falls short to meet the financial needs of India’s 

91 
 
cultural heritage. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make a 
strong case for higher fund alloc ation and would also urge the Ministry of Finance to be 
considerate to preserve our rich cultural heritage.  
(Para 5.6.25) 
The Committee feels that given the limited budget available with ASI, it is imperative to 
ensure that schemes such as Adopt-a-Heritage are implemented in way to maximize their 
impact on the state of maintenance and conservation of the heritage sites. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Culture may coordinate with the Ministry of 
Tourism and expand th e scheme to permit the conservation works by private 
organizations, under close supervision of the ASI.  
(Para 5.6.27) 
(v) Human Resources at ASI 
The Committee is dismayed to note that almost 29 percent of the sanctioned staff strength 
of ASI is lying vacant. Given the large number (3692) of monuments under the protection 
of ASI and the support ASI provides to archaeological departments of State Governments, 
even the sanctioned staff strength seems inadequate. The Committee is of the view that 
continuing vacancies reflects the lack of intent on part of ASI to fulfill its mandate to 
protect and preserve the archaeological monuments across the country. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to take immediate steps to ensure the recruitment of the 
required personnel in Archaeological Survey of India. The Committee would also like the 
Ministry to look into the reasons for such large number of vacancies in ASI and take 
corrective measures to overcome the shortage of staff.  
(Para 5.6.29) 
The Committee agrees wi th the view that efforts must be made to ensure that ASI officials 
are from a diverse professional background, since the same would allow ASI to take more 
well-informed decisions regarding the development and conservation of archaeological 
sites. The Commi ttee recommends that ASI may take steps to gauge the need for creation 
of posts of officials of diverse expertise and if needed, to seek expertise on a consultancy 

92 
 
basis so as to ensure optimal utilization of the constrained budgets available with ASI for 
carrying out conservation works.  
(Para 5.6.36) 
(vi) Scarcity of Artisans 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to organize training camps and short -term 
courses to enhance the competencies of artisans required for working on the monuments. 
Master artisans /craftsman may be employed to pass on their skills to young artisans at 
these training camps and courses. The Committee sees no reasons as to why people would 
not be interested in attending such training camps/ courses as long as they are aptly 
incentivized and enough employment opportunities are created. The Committee desires the 
Ministry to work on this aspect so that our valuable monuments do not suffer damages 
because of lack of artisans.  
(Para 5.6.39) 
Opportunities:- 
(i)   Promotion of Tourism and Business 
The Committee is of the view that developing garden spaces present ly associated with 
monuments, having souvenir shops, interpretation centers, well -designed signage, good 
waste management techniques and engaging the local community to play a bigge r role in 
development of archaeological sites, would provide a much better experience to tourists 
visiting these sites and would certainly help in tapping the vast potential of increasing the 
tourism prospects and revenue generated by these sites. The Comm ittee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry/ ASI may take concrete steps in this regard, in close 
coordination with the Ministry of Tourism.  
(Para 5.7.9) 
The Committee feels that there should be greater synergy between the Ministry of Culture 
and Minis try of Tourism to collectively work on policies/initiatives aiming to strengthen 

93 
 
capacities of tourist guides, develop basic facilities for tourists at tourist spots, organize 
special events and exhibitions to attract tourists etc. The Committee is of the view that the 
combined expertise of both the Ministries would go a long way in supplementing each 
other’s initiatives and also result in better experience for the tourists visiting the Museums 
and archaeological sites in India.  
(Para 5.7.10) 
(ii)  Model conservation process 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should come up with a model conservation 
process for archaeological artefacts and sites across the country. This would not only bring 
consistency in the process followed by both Centrally prote cted and State protected 
monuments but also act as a benchmark for the private contractors hired by ASI/ State 
Government departments for carrying out conservation works.  
(Para 5.7.11) 
The Committee is concerned to note the apprehensions of the experts/st akeholders 
regarding the focus laid by ASI on carrying out scientific research for the conservation 
processes followed by it across the country. The Committee recommends that ASI may 
review the functioning of its Science Branch, provide it with better fund ing and ensure that 
all the conservation processes employed at the Centrally protected monuments are backed 
by well-documented scientific research. The Committee further recommends that modern 
technology such as photogrammetry, 3D laser scanning, blockchai n technology etc. may be 
explored and utilized, wherever possible, to improve the documentation of the monuments 
since quality documentation at present would allow quality scientific research in the 
coming future. The documentation should be made freely av ailable on the internet, so as to 
encourage the scholar community to study the monuments and contribute to their 
conservation.  
(Para 5.7.15) 
(iii)  Involvement of Communities 
The background note furnished by the Ministry lists promotion of business by training 
local archaeologists and specialists in conservation and site management as an opportunity. 

94 
 
The Committee may be apprised of the steps that have been taken by the Ministr y in this 
regard.  
(Para 5.7.17) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take steps to institutionally integrate 
municipalities and village panchayats in heritage conservation and management work, and 
if needed, a separate body may be created to regulate the framework for the same.  
(Para 5.7.23) 
The Committee agrees with the view that making information regarding conservation 
efforts being undertaken by ASI, available on its website as well as physically at the 
monument would allow the participation  of experts and local communities. Further, there 
should be  a provision to allow members from the local community to have unlimited access 
to the heritage site in their vicinity at a discounted price and to also allow them to set up 
kiosks and souvenir sh ops as such. Doing so within a defined limit, would help inculcate a 
sense of responsibility and belongingness to the monuments among the local community, 
which will go a long way in safeguarding the monuments for the generations to come.  
(Para 5.7.24) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture may approach the Ministry of 
Education to consider the inclusion of knowledge of local archaeological monuments and 
sites in the assessment of history courses in school. A thorough understanding of the 
historical and cultural significance of historical sites at a young age would go a long way in 
developing a sense of respect and responsibility for the same among the citizens.  
(Para 5.7.25) 
The Committee feels that having a dedicated senior personnel for forging partnerships with 
universities, local bodies, State Governments as well as Archaeology Departments of 
foreign countries would help laying an enhanced focus on benefitting from the knowledge 
and participation of these entities. The Committee, therefo re, recommends that ASI may 
create a special unit dedicated to this task, headed by a senior ranking officer.  
(Para 5.7.27) 

95 
 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to run ad campaigns akin to the Atithi Devo 
Bhava – Incredible India ad campaign, to make com munities more aware, proud and 
protective of the cultural heritage in their vicinity. A feeling of ownership, responsibility 
and pride would also help in bringing down the instances of vandalism at archaeological 
sites and monuments. The Committee recommen ds that social media campaigns may be 
utilized for the same.  
(Para 5.7.28) 
The Committee urges upon ASI to showcase local craftsmanship at its archaeological sites 
and monuments, in order to build a connect with the local community as well as to provide 
them with a platform to showcase their talent. The Committee further recommends that 
the Ministry may strive to organize events/ competitions/ social media drives to spur civil 
society engagement for conserving our archaeological cultural heritage.  
(Para 5.7.29) 
(iv)  Training the communities for the purpose of developing local guides 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may develop regional training centers at 
places where there are several archaeological sites and Museums. Besides, the Ministry 
may also arrange language classes for local shopkeepers and vendors in areas with high 
tourist influx. By resorting to this, the local businesses will prosper and will also make 
tourists more secured and comfortable.  
(Para 5.7.30) 
  (v)  Setting standards for archival research:  
The Committee further recommends that ASI must ensure that proper procedures are 
followed in storage and maintenance of all archival records pertaining to the Centrally 
protected monuments. Documentation related to conservation works carried out at 
monuments should be preserved carefully, possibly in coordination with the National 
Archives of India, since the information would be helpful in taking informed decisions 
regarding conservation of the monuments in the future.  
(Para 5.7.32) 

96 
 
The Committee  feels that the Ministry should vigorously pursue digitization of 
archaeological artefacts so as to create a central database of the same for research and 
archival purposes. Such a central database would also permit academicians and scholars i n 
the upcoming IIHC and other such institutions, not only in India but internationally as 
well, to learn about our cultural heritage in detail without needing physical access.  
(Para 5.7.33) 
(vi) Revamping the digital presence of archaeological sites/ monuments: 
The Committee observes that most websites of the Ministry of Culture – especially 
indiaculture.nic.in, asi.nic.in and asimustsee.nic.in, look quite outdated and non -intuitive. 
The Committee thus feels the need for having information on archaeologica l sites and 
monuments through a one -stop, modern, easy -to-read, multi -platform solution for 
enthusiasts of Indian culture and heritage, and it is long overdue. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may revamp its digital presence and come up 
with such a user-oriented solution.  
(Para 5.7.36) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should closely coordinate with the Ministry 
of Tourism and provide the facility of booking tickets for the archaeological sites/ 
monuments and Museums on the Incredible India application and website as well. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Culture may work with the Ministry 
of Tourism to highlight its cultural events and programmes through the Incredible India 
application and web portal to o, since information regarding the same would be of 
significant interest to tourists visiting a certain place. Ministry of Culture may also prepare 
a database of important State -controlled Museums and archaeological sites and coordinate 
with the Ministry o f Tourism to ensure that they are also highlighted as tourist attractions 
on the Incredible India web portal and smartphone application.   
(Para 5.7.37) 
(vii) Inclusion of Monuments in UNESCO World Heritage Sites List 
The Committee takes note of the extens ive suggestions given by the stakeholder with 
regard to UNESCO World Heritage Site (WHS) nominations. The Committee may be 

97 
 
apprised of the efficacy of the Advisory Committee set up by the Ministry in this regard. 
The Ministry may take all necessary steps t o ensure that a well -thought-out strategy is 
evolved and implemented to maximize the chances of nomination of more monuments and 
sites to the UNESCO World Heritage Site list. Inclusion of more monuments by way of 
minor boundary modifications of the existing WHS may also be explored.  
(Para 5.7.40) 
The Committee further recommends that the National Monuments Authority may 
prioritize the preparation of Heritage Byelaws for the monuments which are either already 
in the UNESCO WHS list or are in the tentative WHS list.  
(Para 5.7.41) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should closely coordinate with the 
concerned State Departments and assist them in the protection of State -protected 
sites/monuments, especially in cases wherein there are plans to include the sites/monuments 
in the World Heritage Sites list. The Ministry should be proactive in offering help to State 
Governments for preparation of dossier that is sent to UNESCO for inclusion of State 
protected sites/monuments.  
(Para 5.7.45) 
(viii) Preparation of database of archaeological sites/monuments 
The Committee is surprised to note that the Ministry of Culture does not maintain a 
central database of monuments under the control of State Governments. The Committee 
wonders how the Ministry can d ecide upon whether a certain monument/site should be 
included in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments, if it does not have any information 
regarding the monuments present in the country. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may collect this info rmation from all State/UT Governments, alongwith 
information regarding encroachment of such monuments/sites, and compile a Central 
Database of Monuments/Sites that exist in the country. This will present a thorough picture 
of the state of the historical mo numents across the country and help the Ministry in its 
policy decisions in the future.  
(Para 5.7.48) 

98 
 
The Committee further recommends that important historical monuments and sites such 
as Rama Temple at Peddathumbalam village, Adoni Taluka; Kethavaram Ro ck Arts and 
Belum Caves in Kurnool etc., be included in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments, 
given their historical significance. Steps may be taken to improve the connectivity of such 
important monuments and sites so as to increase the footfall to these monuments.  
(Para 5.7.49) 
The Committee further notes that there are many monuments across the country which are 
not under any sort of protection, whether Central/State or private protection. This clearly 
suggests that a large number of monuments of c ultural and historical significance are 
unexplored as of yet and suffer irreparable damage with each passing day. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry/ASI may conduct an extensive survey to identify such 
monuments across the country, add them to the Central Database of Monuments/Sites that 
exist in the country, categorize them, and come up with ways to at least provide a bare 
minimum level of security to the same, in coordination with the local municipal bodies and 
local residents.  
( Para 5.7.55) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons for the inability of 
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities to complete its task of creation of a 
National Register on Built Heritage & Sites as well as on Antiquities. The Committee is 
concerned to note that in the absence of such a Central database, many monuments would 
go missing without any knowledge of them having existed in the first place. Concrete 
measures must be taken to ensure that a database is prepared at the earliest and that the 
list thus prepared is categorized into the different levels of protection that must be 
extended to them.  
(Para 5.7.56) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may assess the financial requirements for 
carrying out such an exercise across the nation and request the Ministry of Finance to 
grant special allocation for the same. ASI/NMMA should supervise this process with t he 
Department of Archaeology of State Governments and develop a mechanism to seek the 
participation of local municipal bodies, local communities, history and archaeology 

99 
 
students and the likes. A specialized software may be prepared to capture important details 
such as photos and location of the sites/antiquities and it must have provisions to avoid 
duplicacy in the database. The use of latest technologies such as 3D Laser Scanning, 
LiDAR, photogrammetry etc. may be made in sync with the blockchain technolo gy to 
ensure that tamper -proof records of the undocumented precious historical heritage are 
created.  
(Para 5.7.57) 
(ix) Drafting Excavation and Exploration Policy 
The Committee recommends that a Draft Excavation and Exploration Policy may be 
framed at the earliest and inputs may be taken from the experts in this field in this regard. 
The Committee further recommends that ASI may consider opening up the field of 
excavation to more educational institutions and professionals and seek the engagement of 
local communities and civil society groups. The Committee is concerned to note that only a 
minuscule part of the budget available with the ASI is allocated for exploration and 
excavation. Further, the Ministry may take steps to ensure enhanced allocation for the 
purpose of excavation and exploration.  
(Para 5.7.61) 
MISCELLANEOUS 
The Committee is pleased to note the renovation of Red Fort, which consists of British 
Barracks of olden times has been taken up by the Ministry. The Committee takes special 
note of the installation of permanent exhibition on Netaji, the rebellion of 1857, and 
paintings, at the Red Fort.  
(Para 5.8.1) 
The Committee feels that preparation of Heritage by-laws for all the monuments across the 
country forms a crucial part of the protection of  monuments envisaged by the Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 
2010. In this regard, the Committee may be briefed about the roadblocks being faced by 
the National Monuments Authority, the proposed soluti ons to the same and the timeline 
being targeted for laying the Heritage by-laws for all the monuments.  

100 
 
(Para 5.8.2) 
The Committee appreciates the progress made by the Ministry in projects around 
pilgrimages, remote border areas and the Ladakh region.  
(Para 5.8.4) 
One Member of the Committee voiced concern about media reports that the original work 
was being distorted  in the name of maintenance and repairing work of the Lord Jagannath 
Temple. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps to allay 
such fears.  
(Para 5.8.7) 
The Committee is constrained to note that the constraints of manpower and funds, quite 
often play spoilsport in the proper upgradation and development of sculpture sheds into 
Museums.  
(Para 5.8.9) 
The Committee is disappointed to note that the Underwater Wing of ASI is defunct since a 
decade.  
(Para 5.8.10) 
The Committee commends the coordinated efforts being made by ASI and the State 
Government of Maharashtra to carry out conservation of Raigad Fort. India is home to a 
large number of historic forts which are unique in the terms of their history as well as their 
cultural significance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may replicate such 
joint efforts with other State Governments to ensure that the h istoric forts as well as other 
archaeological sites are developed for tourism purposes.  
(Para 5.8.10B) 
The Committee is dismayed to note that even though funds are available with ASI, proper 
work is not being done at Raigarh project, which is funded by the State Government, as 
per the guidelines of ASI. The Committee emphasizes the need to speed up the work being 
done at the Raigarh Fort, which is also called as the ‘Gibraltar of the East’.  
(Para 5.8.11) 

101 
 
The Committee recognizes the need for developing such places/sites into tourist spots. The 
Committee desires the Ministry to take note of the need to allocate funds for the Damerla 
Rama Rao Art Gallery in Rajahmundry, which has pieces of art which are centuries old.  
(Para 5.8.13) 
The Committee emphasize s upon the need for ASI to work in tandem with the concerned 
State Governments to ensure that archaeological sites and historical structures are 
maintained and preserved in good condition.  
(Para 5.8.14) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensur e that the provisions of the 
concerned legislation in this regard, are enforced strictly.  
(Para 5.8.16) 
Too many visitors at an historical site can have negative effects on its physical 
characteristics and integrity, as well as the ecological characterist ics of the associated 
spaces. The Committee, therefore, recommends that ASI may conduct a detailed study into 
the negative impact of high tourist activity at Centrally protected monuments that attract 
high footfall. The study may explore solutions to minim ize such negative impact and to 
figure out a number of visitors that can be allowed at the site while ensuring there is no 
lasting damage caused to the monument and the associated spaces.  
(Para 5.8.18) 
The Committee feels that having a Statement of Significance for each Centrally protected 
monument would go a long way in making ASI staff as well as tourists more aware and 
appreciative of its cultural and historical significance. The information may also be 
uploaded on the ASI website so as to benefit  scholars as well as tourists who might be 
researching before planning a trip to the place.  
(Para 5.8.20) 
The Committee feels that visitors should experience the heritage sites in the purest possible 
form, and thus, utmost care should be taken to ensure that any structures built to provide 
facilities at such sites are in sync with the historic character of the  site and do not disfigure 
its view and aura. The Committee, therefore, recommends that signage, ticket counters, 

102 
 
toilets, interpretation counters etc., should be designed in consideration of the site in 
question, and approved by an expert committee compri sing archaeologists and heritage 
architects.  
(Para 5.8.22) 
The Committee recommends that ASI may experiment with the ticket pricing for both 
domestic as well as international tourists, with the aim to maximizing the revenue 
generated by such visits as wel l as allowing the maximum feasible number of people to 
enjoy visiting the site. As a part of this attempt, ASI may consider granting special discount 
to young international tourists as well as offering weekly passes to both foreign and 
domestic travelers t o entice them to visit and appreciate more historical sites during their 
trip.  
(Para 5.8.24) 
The Committee is deeply concerned to note the observations made by Aga Khan Trust for 
Culture regarding approval granted by NMA on the basis of HIA commissioned b y the 
developer itself. The Committee recommends that necessary provisions may be put in place 
to ensure that the HIA required for approval of development projects should be conducted 
by a specialist NGO or academic institute, who is not associated with the developer itself.  
(Para 5.8.26) 
The Committee recommends that a robust mechanism may be put in place to ensure that 
detailed assessment exercise is conducted for all Centrally protected monuments 
periodically. The assessment may be utilized to come up w ith short -term and long -term 
action plans for development and conservation of the sites.  
(Para 5.8.28) 
The Committee recommends that ASI may work on the revival of historical water bodies 
across the country. Besides helping in collecting rainwater during rainy season, the revived 
water bodies will act as a tourist attraction as well. The Committee urges upon ASI to 
explore partnering with the Ministry of Jal Shakti in this regard.  
(Para 5.8.30) 

103 
 
The Committee is surprised to note that less than 10% of monu ments in the Centrally 
Protected Monuments list have been added to the list since 1947. The Committee feels that 
given the size of our country as well as its rich historical heritage, many more monuments 
should be under the protection of ASI. The Committee , therefore, strongly recommends 
that the Ministry may thoroughly consider important State -protected monuments as well 
as monuments outside the protection of both Central and State Governments, for inclusion 
in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments. 20 th Century buildings of historical 
significance may also be considered for inclusion in the CPM list during this exercise.  
(Para 5.8.32) 
The Committee recommends that ASI may take necessary steps to ensure well -planned 
illumination of historical monuments , wherever feasible, since the same would act as a 
major attraction for night -time tourism. The Committee further recommends that urgent 
steps may be taken to ensure that the ASI monuments are easily accessible by differently -
abled visitors.  
(Para 5.8.35) 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to address the 
problems pointed out in the above-mentioned CAG Report.  
(Para 5.8.37) 
 
ISSUES COMMON TO MUSEUMS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND 
MONUMENTS 
 
Partnering with the private sector for development and conservation of Museums and 
archaeological sites 
In view of the fund crunch faced by the Ministry of Culture for development and 
conservation of Museums and archaeological sites/monuments across the country, the 
Committee feels that it is imperative for the Ministry to seek the participation of private 
sector in order to have the necessary investment needed to make our Museums and 
archaeological sites/monuments at par with international standards, while ensuring the 

104 
 
employment of best possible preservation practices to keep our cultural heritage safe and 
preserved for the future generations. The Ministry may come up with possible schemes to 
partner with the private sector in development and conservation of our cultural heritage 
via PPP mode, test these on a pilot basis and roll out the successful ones on large scale.  
(Para 6.1.2) 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has come up with the idea of identifying 
some start-ups, who will then incubate the idea and then put it out for main-streaming of 
investment, in respect of iconic heritage structures identified in the country, by the 
Ministry. The Committee appreciates the proposal mooted by the Ministry to create a 
Section 8 company which will actually monitor and execute all these projects and it will be 
self-sustaining.  No money will be provid ed by the Government.  The company, for the 
purpose of viability gap funding, will take some money from the Central Government 
which the Ministry already has for schematic assistance to the Museums.  
(Para 6.1.3) 
The Committee suggests that the maintenance of various archaeological sites and 
monuments be outsourced to private agencies and in order to attract funds from such 
individuals/agencies, an incentive, such as display boards in the name of such individual 
agency at the sites, may be provided.  
(Para 6.1.5) 
Effect of pollution on Museum artefacts and Archaeological Sites 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may conduct researches to devise 
technological solutions to curb the ill -effects of air pollution on our cultural heritage. 
Different effects  of the pollutants lingering in the air on different types of surfaces and 
materials should be studied and the solutions devised to prevent or minimize the same 
should be shared with State Government archaeology departments and Museums as well. 
The Committ ee strongly recommends that the Ministry should seek higher budgetary 
allocation to fund researches since the process of conservation of monuments and artefacts 
is as much science as it is an art.  
(Para 6.2.3) 

105 
 
Re-examination and updation of Acts and Laws pertaining to Museums and Archaeological 
Sites 
The Committee urges upon the Ministry to review the heritage laws in light of 
contemporary times and come up with suitable amendments, wherever necessary, to ensure 
that they are more realistic, transparent an d do not cause unnecessary inconvenience to 
bona fide  citizens. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may come up 
with a legislative framework to enable and encourage the participation of municipalities 
and village panchayats in heritage cons ervation and management, especially in case of 
monuments that are not included in the list of Centrally protected/ State protected 
monuments.  
(Para 6.3.3) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake an exhaustive review of the 
Indian Museum A ct, 1910 and the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act, 1958 and come up with suitable amendments, in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law & Justice. The Committee further recommends that the blanket ban on 
construction works within the prohibited area of 100 meters around the monument, should 
be reviewed in consultation with experts and stakeholders, and suitable amendments may 
be proposed to ensure a balance between developmental works and heritage conservation. 
It should be ensured that prohibitions are still in place against works that might impact the 
view corridors to the monument or where such works may be of detrimental effect to the 
structural integrity of the monument.  
(Para 6.3.9) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry m ay come up with the necessary legislative 
framework to ensure that conservation plans are in place at all Centrally protected 
monuments and for making Heritage Impact Assessment compulsory for major 
development projects. The Committee urges upon the Minist ry to revise its National Policy 
to encourage transformation and reuse as an alternate to demolish and rebuild, since the 
same would allow many more historical sites to be preserved in a better shape instead of 
them disappearing or getting demolished over time.  
(Para 6.3.12) 

106 
 
Weekly/ Biweekly cultural evenings at Museums/ Centrally protected monuments 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should organize weekly / biweekly cultural 
programmes such as lectures, traditional dance and music programmes, film screenings, 
book discussions, traditional art melas etc. at Museums and archaeological sites, in  close 
coordination with the Ministry of Tourism and concerned departments of State 
Governments. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Culture’s database of local artistes 
would be of immense help towards this initiative and would give a boost to both d omestic 
and foreign tourism. Organizing participative programmes from time to time would also 
tend to make Museums/ sites visits a fun and learning experience for the visitors. The 
Ministry should tap its pool of artistes and local talent in such programme s. The same 
should be advertised through social media in order to reach out to the target audience in a 
cost-effective manner. Due caution must be exercised by the Ministry to ensure that any 
events organized at a Museum or an archaeological site are not i n any way detrimental to 
the site or any artefacts.  
(Para 6.4.3) 
Taking action on feedback from visitors 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may set up a robust mechanism to collect 
feedback from domestic as well as foreign tourists who visit a Mus eum or archaeological 
site/monument. Technology may be utilized to permit the tourists to easily leave their 
feedback regarding the experience they had in their visit to a Museum/ archaeological 
monument. Working on first hand feedback from the visitors wi ll lead the Ministry into 
improving tourist experience in the future, while also leaving a positive imprint about 
Indian culture and heritage among those who visit.  
(Para 6.5.1) 
Review of the tendering process for awarding conservation contracts 
It has come to the notice of the Committee that in some cases, the projects are awarded to 
such contractors who have little to no experience in the field of conservation, who later hire 
sub-consultants and end up doing more harm than good, to the monuments / artefacts 

107 
 
involved. In light of this, the Committee recommends that the Ministry may thoroughly 
review the tendering process it adopts for awarding conservation contracts of 
archaeological sites/monuments and Museum artefacts and to have provisions in pl ace to 
ensure that tenders are not awarded to the lowest bidder, but to a contractor who has 
considerable experience and expertise in the required skillset.  
(Para 6.6.1) 
Lending assistance to important State Protected Archaeological Monuments and Museums 
The Committee observes that the development and preservation of archaeological sites and 
Museums often does not run high in the priorities of State Governments. This often leads to 
neglect, and thus irreparable damage is caused to the State protected archa eological 
monuments as well as Museum artefacts. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should have a mechanism in place to identify instances of gross neglect of maintenance and 
preservation of important archaeological sites and Museums and prod the S tate 
Government Department concerned to take action to rectify the same. In cases of exigent 
needs, ASI may proactively provide technical assistance to such monuments and Museums. 
The Committee suggests that the Ministry may, from time to time, consider th e inclusion of 
the State protected archaeological monuments and Museums which are more than 100 
years old, in the list of Centrally protected monuments and National Museums. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry may lend assistance to State 
Governments to enable introduction of online ticketing to archaeological sites and 
Museums under their purview.  
(Para 6.7.3) 
Coordination with different Ministries and State Governments 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should strictly ensure that there is close co -
ordination between/amongst the Ministry of Culture and the concerned State Departments. 
The Committee desires the Ministry to come up with well -defined procedures to allow the 
State Departments to seek guidance and technical expertise fro m the various organizations 
under the Ministry. Regular meetings may be held with the concerned officials of the State 
Governments, at least once in 3 months, and the Report thereon, should be submitted to the 

108 
 
Central Government and also to this Committee.  The Committee should be updated 
periodically about the outcome thereof. The Committee also recommends that if the 
Ministry feels that any Amendment of the concerned legislation is needed, the Ministry 
may ensure that the Amendment is fructified, by piloting a Bill in this regard.  
(Para 6.8.2) 
The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in Para 114 of its 289 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Culture and strongly recommends the 
Ministry to coordinate with the Ministry of Railways ; Road Transport and Highways and 
concerned State Departments to make necessary improvements in rail and road 
connectivity at important Museums and archaeological sites/monuments in the country.  
(Para 6.8.3) 
Allocation of funds generated from Museums and ASI, to the Ministry of Culture 
The Committee notes that at present, the revenue generated by the Museums and 
Archaeological Sites/Monuments under the Ministry of Culture, by way of sale of entry 
tickets etc., is deposited to Consolidated Fund of India. Gi ven the scarcity of funds 
available with the Ministry of Culture, the Committee strongly recommends that the 
Ministry may request that the revenue so generated should be allocated to the Ministry 
itself for the purpose of development and conservation of Mu seums and archaeological 
sites/monuments. This would also encourage the autonomous organizations under the 
Ministry of Culture to come up with innovative ways of revenue generation and result in 
better development and upkeep of the cultural heritage of the country.  
(Para 6.9.3) 
Lowering the fees charged for filming at Centrally Protected Monuments 
The Committee reiterates the recommendation made in Para 124 of its 289 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Culture that the prices charged b y the 
Ministry for filming at archaeological sites/monuments and Museums, outside the period 
notified in the ASI notification mentioned above, are very high. Films and videos featuring 
the archaeological monuments and Museums showcase the richness of our cultural heritage 
to both domestic and foreign viewers alike and act as a free tool for publicity of the 

109 
 
monuments and Museums, thus propelling their tourism prospects. In light of this, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry to opt for a pay-as-you-wish payment model, wherein 
the filming company seeking the permission can pay the amount that it can afford to pay. 
The Ministry may also ensure that there are no delays in grant of permission for filming at 
the monuments while putting in place enough safeguards to ensure that the filming 
activities do not cause any harm to the monuments and/or the archaeological artefacts.  
(Para 6.10.1) 
One Member of the Committee underscored the imminent need for the infusion of 
professionalism into the identification, maintena nce, and preservation of archaeological 
sites and in the maintenance of Museums. The Committee endorses this view and strongly 
recommends that the Ministry should give due attention to ensure that professionally 
trained people are engaged in all such activ ities. The Committee urges the Ministry to give 
emphasis to branding and social media presence.  
(Para 6.11.1) 
The Committee agrees with the view that private owners of listed historic buildings as well 
as people having residential property properties within prohibited/ regulated/ buffer areas 
should be provided with certain compensation/ incentives to encourage their participation 
in the conservation and protection of the historical sites. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that wherever feasible, th e Ministry may act on the suggestions made by 
INTACH in this regard.  
(Para 6.12.3) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

110 
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 14 th October, 2020 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Margani Bharat 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
12. Shri Dushyant Singh 
13.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses  
   
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
  
1. Shri Raghvendra Singh Secretary 
2. Shri Padma Lochan Sahu Joint Secretary 
3. Ms. Nirupama Kotru Joint Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Prasad Sarbhai Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Aditi Das Rout Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal Joint Secretary 

111 
 
7. Ms. Sunita Dhavale Deputy Secretary (Museums) 
  
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
  
8. Shri Janhwij Sharma Joint Director General 
9. Shri Nambirajan Joint Director General 
10. Dr. Sanjay Manjul Joint Director General 
  
NATIONAL MUSEUM 
11. Shri Subrata Nath Additional Director General 
  
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
The Chairman then informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the 
Secretary, Ministry of Culture on the subject ‘Development and Conservation of Museums and 
Archaeological Sites – Challenges and Opportunities’. 
3.         Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and other senior 
officials from the Ministry to the meeting. The Secretary informed the Committee that the 
Ministry is engaged in redevelopment plans of the iconic museums and  the cultural spaces which 
have been identified by the Ministry. He stated that the Ministry is taking steps to upgrade the 
facilities at the museums to make them more modern and interactive. On the issue of skilling, he 
briefed the Committee about the different institutions under the Ministry of Culture which impart 
diplomas, post-graduate degrees and Ph.D. About the upcoming Indian Institute of Heritage and 
Culture, he stated that the Ministry has listed out the requirements in terms of manpower, faculty 
etc. for the next five years and that the Ministry is in the process of placing it before the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. 
4.         He further briefed the Committee about the various digital initiatives taken by the 
Ministry in the wak e of Coronavirus pandemic, including Virtual Experiential Museums, e -
ticketing and upgradation of websites. He stated that the Ministry is concentrating on creating 
museums in remote border areas. He elucidated upon the repair and restoration works being 
carried out by the Ministry in the National Library building in Kolkata, old Jaipur House and a 
13 acre property in Kolkata which has five buildings and is being developed as a cultural space. 
He informed the Committee that a Central Asian collection of abo ut 13,000 artefacts of around 
8th century A.D. are being set up for display in four galleries in National Museum, New Delhi. 
He threw light on the upcoming Buddha Gallery, which will be a Buddha museum of 
international stature and is planned to be inaugurated around the third week of January, 2021. 

112 
 
5.         As regards conservation of Museums, the Secretary mentioned about a new conservation 
lab which is being created and equipped by the collaborative efforts of National Museum 
Institute, National Museum and National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural 
Property. He shared with the Committee, the plans of the Ministry regarding exponentially 
expanding the Painting, Manuscript and Textile galleries in National Museum by October, 2020. 
He submitted that the Ministry, in collaboration with the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), 
plans to create an impressive gallery on ancient Indian civilization with artefacts and antiquities 
from the sites of Rakhigarhi, Sanauli, Lothal, Kalibangan etc. He further briefed the Committee 
about the upgradation of security infrastructure being carried out in the National Museum. 
6.         On the issue of development and conservation of archaeological sites, the Secretary 
informed the Committee that 22 out of  the 38 World Heritage properties in India fall within the 
purview of ASI. He stated that structural conservation work is going on in about 700 
monuments; environmental development in around 500 monuments; and scientific preservation 
in about 150 monuments . He further informed the Committee that online facility is being 
provided for filming, photography & videography and procurement of archival images. He stated 
that dossiers have been submitted to UNESCO for inclusion of Ramappa temple, Dholavira, 
Rithi Ra njhana, Bijnore, Sanauli, Vadnagar, Gottiprolu and Asuragarh, in the list of World 
Heritage Sites. 
7.         The Secretary elucidated upon the challenges faced by ASI in its conservation works, on 
account of issues of structural stability, climatic factor s, biological and botanical factors, age of 
monuments, encroachment, pollution, quarrying and natural disasters, vandalism, lack of support 
from local authorities, shortage of skilled manpower, lack of funds etc. Thereafter, he briefed the 
Committee about the various opportunities present with respect to the subject under 
examination viz., promotion of tourism and business, involvement of the local community, 
capacity building, establishment of modern conservation process which is being planned to be 
built through the Indian Institute of Heritage Conservation, making benchmarking and 
documentation available to the global audience and developing a module for civil society 
engagements in the preservation of national heritage. 
8.         Members of the Committe e raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
9.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.         The meeting adjourned at 12:38 P.M. 

113 
 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 28 th January, 2021 in Committee 
Room No. 4, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Margani Bharat 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Dushyant Singh 
12. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
 Witnesses   
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1. Shri Raghvendra Singh   Secretary 
2. Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal    Joint Secretary 
 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
3.  Ms. V. Vidyavathi    Director General 
4.  Shri T.J. Alone    Joint Director General 

114 
 
5. Shri S.K. Manjul    Joint Director General 
6. Shri Ajay Yadav    Director (ASI & Administration) 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
7. Shri Shri Prakash    Joint Secretary 
8. Shri Krishan Kumar    Director 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He 
informed the Members that as a part of the examination of the subject ‘Development and 
Conservation of Museums and Archaeological Sites – Challenges and Opportunities’, the 
agenda of the meeting was to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Culture on ‘Preservati on, 
Protection and Funding of Museums and Archaeological Sites’. 
3. The Chairman then welcomed Shri Raghvendra Singh, Secretary, Ministry of Culture; 
and Shri Shri Prakash, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs alongwith other senior 
officials of the resp ective Ministries, to the meeting of the 
Committee.                                                                 
4. Secretary, Ministry of Culture began his deposition by informing the Committee that the 
Ministry has taken up almost all of the iconic museums under the purview of Government 
of India for upgradation to world standards. While briefing the Committee about the issue 
of shortage of manpower faced in museums, he stated that the Ministry has a five year 
plan to address manpower shortage and that th e Ministry is coming up with an Indian 
Institute of Heritage which will bring schools of archival studies, manuscriptology, etc. 
under one single umbrella. He informed the Committee that there are about 75,000 iconic 
heritage structures in the country whic h are neither governed by the archaeological rules 
and regulations of the State nor that of Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). He stated 
that about 150 -200 of these structures have been identified for renovation by the States 
and Central Government. He further informed the Committee that the Ministry is 
planning to receive several proposals for renovation of these sites from start -ups, choose 
one among them, and put it out for mainstreaming of investment. He apprised the 
Committee of the plans of the Min istry to create a Section 8 company under the 
Companies Act, 2013 to monitor and execute these projects and that the same will take 
money from the Central Government only, for the purpose of Viability Gap Funding. 
5. Director General, ASI informed the Committ ee that the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 empowers ASI to take over any 
monument or site as a Centrally protected monument, provided it meets certain criteria 
clearly defined in the Act. She stated that ASI does n ot have any estimate on the number 
of monuments or sites which are not under any kind of protection, neither State/Central 
nor private protection, and need to be protected. Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed 
the Committee that a Legal Conference will be held, where the Ministry will examine all 
the aspects of existing legal provisions and having then consolidated the Ministry's 

115 
 
approach towards the issue of vandalism of monuments/temples, try to introduce them in 
the form of amendments in the AMASR Act. 
6. Director General, ASI further stated that there have not been any major instances where 
the district administration has refused to cooperate with ASI in case of encroachment at a 
Centrally protected monument. She informed the Committee that there have be en no 
instances of vandalism in Centrally protected monuments, except for one incident at a 
temple in Hassan district, Karnataka where ASI filed a police complaint and a modeller 
was sent to rectify the damage caused. She stated that ASI has carried out an  extensive 
assessment of security requirements for all the Centrally protected monuments. She 
apprised the Committee of the constraint of funds faced by ASI, due to which 24x7 
protection is not made available for many monuments. Elaborating further on the 
constraint of funds, she informed that the focus of ASI has been to complete the ongoing 
works, rather than taking up new works. 
7. Secretary, Ministry of Culture further informed the Committee that the Ministry is 
planning to come up with a projection mapping show in Lal Qila, which is also aerial. He 
further stated that Lal Qila will become the first cultural space where about 11 -12 
museums will be open within next 2 -3 months and the visitors would be able to spend 8 -
10 hours there. 
8. Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that the Ministry has 
received a few VIP references regarding attacks on Hindu temples in Andhra Pradesh. He 
added that since Police and Public order are subjects enumerated in the State List of the 
Constitution, the State of Andhra Pradesh has been requested to send a detailed Report to 
the Ministry on such attacks, which is yet to be received.  
9. Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary, Ministry of Culture. The C hairman then directed that written replies to the 
queries which remained unanswered may be sent to the Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
  
10. *   *    *   * 
11. *   *    *   *§ 
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13. The meeting adjourned at 11:58 A.M. 
  
                                                 
§ * Relates to other matters 

116 
 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Friday, the 25 th June, 2021 in Committee Room 
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Anto Antony 
      8.   Shri Margani Bharat 
      9.   Shri Tapir Gao 
    10.   Shri Rahul Kaswan 
    11.   Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
    12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
    13.   Shri K. Muraleedharan 
    14.   Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
    15.   Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
    16.   Shrimati Mala Roy 
    17.   Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
    18.   Shri Dushyant Singh 
    19.   Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
    20. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
    21. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
  

117 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the   
following draft Reports:- 
(i) *   *   *   *; 
(ii) *   *   *   *; and 
(iii) Report on 'Development and Conservation of Museums and Archaeological 
sites- Challenges and Opportunities '. 
 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
4. *   *   *   ***. 
5.   The meeting adjourned at 12:05 P.M. 
  
                                                 
** * Relates to other matters 

118 
 
XXI 
TWENTY FIRST  MEETING 
The Committee met at 4:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 20th July, 2021 in Committee Room - 3, 
First Floor, Block-B, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Manshingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Anto Antony 
9. Shri Margani Bharat 
10. Shri Tapir Gao 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
13. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
14. Shri Prince Raj 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
      
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 

119 
 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
2.        At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. *   *   *   * 
3.      *   *   *   * 
4.      *   *   *   * 
5.        *   *   *   * 
6.        The Committee then decided to present/lay the Report of the Committee on the subject 
'Development and Conservation of Museums and Archaeological sites - Challenges and 
Opportunities' to both the Houses of Parliament on 26 th July, 2021. The Committee, 
accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and in his absence, Dr. Sonal 
Mansingh, M.P. to present the Report in Rajya Sabha.  Shri Anto Antony, M.P. and in his 
absence, Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas, M.P. was authorized to lay the above mentioned 
Report on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
7.        *   *   *   * 
8.        *   *   *   *†† 
9.         The meeting adjourned at 4:50 P.M. 
  
                                                 
†† * Relates to other matters 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES  

120 
 
Annexure-A 
The list of disbursal of Funds to State Governments under the Museum Grant Scheme in 
last five years. 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
S. 
No
. 
State  Name of Organization  FY:  
2015-16 
FY: 
2016-17 
FY:  
2017-18 
FY: 
2018-19 
2019-20 
 
1)  Andhra 
Pradesh 
Padamshree Kalluri 
Subbarao Memorial 
District Archaeological 
Museum Anantpur, 
Government of Andhra 
Pradesh  
252.777 - - - - 
2)  Archaeological 
Museum, Eluru, West 
Godavari Dist.   
Department of 
Archaeology & 
Museums, Govt. of 
Andhra Pradesh  
- - 160.00 - 80.00 
3)  Bapu Museum, M G 
Road, Vijayawada, 
Krishna Distt.   
Department of 
Archaeology & 
Museums, Govt. of 
Andhra Pradesh  
- - 320.00 - 160.00 
Total (972.777) 252.777 - 480.00 - 240.00 
4)  Kerala 
 
 
 
Archaeological 
Museum, Hill Palace 
Museum, (PO), 
Thripunithura, Kerala 
- - - 112.036 - 
5)  Koyikkal Palace - 
Archaeological Museum 
for Folklore, Folk Art & 
Numismatics, Sathram 
Juntion, Nedumangad 
- - - 62.737 - 

121 
 
6)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pazhassi Raja 
Archaeological 
Museum, East Hill, 
Kozhikode Kerala 
- - - 60.763 - 
7)  Govt. of Kerala for 
Development of Govt. 
Museum Sakthan, 
Thampuran Palace 
Museum, 
Chempukkavu, Trissur, 
Kerala 
 
 
- - - 200.426 - 
Total (435.962) - - - 435.962 - 
8)  Manipur State Archaeology, 
Govt. Of Manipur for 
setting up of three 
galleries in Kangla Fort. 
- - - - 217.755 
Total (217.755) - - - - 217.755 
9)  Mizoram Mizoram State Museum, 
Director, Art & Culture 
Department, Aizwal, 
Mizoram  
50.00 - 25.00 - - 

122 
 
10)  Director Art &  Culture 
Department, Chanmari, 
Aizwal for Setting up of 
District Museum at 
Lunglei, Mizoram 
- - - - 413.61 
Total (488.61) 50.00 - 25.00 - 413.61 
11)  Nagaland State Museum Kohima, 
Govt. of Nagaland 
- 750.00 - 365.667 373.51 
12)  Directorate of Art and 
Culture, Kohima, 
Nagaland for setting up 
of Chesore Museum in 
Tuesang Town  
- - 468.63 - 231.801 
13)  North East Heritage 
Museum, at NEZCC 
Complex, Post box No. 
98, Dimapur, Nagaland -
797112 
331.82 - - - - 
Total (2521.428) 331.82 750.00 468.63 365.667 605.311 
14)   Punjab 
 
Punjab War Memorial 
Museum,  Attari Road 
Amritsar, Punjab 
97.22 305.58 - - - 
 
Total (402.8) 
 
97.22 305.58 - - - 
15)  Rajasthan Department of 
Archaeology & 
Museums, Government 
of Rajasthan (i) 
Government Museum, 
Ahar, Udaipur (ii) 
Government Museum, 
Alwar and (iii) 
Government Museum, 
Dungarpur 
100.00 - - - - 

123 
 
Total (100.00) 100.00 - - - - 
16)  Sikkim State Museum Sikkim, 
Govt. of Sikkim   
- 500.00 - - - 
Total (500.00) - 500.00 - - - 
17)  Tamilnadu 
 
 
 
Govt. Museum, 
Thirugokarnam, 
Pudukottai, Tamil Nadu 
- - 160.00 - - 
18)  Government Museum 
St. Mark Road, 
Samathanapuram 
Palayamkottai, 
Tiruneveli Distt.  
- - 90.572 - - 
19)  Government Museum 
Trichy, Rani 
Managammal Palace , 
Dist. Tiruchirapalli  
- - 149.97 - - 
20)  Government Museum 
Ooty, Stone House, Dist. 
Udhagamandalam   
- - 46.00 - - 
21)  Department of 
Archaeology, Tamilnadu 
for Development up of 
Thirumalai Nayak 
Palace Site Museum  
Madurai 
- - - - 330.88 
Total (777.422) - - 446.542 - 330.88 
22)  Uttar 
Pradesh 
Ram Katha Museum and 
Digital Holographic 
Ram Leela (OAT), 
Ayodhya (District 
Faizabad),  Govt. of 
Uttar Pradesh 
- - - 400.00 - 
Total (400.00) - - - 400.00 - 
23)  Uttara-
khand 
Tourism and Culture, 
Uttaranchal, Uttarkhand 
(Himalayan Museum, 
Rishikesh) 
- - - - 244.19 

124 
 
24)   
 
 
 
 
 
Sumitra Nandan Pant 
Mueum, Kausani Distt. 
Bageshwar, Uttrakhand 
of Tourism & Culture  
- - 20.888 - - 
Total(265.078) - - 20.888 - 244.19 
25)  Delhi North Delhi Municipal 
Corporation, 
Shahajhanabad 
Museum, Lahori Gate 
Chowk Delhi  
- - 169.20 - - 
Total (169.20) - - 169.20 - - 
Total (7251.032) 831.817 1555.58 1610.26 1201.629 2051.746 
 
  

125 
 
Annexure-B 
Subordinate Organizations 
 
NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Sl. No.  Name of 
the Post  
Grade Pay No. of 
Post  
Filled Status 
1. Director 
General  
Level-
15(182200-
224100) 
1 1 The post of Director General, 
National Museum temporarily 
upgraded as Chief Executive 
Officer, Development of Museums 
and Cultural Spaces(DEO -DMCS) 
to Apex Scale for a period of three 
years keeping the RRs of DG,NM 
in abeyance f or a period of three 
years vide Cabinet Sectt. ID Note. 
08/13/2016-CS(A) dt. 9.9.2019. 
 
2. Additional 
Director 
General 
Level-
14(10000) 
2 1 1 post of ADG has been filled up 
under Central Staffing Scheme. The 
incumbent has joined as ADG, 
National Museum w.e.f. 14.1.2009 
(AN) for a period of five years or 
until further orders whichever is 
earlier.  
 
1 post is vacant. UPSC vide letter 
dated 4.10.2019 has recommended 
Dr. S C Pandey for appointment to 
the post of ADG on short term 
contract. Proposal for seek ing 
approval of ACC is under process.  
3. Joint 
Director 
General  
Director 
Level-
13(8700) 
2 0 1 post is to be filled by composite 
method and other 1 by DR. 
 
1 post is to be filled by Composite 
Method. Vacancy for the post was 
advertised for the 5th time and 
proposal submitted in UPSC on 
01.05.2019. UPSC in letter dt. 

126 
 
14.06.2019 found the lone candidate 
ineligible for the post and selection 
process was treated a s infructuous. 
The Commission has advised to fill 
up the vacancy as per provisions of 
RRs.  
 
Against DR vacancy, action is being 
taken for filling up the post through 
Central Staffing Scheme.  
 
Amendment of RRs is also 
underway. 
4. Director Level 12 
(7600) 
3 0 1 post has been abolished. Action is 
being taken for creation of the post. 
 
1 post was under deemed abolished 
category, which has been 
revived.Process for filling up the 
post will be initiated soon.  
 
The 3rd post has recently vacated. 
Process for filling up the post on 
promotion basis is underway.  
 
NATIONAL GALLERY OF MODERN ART (NGMA) 
1. Director 
General 
Level-
14(10000) 
1 1 The Appointments Committee of 
the Cabinet (ACC) has approved the 
appointment of Shri Adwaita 
Charan Gadanayak, Director, KIIT 
University, Bhubaneshwar to the 
post of Director General, NGMA. 
Shri A. C. Gadanayak, has joined as 
DG, NGMA on 7.12.2016 for a 
period of Three years or untill 
further orders whichever is the 
earliest. ACC vide their office order 
no. 4/19/2016 -EO(SM.II) dated 
13.11.2019 has now extended his 
tenure for further period of three 

127 
 
years beyond 6.12.2019. 
 
 
2. Director Director 
Level-
13(8700) 
1 2 Out of 3 posts, 2 posts are filled up 
by Central Staffing Scheme as per 
details given below: 
 
 
(i) The incumbent has joined as 
Director, National Gallery of 
Modern Art, Mumbai w.e.f. 
25.10.2018 (AN) for a period of 
five years or until fu rther orders 
whichever is earlier. 
 
(ii) The incumbent has joined as 
Director, National Gallery of 
Modern Art, Bengaluru w.e.f. 
20.11.2018 (FN) for a period of five 
years or until further orders 
whichever is earlier. 
 
(iii) One vacancy has arisen on 
12.06.2020. Action is being taken to 
fill up the post. 
(i)  
2. Deputy 
Director  
Level 12 
(7600) 
2 0 Both the posts are under deemed 
abolished category.  
 
The file for revival of one post has 
been sent to Ministry of Finance.    
 
Proposal for revival of another post  
is awaited from NGMA. 
 
NRLC 
1. Director 
General  
Level-
14(10000) 
1 1 Pursuant to the approval of the 
Appointments Committee of the 
Cabinet vide DOPT 
Communication No. 4/5/2019 -

128 
 
EO(SM.II) dated 14.08.2019, Prof. 
(Dr.) Manager Singh, Head of the 
Department of Conservation, 
National Museum Institute of the 
History of Art, Conservation and 
Museology (NMI), New Delhi has 
been appointed to the post of 
Director General, NRLC, Lucknow 
on contract basis, for a period of 
three years or until further orders, 
whichever is earlier. Prof. (Dr.) 
Singh has taken charge of DG, 
NRLC, Lucknow on 19.09.2019. 
 
 
AUTONOMOUS ORGANISATIONS 
 
NATIONAL MUSEUM INSTITUTE 
Sl. No.  Name of 
the Post  
Grade Pay No. of 
Post  
Filled Status 
1. Vice-
Chancellor 
Apex Scale 
Level-17 
(225000-
225000) 
1 1 Chief Executive Officer, 
Development of Museums and 
Cultural Spaces(DEO -DMCS) is 
also the Vice-Chancellor of NMI.  
SALAR JUNG MUSEUM 
1. Director  Level-
14(10000) 
1 1 Dr. A Nagender Reddy has 
joined as Director, Salar Jung 
Museum on 28.6.2018. His 
appointment has been made till 
he attains the age of 
superannuation or until further 
orders, whichever the earliest. 
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENCE MUSEUM 
1. Director 
General 
Level-
15(182200-
224100) 
1 1 Vide note dated 23.03.2019, 
ACC approved the proposal for 
appointment of Shri A.D. 
Choudhury, DDG, NCSM to the 
post of DG, NCSM till the date 
of his attaining the age of 

129 
 
superannuation or until further 
orders. Shri A.D. Choudhury 
assumed the office of DG, 
NCSM w.e.f the forenoon of 
29.03.2019. 
Indian Museum 
1. Director Level-
14(10000) 
1 0 ACC vide letter dated 27.12.2019 
approved premature repatriation 
of Shri Purohit from the post of 
Director, IM to his parent cadre 
Allahabad Museum w.e.f. 
04.09.2019. Further, ACC vide 
order dated 04.02.2020 has 
approved entrustment of 
additional charge of the post of 
Director, IM to Shri A.D. 
Choudhary, DG, NCSM w.e.f. 
03.09.2019 and upto 30.06.2020, 
or till the appointment of regular 
incumbent to t he post or until 
further orders. In r/o of filling up 
the post of Director, IM on 
regular basis, vide D.O. dated 
21.01.2020, Addl. Chief 
Secretary to Governor of West 
Bengal was requested to publish 
an advertisement inviting 
applications for the post of 
Director, IM in National 
dailies/employment news. With 
the approval of HCM, Ministry 
had asked IM to issue 
advertisement immediately. 
Now, an advertisement for 
inviting applications for the post 
of Director, IM was published in 
the leading newspapers on 
12.04.2020. 
 

130 
 
Annexure-C


131 
 


132 
 


133 
 


134 
 


135 
 
 
  

136 
 
Annexure-D 
List of witnesses who appeared before the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
14th October, 2020 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
  
1. Shri Raghvendra Singh Secretary 
2. Shri Padma Lochan Sahu Joint Secretary 
3. Ms. Nirupama Kotru Joint Secretary 
4. Ms. Amita Prasad Sarbhai Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Aditi Das Rout Joint Secretary 
6. Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal Joint Secretary 
7. Ms. Sunita Dhavale Deputy Secretary (Museums) 
 ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
8. Shri Janhwij Sharma Joint Director General 
9. Shri Nambirajan Joint Director General 
10. Dr. Sanjay Manjul Joint Director General 
NATIONAL MUSEUM 
11. Shri Subrata Nath Additional Director General 
  
28th January, 2021 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
1. Shri Raghvendra Singh   Secretary 
2. Ms. Sanjukta Mudgal    Joint Secretary 
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 
3.  Ms. V. Vidyavathi    Director General 
4.  Shri T.J. Alone    Joint Director General 
5. Shri S.K. Manjul    Joint Director General 
6. Shri Ajay Yadav    Director (ASI & Administration) 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
7. Shri Shri Prakash    Joint Secretary 
8. Shri Krishan Kumar    Director 
 
                                                            ***** 