CONTENTS 
I. CoMt·O~tllON o~ 1 H~; C0'1MI n to~ 
2. IN·I KOl)lJc-riON 
3. RFI'oR 1 oF rHt CoMMITte~ 
4. MtNl)T fi~ 
(i)-( ii) 
(iii) 
1- 15 
17-23 

r 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
( 1996-97) 
1. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari _ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrt G. Prathapa Reddy 
3. Shri Sushi! Barongpa 
•4. Shri S.S. Surjcwala 
5. Shri Yirendra Kataria 
6. Shri Janardhana Poojary 
7. Shn V. Hanumantha Rao 
8. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
9. Shri Raghavji 
10. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
ll. Shri Prcm Chand Gupta 
l2. Shri Bratm Sengupta 
13. Shri V. P Durai\amy 
l4. Shri Yerra Nurayanaswamy 
15. Dr. D. Vcnkutcshwar Rao 
lOK SABHA 
16. Shri PramO<I 1\tahajan 
17. Dr A. K. P<ttel 
18. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhary 
19. Shri Dcvi Bux Singh 
20. Shri Ganga Charon Rajput 
21 Shri P.S. Gadhv;ti 
22. Shri Chamanlal Gupta 
23. Shri Unam Singh PawaJ 
24. Shri Ch<llldra Ohu~han Singh Rathour 
25. Slui K. Vijuy Bhaskara Reddy 
26. Shri P. M. Sayecd 
'27 Shri Manoranjan Bhakt:t 
28. Shri P. C. Chacko 
29. Dr. Y. S R:tjsckhar Reddy 
30. Shri Sat Mahajun 
31. Shri K. D. Suhunpuri 
32. Shri Pradecp Kumnr De' 
33. Shri Parsa Ram :>kghwal 
'3-1 Shri A. StddaraJu 
35. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
36. Sh•·i Ra tna 13ahudur Rai 
37 Slui Balay Rai 
38. Shri A.M. Velu 
39 Shri S.S. Palan•m:tnickam 
( i) 

r 
40. Shri Lgandula Ramana 
41. Shri Anant Mahadevgude 
42. Shri Bishambar Prasad Nishad 
43. Shri Mahcndr:1 Baitha 
44. Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal 
45. Shri G .M. Banatwalla 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ashok Tomar. Director 
(ii) 
Shri Surinder Kumar. Under Secretary 
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Commince Officer 

r 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism, having been 
authorised by the Commillee to present on their behalf, present this 25th RepOrt on the 
Demands for Grants 1996-97 of the Ministry of Surface Transporl-
2. The Committee at 1ts meeting held on !9th August- !996 considered the Demands for 
Grants 1996-97 of the Ministry of Surface Transport (Demand Nos. 78, 79 ;md 80) and heard 
the Secretary, Ministry <'f Surface Transpon on the wbject. 
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry for placing before 
the Commillee the material and inform~tion desired m connection with the examination of 
the Demands for Grants of the Ministry and ror giving evidence before the Committee. 
4. The Committee considered and "dupt<.:d the report at its m~cting held on the 
4th September, 1996. 
NEw Dtcu11; 
September 4, 1996 
Bhadra 13. 1918 (Saka) 
(iii ) 
SUNDER SINGH 13!-IANDAKI, 
Chmrman, 
Commuree on 
Transport and Tourwn. 

REPORT 
The Ministry of Surfa~c Tmnspon is responsible for the formulation ~nd 
implementation of policies and programmes for the development or various modes of 
transport except the railways and civil avimion. The sectors handled by the Mtnistry of 
Surface Transport include shipping , ship build ing and ship repair , major ports. national 
waterways, national highways, road transport, inland water transport and tran>port research. 
2. The Ministry is administratively divided into different wings. namely Roads. Por!S. 
Shipping, Transpon, Chartering and finance. 
3. The fol lowing subordinme offices. Pub lic Sector Undenakings and other autonomous 
bodies function under the administnuive control of th is Ministry:-
Subordinate Offices: 
(i) Direc torate General of Shipping. 
(ii) Directorate General of Lighthouses and Lightships. 
(iii) Andaman and Lak.~hdweep Harbour WCJrh. 
(iv) Minor Ports Survey Organisation. 
Autonomous Bodies: 
(i) Port TruMs at Calcutta, Cochin. Kamila, M<tdr~s, Mormugao, Mumbai, Paradip, 
Tuticor in. Vis;~kh<tpatnam. New Mangalore. Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT). 
(ii) Dock Lahour Board~ at Ctlcutta, Cochin, Kand la, Madras, Mormugao and 
Visakhapatnam . 
(iii) Inland Waterways Authority of Ind ia. 
(iv) Nat ional Highwttys Author ity of Ind ia. 
(v) Natiomtl Ship Design and Research Cen tre. 
(vi) National Institute [or Training of Highways Engineers. 
Public Sector Undertak ings: 
(i) Shipping Corporation of lndia. 
(ii) Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. 
(iii) Cochin Shipyard Ltd. 
(iv) Central Inland Water Transport C()rporatio n. 
(v) Indian Road Construc tion Corporation. 
(vi) Delhi Transport Corporation. (Tntnsferred to the Government of National Cap ital 
Territory De.lhi w.e.f. 5th Augus t, !996). 
(vii) Dredging Corporation of lndi<t. 
1 

I 
2 
(viii) Hooghly Dock and Ports Engineers Ltd. 
Societies/Assoclalions: 
(i) National Institute of Port Management. 
(ii) National Ship Design and Research Centre. 
(iii) National Institute of Training for High Engineers. 
4. llte following three demands pertain to the Ministry of Surface Transport: 
Demand No. 7~urface Transport: 
Demand No. 79-Roads; and 
Demand No. ~Ports. Lighthouses and Shipping. 
5. DEMAND NO. 78 covers activitic~ of the Ministry, Road Twnsport Sector, lnlnnd 
Water Transport, the Public Enterprises in the Roads and lnland Water Transpon Sectors. 
Under this demand, a provtsion of Rs. 140.65 crores has been made for the surface transport 
sector for 1996-97 against Rs. 87.75 crores during the previous year. 
6. DEMAND NO . 79 covers the entire gamut of activities related to construction, 
development and maintenance national highways, strategic border ro;tds, inter-state l'Oads 
and roads of economic importance, transactio ns relaung Central Road Fund Bridge Fee 
Fund, etc. Under this demand. Budget allocation of Rs. 1792.86 crore~ has been made for 
roads sector for 1996·97. against Rs. 1405.49 crores allocated for the: previous year. 
7. DEMAND NO. 80 covers the activities of ports lighthouses, shipping, ship-building 
and ship-repair sectors. Under this demund. a Budget allocation of Rs. 401.91 erore~ for 
ports. lighthouses and shipping sector has been made thb year. as against Rs. 366.17 crores 
allocated for the previous year. 
8. There has thus been an across the board ~ubstantial increase in allocations under the 
three demands pertaining to the Ministry of Surface Transport. 
9. Realising the importance of an integrated approach to all modes of transport. the 
Committee m its lOth Report on Demands for Granll. for 1994-95, had recommended that 
the Ministry of Surface Transport appoint a Committee to go into all aspects of an 
integrated approach to surface transport and prepare an action plan to implement the same 
at the earliest. ln its 16th Report on Demands for Grants. the Committee had expres~ed its 
concern at the volte-face by the Secretary, Ministry of Surfltce Transport, who after 
accepting the Committee's recommendations on appointing a Committee, approached the 
Planning Commission for the constitution of a i'lmional '1 ransport Co-ordination Committee. 
The Committee had then recommended that the Governme nt ~hould finalisP un Integrated 
Surface Transport Policy without any further lOS\ of time and that such a poJicy should be 
ready within a maximum period of six months. 
10. Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport, who deposed before the Committee during 
examination of Grants for 1996-97, ~tated that the earlier Committee set up by the Mtnistry 
in 1994 had been an interna l Committee which had finulised its report in December 1995. 
This Report said that there were a number of issues which needed to be addressed while 
making recommendations on an integrated approach to transport. These were broadly 
identified as sectora l allocations of Plan sources umong various ~cctors of trallSport; policies 
t~ be formulated in this regard to realize such modal-mix. and fiscal incentives/disincentives; 

r 
3 
infrastructure augmentation in various sectors and improvements in its efficiency and extent 
of private sector funding; interaction between Central Ministries such as Railways. Surface 
Transport, Co1J111lerce, etc.; modernisation of freight carrying vehicle Oeet; and senmg up of 
an umbrella agency to oversee all the sectors of trdnsport. 
11. Simu lta neously, the Ministry of Surfac -e Transport had approached the Planning 
Commission to constitute a National Tr:tnsport Co-ordination Committee for preparing 
guidelines for an investment plan for the transport sector, suggesting measures to augment 
funds for the sector, improving productivity, allowing the sector to function on a self­
sustaining commercial basis, facilitating private sector participation, etc. The Planning 
Commission conveyed its approval to the constitution of the above Committee and said that 
funher action in the matter to notify the Committee be taken in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance etc. The Planning Commission further desired that the Ministry of 
Surface Transport should be the nodal Ministry. and provide the necessary funds. 
accommodation, etc., and act as the convenor of the Committee. The Ministry of Surface 
Tr•nsport has since taken up the matter of funding for this Committee with the Department 
of Economic Affairs for assistance from UNDP/ADB . 
12. The Planning Commission ha~ also separately set up a Steering Committee on lnter 
Modal Lmkages and Programmes for the Ninth Five Year Plan 
13. The Committee expresses its serious concern at the manner in which its earlier 
recommendations on the subject have been handled by the Ministry of Surface Transport and 
at the inordinate delay in their implementation. The re~ommendation for a Committee on 
Integrated Surface Transport was made In 1994·95. Two years have passed since Lheu, and no 
such Committee has yet been set up. The Government has taken the plea that llley have not 
been able to identify funds for setting up a Committee. The Committee is shocked to hear lllat 
the Government should have difficulty in the funding such an important issue as an Integrated 
Surface Transport Polley. Surely, an Integrated Surface Transport Policy cannot wait 
eternally for external funding. The Committee urges the Government to expeditiously make 
provision for funds in this regard and initiate work on the formulation of an lntegraterl 
Transport Policy at the earliest. 
PART- I 
Di!mand No. 78 - Surface Transport: 
14. This Demand covers the activities of the main Ministry, Road Transport Sector. 
lnland Water Transport and the Public Enterprises in the roads. and Inland Water Trasnport 
Sector\. Under lllis demand , a provision of R~. 14!!.65 crores has been made for the surface 
transport scc.•or for 1996-97, as comp;tred to Rs. 87 75 crores dunng the previous year. 
15. 111c thrust of the Eighth Five Year Plan ~nd the Annual Plan 1996-97 is th<ll private 
>eclut •huulll be encouraged and enabled to meet the growing demands of passenger 
transport and that Lhere ~hould be improvement in the overall performance of State Road 
Transport Undcnakings. 
16. The following are the guidelines given by the Planning Commission:-
(i) Operationa l efficiency and financial performance of SRTCs must improve. 
(ii) The incremental demand for passenger tr;tffic can well be mel by the private 
sector. Therefore, there is no need for the public sector to add to lhetr Oeet of 
buses. However, exception in ~pecific dtllicult areas where private sector may not 
be in a po8ittOn to come at present, can be made. 

(iii) Budgetary support for c:~pital requirement~ to meet th.: expansion of bu~ flecv 
)ervaccs would, therefore. be confined to .. exc..:ption~l" area~ only; :~nd 
(i,·) If ' public sector SRTC functions well and generate-. ,uffacient resource' for 
expamiom of its fleet\, it may do 'o 
17. The buugct allocation for 19!16-!17 for the Inland W;uer Trunspon Authority of I ndm 
has been lncrensed sub't~ntially from Rs. 6.30 croacs in 1994-95, und R>. 6.65 crorcs 111 
1995-96 tO Rs. 1 li.65 crore> year 1996-97 Th.: Committee was informed that while no new 
major proj..:cb have been planned \luring 1996-97. the increased allocation h mainly for on­
going de,clopmcntal projecb on the three :-.lauonal W;tterway> .-iz the Ganga·Bhagirathi · 
Hooghly river S)'tems, the Drahamputr.t and the West Coast canal The representatives of 
the Ministry of Surface Tran>port, who deposed bcfNe the Committee. saad that 111 the 
earlier years of the Eighth Plan, expenditure on • .kvclopmcnt of inlanu waterways wa~ low 
because various preliminary studae> thtu were necessary. were being done. Only >incc ltt~l 
year the Authority has >hown rea,onable performance against Budget allocation~ .• md ~o 
there have been enhanced allocations this year lhc Authority ha' completed hydrographic 
~urveys on all three national waterways. A number of -chemes including annual fa if\\ ay 
imprO\cmcnt "ork consisting of bandalling, maantenance dredgins. channel m:~rking. 
maintenance of t~rminals, organa~auon. etc. have b.:cn prepared and thcar unplementatton " 
in progrcs~. lhc Commillec was told that ownillg to preparatory work eurlier, the timcfrnme 
for several prOJects of the development of waterw11y~ could not be m:unwlneu. There hnve 
abo been cost c~calauons. Mt~ny of these project,, wluda were scheduled to be completed 
durmg tho: caghth Plan an: nov. likely to spill over to the Ninth Plan. 
IS. The C\lnuninee is conc<:rncd at the slo" r<~tC of progre" in the development of 
mland watcrw,tys According to the Cummitlcc. the- w,t} the work- arc heing execut~:d on 
the waterway~. at " highly unlikely tl1011 these can he completed even in the Ninth Plan. They 
may well lBkt· over 20 years, with >ttbstuntiul cost cscalmions. The Commtllce was tL>Id th((t 
even the Pbnnang Commission :tnt! the Ministry <'f Finance arc not fullv s3ti•fied with the 
execution of projects in thi' ~ector and arc. thcrdvre. hesitant to rclc:t'c more money. Tht~ 
is a matter for 'criou, concern lnlanJ waterways. if proper!~ ,1.-vcloped coulu gre;,tl~ 
'upp!ement the road transport >y,tem which ;, badly ovemretdtcd. Tne Commattcc 
recommend' to the Government to lay greater cmpha,is on the development of ml:mu 
waterways :•nu ensure speedy and umely excnllaon ol projcch, and :•lso Utke up nc" 
projects. wherever n~cessary. 
The Committee also recommend' to the Government 10 examinl' ul10wing the lnl .. nd 
W"terwa~' Authority to seek ur,titullonal finan.:c rilther than l'~ lll'J'Cndent sold) .lll 
Budgetary support . 
19. There is a budgetary allocataon of R~. YO 25 crnres on the mm·l'l<tn ~ide for d;ed~•ng 
subsidy puyablc t\l Calcutta Pt11t Trust tor Jn:dgutg ul Calcutt:t Poll und ll<~ldJ:t Channel 
l'ht: Actu:al rcimbun>emcnt is on the basis of audited figure\. The ;tctuul cxpcndiuu c l<l't 
year was Rs. IJ 1.9\1 crores agntn\t an e~rlier BE of Rs. 60 nore>. The Committee note' wnil 
concern the large dascrepancy at the BE and RE \tilge~ in 1995·96 The BE thb year is Ro,. 
90.25 crorc,, Tbc Commitlee hopes that this is n.:>l indicath·e of lo" er level of dredging 
acthil) during the current )ear, as compared 11ith the pre•ious )tar. 
20. The Central Inland W<ttcr Transport Corporntion. a Public Sector Undertaking.. w:" 
incorpor;ttcd in February. 1967. by taking over the- lo\s making River Steam ~av i ~:(ltion 

5 
Company Ltd. The Corporation provides inland water tran~port services for transportation 
of goods in the Eastern Sector on the Brahamputra and upto Patna on the Ganges; small 
and med ium size ship building and ship repairing . 
21. A p rovision of Rs. 12.60 cro res has been made for the Corporati.on in the Budget 
Estimates for 1996-97 to provide it with budgetary support for financ ing Plan Schemes 
relati ng to modernisa tion of Rajilb<tgan Dockyard, acqu isition of vessels , repair of vesse ls. 
etc . The Corpo ration has been a chro me Joss-makmg company since its very inception, as 
almos t all its vesse ls were old and unserv iceable and the facilities at Rajabagan Dockyard for 
ship -repai r were obso lete . The s.ituation at present is extreme ly dismal and the Corporation's 
annual losses are more than its annual turnover. The Committee was informed that business 
had gone down during the previous year on account of non-availability of cargo on the 
return trips of ClWTC's vessels from Bangladesh; ~md decline in the number of operational 
vessels due to insuffic ient cash reserves needed to keep the vessels In working condition . 
22. The Committee. in its 16th Report on Demands for Grants (1995-96) pertaining to 
Minis try of Surface Tra nsport, had impressed upon the Government to look into the ~ffa i rs 
of the Corpo ration and take suitable action to make the organisation a profitable one . In 
their Action Taken Replies, the Min istry of Surface Transport had, imer rzlia. ;,tatcd that the 
Government had taken some steps to improve the condition of the Corporation. Efforts are 
being made to pi'Ocure more cargo on all routes. ln order to reduce surplus manpower , a 
voluntary retirement scheme has been introduced . under which 749 persons have already 
sought volunwry ret irement. The Gove rnment have al$0 adopted a number of measures to 
improve the condit ion of the Company. like fleer replacemcm Jnd augmentation 
programme; construct ion of one oil tanker; Lmdertaking a project for modernisation of ship­
repa ir facilities at Rajabagan Dockyard . The CIWTC itself has come up wit11 some options. 
'The Govern ment has asked ClWTC to have all option;. extll11ined by a specialist agency and 
come up with a long term Revival Plan. 
23. The Committee again ii11Jlresses upon the Ministry to take expeditious steps with 
regard to CI WTC's future. 
Capital Subs idy to State Road Transpor t Corporations: 
24. A provision of 6.00 crores has been made in th~ Budget Estimates for 1996-97 for 
Plan assistance to State Road Transport Corporations in accordance with the Road 
Transport Corporations Act, 1950. Under thi' Act. capital requirements nf these 
Corporations used to be contributed by the Centre and th~ Swtc Government> on a 1·2 
basis . TI1e assistance was provided only to those SRTC\ which were breaking even, or 
making profits. A sum of R~ . 70 cro1·(!j; wa~ approved by the Plannmg Commission for the 
Eighth Five Year Plan per iod for this purpose and ~mnut1l relcnsc..\ were made from thb 
umount. The Committee was informed that since 1993-94. the Planning ComJ• ·,jon h~> 
dispensed with the provision of capital o.:ontribution to SRTCs on the !!· .nd that 
incremental passenger traffic should be met by the pnvatc ~ector ;ond. th~}efore, t•lC SRTC> 
need not expand their operations. The Mini stry of Surfucc Transport submitted revi>cd 
c<ipital contribution proposals, but the~e were not accepted. Th~ present alloc~tion;. under 
this head are largely to clear the arre~• rs until 1992-93. A provi>ion of Rs. 2.00 crore;. was 
made in the Revised Estim<Hes for 1995-96. out of which Rs. 39.20 lac:. were paid to 
Mahara~htra State Road Transport Corporat ion. after which ull arrcurs due to the MSRTC 
were cleared. Arrears worth R,. 13.147 crores arc now due only to tl1e Gujarat Stat e Road 
Transport Corporat ion. The Ministry hope:. to di:.ch;~rge the entire umount of 11frears due to 
that Corporatkm by next )'ear. 

r 
6 
25. The Committee is of the view that a number or State Road Transport Corporations are 
incurring losses due to inadequacy or capital. These Corporations have a major role to play in 
providing srrvices to millions of commuters. They should not be viewed as mere commercial 
organisa tions. There are areas and rout es where only ~uch publicly-owned undertakings can 
provide service. It is obligatory on the part of the Central Government to strengthen the capital 
base of State Road Transport Corporations. T11e Central and Sta te Government~ should aim at 
developing a good, integrated public tran sport system in the country, especially in areas not 
served by rail. The Committee recommends that lht Central Government should come forward 
with alternative schemes and plans to help strengthen the capital base of SRTCs. The State 
Governments should also be provided necessary guidelines in this regard. The Commi ttee 
recommends that Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport should caU a meeting or Transpo rt 
Secretaries or the Sta tes to see how best the latter could be encouraged to address to the prob lems 
of State Road Transport Corporations. 
26. The allocation for road transport i' R\. 63 crore' in 1996-97 as agaimt Rs. 26 crores and 
Rs. 71.50 crore' at the BE andRE stage\ rc\pcctively during 1995-96. Th.: bulk of the allocation 
thl\ year a~ in the previous year. lS for non-Plan as~istance 10 the Delhi Tram port Corpornuon 
to enable it to cover its cash losses. 
27. The O>mmittee in its lOth and 16th Reports h<ld recommended that the DTC ~hould be 
handed over by the Central Government to the Government of the Nation:tl C~pital Territory 
of Delhi. The Central Government decided to trunsfer the Corporation 10 the Government of 
N~tional Capital Territory on 6.08.96 to enable the latter 10 operate it in an integrated and co­
ordinated manner along with other public trunsport scrvtces. The Centre also approved waiving 
of past liabilities amounting ro Rs. 2U3.21 crorc' to enable it 10 raise resources from the market 
for the expansion of its fleet and modcmb:llion. 
PART-11 
Demand No. 79- Roads: 
28. Th1~ demand covers the activities related to the construcuon. development and 
maintenance of national highways, strategic and border road\, inter- ~tate roads and roads of 
economtc importance, schemes financed under the Central Road fund, Bridges Fees Fund, etc. 
The total amount allocated under this demand for L 996-97 is Rs. 1792.86 crores against the BE 
for 1995·96 which was Rs. 1405.49 crorcs und RE for that year, which was Rs. 1482.89 crores. 
29. Out of this, the allocat ion for n~tiona l highways is Rs. 1209.10 crores as compared to 
R\. 1109.84 crores in the RE of 1995-96. n;nionol highways. which add up to 34,058 kms .. 
con;titute :1bout 2% of the length of the entire road network in the country but carry about 40% 
of the tot~l T03d traffic. According to Mini<try of Surface Transport, os:linst " projected 
requirement of Rs. 7800 crores. the 8th Plan Outlay on national highways had been restricted to 
Rs. 2,600 crores. During the fust three ye<trs of the 8th Plan. the actual expendllure on nauonal 
highways was Rs. 2415.86 crores . The Plan expenditure for 1996-97 for development of national 
h1ghway~ i~ Rs. 79-1.90 C1"ores. Rs. 341 crore> out of this is for externally aided l>Chemes and 
Rs. 453.90 crorcs for other normal national highways. According to the Mmbtry of Surface 
Transport. this allocation is not sufficient. The Commtl!ee was informed that the BE for 1996-97 
on maintenance of national highway' t> Rs. 322 crore~. On the basis of norms worked out by the 
Mini> try of Surface Transport for maintenance of national highways throughout the country. the 
total annual requirement for maintenunce us u whole is Rs. 550 crores. There is thus a shortfall 
of about Rs. 130 crores under this hcud. 

7 
30. The target s set and likely achievements for 1995-96 in respect of different irems of 
work$ on natio nal highways are indicated below: 
Sl. Item s o f work Unit 1995-96 
No. Targets Achievements 
(a) Wid ening with or without strcngtheni ng Kms. 301 200 
single lan e to double l<tnc width 
(b) Widening of four lane s Kms. 215 50 
(c) Bypass and diversion Nos. 3 2 
31. The Com miltei! notes with conce rn that the targets set by the Government in dHTerent 
ite.rns of work on national highways have not been fulfilled. While the M inistry is justified in 
seeking higher outlays for the fuiUre, it should first ens ure that it otleast meets its existing 
targets. 
32. During the examination of Demands for Gra nts in 1995-%, the Mini stry had told 
the Commiuee that due to pauctty of budgetary re~ources. ahernattvc courses of action were 
being conMde red by the Minbtry to augment fund' for national highways. These included: 
(i) augmentation of Central Road Fund as per the Re~olution of 19$8 pa,sed by Parliament: 
(ii) private sec tor participation; and (iii) enhancement of vehicle regtstratton fees. The 
Commill cc hus examined the latest position in regard to these al terna tive course~ of act ion. 
Details arc in succeeding paragraphs: 
(i) Augmentation of Central Road Fund: 
33. Thb proposal has not moved forward Mnce the prevtous meeting of the Committee 
The Committee had considered the matter of the non-implementation of the Rc~olution of 
1988 pa~~cd by Parliament in it> lOth, 13th and 16th Report' and cxprc%.:d i t~ e>.tremc 
unhapptncs~. Th e Committee ha~ again been info tmed that the mutt er is still pending with 
the Group of Mini sters. The Comm ittee fails to understa nd how a l{e~o l ution pas~ed by 
P•rliament und which hud been considered ear lier bv the Concerned Mintstrics. is now hc111g 
objected to and not implemented by the same Mtni~tries. Meanwhile. the road ~ector tn the 
country conttnues to deteriorate because of lack of resourc<:l>. Clear!)·. this alternative couhe 
of ac\lon. a' ~uggested by the Ministt)', bas not taken off. nor doe' there seem to be any 
likelihood of 11 doing so in the nc;~r future. The Commiltee has already repeatedly expr essed 
its unhappine ss and dissatisfaction on this issue, and there does not seem to he much point in 
its doing so OII('C again. However, the Conutti lt e~ r~el duly bound to druw the attention or \he 
Government to the non-implementation of the Resolution of Parliam ent on this $object and to 
the fact that the concerned Mini.!.tries, which bad been consulted on this Resolution before it 
wos placed before Parliament, ha"' uuw <:banged their \ie\ls. The Committe~ ge~ tht 
Government to implement the resolution "ilhoul un) furth er dela). 
{ii) Pri vate Sec tor Participation: 
34. The! sewnd al tern<ttivc course of action being con>tdcrcd by the Ministry ttl augment 
funds tn the national highways sector wa~ to encoutage the private sector to particip:•te . The 
Ministry had inlormed the Committee that tl would amend the National Highway~ Act of 
1956 to permit private entrepreneurs to undertake projects relatmg to construcllon and 
maintenance of national highway~ and allow them to collect toll dirc((!y from U\cr- . 'I he 
Ministry has informed the Committee that the Nuticlnal lltghw;~y, Act I 9% was amended in 

8 
June 1995 to enable the private entrepreneur to collect and retain fees (toll) 1tt such road, for 
services or benefits returned by him as the Central Government may, by notification approve. 
The Committee wa$ also info rmed ' that guide lines on private investments in roads are under 
issue and will take into account the factors for fixation of toll , apart from other policy directives . 
The Committee is of the view that even on this alternative course of action which had been 
submitted by the Ministry last year, action slill needs to be completed by it. The Committee is of 
the view that this slow rate of progress in issuing guidelines and rules for private entrepreneurs is 
not likely to encourage them very much. The Ministry needs to move forward quickly in this 
regard so that private entrepreneurs start corning forward in large numbers. At this rate, the flrst 
road to be built by the private sector is not likely to be laid for se.-eral years. 
35. The Committee also notes with concern thm the Ahmedabad -Vadodara ProjeCt, which 
was the first Express Highway to have been constructed with the help of private sector by 199'2. 
is not even half complete. The target date for completion of the Project is March 1997. The 
Committee urges the Government to ensure that the revi.~ed deadline is adhered to and there are 
no more delays. 
(iii) Revision of Motor Registration Fee: 
36_ During consideration of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 1995-96, the latter 
had informed the Committee about a proposal to enhance the existing vehicle registration fee, 
and utilisation of funds accruing therefrom for maintenance and development of roads. 
including National Highways . State Governments had reportedly been consulted on the 
proposal, and additional collections worth Rs. 900-1000 crores were estimated . The proceeds of 
thts fee were to be distributed between the Centntl and State Governments. ln its 16th Report, 
the Committee had supported the proposal and had called for an early action in the maner. 
37. The Ministry has now informed the Comminee that the proposal is still under 
consideration in consult<ttion wiUJ the Ministries of Finance and Law. 
38. The Cornmiltee is surprised to note that the proposal is still under consideration. The 
Committee expresses its unhappine-<>S at the time taken in processing of such an important 
proposal which would enable U1e Central and State Go~· ernments to raise more funds needed for 
the development of road sector. The Committee urges the Ministry to expedite all approvals in 
this regard and raise the existing registration fees on vehicles. 
39. It is. therefore. clear that none of the three alternati, ·es suggested by the Ministry for 
raising additional funds for the national highways has brought in any extr:t resource s. Two of the 
alternatives l'iz. augmentation or the Central Road ~·und, and Revision or Motor Registration 
Fees, are still under consideration hy various Ministries and it is not known when mld if these will 
the light of day , The third alternath •e, the involvement of the private sector in this area, bas not 
taken oil' as the necessary regulatory , legal :md administrative frumework is not yet in place. The 
<.:ommittee is, therefore, constrained to observe that the overall situation in the road sector with 
regard to finance is extremely bleak. The Committee recalls yet another one nf the earlier 
recommendations made hy it in the lOth. 13th and 16th Ret>orts that 70% of the revenue 
~cncrated hy the national highways should he reitwested in national highways for infrastructure 
and expansion . The Committee ha~ noted lhat nothing has happened on that recommendation 
either. 

I~ 
9 
40. The Committee urges the Government to take a serious look at the existing situation 
in the road sector and all the possible alter natives of seeking fman ce for it. Mere budgetary 
support is not enough. 
Strategic Roads: 
41. Ministry of Defence identified s tr;~tegic roads having opera tional requirements in the 
border area~ of Gujarat, Jam mu & Kashmir, Uu~r Pradesh, West Bengal, Punjab , Tripura , 
Rajasthan, Meghalaya and Himachal Pradesh. Funds arc provided by the Ministry of Surface 
Tr~nsport for the projects which are executed through State PWDs/Bo rder Road 
Development Board. 
42. The Minbtry. in their action take n replies of 16th Report have stated that due to 
resource constntint~. they are still spend ing money under this head on the spillover schemes 
of the 7th Plan. There had been a spillover of about R~. 65 crores worth of works at the 
beginning of the 8th Plan. Against the above requirement, the Plannmg Commission had 
earmarked an umount of Rs. 30 crores only during the 8th Plan. However, the expected 
actual expenditure during the entire 8th Plan period is likely to be of the order of Rs. 38 
crores. still leaving a spillover of about Rs. 27 crorc~ for the Ninth Five Year Plan. Thas 
~pillover would escalate to about Rs. 35 crores by the ume these prOJCcts get completed. 
43. Jn the Ministry's Perfonmmce Budget it is ~lilted that 38 schemes have been 
identified by the MiniMry of Defence for inclu~ion in the Eighth Plan. However. according 
to the Ministry of Surface Transport, due to paucity of funds, no new schemes have been 
~anctioned so f:or in the Eighth Plan Period. 
44. The Committee notes thut the funds allocmed for 8th Plan under this head are les~ 
than the requirement of the spillover schemes of the 7th Plan period .and that no new 
\Chemes for the 8th Plan have been sanctioned. de,pate the fact that Mini~try of Defence 
have given a priority lbt for tnclu'lon an the 8th Plan. The Committee reiterates its earlier 
recommendation made in the 16th Report that strntegic roads should be accorded priori!) in 
'i~" of the security needs of the country. The Committee also feels that with the existing level 
of allocations, the Ministry will be one plan behind in the strategic road area. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that adequate funds should be made available at the time of Revised 
E~timntes for all the spillover schemes of the 7th Plan so that no backlog is left over from the 
7th Plan, by the lime the 9th Plan Period commences. 
Roads of Int~r-State and Economic Importance: 
45. A ~~:heme was initiated in May. 1954 to promo te inter-state facilities and 3lso to 
a\Sist the St~te Government in thear econom ic development through construction of roud:V 
bridges of inter -state or economic amportance. The scheme is operated through 100% loan 
""'Mance m the ca'e of intcr-,wte roads and 50% m the case of prOJCCb with economic 
Importance An outlay of Rs. 60 crores was provid~d tn the 8th Plan for this purpose, 
indud ing carry-over 'chemes from the 7th Plan. 

r 
10 
46. The year-wise allocation and the actual release to the States is given below: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Year Plan Allocation Actual Allocation made to States 
1992-93 02.00 02.00 
1993-94 02.50 02.50 
1994-95 03.00 00.80 
1995-96 12.00 03.00 
1996-97 12.00 
47. According tO the MiniHry of Surface Transpon. one of the reasons for non· 
utilisation of allocations is the non-submission of detJ!iled es tim~t es by States even after 
approvals have been accorded. Further. due to resource constraints many States arc not able 
to provide matching contribut ion s from their own budgetary resources . 
48. In view of abo\'e, the Centre is now propo,ong to adopt the following revt~ed criteria 
for selection of projects under this ~cheme: 
(i) Preference to be given to projects of inter -State import~nce; 
(ii) Roads or bridges linking with n:ttio nai highways would be accorded higher priority; 
(iii) Only such proposals where the forrna liu e~ like land acqutsttion, sbihing of uttlities. 
etc .. have been completed will be constdercd; 
(iv) tlw proposal would be ~•onctioncd only (>11 the ba>is of dewiled colllnates . No 
approval in principle will be iii'COrded, 
(v) Schemes which have been approved in principle in the pa!>t but do not take off ever: 
after two years will be cancelled; 
(vi) States which have defaulted <lfter approval an taking up 'uch •chcmc~ would be 
accorded lower priority; 
(vii) lnll'r·se prionty for schemes received (rom different State~ would be accorded on 
the basi~ or economic rate of return of each proiect. 
49. The Committee e"presse~ if!. concern 111 the non-utilisation of funds during 1994-95 
and 1995-96 in such an important scheme. Given the fact that this I> going to he the last )ear 
of the 8th Plan, most of the Plan allocation \\ill, therrfnrr, rlr<1rl~ •t•y unutilisod . The new 
criteria formulated by the Government will also not help In lbis regard as th~e -.ill only serw 
to eliminate non-seri ou• pr-ojects and -.ill not help it to attract more ~riou' ones. The 
Commilltt, therefore, reeommeuds to the Go"ernmcnt that it \hould ha•e greater co· 
ordination wilh State Go•ernments for identif)ing and prioritising projects under this scheme. 
PART lll 
Oemand No. 80 : 
50. This Demand covers tbe activttie~ of port~ . hghthou~e~ and 'hap butldmg. ancludmg 

11 
ship repairs . The 8th Plan outlay for this ~ector i$ Rs. 3216 crores. The actua l expend iture 
for the first three years of the Plan has been only 55% of the 8th Plan out lay. As compared 
to the Revised estimates of Rs. 312.80 crores for 1995·96, the Budget Estimates for 1996-97 
provide for an amount of Rs. 406.91 crores. Rs. 115.60 crores have been allocated for minor 
ports development and payment to Calcuua Port Trust for dredging, and maimenance of 
llooghly and Haldia Channel. 
51. The Lighthouses and Light~ hipping Organi sation is a commercial department of the 
Government which provides navigational aids, including buoys, decca navigator chains , radio 
beacons, etc. It uh.o undertakes construction and maintenance of light h ou~es for guidance of 
\hips. The Plan provision of Rs. 37.18 crores 10 the Budget Estimates b for capital 
expenditure on construction and development of lighthouses and other navigational aids and 
is met from the light dues collected as per the provi~ions of Indian Lighthouses Act, 1927. 
52. The Be for 1996-97 also provides for budgetury support of R~ . 116.60 crores for the 
purpose of routing external assistance through the Budget. ln the BE and RE of 1995-96, 
the corresponding allocations were Rs. 129.65 crorcs and Rs. 56.59 crore~ respectively. The 
~upport is for projects in the Ennore, Paradip, Mumbai and Calcutta ports. 
53. Port traffic by the end of 1996-97 i~ expected to reach 215 milhon tonnes as against 
157.86 million tonnes handled by the major ports till the end of 1991-92 The actual quantum 
of cargo handled during 1995-96 was 215 million tonnes . 
' 54. According to the Ministry of Surface Transport, the actual realisation of outlays 
during 1994-95 and 1995-96 for externa lly assiste~ projcm has been low because of the long 
time taken in finalisation of the major contractt tor wh1ch International competitive bidding 
procedures have to be followed In the case of the major externally funded projects of 
Ennore and Paradip port project\, the stage has been reached where ~ome major contracts 
have already been awarded and the expenditure thi' year b, therefore, expected to pick up. 
The construction proJect of a Derth at Mumbai poll has already been completed and certain 
balance payments have to be made dur ing 1996·97 
55. From the figures provided by the Ministry, it can be seen thm except for JNPT, 
Paradip. New Mangalore and Tuucorin ports, the percentage of utili,ation of funds has not 
been satisfactory . ln it~ 16th Report also, the Committee had commented on this low 
utilisation of fund~. and had asked the Ministry to take corrective steps to reduce the lime 
taken in complet1ng formalities. Thb docs not appear to have been done . The Committee 
recommends to the Government to pay greater attention in this regard: 
56. T he m<tjor thrust areas of the 8th Pl;m are modernization of Ports and Cargo 
handling facilities. intens ive utiliz.ation of the existing infra~tructure through operational and 
managerial measurt:l.. and encourag~mcnt of private ;ector investment tn port activities. 
57. The Committee m liS 20th Report on pnvau~at1on pohc1e~ wtth regard to ports . 
recommended rapid expansion and upgradation m port facilities in the country to meet the 
growing demands of the foreign trade sector. Thi' r:tptd expansion ond upgradation would 
necessitate massive investment s in all ports , which cannot be met o nly by Central Budgetury 
sources and therefore the decision of the Governm ent to invite private secto r participa tion in 
port activities. The Committee had recommended that the Major Port Trus t Act. 1963 be 
\Uitably amended if considered necessary, because the guidelines on privati~ation which were 
issued by the Mmistry of Surface Transport were somewhat vague <tnd general. 
58. From th~; replies given by the Minbtry of Surface Transport, it i) clear that so fur 

12 
private participation in the port sector is restricted mainly to leasing of existing berths and 
assets of ports or handing over specific services to private entreprenems . There has not been 
much direct investment by the private sector for enhancing the capacity of these ports. This 
is exactly what the Committee had observed in its 20th Repor t on privatisation policy with 
regard to ports . The Committee is of the view that this kind of privatisalion is not of any help 
to the port sector or to the national economy as it does not add to total capacity. The 
Committee recommends U1at the various port trust s should modify their approach in this 
regard and should encourage private participation with a view to augmenting port capacities. 
59. The Committee examined the problem being faced b)' the population or the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands on account of irregular shippi ng services, due to lack of 
adequate trained manpower. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that there are 
basically two kinds of vessels with the Andaman & Nicobtir Administration. The first are the 
passenger-cu m·cargo ships ope rating between the Islands and mainland and which ;arc 
registere d unde.r the Me rchant Shipping Act, and consequent ly have to employ crew and 
officers who fulfil the requirements laid down in the Act as well as International Maritime 
Organisation conventions/protocols etc. 
60. Tne second kind are those vessels that are registere d under the Inland Vessels Act 
and which ply between various Islands. The se vesseb are known as lnter·I~Iand Vessels. 
According to the Ministry of Surface T ranspo rt , the personnel working on board these ships 
are drawn from the seafarers available on the island itself. 
61. The Ministry of Surface Transport told the Committee that there is no shortage of 
seamen for either kind of vessels. According to the Ministry, the Andaman and Nicobar 
Administration had requested them to impar t traini ng to some of their i nhabitant~ as deck 
cadets so that subseque ntly tl1ey are able to acquire Officers' Certificate of Competen cy. The 
Ministry had told the A&N Administration tllat the Diro.;ctoratc General of Shipping has no 
objec tion to providing the requisite training to candidates sponsored by the A&N 
Administration , providecl they meet the basic educa tionul, med ical ~nd other prescribed 
l'Onditions. 
62. The Committee was also informed of del~ys in obtaining approvals for vessels 
proposed to be purchased by the A&N Administra tion. Under the existing budgetary 
system, these proposa ls have to be cleared by the Ministry of Surface Transport which is the 
central adm inistrat ive and technical ministry. 
113 The immediate dependence of the A&N inhabitants on shipp ing services between the 
islands and t.bc mainland has to be recognised. The Committee is of the view lhat all efforts 
~hould be made to ensure that adequate shi pping services and facililies are available to the 
people of these islands . The Committe<' recommends thnt purchase proposals of ships and 
other vessels sent by the A&N Administration to the Ministry of Surface Transport, be 
cleared expeditiously. The A&N Administration should sponsor greater nnmber of candidates 
for train ing in maritime institution s so that a sufficiently large number of i'rained seamen are 
available locally. The Committee also recommends that greater priority should b~ given for 
the development of landing facilities and jetties in Andaman, Nicobar and Lakshadweep 
Islands. 
Shipping Corporation of India (Sen: 
64. An amoun t of Rs. 30 crores h<ls bee n prov ided to Shipping Corporat ion of India U> 
budgetary support for the year 1996-97 10 meet its plun .:xpcnd iturc . The Budget Estimat~ 
for 1995-96 was Rs. 27 crores which wus ~ater reduced to Rs. 25. 

65. An outlay of Rs. 3300 crorcs was approved by the Planning Commi~\ion for 
Shipping Corporation of India during the 8th Five Year Plan period for acquisition of ~hips. 
The Shipping Corporation of India had earmarked thi\ outlay for acquisition of 79 vessels 
aggregating 17.20 lakh' GRT during the Sth Plan period by replacement of 4.1 vessels of 
12.33 lakhs GRT. and addit ion of 38 vessels of 4.95 lakhs GRT. SCI had also proposed that 
they would ~crap/sell 42 vessels of 13.53 lakbs GRT during the ~arne period 
66 During the lu~t fvuc years (19')2-93 to 1995-96) however. SCI has onl~ acquired 19 
vessel~ aggregating to 10.90 lakbs DWf at a cost of US $6:'\5.02 million and Rs. 18R.S6 crores 
respectively from abroad and lndinn Shipyards. In uddition to the above, SCI have also 
placed orders with lndiun Shipyards for two more vcsscb SCI ha~ tti\O submitted a proposal 
for the acquisition of two LR-U tankers of 110,000 DWT each from Korean Shipyard. 
67 The followmg are detatb of outlays approved by the Planmn): Commi~ston and the 
actual expenditure incurred by SCI for the la't four years:-
Year Approved Outlay Actual Expendiwre 
1992-93 Nw .so 340.12 
199J-94 'i97 Jl 787.78 
1994-95 11!10.37 745.22 
!995-96 1!79 ~() 461.07 
1996-97 IX95 .U3 
6!). 1l1e C~. SCI, informed the Commiue~ that while in l~rms of numbl!r of vc;scls 
pur~hascd, the shortfall doe' appear lttrgc, in ter111' of load capacity 11 was not that bad. 
Through thcs~ purchases, SCI was ;tblc Ill meet 3S'l'., of tt' reqUirements :md >UVcJ nearly 
40% in term~ of coM \1ost of the 'htps that the SCI had to Jcquirc were (rom foretgn 
sources for which foreign exchange wa' requtred . Ouring fir;t ~-1 year\ of the l'bn, they 
were not abk to tap the foreign currcnC) market\ due to the advcr'< Balance of Payment 
situation prevailing in the coumry at that time. 
69 The Committee W<•S informed that from lWJ-9-1 onwarJJ>. SCI htl\ been 'ucce,slully 
rai\lng loan' from abroad. and phtcing orders for 'h'P' · and h;" hccn <tble to more than 
make up the l~s of 111nc in the fiN 2-3 years . 
70. The Committee wa" als(' informed tll.lt '" the procedure' for approving the 
aLquisition of ship~ untl rclett\e of foreign exch<l!lgc were 11111C con!!ltnttng, the Government 
ha' given SCI the >tutU> of a MoU Mgntng compuny Under the tcnm of thi> Menun•ndurn. 
the Board of SCI ha~ bc.:n gtven the delegJted authont~ to appro\.: projects of upto R~. 200 
crore~ fur •.:ssels. prmided re~ourcc' c.m be gcncr ted from within the compan) or through 
commerctal market lo:m., 
71. The Committee is happy to note tha t the SCI hu; been making profit.,~ for th~ last few 
year~. The Commitlte hopes that the Corporation 11 ill be able to keep pace with the 
development of shiping, requirements nnd successfull) manage its iln·e~tment plans of US S I.S 
billion proposed for the ne\t few )enrs. 0-.ing to the ~hortfall in purchases in the first 2-3 
yean or the 8th File Year Plan, the Committee i~ not ~ure if SCI "ill be able to utili~e the 
entire \um which has been allocnted for it f or the purpose of ne" ships. The Committee . 

14 
r~ommends to the SCI to ensure that it is able to maximise the level of utilisation of these 
Plan funds. 
72. In its 16th Repon on Demands for Grants, the Committee had recommended to the 
Government to refix the ceilings of comme rcial borrowings and withdraw interest tax for the 
shipping industry to enab le it to compete with international shipping companies. The 
Committee regrets to note that no specific provisions have been made in this regard in the 
Budget. The Committee urges the Govemmen1 to take a serious look at this aspect and 
provide such incentives to the shipping sector. 
73. An allocation of Rs. 29.82 crore~ has been provided by way of budget support in the 
ship building sector to three Public Sector Units viz., Hindustan Shipyard (Rs. 15 crores) , 
Cocbin Shipyard (Rs. 9 crores) and llooghly Dock and Port Engineering Co. Ltd . (Rs. 5.82 
crores). 
Hindustan Shipyard: 
74. The Committee was informed that the Shipynrd's !Umover an 1994-95 increased to 
Rs. 255.90 crores as compared with Rs. 204.39 crores an the preceding year. The net losses 
incurred by the Company were Rs. 110.25 crores in 1993-94 and Rs. 51.81 crore~ in 1994-95. 
However. for the fll'lt time in almo~t 15 years. lhc Company wa~ able to make an operatmg 
profit of Rs. 25.3 crores. According to the Mini~try of Surface Transport, the net loss 
incurnd by the Company has been due to interest payments on loans taken in the period 
before 1988-89. These loans had been taken for meeting working c~pital requirement unc.l for 
wages and salaries. These altogether worked out to R,. 273 crore>. Lately, the Company has 
not taken any loans from banking institutions. The Shipyard has also reportedly completed 
all it~ projects and new proJects are '" hand. 
75. Ministry of Finance are currently considering a proposal with regard to the 
outstanding loan liability of the Shipyard. Once this is seuled, the Company will be in a 
position to come out of the situation of the net loss. 
76. The Committee has noted the statement about the past and present situation of the 
Hindustan Shipyard. The Committee hopes tbe ~1inistry of finance will complete the 
consideration of the proposal before it on the matter of the outstanding loan liability or the 
Shipyard. Once that decision is taken, the Commillee hopes the Shipyard will be able to get 
out of its present situation of losses, which is serving as a drain on the national exchequer. 
' 
Cochin Shipyard: 
77. The Cochin Shipyard is pre~cntly eamtng a net profit. It ha~ been able to raise small 
amount from internal resources. However, the shtpyard reportedly runs the risk of ending up 
like some other sick yurds, as not enough budgewry support is being provided to it for 
upgradation of its facilities and for urgen1 r~rair' The Secretary , Ministry or Surf'uce 
Transport. informed the Committee that they asked for on allocation of Rs 27 crores for the 
shipyard this year, but they could only get Rs. 9 crores. 
78. The Committee recommends to the Government to take a serious look at the needs of 
the Cochin Shipyard which was become a viable unit but which requires some budgetary 
support for repairs and modernisation. Such support 111 this stage could go a long way in 
making the Shipyard a profitable venture and may obviate the need for more expensive 
turnaround strategies at a later date . 
Hooghly Dock and Ports Engineering Co. Ltd. (BDPE): 
79. HDPE is one of the oldest shipyards which has been incurring losses from the very 

15 
beginning. The net losses of the Shipyard have been steadily mounting and exceed its 
turnover. In 1993·94 and 1994·95, the losses were Rs. 9.25 crores 11nd Rs. 13.27 crorcs 
respectively against the turnover of R~. 14.90 crores and Rs. 4 crores respectively. The 
Committee was informed that this shipyard is overstaffed, saddled with obsolete equipment , 
outdated technology. and no orders . 
80. The Government has recently approved a short-term revival strategy for the 
Company. A long term strategy is also on the cards involving restructuring and reviving the 
Company or disposing it off. 
81. The Committee has noted the sorry state of the HDPE. The Shipyard needs a massive 
investment for a total modernisation, without which It does ool seem to have any future. It Is 
of the view that the Government should expeditiously take a final decision on BDPE. While 
deciding on revival strategies it must be ensured that other units do not suffer on account of 
HDPE's revival strategy. For example, the Commillee was Informed that HDPE was unable to 
complete two projects, one for n light house vessel and another for a passenger·cum-100 ton 
cargo vessel for A&N Administration. The Co:mmlttee recommends to the Government to 
avoid instances of this kind Ln the future. 

MINUTES 

l 
i 
m 
"THHRD MEETING 
The Commiuee met at 9.30 A.M . on Tuesday. the 13th August, 1996 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament Hou~e Annexe. New Delhi. 
MEMBE RS PRESENT 
I. Shri Sunder Singh Bh:tndari-Chatrman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sushi! Barongp<t 
3. Shri Ajit P. K. Jog! 
4 Shri Virendra Katarin 
5. Shri Janardhuna Poojary 
6. Shri V. Hanuman tha Rao 
7. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
8. Shri RaghaYJI 
9. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
10. Shri V. P. Duraisamy 
11. Shri Ycrra Narayanaswamy 
12. Dr. D. Vcnkateshwar Rao 
LOK SADnA 
13. Shri Pramo<.l Mahajan 
14 Shri De vi Bux Singh 
15. Shri P. s. Gt~dhvai 
16. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
17. Shri P. c. Chacko 
18. Shri K. D. Sullanpuri 
19. Shri J>.,rsa Rum Mcghwal 
20. Shn A. M. Velu 
21. Shri s. s. P:tlanimnnicbm 
Rathour 
22. Shri Bishamber Prasad Nishad 
23. Shri Mahendra Baithu 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ashok Tom;~r. Director 
Sh ri Sunn der Kumar, Unde r Secretary 
Shrimati Sunita Sckaran. Comn11ttec Officer . 
2. • • • 
3. The Commiuee decided to hold its meeting at lUX) A.M. on .Monday, the 19th 
August, 1996 to consider the Demand~ for Grams , (1996-97) of the Ministry of Surface 
Tra nsport und 10 hear the Secre tary of that Ministry. 
4. The Cornmiuee adJourned at 11 .15 A M 
·~11nutcs of the mcchng} frnm b1 ~1nJ .2nd n.:latc tu other ruaucr. 
• • • Rcfatc ro mane:" not rnduc.lcd in 1h1.s Rcpurt 
1~ 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 19th August, 1996 m Main 
Committee Room, Ground floor , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
l. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari-Chairmnn 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Janardhana Poojary 
3. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
4. Shri Raghavji 
5. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
6. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
7. Shri Bratin Sengupt a 
8. Shri V. P. Duraisarny 
LOK SABRA 
9. Dr. A. K. Patel 
10. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudhury 
1 I. Shri De vi Bux Singh 
12. Shri Urtam Singh Pawar 
13. Shri Chandra Shushan Singh Rathour 
14. Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
15. Shri P. C. Chacko 
16. Shri Sat Maha jan 
17. Shri K. D. Sultanpuri 
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Oev 
19. Shri A. Siddaraju 
20. Shri A. M. Vclu 
21. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
22. Shri Ananl Mahadevgude 
23. Shri Bishamba r Prasad Nishad 
24. Shri Mahendra B:titha 
25. Shri G. M. Banatwalla 
Repr-~ut.ative.:; uf Ute J\.fiuistry of Surface Tntn:.pvrl 
I. Shri S. Sunder , Secretary 
2. Shri S. N. Kakar , Add!. Secrelitry & Financial Advisor 
3. Shri A. D. Narain. D. G. 
4. Shri G. Gopalan, D.A (RD) 
5. Shri K. R. Bhati. Joint Secretary (T) 
6. Shri A. K. Rastogi, Joint Secretary (S) 
7. Shri S. Biswas. C.C.A . 
8. Shri P. R. Acharya, Deputy Financiul Advisor 
9. Shri R. P. Sinha, Chairm an. I.W .T. 
10. Shri Yogcndra Narain, Chairman, N.ll.A..l. 
20 

21 
11. Shrl M. P. Pinto. DG(S) 
12. Shri P. Agarwal, Deputy Director General (S) 
13. Dr. B. Sarkar. Chairman, C.P.T. 
14. Shri S. Rama Krishnan, Chairman, M.P.T. 
15. Shri S. Kale, Chairman, B.P.T. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ashok Tomar, DirectOr 
Shri Surinder Kumar, Under Secretary 
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Commince Officer 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the 
Mini•.try of Surface Transport and heard the Secretary. of that Ministry on the subject. 
3. • • 
4. A verbatim record of the procccdmgs of the meeting was kept. 
5 The Committee adjourned at 5.45 P.M. 
•"Relate~'- hl m;IIICr no1 Jncludcd : .. thi' Rcpu11, 

VI 
SJXTII MEETING 
Tite Comm ittee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 29th Aug ust. 1996 in Room No. 63, 
First Ploor, Par liament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari-Chnirma11 
RAJYA SABR A 
2. Shri Sushi I Barongpa 
3. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
4. Shri Raghavji 
5. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
6. Shrt v. P. Duraisamy 
7. Shri Y err a Narayanaswamy 
LOK SABHA 
8. Dr. A. K. Patel 
9. Shri Ram Tahal Chaudh;try 
10. Shrt Devi Bux Singh 
I I. Shri Uttam Singh Pawar 
12. Shn Chandra Bhushan Singh Rathour 
13. Shn P. M Sayeed 
14. Shn P C. Chacko 
15 Shn Sat Mahajan 
16. Shri K. D. Sultanpuri 
17. Shn A. Siddaraju 
18. Shri 13asangouda R . Patil 
19. Shri Amrik Singh Aliwal 
20. Shri G. M. Banatwalla 
SECRETRIAT 
Shri A'hok Tomar . Director 
Shri Surindcr Kumar. Under Secretary 
Shnmati Sunita Selutran. Committee Officer 
? 
~· 
.3. The Committee deferred con~idcraunn of ih dr<tft Twenty·ftlth Rep ort on the 
Demand' fnt Grants (1996-97) pcr1Jtnins to the ~lmi,trv of Surf;,c·e Tt:ttt,port ;md decided 
to wn,idcr the \ittne on Wellne\dJ~ the ~th Scptrmb<:•. t\l'lf-
•l. J he Cotnmtttcc adJourned at ·1..~\l ''·"· 

Vll 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met ot 3.00 r.M. on Wedne sday, the 4th September, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'A'. Ground Floor. Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRES EI'.'l' 
I Shri Raghavj1-111 the Chatr 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri G. Prathapu Rc<.ldy 
3. Shri Sushi ! Barongpa 
4. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
5. Maulana Obaidullah Khan Azmi 
6. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
7. Shri Yerra Narayanaswamy 
!.OK SABHA 
!t Shn Ram Tahal Chau<.lhary 
9. Shri Ganga Churan Rajput 
I 0. Shri Uttam Singh l'aw;tr 
I I. Shri Chandra Bht"han Singh Rathour 
I 2. Shri Prade~p Kumar Dcv 
13. Shri Parsa Ram Mcgh,.al 
14 Shri Basangoudu R Paul 
15. Shr1 G . M Banatwalla 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ashnk Tom<~r . Director 
Shri Surindcr Kumar. Under Secretary 
Shr imnti Sunila Sekaran . Comm illc t: Officer 
2. In lhc ab,cncc of ChairnKm. Sltri Ra~h a\'jt ''"' 101cd to the Cha1r. 
3. The Committee tO<)~ up lor t·onsidet at ion '" dr;•lt Twenty-fifth R<'Jltlrl on Demand\ 
for Grants (1996-97) of the :'11ini,tl') of Surf,tcl.! ltan,po •t. The Comnuucc held d i ,cu~~iom 
<'n the suggc~tions put forth by sonw m<~m l>t •" '""' ;uiop lt•d th<' Rcpor1. w11h slight 
mod ification,. Tht: Con HntiiCC also decided tha t the Clllttrlllan may nmnm;ll~ Membe rs from 
among Member s of the Co mmit .~¢ :o prescnv1~•Y the 1 cport in the Rajya Sahh: 1 and the Lok 
Sabhn. 
4. • • 
5. The Committee adjourned at 4.3(1 ''·" 
•••Rd:llt '\ llJ math.!l lhll llldudn l 111 1111~ Rcp (ll l 