PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                    152 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE  
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT 
ON PROMOTION OF TOURISM IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR 
 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3 
RD  March, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 3 RD  March, 2010) 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2010/PHALGUNA, 1931 (SAKA) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH REPORT ON 
PROMOTION OF TOURISM IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 3 RD  MARCH, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 3 RD  MARCH, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI  
MARCH, 2010/PHALGUNA, 1931 (SAKA) 
 

CONTENTS  
   
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 1-43 
4. O BSERVATIONS /C ONCLUSIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS ––  AT A GLANCE 
............................................ 
44-50 
5. M INUTES ........................................................................................................................ 51-54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2009-2010)  
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury   ----------      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 5. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7. Shri Thomas Sangma 
 8. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma 
 *9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10. Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13. Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 14. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 15. Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 16. Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17. Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18. Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19. Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20. Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 22. Shri S.D. Shariq 
 23. Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24. Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25. Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28. Shri K. Sugumar 
 29. Shri Kabir Suman 
 30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
* Nominated on 12th September, 2009.  

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION  
  I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism 
and Culture, having been authorised by the Committe e to present on its behalf, do hereby present this 
One Hundred and Fifty Second Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee conta ined in its One Hundred and Fortieth Report 
on Promotion of Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir. 
2.  The One Hundred and Fortieth Report of the Depa rtment-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was pre sented to the Parliament on the 23rd October, 
2008. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained on its One 
Hundred and Fortieth Report were received from (i) Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways on the 
18th December, 2008; (ii) Ministry of Civil Aviatio n on 11th May, 2009; (iii) Ministry of Culture on 
1st June, 2009; and (iv) Ministry of Tourism on 4th September, 2009. 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the Report  at its meeting held on the 9 
th  February, 2010. 
 
 
  SITARAM  YECHURY 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
February 9, 2010 Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Magha 20 , 1931 (Saka)  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture . 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
  The Report of the Committee deals with the Action  Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred and Fortieth, Report on Promotion of 
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir of the Ministries of T ourism, Civil Aviation, Culture and Road 
Transport and Highways which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 23rd October, 
2008. 
2.  Action Taken Replies have been received from th e Government on the 18th December,2008, 
11th May,2009, 1st June,2009 and 14th September, 20 09 in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been a ccepted by the Department:  
 Para Nos. 12,21,84,85,106 and 116, Total- 6 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Department replies: 
 Para Nos. 76, 110 and 121 Total-3 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Department have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
 Para Nos. 27, 44,52 and 75 Total-4 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the Department are 
still awaited: 
 Para Nos. 23,26,29,30, 38,42,44,47 and 48 Total-9 
3.  The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those which have been categorized as 
interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.  
4.  On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Co mmittee has made observations on each item of  
Action taken/proposed to be taken by the concerned Ministries. The recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the One Hundred and Fortieth  Report, action taken thereon by the Ministries 
and recommendations/observations of the Committee o n each item of action taken has been given in 
the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.  Tourism being one of the world’s fastest growin g industries today enjoys a vital significance in 
the overall development of a country, mainly due to  its multiplier effect on different walks of life. 
India too is not an exception in this regard; Touri sm is the second largest export industry in India. 
Foreign tourist arrival here rose from 3.46 million  in 2004 to 5 million in 2007. Tourism made a 
significant contribution to India’s foreign exchang e earnings, which grew from $ 6.17 billion 
(Rs.27,944 crore) in 2004 to $ 11.96 billion (Rs.49 ,413 crore) in 2007. The share of India in world 
tourism receipts went up from 0.65 per cent in 2002  to 1.21 per cent in 2006. The contribution of 
tourism to GDP of the country had been 6.11 per cen t in 2004, while employment in tourism sector 
both direct and indirect had been 41.8 million in 2 003, which accounts for 8.74 per cent of total 
employment in the country. 
(Recommendations at Para 1 of the 140 
th  Report) 
6.  Such an impressive growth in tourism notwithsta nding, India’s share in the world’s tourist 
traffic was a mere 0.55 per cent in 2007. While the  number of tourists visiting India and earnings 

therefrom may be increasing, its slow growth rate as well as insignificant share in world’s tourism has 
always been a cause of concern to this Committee.  (Para 2, ibid )
Reply of the Government  
7.  As per the tourism data for the year 2008, shar e of India in international tourism arrivals 
increased to 0.58 per cent in 2008. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
8.  The data provided by the Ministry shows a mere 0.03 per cent increase in the tourist growth 
during the year 2008. This data further supports th e observations of the Committee. The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry will take further measures to improve the tourist flow to the Country. Further , 
the Committee desires that the target for the touri st arrival should be specified so that actual statu s of 
tourist growth may be arrived at and is comparable. 
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR  
9.  Till 1989, tourism had been the major economic activity of the State. During the past one 
decade, however, the tourist arrival received a maj or set back affecting the economic activity of the 
State adversely due to difficult circumstances prev ailing in the State. But, the things appears to hav e 
been improving slowly particularly during the last a few years. Development of tourism in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir, the Committee notes has received  priority both by the Central Government as 
well as the State Government. 
(Para 5, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
10.  As per the inputs received from the State Gove rnment, tourist arrivals have increased over the 
last few years in the State. During the year 2008, 5,36,689 tourists have visited the valley upto end of 
July, 2008 as compared to 2,79,191 during the 2007 year for the same period. However, the tourist 
traffic has declined due to the agitation in July, August 2008 both in Jammu and Kashmir region. This 
agitation has not made any difference to the touris t arrival to Ladakh regions. The Ladakh region has 
been visited by record number of tourists during 20 08. Upto the end of August, 2008, 60,116 tourists 
have visited Ladakh as compared to 40,185 tourists visited last year. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
11.  The Committee is aware of the peculiar situation of  Jammu and Kashmir and the 
practical problem in ensuring tourist arrival. It h owever, hopes that the tourist inflow will take 
new peaks in the changed situation in the region. The Ministry should also project the improved 
situation through advertisements so that more tourists are attracted to visit the State.  
12.  The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir 
for development of tourism in the State. However, the Committee feels that the strategy and initiatives 
taken by the State require a more focused approach for effective and structured growth. The 
Committee was informed that there was no “Tourism P olicy” for the State. The Committee is of the 
opinion that the policy supports would certainly he lp achieves goals and targets in this sector more 
effectively. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes t he need to have a tourism policy in place. It also 
emphasizes that the strategy for marketing tourism products of the State needs to be revisited for 
tapping the domestic and international tourism mark ets. The State should endeavour to assess the 

market trend and focus on diverse and varied touris m products of Jammu and Kashmir targeting 
specially the domestic middle class tourists. (Para 8, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
13.  The State Government has started action to for mulate a vision document for tourism promotion 
for the State. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
14.  The Committee desired that blue print of the touris m promotion plans may be elaborated 
so that the Committee would be able to make some contributions and suggestions to the plan.  
TOURIST ARRIVALS  
15.  The Committee after visiting many places in an  around Srinagar had a sense of satisfaction that 
normalcy was returning to the valley, as a large nu mber of tourists were seen at different places that  
included the local people. The Committee views this  as a positive development reflecting the existing 
mindset of the people about the law and order situa tion of the valley was changing. The Committee 
feels that this has an impact in increasing the tourist traffic to the valley not only in summer but during 
the winter season as well. The Committee is of the view that to keep pace with the increasing traffic,  
efforts be made to develop quality tourism infrastr ucture and tourism products for providing better 
services to domestic and tourism products for provi ding better services to domestic and international 
tourist. The Committee desires that State Government and Central Government need to work together 
to provide best facilities at most economical price s. They should also sensitize/educate all the 
stakeholders in tourism industry and the general pu blic about various issues including hygiene, 
sanitation and waste disposal system at monuments a nd tourist places, treatment of tourist, ensuring 
safety and security and hassle free comfortable stay for the tourists in the State. 
(Para 11, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
16.  The Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned tourism  infrastructure projects amounting to Rs.115.57 
crore, hospitality education projects of Rs. 9.50 c rore and rural tourism projects of Rs.12.53 crore i n 
the Eleventh Plan for development and promotion of tourism in Jammu and Kashmir. Implementation 
of projects is primarily the responsibility of Stat e Government/Union Territory Administration. 
However, Ministry of Tourism also monitors the prog ress of the projects with officials from the 
concerned State Government/Union Territory Administ ration through site visits and review meetings 
from time to time. 
17.  In order to make India a safe destination wher e Tourists would feel secure and free to move 
around, a need was felt to consider the deployment of Tourist Police. To look into the safety and 
security of tourists in this regard all the Chief M inister/Administrators of States and Union Territories 
were requested for deployment of tourist police/Pol ice force at the prominent tourist places in their 
respective States/Union Territories. As per the inf ormation available the Government of Jammu and 
Kashmir have complied with the request. The guideli nes for formation of Tourist Security 
Organizations (TSO) for the security and safety of tourist were forwarded to the Chief Minister of the 
State by the Ministry of Tourism in May, 2008. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  

18.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may  pursue the matter to ensure that the States/ 
Union territories implement the guidelines for formation of Tourist Security Organizations (TSO). The 
Ministry should also coordinate with the State and Union territories to speed up the action of setting  
up Tourist Security Organizations. 
19.  Isolated cases of harassment of tourists sever ely undermine tourism. The Committee is 
concerned to note the recent happenings in Kashmir valley and Jammu regions after visit of the 
Committee and hopes that the things will improve ve ry soon. The Committee feels that the role of 
media is very crucial in building public confidence  about a place. It needs to be very careful as a 
report about a small incident may spread scare all over. A reporting should not have a gap between 
impression that it creates and actual ground reality. 
(Para 12, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
20.  The Ministry of Tourism agrees with the recomm endation of the Committee. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
21.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and f eels that the press may be sensitized 
about the issue and close interaction may be mainta ined with media persons to ensure a more 
positive projection of ground realities in the State.  
ADVENTURE TOURISM  
22.  Both the valley and Ladakh regions, offer exce llent locations for different kinds of adventure 
activities such as mountaineering, trekking, skiing, rafting, canoeing, , mountain-biking, hand-gliding, 
para-sailing, heli-skiing, etc. Apart from the area s selected for adventure tourism such as Sonemarg, 
Gulmarg, Aru (Pahalgam), Suru valley (Kargil), Stock (Leh), Patnitop, Mansar, there are several other 
areas which need to be developed for this purpose, particularly in Ladakh region. Kargil is now 
catching the imagination of tourists very fast. 
(Para 13,  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
23.  Development and promotion of tourism including  Adventure Tourism is primarily the 
responsibility of State Governments concerned. However, Ministry of Tourism has requested the State 
Government of Jammu and Kashmir to take necessary action in this regard. The Ministry has set up an 
Indian Institute of Skiing and Mountaineering (IISM ) in Gulmarg for promoting skiing, 
mountaineering etc. and also provides funds for courses to the Institute. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
24.  The Committee hopes that the setting up of Indian Institute of Skiing and Mountaineering 
(IISM) is a beginning and the Ministry will endeavo ur to set up more such institutions at other 
places in Jammu and Kashmir.  
25.  During the discussion at Leh, the representati ves of LAHDC brought to the notice of the 
Committee that as a result of development initiativ es and as per the aspirations of the people, new 
approach roads, even in remote areas were being dev eloped. On the flip side, the constructions of 
roads to new villages have had an adverse impact on  the tourism in a way that most of the trekking 
routes passing through villages have been converted  into motorable roads. In this context, they cited 

an example of Sham valley trek from Likr to Temisga m which has since been become a motorable 
road. They requested for development of new trekking routes across Ladakh. (Para 14, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
26.  The observations have been communicated to the  Government of Jammu and Kashmir. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
27.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry with dismay. The Committee feels that the 
Ministry should have obtained the reference of the State Government before submitting replies 
to it. The Committee desires that the Ministry shou ld further pursue the matter with the State 
Government. It is expected to adopt a proactive approach in such matters.  
28.  The Committee notes that Adventure Tourism is relatively a new segment and Ministry of 
Tourism is providing financial assistance to the St ate for development of infrastructure and other 
facilities required for trekking, rock climbing, mo untaineering, winter sports, skiing etc. The 
Committee also notes that J&K Tourism Department wa s able to acquire good quality equipment of 
international standard for these activities. The Co mmittee feels that the Kashmir Valley and the 
Ladakh region have immense potential for adventure tourism that largely remains untapped so far, 
despite Government efforts made for this purpose. I t has been found that foreign tourists are more 
attracted to such tourism and, if, the latest equip ments and infrastructure supported by the wider 
publicity and human resources were provided, the Co mmittee has little doubt that adventure tourist 
would not be attracted to Jammu and Kashmir in larg e numbers. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry to prioritize the Adventure Tourism projec ts in the Jammu and Kashmir and give adequate 
publicity in India and abroad.  (Para 16, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
29.  Ministry of Tourism promotes and publicises In dia tourism products including adventure 
tourism through printing of brochures/literatures/c ollaterals etc., website www.incredibleindia.org  
print and electronic media, participation in intern ational events like WTM London, ITB Berlin and 
Dissemination of Information through India tourism offices in India and abroad. 
30.  The construction of building of Indian Institu te of Skiing and Mountaineering Gulmarg is 
completed and made functional. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
31.  The Committee finds the reply to be blatantly evasi ve. The recommendation was about 
developing adventure tourism in the State and adequ ate publicity thereof. Most regretfully, the 
replies about the first part have been held up. The  Committee hopes this was not deliberate. It 
expects the officials to be more careful while prep aring replies on Committee’s 
recommendations/observation. The Committee reiterates its recommendations that the Ministry 
should prioritize the Adventure Tourism projects in  Jammu and Kashmir and give adequate 
publicity in India and abroad.  
32.  The Committee also desires the Ministry to ide ntify new/alternate trekking routes with the help 
of LAHDC and Jammu and Kashmir Government in the La dakh region. The Committee recommends 

that while going for construction of roads to new v illages, planning may be done in such a way that 
old and popular trekking route be saved. Granting a  special package to Ladakh region for developing 
new trekking routes may be considered and finalized at the earliest. (Para 17, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
33.  The recommendation of the Committee has been s ent to the State Government of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
34.  The Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken by the Government of Jammu 
and Kashmir for development of trekking routes. The Committee would also like to know about 
the efforts made by the Ministry to obtain State Government’s response to all such paras sent to 
them. The Ministry can not wash its hands off just by forwarding Committee’s 
recommendations to the State. It is their responsib ility to procure them and submit to the 
Committee with replies.  
35.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the  construction of building for IISM at Gulmarg has 
been completed and will be handed over to the IISM by the ITDC. The Committee feels that without 
proper building, the IISM would not play its role a nd carry out its activities. The Committee is of th e 
view that up-gradation of the institute will not on ly result in increment in the tourist traffic to th e 
valley but also promote adventure and sports touris m in particular. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to ensure early transfer of  building to IISM at Gulmarg without further 
delay. (Para 18, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
36.  The building of IISM at Gulmarg has been trans ferred to the Ministry of Tourism by the ITDC. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
37.  The Committee is happy to note that IISM has been h anded over its building at Gulmarg. 
The Committee hopes that IISM will now help in exploration of avenues of adventure and sports 
tourism in the region.  
PILGRIM TOURISM  
38.  Pilgrim tourism in the State is yet another im portant aspect of tourist attraction in the State. 
Mata Vaishnodevi Temple in Jammu, famous sufi shrin es and mosques in Kashmir and the Holy 
Amarnath Cave are important centres of pilgrimage. Ladakh region also has been a preferred tourist 
destination particularly for foreigners because of the centuries-old monasteries as places of worship,  
education and store-house of ancient Buddhist literature, artefacts etc. (Para 19, ibid ) 
39. The J&K Government informed about its initiative to combine pilgrim traffic with leisure tourism 
in the State. During the meeting the representatives of LAHDC pointed out that in the recent past there 
had been repeated tragedies en-route ‘Kailash Mansarovar Pilgrimage’ via  Uttarakhand in which large 
number of lives were lost. Due to the vulnerability  of this route possibility of recurrence of such 
tragedies is always there. Accordingly, they sugges ted that an alternative route via Demchok in 
Ladakh needs to be opened for Kailash Mansarovar Pilgrimage. (Para 20, ibid ) 

Reply of the Government  
40.  The recommendations of the Committee have been  communicated to the Ministry of External 
Affairs. 
41.  Since Ladakh has the best route to Kailash Man sarovar via  Demchok, the Committee desires 
that the possibility could be explored for allowing  Kailash Mansarovar Pilgrims via  Demchok in 
Ladakh as an alternative route, which is safer depe ndable and shorter. A special promotion campaign 
should be made to attract larger number of pilgrims  to the places of worship in all the region of the 
State by offering affordable packages. 
(Para 24,  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
42.  Recommendation has been noted. Since the route  to Kailash Mansarovar is identified by 
Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Tourism has written to MEA for inputs. Ministry of External 
Affairs has informed that the matter of opening Demchok as an alternative rou te for Kailash 
Mansarovar Yatra has been formally raised with the Chinese side. However, the Chinese 
response has not been positive so far.  A campaign may be considered by Ministry of Touris m once 
the route is opened for the tourists/pilgrims. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
43.  The Committee feels that Ministry of External Affairs may further pursue the matter with 
Chinese authorities.  
44.  During the deliberations, the Committee had be en informed by the representatives of the State 
Governments and LAHDC that ‘Bed and Breakfast’ and ‘Paying Guest Accommodation’ schemes had 
been introduced with a view to providing comfortabl e and homely stay to the tourists and to 
supplement the availability of accommodation in Jam mu and Kashmir. The scheme was getting 
momentum in the State and was successful. They suggested that due publicity needs to be given to the 
tourists about the location of such accommodation and that it needed to be expanded further. (Para 21, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
45.  The Ministry of Tourism agrees with the recomm endation of the Committee. This has also been 
communicated to the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
46.  The Committee feels that mere agreeing to the propo sal does not serve the purpose of 
providing publicity to ‘B&B and PG’ (‘Bed and Break fast’ and ‘Paying Guest 
Accommodation’). The Ministry must inform the Commi ttee about the steps taken to provide 
publicity to boost tourism.  
47.  The Committee feels that the pilgrim tourism h as great tourist potential in all the three regions  
of the State and is one of the major contributors t o its economic growth both in terms of employment 
and other activities. The facilities for pilgrims n eed to be further expanded and the Government of 
Jammu and Kashmir should exploit the potential of J ammu as a tourist destination and not just as 
transit point en route to Kashmir or on a pilgrimage to the Vaishno Devi temple. (para 22, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  

48.  Development and promotion of tourism is undert aken primarily by the State Government/Union 
territory Administrations. However, Ministry of Tou rism, Government of India, extends financial 
assistance to the State Governments/Union Territory  Administrations for tourism related projects, 
which are identified in consultation with them. Pro ject proposals that are complete in all respect are  
approved as per guidelines on the basis of inter-se priority and funds released subject to availability of 
funds. The Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned tourism infrastructure projects amounting to Rs.115.57 
crore, hospitality education projects of Rs. 9.50 c rore and rural tourism projects of Rs.12.53 crore i n 
the Eleventh Plan for development and promotion of tourism in Jammu and Kashmir. .. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
49.  The Committee thanks the Ministry for delineating t he roles of the Union and State 
Governments in promotion of tourism. As such it is a joint responsibility; the replies also should 
have been prepared jointly. It would have been high ly obliged, had the Ministry responded 
specifically to the Committees recommendations/obse rvations that were specific about facilities 
to pilgrims of Vaishno Devi Temple. The Committee n otes the allocation of resources in the 
Eleventh Plan. The Committee hopes that the sanctio ned amount will be utilized judiciously 
within the scheduled period.  
50.  The Committee appreciates the efforts of the S tate Government for encouraging local residents 
to supplement the availability of accommodation for the comfortable stay of tourists in their homes to  
experience local customs and traditions and relish authentic cuisine in the natural and affordable 
manner. This scheme appears to be working well both  for the tourist as well as the local residents. It  
needs to be further strengthened and expanded to many more villages and towns. (Para 23, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
51.  The recommendations of the Committee has been communicated to the State Government of 
Jammu and Kashmir. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
52.  The Committee hopes that response of the State Gove rnment will be communicated to the 
Committee as soon as possible.  
TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE  
53.  Tourism infrastructure comprises inter-alia  hotels, and other types of accommodation to 
tourists. In case of the valley, Houseboats and Shi karas had been the most sought after tourist 
accommodation. During the discussion, the Kashmir H otel and Restaurant Federation brought to the 
notice of the Committee that the Kashmir offered a variety of accommodation options for visitors, 
ranging from luxury hotels to humble lodges, guest houses etc. There were hotels to suit every 
requirement. A number of hotel properties were lyin g in shambles which should be brought back to 
their earlier glory, if, Government of India came forward with plans and packages for their restoration. 
It will not need more than a few hundred crore gran t-in-aid to prepare all these properties in places 
like Srinagar, Pahalgam and Gulmarg for the up market tourists. The Committee was informed that the 
Valley had adequate accommodation infrastructure, to the tune of about 20 lakh for lower, middle and 
upper middle class tourists. As such, there is no need of further expansion in this sector it was argued. 
They demanded that a prudent loan scheme could be devised for renovation/upgradation of these hotel 
properties in Jammu and Kashmir and modalities may be worked out for granting interest free loans 

for the purpose. In view of the position of accommodation explained above, and if it is true, the 
Committee feels that there is a need to help them r enovate. The Committee desires the 
Governments to prepare a plan after mutual consulta tion for revival of these hotel properties 
lying in utter neglect. However, the Committee emph asizes the need for bigger and organized 
hotels to attract high end tourists in the State.  (Para 25, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
54.  As of now, the Ministry of Tourism provides Ce ntral Financial Assistance for construction of 
budget accommodation in the State of Jammu and Kash mir. However, the extant Scheme Guidelines 
do not provide for renovation of hotel properties/e xtending financial assistance for construction of 
luxury hotels. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
55.  The Ministry may explore Public-Private-Partnership model for setting up construction of 
luxury hotels to boost high end tourism in the State.  
56.  The Committee also recommends the Government t o provide grant-in -aid to the Centaur Hotel, 
Srinagar located just on the bank of Dal Lake for i ts total renovation and restoration and providing 
other facilities. The portion occupied by the secur ity forces also needs to be vacated by 
accommodating them elsewhere, except for those needed for its own security. (Para 26, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
57.  It pertains to Ministry of Civil Aviation. Thi s has been forward to them for necessary action. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
58. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken b y the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry of Civil Aviation  may be pursued further to act on the 
recommendations of the Committee.  
59.  The Committee had seen the deteriorating condi tion of the legendary Dal Lake in Srinagar. The 
factors responsible for its pollution, encroachment  etc. mainly comes from the pressure of human 
settlement along its shores and within the lake itself. The present open lake area is only 12 square km. 
(approx.), which is but a vestige of what was there  even in the 18th century. The shrinking of the lak e 
is due to “siltification”- where the feed rivers du mp huge silt deposits into the water catchments. 
These are pointed source suffocating the lake and c ontaminating its water mass. The raw sewage is 
feeding an already rapid growth of algae and raising weed growth to critical and unmanageable levels. 
The Committee expresses its concern over the fast d eterioration of the Dal Lake eco-system. The 
Committee is of the opinion that conservation and p reservation of Dal Lake should be our priority. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry t o pursue the matter with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests for formulation of Action P lan to control and manage pollution, de-silting, 
and de-weeding for conservation of the lake eco-sys tem. The Committee also recommends that a 
proper sewage disposal system should be in place to  reduce the organic discharge into the lake from 
the cluster of house-boats. The encroachments also must be removed. (Para 27, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  

60.  The recommendations of the Committee has been communicated to the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
61.  The Committee to its utter dismay notes that the Mi nistry has again very conveniently 
stepped out of the line by just passing the recommendations of the Committee to the Ministry of 
External Affairs and the State Government. The Comm ittee further hopes that in view of the 
importance of the matter, more proactive approach w ould be taken in coordination with the 
concerned Ministries/authorities.  
62.  The Committee understands that the Government,  through its own limited resources, has not 
been able to provide the requisite funds for the de velopment of tourist infrastructure in the country.  
The Committee is of the opinion that the participat ion of the private sector can go a long way in 
supplementing the efforts of Government in developi ng the tourist infrastructure in the J&K. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Central/State Governments must try to remove 
the obstacles faced by the private investors and en sure early implementation of the single-window 
clearance system for tourism projects. 
(Para 28, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
63.  Ministry of Tourism fully agrees with the obse rvation made by the Committee that the private 
sector can go a long way in supplementing the effor ts of the Government in developing tourist 
infrastructure in J&K. The State Govts. are advised , however, to frame the proposals for central 
financial assistance from the Ministry of Tourism u nder the extant guidelines and submit them after 
obtaining all clearance like that on land availabil ity, forest departments etc., so that the projects could 
be implemented in right earnest. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
64.  The Committee may be apprised of any plan rece ived from Government of Jammu and 
Kashmir. If not, the Ministry may advise the State Government to send proposals. 
65.  The most desirable location is the Boulevard, which overlooks the Dal Lake. Many tourists are 
attracted to Srinagar by the charm of staying on a houseboat, which provide the unique experience of 
living on the water in a cedar-panelled elegant bed room, with all the conveniences of a luxury hotel. 
These houseboats can be seen along the Dal and Nagi n Lakes and River Jhelum. But, the Committee 
was told that the Shikarawalas and Houseboat owners, due to lack of tourists during the last years, ar e 
finding it very difficult even to afford their upke ep and maintenance. The Committee feels that these 
being symbols of Kashmir and keeping in view large number of people depending on these for 
livelihood, need adequate support to keep them runn ing. It, therefore, recommends that suitable 
assistance and support be given to these Shikarawal as and Houseboat owners in the form of soft 
loans/subsidy for this purpose. (Para 29, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
66.  The recommendations of the Committee has been communicated to the State Government of 
Jammu and Kashmir. 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
67.  The Committee does not accept this as a reply and r equest the Ministry to submit specific 
reply in consultation with the State Government.  
68.  Leh offers a variety of accommodation to suit almost every pocket or preference. Most hotels 
are family-run establishments and as such, the serv ices are more personalized than professional. 
Restaurants, providing food and beverages; tourist transport system for internal sightseeing and long-
distance travel; Boutiques selling goods of interes ts to tourists other than goods of daily use like 
toiletries, food articles, etc.; entertainment, lei sure and sports facilities which directly serve tou rism 
are there but need to be made more organized.    
Reply of the Government  
69.  The recommendations of the Committee have been  communicated to the State Government of 
Jammu and Kashmir. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
70.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry will pursue t he matter with the Government of 
Jammu and Kashmir and inform the Committee about the action taken.  
71.  The Committee finds that Leh generally is a lo ng haul destination among adventure tourists who 
love nature and has variety of accommodation suitin g to the requirement of the tourists. The 
Committee finds that there is a lack of good qualit y hotel with convention facilities in Leh and the 
hotel staff need to be trained in the, hospitality industry. The share of local people in the hospital ity 
sector in Leh is negligible. The Committee, therefo re, recommends that local people should be 
encouraged and educated by training service providers to take part in the hospitality sector. (Para 31 , ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
72.  The Ministry of Tourism is already alive to th e necessity of creating training facilities specific to 
hospitality education in Ladakh region. Keeping this in view, the Ministry has sanctioned a Food Craft 
Institute at Leh at an estimated cost of Rs.538.48 lakhs. The Central assistance, however, will be 
limited to Rs.475.00 lakhs of which Rs. 375.00 lakh s will be for civil work and the balance for the 
purchase of equipment. The first instalment of the grant amounting to Rs.200 lakhs has been released. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
73.  The Committee notes the sanctioning of Food Craft I nstitute and release of Rs.200 lakhs. 
The Committee hopes that the Institute will be open ed shortly. The Government should explore 
the possibility of providing good quality budget ho tels with convention centers through PPP 
mode or otherwise.  
CENTRAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR  
74.  The Committee notes that three tourist circuit s were sanctioned by the Ministry of Tourism in 
the State of J&K at a cost of Rs.21.78 crore for Ja mmu-Rajouri-Poonch, Lakhanpur-Sarthal and 
Bhaderwah-Kishtwar-Sinthan-Srinagar. Out of the san ctioned amount of Rs.21.78 crore, only a sum 
of Rs.2.90 crore has been spent till date. Further, it notes that under PM’s Reconstruction Program for 
creation of infrastructure facilities in the State of J&K, a sum of Rs.240.00 crore was sanctioned and  
201 schemes were identified between the year 2005-0 6 to 2007-08 at a cost of Rs.93.05 crore. The 

Government of India released a sum of Rs.67.18 crore for development of the projects identified under 
the package, but the State Department of Tourism co uld utilize only Rs. 25.71 crore so far. The 
Committee was informed that projects worth Rs.150.0 0 crore were yet to be sanctioned by the 
Ministry of Tourism to the State Government. (Para 34, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
75.  The utilization of funds for the three tourist  circuit, Jammu-Rajouri-Poonch, Lakhanpur-Sarthal 
and Bhaderwah-Kishtwar-Sinthan-Srinagar has increased to Rs.6.46 crore. Central financial assistance 
provided to the 12 Development Authorities under th e PM’s Reconstruction Plan as on 30.6.2009 is 
Rs.113.34 crore and the amount released is Rs. 77.7 2 crore. The State Government has reported the 
expenditure Rs.25.71 crore so far. The project prop osals of the State Government are considered 
subject to the scheme guidelines inter-se priority and availability of funds and the projects which ar e 
not as per the guidelines are returned to the State Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
76.  The Committee feels that timely implementation of t he projects will result in better 
utilization of funds. Hasty works at the end of the  financial year to consume the balance funds 
ultimately results in wastage of money as the quali ty standards could not be followed in works. 
The expenditure blue print may help to implement the plans step by step in an organized way.  
77.  During the course of deliberations, the Commit tee pointed out shortfalls in expenditure of 
budgetary allocations in almost every project and w anted to know the reasons for this. The Secretary, 
Government of Jammu and Kashmir while agreeing to t he shortfalls in the utilization of funds 
sanctioned/released by the Central Government infor med the Committee that the major tourist 
destinations in Jammu and Kashmir remained snow bou nd and therefore cut-off for a considerable 
period resulting into road-block and shortage of me n and material. Hence, delay on the physical 
progress of work and under utilization of funds get s delayed. He suggested that if the sanction of 
projects were given by October-November, it would e nable them to make use of nonworking months 
for completing pre-construction procedures so that the work was immediately started after the snow 
melted. (Para 35, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
78.  The proposals from the State Government for ce ntral financial assistance for the tourism 
projects are received throughout the year. The Ministry of Tourism endeavours to sanction the projects 
at the earliest possible subject to the proposal being as per the scheme guidelines, inter-se priority and 
availability of funds. Sanctioning of infrastructur e projects to the states by 30th Sept., of each yea r 
is followed as a policy by the Ministry of Tourism.  The progress of implementation of these projects 
is also monitored by the Ministry of Tourism in coo rdination with the State Government through site 
visits and review meetings. Monitoring of projects is a continuous process. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
79.  The Committee while agreeing with Ministry observes  that monitoring was a continuous 
process, still finds a shortfall and pendency. The Committee feels that the present mode of 
monitoring system needs improvement for achieving better goals.  
80.  The representatives of the tour operators at L eh demanded that the new areas need to be opened 
in Ladakh region for tourism. It was informed that last major area opened for tourism was 12 years 

back and no other areas had been opened thereafter. They submitted that tourism was a main source of 
income to the tribal residents of Ladakh and there was utter lack of infrastructure for this in the area. It 
was demanded that Leh-Pangong-Spangmik-Hanle-Nyoma- Mahe-Leh circuit can be developed as a 
major tourist destination. 
(Para 36, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
81.  Leh has been indicated as a mega Destination u nder the Product Infrastructure Development for 
Destinations & Circuits Scheme for which a maximum of Rs.25.00  crore is admissible as central 
financial assistance. The State Government has been  asked to prepare a detailed project report and 
send the same to the Ministry of Tourism. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
82.  The Committee desires that the matter may be pursue d further and the Committee may 
be informed the response from the State Government. 
CENTRAL  FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  SCHEME  IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR  
83.  The Committee notes with concern that a large number of tourism projects were sanctioned by 
the Union Ministry of Tourism for the State of J&K during the last three years, but the pace of their 
progress has been very slow. The Committee apprecia tes the constraints faced by the State due to 
adverse weather, shortage of working days as well as manpower. The Committee recommends that the 
Government of India should consider modifying the norms for release of funds to the State keeping in 
mind the topography and difficult terrain of the re gion and ensure that projects do not lag behind for  
want of funds at any time during the financial year . The Committee also desires that there should be 
proper co-ordination with the State Government so as to obtain utilization certificates etc. (Para 37,  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
84.  Keeping in view the recommendation of the Comm ittee regarding the difficulties faced by the 
State Government owing to the topography and diffic ult terrain of the region, the implementation 
period of a project for which CFA is provided by th e Ministry of Tourism has been increased to 36 
months. Accordingly the pattern of the release of t he CFA has also been modified from 80%, 20% to 
20%, 60%, and 20%. The Ministry of Tourism, Governm ent of India is regularly taking up with the 
State Government for timely submission of the utilization certificates. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
85.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry  and hopes that with modified CFA, 
the State would be able to utilize the money.  
86.  The Committee was informed that posts particul arly at key positions were lying vacant for 
years. The committee desires that the State Governm ent should be impressed upon to fill up all the 
vacant posts specially the key-positions, at the ea rliest so that the infrastructure development proje cts 
were not unduly delayed. 
(Para 38, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
87.  The recommendations of the Committee has been communicated to the State Government. 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
88.  The Committee recommends that the State Government may be pursued to fill up the 
posts urgently. The Committee also desires to know the response and the present status thereof.  
89.  The Committee also recommends that since infra structure development holds the key to 
sustained growth in tourism sector, there is a need  that the tourist sites and destinations should be 
carefully selected on the basis of their potential to provide all essential infrastructural facilities  
required by the tourists. An aggressive marketing a nd publicity of these destinations and circuits 
should be made to generate tourism markets across t he world. The Committee also recommends that 
possibility be explored to open “Leh-Pangong-Spangm ik-Hanle-Nyoma-Mahe-Leh” as a tourist 
destination in Ladakh for inbound tourists. The Committee also impress upon the Ministry of Tourism 
to identify more such circuits and destinations in the three regions to offer new products to tourists . It 
would given impetus to the socio-economic development of the people living in the State.    
Reply of the Government  
90.  This issue is being deliberated upon in consul tation with the concerned Ministries/Agencies 
such as Ministry of Defence, ITBP, RAW etc. Leh has been indicated as a mega Destination under the 
Product Infrastructure Development for Destinations  & Circuits Scheme for which a maximum of 
Rs.25.00 crore is admissible as Central financial a ssistance. The State Government has been asked to 
prepare a detailed project report and send the same to the Ministry of Tourism. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
91.  The Committee desires to know the response of the M inistries and State Government over 
the issue.  
92.  The Committee has been informed that in J&K, 5 0 tourist villages were identified for tourism 
development at a cost of Rs.35 crore. Out of these,  9 tourist villages were sanctioned by the Ministry  
of Tourism at a cost of Rs.5.06 crore. Only 5 villa ges have since been completed ( Annexure-II ). The 
Secretary Tourism, Government of J&K informed the Committee that 34 projects are pending with the 
Ministry of Tourism for sanction and requested the Committee that the projects should expeditiously 
be cleared for development works.    
Reply of the Government  
93.  The Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned 20 rura l tourism projects in the state. 29 rural tourism 
projects were examined and returned to the state Government on account of certain deficiencies which 
are to be submitted as per the scheme guidelines. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
94.  The Committee further recommends that the examinati on and finalization of the projects 
should be done in a time bound manner with Ministry  of Tourism acting as facilitator in this 
regard.  
95.  The Committee is of the view that rural touris m has great potential in Jammu and Kashmir 
where any village could be developed as a tourist destination. It helps to provide boost to the local arts 
and conserve the local culture apart from preventin g rural - urban migration. The Committee, 
therefore, feels that the rural tourism needs to be  given added impetus in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. The Committee notes that out of 9 rural to urism projects sanctioned in the State only 5 

projects have since been completed. The Committee i s of the view that more villages should be 
identified for priority development involving the l ocal bodies in order to promote tourism in rural 
areas. All the pending rural tourism projects of th e Government of Jammu & Kashmir should be 
examined and expedited by the Ministry of Tourism at the earliest. 
(Para 41, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
96.  Considering the importance of rural tourism in  Jammu & Kashmir, the Ministry of Tourism has 
sanctioned 20 rural tourism projects in the State. 29 rural tourism projects were examined and returned 
to the state Government on account of certain defic iencies which are to be submitted as per the 
scheme guidelines. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
97.  The Committee notes the reply of the Government.  
RELAXATION IN INNER LINE RESTRICTION  
98.  Ladakh was thrown open for outside world in 19 74. However, entry to some areas was restricted 
or was out-of-bound for foreign as well as domestic tourists. In the year 1994, new areas were thrown 
open but only for those holding a valid inner line permit with a restriction of time limit of a week a nd 
a group of minimum four persons. The Chief Executiv e Councilor, Ladakh Autonomous Hill 
Development Council, Leh demanded that these restri ctions now need to be relaxed. He further 
suggested that the duration of the visit to inner l ine areas should be extended to 15 days from the 
existing 7 days and the minimum number in a group t ravelling to restricted areas to be reduced from 
four to one. (Para 42, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
99.  These recommendations have been communicated t o the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
100.  The matter may be pursued with Ministry of Home Aff airs and this response may be 
intimated to the Committee  
101.  The Committee is also of the view that normal ly, any restriction of the number of tourists and 
the duration would certainly impede promotion of tourism in a region; it is true about Ladakh as well.  
The issue of relation in the existing restrictions needs to be considered in totality by the concerned  
authorities of the Government at various levels. Mu ch water has run into river Sindhu since this 
decision was taken; this is high time that it should be reviewed suitably. (Para 43, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
102.  In connection with the representation made by  various associations/ Societies on various matters 
during the study visit of the Parliamentary Committ ee to Srinagar and Leh from 1st to 6th June’08, 
request has been sent to the Ministry of Home Affai rs, Government of India and the Government of 
Jammu & Kashmir to taken necessary action. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  

103.  The Committee desire to know the response/stand of Ministry of Home Affairs and that of 
the State Government. The Ministry of Tourism should pursue the matter with them and inform 
the Committee accordingly.  
TOURIST TRANSPORT  
104.   Surface transport is the main mode of transp ortation in the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
and has become one of the vital infrastructures in the process of development of State economy. New 
housing colonies and town have come into existence due to increase in human population which have 
in turn increased the demands for transport facilit ies. The State Road Ttansport Corporation has been 
operating a fleet of luxury coaches both for transp ortation as well as for sight-seeing of various 
resorts. There are a large number of taxis catering to the up market tourists. For local transport, ponies, 
auto rickshaws, bikes and bicycle are also availabl e. But the transport sector, both in the form of 
coaches as well as taxis does not come up to international standards. (Para 44, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
105.  These have been communicated to the State Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
106.  The Committee feels that mere communication to the State Government does not serve the 
purpose. The need of the hour is to sensitize the S tate Government to look into the issue and 
make plans for the road transport sector so that to urism is made convenient. There is a need to 
support the State Government by providing expertise and financial help to reform the transport 
sector. Such replies in fact, reflect all pervasive  attitude of passing the buck in our delivery 
system.  
107.  The Committee desires that the State Governme nt should come forward by way of providing 
low interest loans to the private transporters for creating a fleet of super deluxe coaches and luxury  
cars for the tourists. Till then outside coaches carrying groups of tourists should be allowed to operate 
in the State without any hassle. (Para 45, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
108.  This subject matter could have been taken up by the State Government in consultation with the 
concerned Ministry. However, in this regard, the Mi nistry of Tourism has not received any 
presentation/representation from the Government of Jammu & Kashmir. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
109.  The matter, after it was referred to the State Gove rnment of Jammu and Kashmir, it 
appears, has not been pursued for taking appropriat e action. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry of Tourism may ask the State to submit  a detailed proposal to be placed before the 
Committee at the earliest.  
GONDOLA  
110.  The experience of setting up of Gondola (rope -way) in Gulmarg has shown that it is, a very 
viable preposition as a tourist attraction. It has proved to be a great success there. There are immen se 
possibilities of setting up of such Gondolas in dif ferent tourist areas such as Pahalgam, Sonamarg and 
Patnitop. Some of these ropeways would not only be a tourist attraction but would open up areas for 
tourist who is interested in winter sports, as in G ulmarg. However, the Committee noticed that many 

carriages are not being used for want of petty tech nical repairs and were lying unattended leading to 
huge queue at the rope-way. 
(Para 46, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
111.  These have been communicated to the state Government for appropriate action. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
112.  The Committee notes the reply.  
113.  The Committee feels that the installation of more Gondolas would open up new tourist areas in a 
sustainable manner without damaging the ecology of the area. The Committee recommends that the 
booking of tickets of these Gondolas at Gulmarg sho uld be de-centralised through J&K tourism 
offices in the country to avoid huge rush at the bo oking counters in Gulmarg and efforts be made to 
make the visit to Gondolas as the part of the packa ge tour so that the tourists are not harassed at th e 
booking windows. The Committee also desires that online bookings of the tickets should also be made 
permissible and the carriages which are not being u sed for petty technical repairs, should be made 
functional without further delay in view of the heavy rush of tourist in Gulmarg. (Para 47, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
114.  These have been communicated to the state Government for an appropriate action. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
115.  The Committee notes the reply and expects the Minis try to submit the response of the 
State Government at the earliest.  
LEAVE TRAVEL  CONCESSION  
116.  Special offers from the Government and other agencies for their employees have proved to be 
successful in the past. The Committee recommends th at the LTC packages for Central 
Government/Public sector employees to visit Kashmir should be re-introduced to promote tourism and 
to revive the domestic tourist traffic to the J&K region by Air. (Para 48,  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
117.The recommendation of the Committee has been communicated to the Department of Personnel  
& Training. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
118.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry.  
HOTEL  MANAGEMENT  INSTITUTE  AT  SRINAGAR  
119.  There is a Hotel Management Institute in the State being run under Government control. The 
new campus of the Institute has been completed and it has become fully functional from the year 
2007-08. There is a Food Craft Institute at Jammu f or which the Ministry has sanctioned Rs.475.00 
lakh and released Rs.200.00 lakh during the financi al year 2007-08. The Ministry has further released 
Rs.9.60 lakh under the Scheme Capacity Building for  Service Providers Programme (CBSP) to CEO, 
LAHDC, Leh for skill up-gradation of 60 students du ring the financial year 2007-08. During the 

meeting at Leh, the demand for a training institute was raised by the CEO of the LAHDC for fulfilling 
the capacity-building needs in all important aspect of tourist sector; Ladakh region does not have one , 
as a result, young person of the area are not able to pursue career in travel and tourism industry.   (Para 49, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
120.  One Food Craft Institute at Leh has been sanctioned. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
121.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry.  
122.  In view of tremendous potential that the tour ism industry has for employment generation for the 
people of Jammu and Kashmir, need for more such tra ining Institutes can hardly be over emphasized. 
The Committee feels that the existing institutions would not be sufficient for the need of the growing  
demand of the trained manpower in the hospitality sector. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
there should be atleast two more such institutes on e to be located in Leh. Besides, more Food Craft 
Institutes should also be opened up in consultation with the State Government. (Para 50, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
123.  Appreciating the fact that the State of Jammu  & Kashmir needs facilities for the training of man 
power in the hospitality sector, the Ministry of To urism had sanctioned in the year 2007-08, a Food 
Craft Institute at Jammu. The Central contribution towards the setting up of this institute would be Rs. 
475 lakhs of which Rs.375 lakhs will be for civil work and the balance for the purchase of equipment. 
The first instalment of the grant amounting to Rs.2 00 lakhs has already been released. Ministry of 
Tourism has sanctioned a Food Craft Institute at Le h. The Central assistance for this institute would 
also be Rs. 475 lakhs of which Rs.375 lakhs will be  for civil work and the balance for the purchase of 
equipment. The first instalment of the amounting to  Rs.200 lakhs has been released. It may be 
mentioned that these two institutes are in addition  to the existing institute of Hotel Management at 
Srinagar. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
124. The Committee notes the reply.  
INCREDIBLE INDIA CAMPAIGN  
125.  During the meeting Secretary, Jammu & Kashmir  Tourism pleaded that the current spending for 
publicity was inadequate and it needed to be increa sed further. Other States were spending far more 
than it is being done in Jammu & Kashmir. It was a general feeling amongst all the stakeholders of 
tourism in Jammu & Kashmir who appeared before the Committee that Kashmir was not given due 
prominence in the Incredible India campaign launche d by the Government of India across the globe. 
The Committee also feels that the outlay earmarked for the Media Campaign and promotional 
activities for J&K is not sufficient and should be increased adequately so that the State got adequate  
publicity both in India and abroad. ‘Incredible India campaign’ should give due prominence to Jammu 
& Kashmir with increased participation in international tourism marts for promoting brand Kashmir.    (Para 52, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
126.  Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 

  Domestic Media Campaign for the promotion of Jamm u & Kashmir Region during the year 
2007-08 and early 2008-09 was launched with a gross  outlay of Rs.11,79,22,058/-. Advertisement 
spots were released in various Hindi, English and R egional Language TV channels. A Print Media 
Campaign in National and Regional Newspapers for th e promotion of Jammu & Kashmir among the 
domestic travellers was also launched in 2007-08 and early 2008-09. This campaign was launched for 
an amount of Rs.l,64,23,024/- and the advertisement s were released in various Hindi, English and 
language newspapers. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
127.  The Committee does not consider spending to be real  indicator of performance. In this 
case despite crores of rupees spent, there was no d esired impact otherwise people would not 
have pointed out about lack of adequate publicity, to the Committee. In this case either the 
money was not spent prudently or it was less than r equired. The Committee still feels that the 
State was not getting adequate attention in this re gard. It wants the Ministry to analyze the 
impact of the existing ad-campaign and take up with  renewed vigour alongwith the State 
Government.  
ADVERSE  TRAVEL  ADVISORIES  
128.  The Committee recommends that the Government of India must put in all possible efforts to 
advise all countries to co-operate and not issue ne gative travel advisory for its citizens in the wake  of 
some isolated incidents in J & K. The Committee als o desires that the media may be sensitized not to 
hype the tourist arrivals in the valley and they should project the objective situation about the Srinagar 
in order to de-link tourism from law and order situation. (Para 53, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
129.  The issue of negative travel advisories in th e wake of some isolated incidents in various 
states/UTs in India including Jammu & Kashmir has b een taken up by the Ministry of Tourism while 
addressing international fora and through the India n Missions overseas. The Ministry of Tourism 
Government arranged a two day visit to Srinagar and  Gulmarg in August, 2009 for heads of the 14 
India tourism offices overseas as well as officers from the Overseas Marketing., Publicity and 
International Co-operation Divisions of the Ministry. The objective of the visit was to give the officers 
first hand experience of the tourism products, infrastructure facilities and ground situation in the State 
so as to enable them to effectively promote the State in the tourist generating markets overseas. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
130.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry  and desires that the Government 
should continuously strive for promoting Jammu & Ka shmir in the tourist generating market 
abroad.  
DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORTS AND AIR-CONNECTIVITY  
131.  Air travel had been till a few years back con fined mainly to the upper economic strata of our 
society largely between the metros. It has, over th e years registered unprecedented growth due to 
various factors such as rising incomes, more corpor ate activity, low cost airlines, cheaper fares and 
absence of adequate rail and road transport infrast ructure. At such a time when the air travel is 
becoming affordable, the airport and other infrastr ucture in the country have come under tremendous 

pressure. The existing infrastructure, with the inc rease in flights and air traffic has proved to be o ld 
and inadequate. This called for not only expansion and modernization of Airports, across the country 
but also increase in air connectivity to the existing as well as to the new cities and places. The pressure 
was more evident in the States having much tourism potential, for example, in Jammu & Kashmir. 
Airports and air connectivity play a vital role in promoting tourism in the State. The Department-
related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tour ism and Culture, therefore, focused on the 
status of airports and air connectivity in Jammu an d Kashmir. The Committee during its visit 
discussed different aspects of these issues with th e representatives of the Government of Jammu & 
Kashmir, Union Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airports  Authority of India, National Civil Aviation 
Company Limited, Indian Air Force, LAHDC and those of tour and travel operators from the State.    (Para 54, ibid ) 
132.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation, NACIL and Air port Authority of India furnished a detailed 
background notes on the subject for consideration o f the Committee. The details of the discussions 
held by the Committee and the Committee’s observati ons thereon have been brought out in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
(Para 55, ibid ) 
DEVELOPMENT OF AIRPORT INFRASTRUCTURE 
133.  There are four operational airports in the St ate of Jammu and Kashmir located in, Jammu, 
Srinagar, Leh and Kargil. The first three airports belong to Ministry of Defence, where Airport 
Authority of India maintains civil enclaves for han dling civil domestic operations. The one at Kargil 
belongs to the State Government having the operations of Indian Air Force. (Para 56, ibid ) 
JAMMU AIRPORT 
134.  Jammu Airport belongs to the Ministry of Defe nce and the Airports Authority of India 
maintains a civil enclave. The terminal building ha s a capacity of 500 passengers at a time and has 
passenger amenities like, central air conditioning,  CCTV, conveyors, X-ray baggage machines and 
fire control system. The domestic traffic handled b y this airport for the year 2007-08 is 6.16 lakh 
passengers and at a level of 30% growth rate it is estimated to have a passenger inflow of 17.60 lakh 
passengers by the year 2011-12. (Para 57,  ibid ) 
135.  Giving the details of developmental works com pleted so far at the airport of Jammu, the 
Ministry informed that resurfacing and extension of runway from 6000 ft. to 6700 ft. with provision of 
high intensity lights at a cost of Rs.8 crores, con struction and modification of terminal building at 
Rs.10 crores and extension and strengthening of apr on at a cost. of Rs.2 crores had since been 
completed at Jammu Airport. The extension of termin al building from 5250 sqm to 6717 sqm for 
increasing the capacity from existing 500 passengers to 650 passengers at a cost of Rs.8 crores would 
be completed during 2008-09. Land is available for modifications. In addition to this, expansion of 
apron for parking of aircraft from existing three to four aircrafts will also be undertaken. Construction 
of additional link taxi track connecting runway and  apron at a cost of Rs.12 crores is also in the 
pipeline subject to the availability of land from the State Government and IAF.   
 
136.  When asked about the future development works  plans of Jammu airport, the Airports Authority 
of India replied that due to land constraints, furt her development of the Civil Air terminal was not 
feasible at present location. They have further stated that new civil air terminal complex on river Tawi 
side was proposed for which land measuring 137.75 a cres has been requested for acquisition by State 

Government at an estimated cost of Rs.250 crores. R unway was proposed to be extended from 
existing 6700 ft to 9000 ft to cater for wide bodie d aircrafts. Land measuring about seventeen acres 
would be required from Army at an estimated cost of  Rs.50 crores and all these works would involve 
shifting of HT lines, High Mast towers and construc tion of bridge across the river Tawi and diversion 
of canals. (Para 59, ibid ) 
SRINAGAR INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT  
137.  Srinagar airport, declared as an internationa l airport by Government of India vide  notification 
effective from 11th March, 2005 belongs to Ministry  of Defence. Airports Authority of India 
maintains a civil enclave for handling civil domest ic operations as well as limited international haj 
operations. The terminal building has a capacity of 500 passengers at a time with all modem passenger 
amenities including central heating system. The bui lding has been modified to facilitate operation of 
limited international haj flights since February, 2 008. The domestic traffic handled by this airport f or 
the year 2007-08 is 8.97 lakh passengers and at a l evel of 30% growth rate it is estimated to have a 
passenger inflow of 25.62 lakh by the year 2011-12. 
(Para 60, ibid ) 
138.  The Airports Authority of India informed the Committee that under phase-l of the development 
works of the airport extension of apron from 13000 sqm to 31036 sqm area for four AB-320 aircraft at 
a cost of Rs.2.21 crores has been completed. Extens ion and modification of terminal building for 
integrated operations from 500 passengers to 950 pa ssengers (500 domestic and 450 international) 
with four aerobridges at an estimated cost of Rs. l02 crore was underway. The entire new building was 
expected to be put into operation by July 2008.    
139.  The Committee was informed that under phase-2 , expansion of apron from 31036 sqm to 55820 
sqm, strengthening of existing apron and additional  link taxi track to increase aircraft parking stand s 
from four to nine at a cost of Rs.28 crores would b e undertaken during 2008-09. In addition to this 
construction of cargo complex and extension of car park have also been planned but above works 
involve transfer of 14.5 acres of IAF land to AAI. It has a dedicated HAJ Terminal and during 2007-
08, 8100 Haj pilgrims were handle. 
(Para 62,  ibid ) 
KARGIL  AIRPORT  
140.  Kargil Airfield, belonging to the State Gover nment, has been developed by Airports Authority 
of India at a cost of Rs.37.81 crores to fulfill the air-traveling needs of the people of this region, which 
comprises of very complex and hilly terrain with equally difficult road connections. The infrastructure 
at this airport has been developed to cater for ope rations of ATR 42 type of aircraft. The terminal 
building of the airport has the capacity of 100 passengers at a time with all the essential facilities. 
(Para 63, ibid ) 
141.  In the meeting held at Leh the representative  of LAHDC submitted a memorandum to the 
Committee stating inter-alia  that Kargil Airport was in bad shape and upgrading the Airport, extensive 
renovation, expansion and repair works of Kargil Ai rport has been pending for decades. He also 
submitted that the current length of 6000 ft. was n ot sufficient for Boeing flights. Therefore, runaway 
was required to be extended at least by 3000 ft. He  also submitted that till the Kargil Airport 
underwent the face lift, private airlines be asked to operate a 50 seater ATR aircraft’s regular servi ce 
to cater passengers for Kargil from Delhi, Jammu, S rinagar and Vice-versa. The Committee was 

informed by Chairman, Airports Authority of India t hat a feasibility study for extension of runway to 
9000 ft. was carried out by a joint team of AAI and  DGCA and it was observed that runway was not 
only required to be extended but also needed to be widened with standard basis strip as per ICAO 
recommendations. The land profile and hill terrain of the area did not permit such expansion and 
extension of runway and basic strip. Also, airline operators need to decide about the type of aircraft  
they intend to operate. Thereafter, an expert team including representatives from airlines can visit and 
study the feasibility.                                                                                                       (Para 64, ibid ) 
LEH  AIRPORT  
142.  Leh Airport situated in the Ladakh Region of Jammu and Kashmir State is the highest altitude 
airport in the world for civil aircraft operations. This airport belongs to the Ministry of Defence, where 
AAI maintains a civil enclave. The terminal buildin g has the capacity to handle 250 passengers at a 
time. The domestic traffic handled by this airport for the year 2007-08 is 1.55 lakh passengers and at a 
moderate level of 10% growth rate it will have an e stimated passenger inflow of 2.27 lakh passengers 
by the year 2011-12. 
(Para 65, ibid ) 
143.  The Committee was informed that development w orks such as modification of terminal building 
with car park and other associated infrastructure f or handling 250 passengers at a time costing Rs.2 
crore, construction of new apron for two AB 320 air craft costing Rs.8 crore and construction of new 
canopy on the city side of terminal building for me eting adverse weather conditions at a cost of Rs.2 
crore had been completed so far.    
144.  The Airports Authority of India has planned t o construct new terminal building for 500 
passengers with two aerobridges, expansion of apron  for access to aerobridge at an estimated cost of 
Rs.112.15 crore subject to the availability of 5.31  acres of land to be transferred from IAF. The 
Chairman, Airports Authority of India informed during the meeting at Leh that the issue of transfer of  
land that was pending with the IAF for a long time had been settled and that the IAF had agreed to 
transfer an alternate land in lieu of the demanded one and that the work in this regard would start 
immediately. The Committee expresses its happiness and hopes that the work would now be started 
without further delay. The Committee hopes that the  Ministry of Defence will consider the request of 
Airports Authority of India for transferring of lan d for other Airports also so that the process of th eir 
modernization could be expedited. (Para 67,  ibid ) 
Reply of Government  
145.  Demarcation of land by officials of Revenue D epartment of Government of J&K has been 
completed. The State Government is, however, yet to  provide the map highlighting the demarcated 
portion of the land and hand over land to AAI. 
146.  AAI will finalize the work of construction of  a new terminal building for 500 passengers and 
expansion of apron, etc. upon handing over of land to AAI by State Government of J&K. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
147.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry will vigorous ly pursue the matter of getting land 
from the State Government and construct new terminal building.  
AIR CONNECTIVITY  

148.  Jammu and Kashmir is presently connected by t hree major airports. Jammu, Srinagar and Leh 
are being connected by six, seven and three operato rs respectively, with the rest of the country. 
Majority of these service providers offer direct flights to Srinagar from Delhi and Mumbai only. There 
is no direct service between Srinagar or Jammu with  other metro or major airports in the country. In 
the case of Srinagar-Leh sector and vice-versa, the re is no air-connectivity, except one flight of Air  
India operating per week. The Jammu-Leh sector is a lso neglected. Except Air Deccan’s daily flight 
between Delhi-Leh, no other operator is providing d aily service. Even the Air India operates only 
three days a week citing poor seat factor. On being asked, representative of NACIL stated that in view 
of poor seat factor and consequent cash losses, NAC IL did not have any plan to increase services 
to/from Jammu, Srinagar and Leh. The Committee was further informed that NACIL had flight 
specific fares, apex fates and easy fares to attract the tourists for Jammu and Kashmir. (Para 68, ibid ) 
149.  During the deliberations of the Committee in Srinagar and Leh, the Stakeholders in the tourism 
industry emphasized the need for improvement in air  connectivity to the State and also within the 
State. Promotion of Kargil and Leh as a major touri st destinations would depend on the air 
connectivity to these places. Air connectivity assu mes great importance in these areas because there 
are no good as well as all weather roads. As a resu lt, these areas remain cut-off from rest of the 
country when roads are covered with snow during lon g winters. Lack of air connectivity therefore, 
was a major drawback for tourists to reach those areas, particularly during winters. (Para 69, ibid ) 
150.  The Committee while on the visit also receive d representation from Ladakh Autonomous Hill 
Development Council, Leh on the following issues: 
  (i) Increase in the frequency of flights:  
  At present all the flights from Delhi and back ar e operating with full occupancy and it becomes 
very difficult to get a confirm ticket. The Council  has received information that the flights are booked 
till September. The non-availability of seats compe ls the tourists to visit some other areas or cancel  
their trip altogether. Further the tourists visiting Kashmir Valley and opting to extend their trip to  Leh 
cannot do so as there is only one flight in a week from Srinagar to Leh. Therefore, the Council 
demands that: 
  
/head2right The Airlines operating Delhi-Leh-Delhi should be r equested to increase the frequency of 
their flights in summer months and the schedules should be nottfied at least 6 months in advance. 
  /head2right The private airlines operating Leh-Delhi should be asked to introduce flights from 
Srinagar and Jammu also. 
On being asked about the reason for private operato rs not flying on the routes in Jammu & 
Kashmir, the Committee was informed that current ro ute disperal guidelines allowed them to 
retain their right to determine which route in 2A c ategory they want to operate. They have to 
serve 2 percent of their flights to Jammu & Kashmir  and North Eastern region. To fulfill the 
obligation, private airlines prefer to fly North Eastern destination and ignore Jammu & Kashmir 
as the former gives them more revenue. 
(Para 70, ibid ) 
151.  The Committee feels concerned about the priva te airlines not flying in Jammu & Kashmir 
region and taking advantages of loopholes in the Ro ute Dispersal Guidelines. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends to modify the Route Dispersal Guidelines in such a way so as to make 
them mandatory to fly to places like Leh and Kargil also. 

  (ii) Ladakhi Architecture in the new Airport Terminal:  
  The Council appreciated the funds allotted by the  Central Government for up gradation and 
modernization of Leh Airport and terminal. The Coun cil emphasized that terminal building at Leh 
should be built with Ladakhi Architecture, which ha s unfortunately being ignored in the present 
building. (Para 71,  ibid ) 
Reply of Government  
152.  At present the details of scheduled air services in the State of Jammu and Kashmir are as under: 
NACIL (1) Delhi-Jammu-Srinagar and return A319 Dail y 
 Delhi-Leh-Jammu & Return A320 2 FIt/week 
 Delhi-Leh-Srinagar & Return A320 1 FIt/week 
 Delhi-Srinagar-Delhi A320 Daily 
Jet Airways Delhi -Jammu -Srinagar- Delhi A-737 Dai ly 
 Delhi -Srinagar-Jammu -Delhi B-737 Daily 
 Delhi-Leh-Delhi B-737 Daily 
 Delhi- Thoise-Delhi (Army Charter) B-737 1 Ft/week  
Jet Lite Delhi-Srinagar- Delhi A-320 Daily 
 Mumbai-Srinagar-Jammu-Mumbai B-737 Daily 
Kingfisher Delhi-Srinagar-Delhi A-320/321 Twice 
Airlines    
Red Delhi-Leh-Delhi A-320 Daily 
Kingfisher Delhi-Srinagar-Delhi   
 Delhi-Jammu-Delhi   
Spice Jet Delbi-Srinagar-Jammu& Return B-737 Daily 
 Deihi-Jammu-Srinagar & Return B-737 Daily 
Go Air Mumbai-Jammu-Srinagar-Mumbai A-320 3 Ft/week  
 Delhi-Srinagar-Jammu-Delhi A-320 4 Ft/week 
 Delhi -Jammu-Srinagar- Delhi A-320 2 Ft/week 
  
153.  The Committee will appreciate that the privat e airlines are also providing air services in the 
State of Jammu & Kashmir. 
154.  As regards modification of Route Dispersal Gu idelines (RDG), it is stated that at present, 
NACIL (1), Jet Airways and Kingfisher Airlines are operating scheduled air services to/from Leh with 
16 flights per week at an average passenger load fa ctor of 57%. Coupled with the global economic 
slow down, currernt financial crisis being faced by  the domestic airlines and resultant decline in 
aviation activity in recent months it will pot be p rudent to modify Route Dispersal Guidelines and 
pressurize domestic airline operator by making it mandatory for them to fly in these sectors. 

155.  Scheduled domestic airlines who are operating  on Category 1 routes (Trunk routes) are 
operating in the North-East Region, Jammu & Kashmir , Andaman & Nicobar Island and 
Lakshadweep Island to fulfill the capacity deployme nt requirements contained in the Route Dispersal 
Guidelines issued by the Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
156.  The Committee hopes that with the increase of touri sts, Ministry of Civil Aviation will 
review the policy to ensure adequate number of flig hts in the sector. The Committee notes that 
there is only one flight to Leh by NACIL(I) that to o is indirect and only once a week, while two 
private airlines were operating direct daily flight s to Leh. It means the Delhi-Leh is a profit 
making route, NACIL not operating flights to Leh ma kes the Committee curious about the 
reasons. NACIL flight, if operated will help Govern ment employees who avail of LTC to Leh as 
the LTC air travel is permissible only by NACIL flights.  
157.  The Committee while appreciating the developm ent works being carried out by the Airports 
Authority of India in the State, desires that pendi ng work at Jammu & Srinagar airports be completed 
within the scheduled time-frame. The Committee emphasizes the need for increasing the international 
services from the Srinagar airport to attract mainly international tourists. (Para 72, ibid ) 
Reply of Government  
158.  AAI is making all efforts to complete the ong oing development works at Jammu and Srinagar 
airports at the earliest. The new terminal building  constructed at Srinagar has been commissioned on 
14.2.2009. The expansion of apron work at Srinagar is likely to be completed by June, 2009. 
159.  As regards development works of Jammu airport , it is submitted that modification of the 
terminal building and expansion of apron are in various stages of planning. .. . 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
160.  The Committee notes the reply.  
161.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Karg il district has not received due attention and the 
Kargil airport is not being used to its potential. It has caught the imagination of the tourist now. T he 
Committee recommends that till the work of extension of Kargil Airport is undertaken and completed, 
the Government should operate ATR 42 between Leh-Ka rgil-Srinagar. The Committee is not quite 
convinced with the shortage of the ATR pilots as was sought to be made out by the NACIL during the 
meeting. To begin with this service may be thrice per week, to be made daily later on. The Committee 
feels that this would not only help promote tourism  but also increase economic activity in the region.  
Kargil is an area with lots of scenic beauty and cu ltural heritage. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends strongly that the NACIL must take the necessary steps in this direction and start services 
in this sector as early as possible. (Para 73, ibid ) 
Reply of Government  
162.  The proposal for extension of runway & other associated works for civil flight operations by 
TR-72 type of aircraft is linked with availability of land and additional land required for the purpos e. 
Further, the funds required for the development works, approx. Rs. 46.50 crores, are to be released by  
J&K Government State Government has already request ed to provide additional land free of cost and 
free from all, encumbrances. State Government’s reply is awaited. 

163.  The variant of ATR 42, which is available wit h Alliance Air, is ATR-42-320, which is equipped 
with PW 121 engines, and the aircraft has ceiling a ltitute of 25000 feet. The peaks available on the 
proposed route from Srinagar to Kargil to Leh are i n excess of 23000 feet and keeping the minimum 
clearance over mountainous region of 2000 feet, it exceeds the operational capability of the aircraft 
ceiling of 25000 feet. 
164.  Moreover, there are further issues regarding aircraft high altitude operation certifications and  
high altitude performance, which seriously restrict the pay load capability. 
165.  As such, in view of the operating limits of t he aircraft and the routes/airports involved, 
operations to Kargil and Leh with A TR-42-320 is technically unfeasible. . 
166.  At present no scheduled domestic airline is o perating any air services on Leh-Kargil-Srinagar 
sector. Government has laid down route dispersal gu idelines with a view to achieve better regulation 
of air transport services taking into account the n eed for air transport services of different regions  of 
the country. It is, however, upto the airlines to p rovide air services to specific places depending up on 
the traffic demand and commercial viability. As suc h, the airlines are free to operate anywhere in the  
country subject to compliance of route dispersal guidelines issues by Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
167.  The main thrust of the recommendation of the Commit tee was to provide air connectivity 
to Kargil region with other parts of the country. I f operating ATR-42 type of aircrafts on this 
route is not feasible, other options may be considered for providing air connectivity to Kargil.  
168.  The Committee is constrained to say that the Leh Airport building did not reflect the local ethnic 
architecture. In this connection Committee would li ke to invite the attention of the Government to its  
recommendations contained in the 88th report which is reproduced below: 
“....the Committee emphasized that while constructi ng the terminal building local art and 
architecture should be kept in mind and building sh ould be designed accordingly. Civil 
Aviation and Tourism go hand in hand as airport is the gateway for the tourists, which should 
unveil the rich cultural and architectural heritage  of the region. This would also attract more 
and more tourists and would substantially take care of the capacity under-utilization problem of 
the airports. The Committee also pointed out that a dequate care should be taken with the help 
of the State Government to open shopping outlets/ca feteria for showcasing local 
cuisines/handicrafts etc. (Para 74,  ibid ) 
Reply of Government  
169.  The suggestion/recommendation of the Committe e has been noted and will be incorporated to 
the extent technically feasible. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
170.  The Committee notes the reply.  
171. The Committee finds that one of the major impediments in development of Leh as a major tourist 
destination is the non-availability of direct fligh t service between Leh and other major cities. The 
existing service between Delhi-Leh by the national carrier should be made daily service. The 
Committee hopes that development of airports and in creased air connectivity to this region will 
definitely play a significant role in increasing th e tourist influx to the State. The Committee expres ses 
its dismay over the fact that NACIL does not have a ny plan to increase services to/from Jammu, 

Srinagar and Leh. The Committee also feels that the re is inadequate publicity about the special fares 
being offered by NACIL viz . easy fare, apex fares and flight specific fares a nd link fares as a result of 
which most of the tourists are not able to make use  of the packages being offered by the NACIL. The 
Committee is of the view that if 50 seater ATR aircraft are used in this region, the cash losses perhaps 
may go down. The Committee also recommends that NACIL should ensure due publicity of its special 
fares. (Para 75, ibid ) 
Reply of Government  
172.  The thrice-weekly services operated by NACIL on the Leh-Delhi routes provides for onward 
connectivity to all the major Indian cities and cit ies outside India via  Delhi, which is the hub for 
domestic as well as international services. 
173.  NACIL do not have plans to increase the frequ ency of services on the Delhi Leh route in view 
of average load factor of about 38% on annualized b asis on these services. Similarly, NACIL do not 
plan to increase the services on other routes since the average load factor on annualized basis on these 
services has been 60% or less. However, NACIL do op erate additional services/to/from the cities in 
J&K to cater to the short term demand for traffic s ubject to availability of resources and commercial 
viability. 
174.  At present, scheduled domestic airlines are o perating 16 flights/week on Delhi Leh Sector as per 
the details given below: 
NACIL (I) Delhi-Leh-Jammu & Return A320 2 Flts/Week
 
 Delhi-Leh-Srinagar & Return A320 1 Flt/Week 
Jet Airways Delhi-Leh-Delhi B737 6 Flts/Week  
Kingfisher Delhi-Leh-Delhi A320 Daily  
Red (Earlier Deccan) 
       
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
175.  Instead of relying on the average load factor of ab out 38% on annualized basis, the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation should increase the freq uency in peak season and holidays. The 
Committee notes that Private airlines are operating daily flights between Delhi and Leh whereas 
the NACIL operates just two flights a week to Leh. The Committee is unable to understand 
what prevents NACIL from operating daily flights to  Leh, while the private airlines are 
operating on a daily basis.  
176.  Sometimes, due to lack of coordination betwee n Airlines, AAI and Air Force regular 
commercial flights are cancelled or delayed leading  to avoidable inconvenience to the passengers and 
loss of revenue. The Committee is of the considered view that under normal circumstances the regular 
commercial flights should not be disturbed due to Air Force sorties. (Para 76,  ibid ) 
Reply of Government  
177.  All operational airports in J&K, namely Jammu , Srinagar and Leh belong to IAF (MOD) and 
AAI maintains civil enclaves. Air Traffic Control Services are provided by IAF. AAI makes all efforts 
to ensure smooth aviation operation keeping in view the operational requirement of IAF in this highly 
sensitive border State. 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
178.  The Committee understands the constraints of Airpor t Authority of India in Jammu and 
Kashmir region. However, all efforts should be made  to ensure that normally no regular 
commercial flights should be disturbed due to lack of coordination with other agencies.  
179.  The Committee has learned that A-320 aircraft  flying to Leh have to carry more load than the 
allowed. The Committee recommends that instead A-32 0, A-319 aircrafts should be operated in 
this sector that comparatively has more load capacity. (Para 77, ibid ) 
Reply of Government  
180.  Aircraft of the class of Airbus A-319/320 or Boeing 737 new generation are subject to load 
penalty flights to/from Leh due to high altitude op eration. Thus, any change in aircraft type in Airbu s 
A-320 or Boeing 737 new generation family will have  to experience similar load penalty for Leh 
operations. 
181.  As regards operation of A319 instead of A320,  the A319 aircraft in NACIL’s fleet are not 
technically cleared to the high altitude airfield l ike Leh, as Certification Take off at 12000 ft. alt itude, 
15 kts tail wind and -3 degree slope are required for Leh. However, as 30 Airbus A320 aircraft owned 
by NACIL (I), have this certification to take care of Leh operations. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
182.  In view of the position explained above the Committ ee would like to know what kinds of 
aircraft are being operated by private-operators and what is their experience?  
183.  It was also brought to the notice of the Comm ittee that during peak season airfare from different 
stations to Srinagar shoots up and no upper limit h as been prescribed for fare. As a result, journey t o 
Kashmir becomes costlier than going to Singapore, M alaysia, etc. The Committee is of the view that 
there should be some regulation of fares for this s ector and people of the Jammu and Kashmir may be 
given relaxation in airfare on the pattern of North-East region. (Para 78, ibid ) 
Reply of Government  
184.  Domestic air fares are not being regulated by  the Government, Domestic airlines are free to 
charge air fares as per the market forces. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
185.  The Committee was aware of this position when it ma de this recommendation. Idea of the 
Committee was to ensure that more and more people v isit Kashmir region mainly due to its 
strategic importance. The Committee reiterates its recommendations and feels that there should 
be some kind of regulation of fares to Jammu and Ka shmir and not being left to vagaries of 
market forces and may be given relaxation in airfares.  
DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN SRINAGAR  
PRIME MINISTER’S PACKAGE  
186.  The Ministry further informed that Reconstruc tion Plan for Jammu and Kashmir was announced 
during the visit of Prime Minister to the State on the 17th and 18th November, 2004. Under the 
Reconstruction Plan seven roads were proposed to be  improved. The details of reconstruction taken 
under the Prime Minister’s package are as under: 

1.  Construction of Mughal Road to connect Shopian in P ulwama district of Kashmir valley 
with 
  poonch and Rajouri regions in Jammu  
Executing agency --- PWD, J&K 
Length of road --- 84 kms 
Cost based on Preliminary survey --- Rs. 159 Crs. ( Central share 50%) 
Cost based on DPR --- Rs.639.85 Cr.(Central share 5 0%) 
The original target date of completion --- March, 2 007 
Revised target date of completion --- April, 2010 
Up-to-date expenditure till April, 08  --- Rs. 162. 35 crore  
2.   Widening of Domel-Katra road (NH-IC)  
Executing agency --- BRO 
Length of road --- 14.4 kms 
Cost based on Preliminary survey --- Rs. 30.00 Crs 
Cost based on DPR --- Rs.34.39 Cr. 
The original target date of completion --- March, 2 007 
Revised target date of completion --- July, 2008 
Up-to-date expenditure till April, 08  --- Rs 27.11  crore 
3.   Double-laning of Batote-Kishtwar-Sinthan pass-Ana ntnag Road (NH-IB)  
Executing agency --- BRO 
Length of road --- 265 kms 
Cost of the project --- Rs. 463 Crs 
(including cost of Rs. 100 crore for 
advancing the target date from 2013  
to 2011) Anticipated Cost of project --- Rs.703.13 Cr. 
Requirement of fund for --- Rs. 90 - 100 crore per year 
Expenditure April, 08 --- Rs. 133.38 crore 
4.   Upgrading Srinagar - Uri LOC road  
Length of the road --- 111.5 kms. 
Road is being development in two 
stretches as under: 
(a)   Srinagar - Uri (NH-IA)  
Executing agency --- BRO 
Length of road --- 94 kms 
Cost of work based on Preliminary survey --- Rs. 12 1 Crs. 
Anticipated Cost of project --- Rs. 439.39 Cr. 
Original Target date of completion --- March, 2009 
Revised target date of completion --- March, 2010 
Expenditure April, 08 --- Rs. 208.83 crore 

(b)   Uri - LOC 
Executing agency --- BRO 
Length of road --- 17.5 kms 
Cost of work based on Preliminary survey --- Rs. 34  Crs. 
Cost of estimate now anticipated --- Rs. 58.00 Cr. 
Target date of completion --- March, 2009 
Expenditure April, 08 --- Rs. 25.1 crore 
5.   Construction of Khanabal-Pahalgam Road  
Executing agency --- PWD J&K 
Length of road --- 43 kms 
Category of road --- Major District Road 
Cost based on Preliminary survey --- Rs. 25 Crs. 
Anticipated Cost of project --- Rs. 110.00 Cr. 
Original Target date of completion --- March, 2007 
Revised target date of completion --- Dec. 2008 
Expenditure April, 08 --- Rs. 51.35 crore 
6.   Construction of Narbal- Tangmarg road  
Executing agency --- PWD J&K 
Length of road --- 37 kms 
Category of road --- Major District Road 
Cost based on Preliminary survey --- Rs. 38 Crs. 
Anticipated Cost of project --- Rs.116.00 Cr. 
Original Target date of completion --- March, 2007 
Revised target date of completion --- Sept. 2009 
Expenditure April, 08 --- Rs. 51.90 crore 
7.   Double laning of Srinagar - Kargil-Leh Road (NH-I D)  
Executing agency  BRO 
Declared as NH - 1 D  30 
th  March, 2006 
Length of road  422 kms 
Cost based on Preliminary survey  Rs. 426.4 Cr. 
Cost of project now anticipated  Rs. 807.03 Cr. 
Target date of completion  March, 2012 
Expenditure April, 08  Rs. 105.9 crore 
(Para 82, ibid ) 
187.  The main reasons for delay in execution of al most all the projects in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir were attributed to following: 

(i) The availability of limited working months, har dly four months, in a year, due to difficult 
climatic conditions of the area. Agencies executing  the work, therefore, find it difficult to 
spend the desired amount of allocation. Now, on acc ount of less expenditure, the Ministry 
of Finance and Planning Commission reduce the plan outlay at RE stage. This further 
aggravated the problem and the work cannot be taken  up further for wants of funds, it was 
argued. Other problem faced in the State are the di fficult and hilly terrain that not only 
delay the project but also increase the cost of construction as compared to plain areas. 
(ii) Land acquisition and environmental and forest clearances take lot of time. There are delays 
in shifting of utilities also.  Another peculiar problem in the State is local opposition to the 
engagement of outside labourers. 
(iii) Non availability of manpower/machinery with B RO in case of departmental execution also 
faced. 
(iv) Non availability of Contractors of big financi al and technical capability in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir, was also cited as one of the reason for delay. 
(Para 83, ibid ) 
188.  The Committee found that all these projects w ere running far behind the schedule, delays being 
from 2 to 4 years and with this pace, the Committee cannot but apprehend further delays in future. The 
Committee is of the view that development of Nation al Highways in Jammu and Kashmir is not only 
necessary for promotion of Tourism in the region but also is of strategic importance for the nation. 
(Para 84, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
189.  The Department agrees with the Committee. It has requested National highways Authority of 
India (NHAI) State Public Works Department and Bord er Roads Organization (BRO) to expedite the 
implementation of projects. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
190.  The Committee is of the view that delays in 2 to 4 years means the project cost will escalate 
many folds and the revenue loss during the period s hould also to be taken into consideration. 
The total volume of the financial loss to the exche quer is a matter of concern that requires 
urgent attention. The Committee desires that coordi nation among various agencies should be 
made to expedite the works and avoid any further delay. 
191.  The Committee appreciates the problem encount ered in the construction of National Highways 
in Jammu and Kashmir particularly on account of cli matic conditions, topography, hilly terrain 
including shortage of manpower. Such forced stoppage of work naturally results in under utilization of 
funds. It is unfortunate that this in turn leads to  reduction of plan outlay by the Ministry of Financ e 
and Planning Commission. The Committee expresses it s concern about this and is convince about the 
need for providing special guidelines in respect of Jammu and Kashmir in keeping with these peculiar 
problems to ensure that funds are available in time  for the work relating to National Highways in the 
region. In this connection Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation made in its 
84th report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Road Transport and Highways. 
“The Committee appreciates the concern of the Minis try of Finance for ensuring that the 
expenditure position in all the Ministries should have an even flow throughout the year. In order 

to achieve this, Ministry of Finance have issued a direction that only 33% of the BE should be 
spent in the last quarter of the year. However, so far as Department of Road Transport and 
Highways is concerned, the working in different par ts of the country is affected due to weather 
conditions and the restriction imposed by the Minis try of Finance creates a setback to the 
physical activities in the areas of construction of Highways and Bridges by the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance may reconsider its decision and 
taking into account the peculiarity of the pattern of utilization of funds due to factors which are 
beyond the control of the Department, the Departmen t of Road Transport and Highways should 
be exempted from any such restriction on expenditur e and should be allowed to spend their 
allocated budget on various activities which are re quired to be carried out during that particular 
period.” 
(Para 85, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
192.  The Department agrees with the views of the Committ ee. The Secretary (Expenditure) is 
being requested to exempt Department of Road Transp ort and Highways from restriction on 
expenditure in last quarter of the financial year 2008-09.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
193.  The Committee hopes that the matter is being pursued by the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways for exemption and the response of Depa rtment of Expenditure may be intimated 
to the Committee.  
194.  The Committee is constrained to note that the  preparation of DPR for remaining section of 
Jammu to Srinagar section of NH - 1 A is still unde r process. The Government is still waiting for 
execution of work under BOT(Toll) Mode, which is not a viable proposition as no private agency will 
be interested to take up the work in that section on commercial grounds. The Committee is of the view 
that the Highway is of vital importance not only fo r the economy of the State but also for the securit y 
of the Nation. The Committee, therefore, recommends  the Government should do itself and allocate 
necessary budgetary provisions for four laning of Jammu - Srinagar Section of NH - 1 (A) and provide 
plan outlay.                                                                                                                  (Para 86, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
195.  NHAI has been requested for finalizing DPR fo r remaining section of NH-IA. Draft Cabinet 
Note for taking up 4 laning of Jammu - Srinagar Sec tion of NHIA on BOT Annuity mode has already 
been circulated and comments of some appraising Min istries received. Modified cabinet note keeping 
in view the comments/observations of appraising Ministries/Departments is being prepared. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
196.  The Committee hopes that the recommendation of the Committee will be implemented 
fully.  
197.  The Committee feels that some kind of special  procedure may be devised for the State. Funds 
may be put in non-lapsable category as is being don e for other such areas of the Country. Cost-norms 
of the project also need to be made State specific.  For land acquisition, environmental and other 
clearances etc. single-window facility be put in pl ace at the earliest. In view of big contractors not  

coming forward, BRO need to be strengthened in a big way both technically and financially. Adequate 
security, financial and otherwise need to be given to the people working on these projects. (Para 87, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
198.   Border Roads Organization has taken steps to  strengthen the resources and manpower in 
J&K State. One additional Border Roads Taks Force a nd two additional Road Construction 
Companies have been inducted recently. However due to acute security problem in J&K, fear free 
working for construction and development of roads i s not possible. Hence adequate security cover to 
man and machinery is needed. Land acquisition and forest clearance for construction and development 
of roads is also a time consuming job, hence facili ty of single window clearance for this work is felt  
necessary. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
199.   The Committee feels that Paramilitary forces could be requested to safeguard the 
men and material in such cases and the procedure fo r single window clearance may be made to 
expedite the work.  
200.   The Committee believes that with adequate pl anning, resources and machinery and above 
all with men of strong determination and will, many  major projects have been completed world over 
even in far more arduous conditions. There is no re ason; the Committee feels that we cannot do it in 
Kashmir. The need of the hour is to work with that sprit. (Para 88, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
201.  Noted. 
202.   The Committee pointed out the poor maintenan ce of National Highways and desired to 
know the justification of having fixed period of fi ve years for repair of National Highways in hilly 
terrain that got damaged almost every year due to v agaries of the adverse climatic conditions. In 
response thereto the representatives of BRO admitte d that the guidelines in this regard were not 
relevant and needed modification so as to take the climatic conditions of the area like J & K into 
account. (Para 89, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
203.  It is experienced that in non snow bound area s of J&K, renewal of road surface after five year is 
sufficient and road surface remains in good condition. The reason for damage of road surface in snow 
bound areas is frequent movement of heavy snow clea rance equipments; landslides during rainy 
season and over flow of water on road pavement in s ummer season due to melting of snow. Damages 
of road surface in snow bound area due to above rea sons cannot be prevented by reducing the repair 
(renewal) period of five years. Hence it is felt th at rigid pavement/provision of interlocking concret e 
block pavement in snow bound area will be a suitabl e solution. Such pavement has already been 
constructed by BRO at Zozilla Pass on Srinagar - Ka rgil Leh Road NH(ID) and at TMG top to TMG 
Base (a GS road) in J&K State and found to be satis factory after two to three years of snow bound 
conditions. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
204.  The Committee notes the replies given by the Ministry.  

205.   The representatives of BRO further submitted  that the damage caused to the national 
highways was also due to poor drainage system. The Committee desired to know whether BRO was 
involving the local bodies in the planning for the development of National Highways passing through 
the towns and villages with a view to avoid the dam ages to the National Highways by having proper 
drainage system to which the representative of BRO replies that they were not doing. (Para 90, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
206.   Department of Road Transport and Highways ha s noted suggestion of Committee. Road 
Agencies will be advised to consult local bodies for providing proper drainage system. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
207.   The Committee notes the reply and hopes that it wou ld be ensured that the road 
agencies consult local bodies for proper drainage system.  
208.   The Committee is also of the view that presc ribing the fixed period of 5 years for repair of 
NH in hilly-terrain like that of Jammu Kashmir are not practicable as the roads there get regularly 
damaged due to frequent rainfall, snow-fall, poor d rainage system, land slide, etc. The Committee, 
therefore, feels that the concerned guidelines need  to be modified so as to ensure that whenever there  
is damage to the NH, the repair work should betaken  up immediately. As regards the damage to the 
National Highways passing through the towns and vil lages due to poor drainage, the Committee, 
recommends that the agencies engaged in planning an d development of NH should consult the local 
bodies to obviate the possibility of any damage to the National Highways due to poor drainage system.  
(Para 91, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
209.   The Cycle for periodical renewal, i.e provis ion of renewal coat to the wearing surface at a 
pre-determined frequency, for NHs as per the Ministry’s norms for Maintenance of Roads varies from 
3 to 5 years depending upon the traffic intensity, terrain, whether the NH is passing through urban area 
or rural area and the type of existing bituminous w earing course. Further, this Ministry has issued 
instruction of immediate arrangement for diversion of traffic through alternate routes in case any NH 
section becomes damaged or overtopped or breached so as to necessitate suspension of traffic and also 
take up immediate repairs for restoration of traffi c in the damaged stretches in accordance with the 
National highways Rules 1957. 
210.   The Indian Road Congress Publication IRC SP- 19-2001 (Manual for Survey, 
Investigation and Preparation of road Projects) has  inter-alia  emphasized that good deal of 
information on drainage could be collected inter-alia  through local enquiry and the most appropriate 
time for such enquiries is during the stage of prel iminary survey. Therefore, it may be seen that ther e 
is stipulation in the manual for consultation of lo cal bodies for making adequate drainage 
arrangements for NHs during project preparation stage. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
211.  The committee notes the reply.  
ISSUES RAISED BY THE TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT JAMMU AND KASHMIR  

212.   Surface transport being the main mode of tra nsportation in the State is under tremendous 
pressure due to new housing colonies and town comin g up and increase in human population. Repair 
of existing roads, demand of new roads and transpor t, facilities are required on heavy scale. Problems 
faced are: 
  Bus Stand:  Taxi, Mini Bus and Bus lack facilities for public and are to be developed on modern 
lines for which Government of India may provide financial assistances. 
  Road Net Work:  Due to increased requirement of transport and road  network, the Cities and 
main town need to have redesign, Circular roads aro und them to decongest the traffic. It would also 
has huge financial implication. Government of India  may provide necessary infrastructure and 
financial assistance for installation of traffic si gnals at all important crossing and for constructio n of 
fly-overs. 
  Highway: Highway parks need to be built between Srinagar - J ammu Highway having basic 
amenities for both passengers and drivers. 
  Mode of Transport:  The local transporters who have suffered losses du ring the turmoil period 
in the State need to be given package so that the old vehicles can be replaced with latest model Hi-tech 
vehicles, both for inter-State and intra-State rout es. The State Government has already declared 25 
year old vehicles condemned and the vehicle owners are demanding special package for which a 
proposal has already been submitted to the Government of India. 
  Model Driving Institutes:  Model driving institutes need to be established at  all the District 
headquarters to impart training to the drivers and also will become source of public awareness. These 
will help in making the State accident free zone. 
  Vehicular Pollution: In order to reduce the vehicular pollution, environ ment friendly fuel like 
CNG needs to be introduced in the State for which t he Government of India has to make policies for 
its availability in every district headquarter of the State. 
  Infrastructure for Motor Vehicles Department:  The motor Vehicles Department has to 
develop the infrastructure for the Transport Commis sioner’s Office, Srinagar, Regional Transport 
Officers and Asstt. Regional Transport Officers exc ept for RTO, Kathua and Transport 
Commissioner’s Office, Jammu. 
  Weigh Bridges:  Weigh Bridges are to be installed at Lakhanpur, Udhampur, Lower Munda and 
Ganderbal in order to check the menace of over loading which is one of the main causes of accidents. 
  Satellite connectivity between RTOs/ARTOs:  There is dire need to satellite connectivity of all 
the RTOs and ARTOs with the Transport Commissioner’s Office. 
  Specialized design for passengers vehicles and load  carriers: The Vehicle manufacturers 
need to be advised to develop specialized vehicles and load carriers for mountainous regions which 
can be safe for the public.    
 
213.   The Committee notes the demand submitted by the State Government. The Committee 
finds that most of the Demand relates to promotion of Tourism. The Committee recommends that the 
matter may be looked into in consultation with Stat e Government with a view to providing necessary 
assistance as a special case under intimation to the Committee. (Para 93, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  

214.   This Department has not received any proposa l from the State Government of J&K. From 
bare reading of the para it appears that this relat es to a fiscal incentive proposal for scrapping of old 
vehicles which relates to M/o Finance. We are not aware whether State Government of J&K have sent 
any proposal to Ministry of Finance. 
215.   This Department had a scheme for setting up of Model Drivers Training Schools which 
was centrally sponsored scheme. As per this scheme,  State Governments were required to send the 
proposals to this Department. Initially the scheme was aimed at establishing one such training school 
in every State. No such proposal was received from the State Government of J&K. in the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan, the scheme was dropped. However, th is Department is making efforts to revive this 
scheme as a central scheme with 100% funding from the Centre. 
216.   This Department has already notified the emi ssion norms and other safety standards in 
respect of motor vehicles fitted with CNG conversion kits. As per Rule 126 of Central Motor Vehicles 
Rules, 1989, the kit should be approved by any of t he testing agency. Use of CNG as fuel in motor 
vehicles is to be decided by vehicle owners. This D epartment doesn’t mandate use of CNG as fuel in 
each and every vehicle under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. 
217.  Availability of any fuel including CNG is the  subject matter of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas. 
218.  As regards issues pertaining to Weigh Bridges  and Satellite Connectivity between 
RTOs/ARTOs this matter pertains to State Government  of J&K. Therefore, a copy of the 
recommendations/observations of the Parliamentary S tanding Committee has been sent to the 
Government of J&K for appropriate action. 
219.   As regards specialized design for passengers  vehicles and load carriers this matter has 
been referred to Automotive Research Association of India, Pune. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
220.   The Committee is of the view that Model Driving Tra ining Schools scheme be 
revived at least for the States/Union Territories l ike Jammu and Kashmir who could not give 
proposals. The Committee is surprised to learn that  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
does not have anything to do with promotion of use of CNG in Motor Vehicles. The Committee 
emphasises the need for putting a school in place f or this purpose with the help of Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas.  
221.  The Committee would like to know the response of ARAI, Pune as said in para 219 above.  
222.   The Committee recommends construction of roa ds from Tsomoriri in Leh to Spiti in 
Himachal Pradesh via Parangal Pass and opening of K ailash Mansarovar pilgrimage via Demchok in 
Ladakh as an alternative pilgrimage route. The Committee finds that the budgetary allocation for road 
projects in Ladakh is given on the basis of being a  district which is very meager considering the vast  
area of Ladakh region (or road projects. The Commit tee recommends that special fund should be 
provided for road connectivity projects in Ladakh region from the Central Road Fund. (Para 96, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
223.  The Ministry has already sanctioned 61 works for Rs.408.57 crore in the State of Jammu & 
Kashmir. The Central Road Fund accrual during the year 2008-09 is Rs.54.92 crore. The ratio of Bank 

of Sanction to CRF accrual is at present 3.92 well above the permissible ratio of CRF. Further 
sanction is possible if the State Government ptilizes the funds. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
224.  The Committee recommends that the State Government should be pursued to utilize the 
funds so that additional funds may be provided. 
CONSERVATION AND MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS IN SRINAGAR CIRCLE  
225.   The Committee notes that all the regions of Jammu and Kashmir have enormous 
archaeological wealth in different forms that need to be preserved and protected. But only 99 
monuments/archaeological sites were declared as pro tected, either by the ASI or the State 
Archaeology Department. Amongst the remaining ones the Committee feels most of them require to 
be brought under protected category immediately. The Committee, therefore recommends that to save 
the important historical monuments in the State fro m extinction their conservation and restoration 
should be given top priority by the ASI and the Sta te Government. To enable the ASI to carry out its 
activities in a better way, the Ministry of Culture should consider shifting of Circle office from Jammu 
to Srinagar for administrative purposes. (Para 103, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
226.   So far as Srinagar Circle of the ASI is conc erned there are 69 monuments/sites which 
have been transferred on de-facto  basis from the State Government to the Central Gov ernment in the 
year 1958 for their maintenance and upkeep. In resp ect of most of the monuments/sites, protection 
notifications have been issued under the relevant. section of AM&ASR Act, 1958 defines their 
respective boundaries. After taking over of the monuments in the year 1958, the Srinagar Circle of the 
ASI, has taken adequate care to maintain and preser ve the cultural heritage of the State subject to th e 
manpower financial constraints. So far as bringing more monuments under the control of the ASI is 
concerned, necessary steps will be taken to survey various regions of J&K including Ladakh and 
identify important historical monuments/sites that can qualify to be declared as monuments to national 
importance under the provisions of AM&ASR Act, 1958 . A team of archaeologists have been 
constituted to survey the regions and formulate a report for the purpose. A programme will be chalked 
out to provide adequate resources for taking up mai ntenance and conservation of these monuments. 
Necessary steps to declare some of the monuments as  monuments of national importance under the 
provision of the Act, have already been initiated. The preliminary and final notification shall be issued 
after considering the objections, if any. In case o f the following monuments, the preliminary 
notifications were issued but final notifications h ave not been issued for the reasons indicated again st 
them: 
1.  Bhim Garh Fort at Reasi (Due to objections rais ed by the State Government) 
2.  Gompas & Other Historical remains adjoining Leh  Palace (No feed back from the local 
State authority about the objections received, if any of issuance of final notification). 
227.   So far as shifting the Circle office from Ja mmu to Srinagar is concerned, it is submitted 
that the office at Srinagar is also functioning wit h some staff members. The conservation works are 
being carried out there as per the Conservation Pro gramme approved. At Jammu, the Office of the 
Superintending Archaeologist used to function durin g winter months from December to April every 
year. In the year 1989, the camp office could not m ove to Srinagar owing to the circumstances then 

prevailing in the valley. In the past, miscreants m ade some attempts to attack the office building at 
Srinagar, due to which some watch and ward staff go t scared. The matter is under consideration and 
the old arrangement shall be restored as soon as possible. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
228.  The Committee has noted the reply and emphasises the need for providing more resources 
and man power to the ASI in Jammu and Kashmir for c arrying out the on-going work and 
taking up additional ones.  
229.   It also recommends the Ministry of Culture t o examine the proposals submitted by the 
State Government for the protection and restoration of Bhimgarh Fort, Hari Parvat and Old Nagar City 
under centrally protected monument for expeditious disposal. Sanctioning a special grant to ASI for 
maintaining the monuments which were damaged by the earthquake in the State should be considered 
and decision be intimated to the Committee.    
Reply of the Government 
230.   The monuments namely Bhimgarh Fort, Reasi an d Hari Parvat Fort are State protected. 
The Bhimgarh Fort at Reasi in District Udhampur is a State protected monument under the control of 
the State’s Department of Archaeology, Archives and Museum. Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine Board 
has been looking after its maintenance. A prelimina ry notification was issued on 8th November 2002 
by the ASl to declare the Fort as a monument of nat ional importance. A meeting was convened by the 
Principal Secretary, Government of Jammu and Kashmi r, Deptt. of Higher and Technical Education 
on 24th March 2003 to discuss the modalities of han ding over the Fort to the ASI. The State 
Government mentioned the following important points in the meeting:- 
(i) ASI should reimburse all the maintenance costs incurred by Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine 
Board hitherto. 
(ii) ASI should absorb all the employees of various  agencies working for the maintenance of 
the fort. 
(iii) Terms and conditions for handing over are bei ng worked out and shall be communicated 
to ASI later. 
(iv) Till the above three points are resolved, ASI should withhold the final notification. 
231.   ASI has assessed the damage caused to these monuments. Steps are being undertaken to 
carryout the restoration works. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
232.    The Committee recommends that all the modalities  should be worked out at the 
earliest to ensure that the protection and restoration work is completed in time. 
CONSERVATION AND MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS 
233. The Committee notes that conservation, preserv ation and maintenance of centrally protected 
monuments and sites are the prime task of ASI. In s pite of all the adversities, the Archaeological 
Survey of India was doing stupendous task of repair s and conservation of the monuments for 
maintaining their historical and aesthetic values. The Committee appreciates the ASI for its work 

particularly in structural repairs, chemical preservation and environmental development works around 
monuments.                                                                                                               (Para 106, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
234.   ASI is grateful to the Hon’ble Parliamentary  Committee for its words of appreciation. ASI 
would continue to shrive for maintaining high stand ards in the matter of protrection and conservation 
of national monuments. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
235.   The Committee reiterates its demand for strengthi ng/expanding the ASI. 
236.   But at the same time the Committee feels tha t ASI should conduct preservation, heritage 
managment and exploration of new destinations of historic importance for promotion of tourism in the 
State especially in Ladakh region. Kargil has treme ndous potential for exploring tourism and cultural 
heritage. The Committee was informed that three roc ks carved statues (Bamyan type) of 
Avalakateshvara from Ghandhara form of art situated  at Barsoo Nalluh, Appatii in Kargil block and 
Mulbekh in Shargole block are lying unattended sinc e years and need immediate preservation. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture and the ASI must undertake for maintenance and 
preservation of these historical/religious place, o bject and buildings on priority basis. Funds be 
earmarked for this purpose.                                                                                           (Para 107, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government 
237.   To assess the damage caused to these monumen ts due to vagaries of nature and human 
vandalism, a team shall be constituted. The team wi ll also explore the areas falling in Kargil and Leh  
Districts for promotion of Tourism and Culture. It will also attend to the preservation of Rock carved  
statues and other archaeological monuments and arti facts. Since the areas of Kargil and Ladakh are 
cut off from the rest of the country during the win ter months, ASI endeavor would be to accomplish 
the task during the available working-season by augmenting its strength. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
238.  The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry of Culture.  
239.   The Committee notes that ASI is taking up th e scientific study and chemical preservation 
in Ladakh region with a view to identify the conser vation problem of various monasteries in the 
region namely Shey, Alchi, Hemis, Thiksey, Lakir, P hyang etc. The Committee finds that most of the 
monasteries are living monasteries and are at prese nt under religious use and many changes in the 
original structures and painting are being effected  by the Lamas in the monasteries. The Committee 
feels that this has caused heavy damage and posed great challenges in protecting of these monuments.  
(Para 109, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
240.   Recently one Dy. Superintending Archaeologic al Chemist has been posted to the Srinagar 
Circle to look after the Chemical Preservation of monuments in the Circle. The painting was inspected 
on 6.6.2008 by the Science Branch officers with the consent of Lamah and it was decided to undertake 
scientific preservation work of painting located in  South-East wall of the assembly hall measuring 
about 16.00 Sq.mt. in a phased manner. The cost est imate in this respect is under preparation and its 

execution will be taken up in the next year as it i s not possible to undertake this work now due to 
inclement weather. 
241.   Some conservation work of painting in sum-te sk shrine of Alchi monastery in the inner 
hall of Shey Palace was taken up. A workshop was al so organized by the Archaeological Survey of 
India at Shey-Palace in order to make Lamas and the local people aware of the need of preservation of 
paintings. An amount of Rs.50,000/- has been allotted for Alchi painting conservation in this financial 
year. The work will be taken up after the weather conditions become more favourable. 
242.  The Committee is anxious to note that ASI was  not allowed to take up conservation work at 
Hemis monastery and Lakir monastery by the manageme nt Committee headed by the Lamas. The 
Committee feels that these monasteries being the tr easure house of the Buddhist architecture and 
literature must be preserved to retain its ancient glory. The Committee recommends that ASI in 
coordination with the local representatives should make efforts to convince Lamas to persuade them to 
allow ASI to take up conservation and preservation work at the monasteries in the region so that the 
glory of ancient Buddhist monastic tradition and cultural heritage could be saved. The Committee saw 
itself that these monasteries needed urgent help to protect and preserve their rich cultural heritage that 
are being damaged in various ways. The Committee re commends that the schools run by the 
monasteries were being given some support by the Mi nistry of Culture. It was informed that the help 
was too meager to have any impact. The Committee re commends that this cultural support for the 
schools run by monasteries be enhanced adequately this financial year itself.   
 
Reply of the Government  
243.  So far as conservation of Hemis Monastery is concerned, recently on, 31.08.2008, a meeting 
was convened by Srinagar Circle in Leh with the man agement of Hemis Monastery in which it was 
emphasized that the ASI is keen on taking up the pr eservation and restoration of the Monastery 
support and cooperation of the Monastery Management was sought. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
244.   The committee appreciates the efforts made by the  Archaeological Survey of India in 
this regard, particularly is being able to take up preservation of painting inside the monasteries. 
STRUCTURAL REMAINS  
245.  The Committee wants to put on record its appr eciation for ASI’s Srinagar Circle for conducting 
archaeological excavations and exploration in Jammu and Kashmir resulting in discovery of new sites 
and structural remains of great cultural and histor ical importance. The Committee feels these findings 
help in understanding sequence of different cultura l assemblage of the by gone era in the State. The 
Committee desires the need for increasing the activ ities of ASI particularly, excavation and 
exploration to other important sites in the Jammu a nd Kashmir. ASI needs to be strengthened 
adequately for carrying out such activities.    
Reply of the Government  
246.   During the visit of the Parliamentary Commit tee in the month of June, 2008, necessary 
information about the archaeological excavation and  exploration carried out by the Circle was 
presented to the Committee during its visit to Pari  Mahal, Srinagar. It was emphasized that it is 
necessary to go for scientific clearance of Pari Ma hal to expose its buried terraces which can throw 

more light on archaeological importance of the monu ment and the cultural heritage of the Jammu and 
Kashmir. A proposal will be prepared for taking up the scientific clearance of the monument. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
247.   The Committee notes the view and desires that the proposal may be expedited. 
PUBLICATIONS  
248.   The Committee appreciates that the ASI is pu blishing brochures on the ticketing 
monuments in J&K for information of the tourists. T he Committee desires that the brochures should 
also be published in the regional language besides Hindi and English, for wider coverage. (Para 116, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
249.   ASI has taken note of the suggestion of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee and needful 
would be done. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
250.  The Committee notes the reply.  
251.  The Committee recommends that the ASI should bring out the field reports and publish reviews 
periodically of the activities carried out during each year on time. (Para 117, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
252.   ASI has taken note of the suggestion of the Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee. Needful 
would be done. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
253.  The Committee notes the reply.  
BUDGET  
254.   The Committee is of the considered view that  allocation of Rs.2.38 crore under the Plan 
and Rs 4.10 crore under the Non-Plan made to the Ci rcle would not be adequate for carrying out 
conservation and maintenance activities during the year 2008-09. The Committee feels that apart from 
on-going projects, a large number of conservation works are yet allocation to the Srinagar Circle for in 
view of the stupendous task of repairing and conservation of monuments before them. The Committee 
also recommends that the Government should identify  the schemes for conservation and maintenance 
of monuments for which MPLADS and MLA funds could b e utilized, particularly, in Ladakh region 
so that the dependence over Government for funds can be reduced to some extent. (Para 119, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
255.  Effort would be made to provide sufficient al location to Srinagar Circle to meet its 
requirements. In case of any shortfall, MPLADS and MLA funds would also be approached. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
256.  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
TICKETED MONUMENTS  

257.   The Committee notes with concern the decline  in number of persons visiting the 
monments. It, however, recommends that more monuments be brought under the ticketed category but 
the charges be kept as nominal and the revenue earned should be given to the ASI for the conservation 
and maintenance of the monuments.    
Reply of the Government  
258.   The entry fee @ Rs.5/- per head for domestic , SAARC and BIMSTEC tourists and @ Rs. 
l00/- per head for foreign tourists is being levied  on the following centrally, protected monuments in  
Jammu and Kashmir:-- 
1.  Group of Temples, Kiramchi, District Udhampur. 
2.  Ancient Palaces attributed to Raja Suchet Singh , Ramnagar, District Udhampur. 
3.  Avantiswami Temple, Avantipura, District Pulwam a. 
4.  Ancient Palace, Leh, District Leh (Ladakh). 
259.   The tourist inflow during the last three yea rs at these ticketed monuments in Jammu and 
Kashmir was: 
Year Indian Foreigner 
2006 9109 1769 
2007 11544 1859 
2008 11236 2433 
260.   Adverse climatic conditions during the winte r months and difficult law and order situation 
impact the tourists-inflow to these monuments. Neve rtheless, efforts would be made to attract more 
and more visitors. 
261.  So far as bringing more monuments under the t icketed category is concerned, Srinagar Circle of 
the Archaeological Survey of India has proposed levy of entry fee at Sun Temple at Martand and Pari 
Mahal at Srinagar. 
262.  It is stated that as per the procedure the re venue earned through entrance fee at protected 
monuments is deposited in the Consolidated Fund of Government of India and cannot be used by 
Archaeological Survey of India. However, budgetary support is provided by Government of India to 
Archaeological Survey of India for its monument protected and conservation works. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
263.   The Committee feels that revenue generation measure s like hike in fee for using the 
sites for commercial purposes may be considered by the Ministry. 
TOURIST AMENITIES AT THE MONUMENTS  
264.   The Committee notes that besides the conserv ation and maintenance works, the ASI, 
Srinagar Circle was also improving to a great exten t the environs of the monuments by providing 
roads, electrification, etc. as also amenities to t he tourist including toilet and drinking water faci lities 
at different places.                                                                                                    (Para 123, ibid ) 

Reply of the Government  
265.   The commendatory observations of the Hon’ble  Parliamentary Committee is 
acknowledged and appreciated by Archaeological Survey of India. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
266.  The Committee notes the reply. 
TOURIST AMENITIES AT THE MONUMENTS AND SECURITY OF MONUMENTS  
267.   The Committee however during its visit to Le h noted that Hemis and Thiskey monasteries 
did not have basic facilities like drinking water a nd toilets. The Committee recommends that these 
basic facilities should be provided in all the monu ments in the State, especially, the Hemis and 
Thiskey monasteries in Leh and attract large number of tourists. (Para 124, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
268.   Possibility of providing drinking water/toil et facilities at Hemis Monastery would be 
explored as and when its Management Committee allow s the ASI to undertake conservation work at 
the monastery. So far as providing drinking water a nd toilet facilities at Thicksey are concerned, the  
Management Committee of the monastery has been requested to provide space for it. 
269.   The Committee notes with concern that large number of group D posts are lying vacant, as 
a result, the ASI was facing difficulties in ensuri ng the security of the monuments in the State. The 
Committee considers this as a major obstacle in the  process of maintenance of monuments. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Culture s hould ensure that the vacant posts in the Circle 
be filled up on priority and new posts also be created as per the requirements. Steps may also be taken 
to train the Monuments’ Attendants so that they can take care of the monument more effectively. 
(Para 126, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
270.   ASI is in the process of submitting a propos al to the Government for cadre restructuring 
which would also be addressing the staff shortage issue. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
271.  The Committee desires that its recommendation is im plemented fully to fill the vacancies 
of Group D employees and Monuments Attendants. 
HORTICUL TURAL ACTIVITIES  
272.  The Committee appreciates the archaeological garden development works in the State especially 
in the Srinagar and Jammu region. The Committee rec ommends that more gardens should be 
developed in the archaeological sites in the State. In Srinagar world famous Shalimar Bagh and Nishat 
Bagh have been the main source of tourist attractio n. The Committee recommends that the “light and 
sound” programme which was used to be arranged in c ollaboration with ITDC in Shalimar Bagh be 
restarted immediately.   (Para 128, ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  

273.  ASI has plans to develop gardens at Akhnoor F ort in Jammu District. Shalimar bagh and Nishat 
Bagh are with the State Government, who would be advised to arrange Sound and Light Show at these 
Baghs in collaboration with I.T.D.C. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
274. The Committee desires that to attract more tourist Sound and Light Show (S&L show) 
should be started at the earliest.  
275. The Bangus valley of Jammu and Kashmir is a virgin area with full of scenic beauty and great tourism 
potential. However, the area is visited by very less tourists due to lack of basic amenities, infrastructure and 
development in and around the area. If it is developed properly the area has all the potential to become one of 
the major tourist spots of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Govt. of 
India should include this area for development as a mega tourist spot and adequate funding may be provided 
for overall development of the area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS –– AT A GLANCE  
  The data provided by the Ministry shows a mere 0.03 % increase in the tourist growth 
during the year 2008. This data further supports th e observations of the Committee. The 
Committee hopes that the Ministry will take further measures to improve the tourist flow to the 
country. Further, the Committee desires that the ta rget for the tourist arrival should be 
specified so that actual status of tourist growth may be arrived at and is comparable. (Para 8) 
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR  
  The Committee is aware of the peculiar situation of  Jammu and Kashmir and the 
practical problem in ensuring tourist arrival. It h owever, hopes that the tourist inflow will take 
new peaks in the changed situation in the region. The Ministry should also project the improved 
situation through advertisements so that more tourists are attracted to visit the State. (Para 11) 
  The Committee desired that blue print of the touris m promotion plans may be elaborated 
so that the Committee would be able to make some contributions and suggestions to the plan. (Para 14) 
TOURIST ARRIVALS  
  The Committee recommends that the Ministry may purs ue the matter to ensure that the 
States/Union territories implement the guidelines f or formation of Tourist Security 
Organizations (TSO). The Ministry should also coordinate with the State and Union Territories 
to speed up the action of setting up Tourist Security Organizations. (Para 18) 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and f eels that the press may be sensitized 
about the issue and close interaction may be mainta ined with media-persons to ensure a more 
positive projection of ground realities in the State. (Para 21) 
ADVENTURE TOURISM  
  The Committees hopes that the setting up of Indian Institute of Skiing and 
Mountaineering (IISM) is a beginning and the Minist ry will endeavour to set up more such 
institutions at other places in Jammu and Kashmir. (Para 24) 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry with dismay. The Committee feels that the 
Ministry should have obtained the reference of the State Government before submitting replies 
to it. The Committee desires that the Ministry shou ld further pursue the matter with the State 
Government. It is expected to adopt a proactive approach in such matters. (Para 27) 
  The Committee finds the reply to be blatantly evasi ve. The recommendation was about 
developing adventure tourism in the State and adequ ate publicity thereof. Most regretfully, the 
replies about the first part have been held up. The  Committee hopes this was not deliberate. It 
expects the officials to be more careful while prep aring replies on Committee’s 
recommendations/observation. The Committee reiterates its recommendations that the Ministry 
should prioritize the Adventure Tourism projects in  Jammu and Kashmir and give adequate 
publicity in India and abroad. (Para 31) 
  The Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken by the Government of Jammu 
and Kashmir for development of trekking routes. The Committee would also like to know about 
the efforts made by the Ministry to obtain State Government’s response to all such paras sent to 

them. The Ministry can not wash its hands off just by forwarding Committee’s 
recommendations to the State. It is their responsib ility to procure them and submit to the 
Committee with replies. (Para 34) 
  The Committee is happy to note that IISM has been h anded over its building at Gulmarg. 
The Committee hopes that IISM will now help in exploration of avenues of adventure and sports 
tourism in the region.   (Para 37) 
PILGRIM TOURISM  
  The Committee feels that Ministry of External Affairs may further pursue the matter with 
Chinese authorities.   (Para 44) 
  The Committee feels that mere agreeing to the propo sal does not serve the purpose of 
providing publicity to ‘B&B and PG’ (‘Bed and Break fast’ and ‘Paying Guest 
Accommodation’). The Ministry must inform the Commi ttee about the steps taken to provide 
publicity to boost tourism. (Para 47) 
  The Committee thanks the Ministry for delineating t he roles of the Union and State 
Governments in promotion of tourism. As such it is a joint responsibility; the replies also should 
have been prepared jointly. It would have been high ly obliged, had the Ministry responded 
specifically to the Committees recommendations/obse rvations that were specific about facilities 
to pilgrims of Vaishno Devi Temple. The Committee n otes the allocation of resources in the 
Eleventh Plan. The Committee hopes that the sanctio ned amount will be utilized judiciously 
within the scheduled period.     
  The Committee hopes that response of the State Gove rnment will be communicated to the 
Committee as soon as possible. (Para 53) 
TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE  
  The Ministry may explore Public-Private-Partnership model for setting up construction of 
luxury hotels to boost high end tourism in the State. (Para 56) 
  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry of Civil Aviation  may be pursued further to act on the 
recommendations of the Committee. (Para 59) 
  The Committee to its utter dismay notes that the Mi nistry has again very conveniently 
stepped out of the line by just passing the recommendations of the Committee to the Ministry of 
External Affairs and the State Government. The comm ittee further hopes that in view of the 
importance of the matter, more proactive approach w ould be taken in coordination with the 
concerned Ministries/authorities.    
  The Committee may be apprised of any plan received from Government of Jammu and 
Kashmir. If not, the Ministry may advise the State Government to send proposals. (Para 65) 
  The Committee does not accept this as a reply and r equest the Ministry to submit specific 
reply in consultation with the State Government. (Para 68) 
  The Committee hopes that the Ministry will pursue t he matter with the Government of 
Jammu and Kashmir and inform the Committee about the action taken. (Para 71) 

  The Committee notes the sanctioning of Food Craft I nstitute and release of Rs.200 lakhs. 
The Committee hopes that the Institute will be open ed shortly. The Government should explore 
the possibility of providing good quality budget ho tels with convention centers through PPP 
mode or otherwise.   (Para 74) 
CENTRAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE SCHEME IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR  
  The Committee feels that timely implementation of t he projects will result in better 
utilization of funds. Hasty works at the end of the  financial year to consume the balance funds 
ultimately results in wastage of money as the quali ty standards could not be followed in works. 
The expenditure blue print may help to implement the plans step by step in an organized way.  
(Para 77) 
  The Committee while agreeing with Ministry observes  that monitoring was a continuous 
process, still finds a shortfall and pendency. The Committee feels that the present mode of 
monitoring system needs improvement for achieving better goals. (Para 80) 
  The Committee desires that the matter may be pursue d further and the Committee may 
be informed the response from the State Government. (Para 83) 
CENTRAL  FINANCIAL   ASSISTANCE  SCHEME  IN  JAMMU  AND  KASHMIR  
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry  and hopes that with modified CFA, 
the State would be able to utilize the money. (Para 86) 
  The Committee recommends that the State Government may be pursued to fill up the 
posts urgently. The Committee also desires to know the response and the present status thereof.  
(Para 89) 
  The committee desires to know the response of the M inistries and State Government over 
the issue.     (Para 92) 
  The Committee further recommends that the examinati on and finalization of the projects 
should be done in a time bound manner with Ministry  of Tourism acting as facilitator in the 
regard.     (Para 95) 
  The Committee notes the reply of the Government. (Para 98) 
RELAXATION IN INNER LINE RESTRICTION  
  The matter may be pursued with Ministry of Home Aff airs and this response may be 
intimated to the Committee.  (Para 101) 
  The Committee desire to know the response/stand of Ministry of Home Affairs and that of 
the State Government. The Ministry of Tourism should pursue the matter with them and inform 
the Committee accordingly.  (Para 104) 
TOURIST TRANSPORT  
  The Committee feels that mere communication to the State Government does not serve the 
purpose. The need of the hour is to sensitize the S tate Government to look into the issue and 
make plans for the road transport sector so that to urism is made convenient. There is a need to 

support the State Government by providing expertise and financial help to reform the transport 
sector. Such replies in fact, reflect all pervasive  attitude of passing the buck in our delivery 
system. (Para 107) 
  The matter, after it was referred to the State Gove rnment of Jammu and Kashmir, it 
appears, has not been pursued for taking appropriat e action. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry of Tourism may ask the State to submit  a detailed proposal to be placed before the 
Committee at the earliest.     
GONDOLA  
  The Committee notes the reply. (Para 113) 
  The Committee notes the reply and expects the Minis try to submit the response of the 
State Government at the earliest. (Para 116) 
LEAVE TRAVEL CONCESSION  
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. (Para 119) 
HOTEL  MANAGEMENT  INSTITUTE  AT  SRINAGAR  
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry. (Para 122) 
  The Committee notes the reply. (Para 125) 
INCREDIBLE INDIA CAMPAIGN  
  The Committee does not consider spending to be real  indicator of performance. In this 
case despite crores of rupees spent, there was no d esired impact otherwise people would not 
have pointed out about lack of adequate publicity, to the Committee. In this case either the 
money was not spent prudently or it was less than r equired. The Committee still feels that the 
State was not getting adequate attention in this re gard. It wants the Ministry to analyze the 
impact of the existing ad-campaign and take up with  renewed vigour alongwith the State 
Government. (Para 128) 
ADVERSE  TRAVEL  ADVISORIES  
  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry  and desires that the Government 
should continuously strive for promoting Jammu and Kashmir in the tourist generating market 
abroad.     (Para 131) 
LEH  AIRPORT  
  The Committee hopes that the Ministry will vigorous ly pursue the matter of getting land 
from the State Government and construct new terminal building. (Para 148) 
AIR CONNECTIVITY  
  The Committee hopes that with the increase of touri sts, Ministry of Civil Aviation will 
review the policy to ensure adequate number of flig hts in the sector. The Committee notes that 
there is only one flight to Leh by NACIL(I) that to o is indirect and only once a week, while two 
private airlines were operating direct daily flight s to Leh. It means the Delhi- Leh is a profit 
making route, NACIL not operating flights to Leh ma kes the Committee curious about the 

reasons. NACIL flight, if operated will help Govern ment employees who avail of LTC to Leh as 
the LTC air travel is permissible only by NACIL flights. (Para 157) 
  The Committee notes the reply. (Para 161) 
  The main thrust of the recommendation of the Commit tee was to provide air connectivity 
to Kargil region with other parts of the country. I f operating ATR-42 type of aircrafts on this 
route is not feasible, other options may be considered for providing air connectivity to Kargil.  
(Para 168) 
  The Committee notes the reply. (Para 171) 
  Instead of relying on the average load factor of ab out 38% on annualized basis, the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation should increase the freq uency in peak season and holidays. The 
Committee notes that Private airlines are operating daily flights between Delhi and Leh whereas 
the NACIL operates just two flights a week to Leh. The Committee is unable to understand 
what prevents NACIL from operating daily flights to  Leh, while the private airlines are 
operating on a daily basis. (Para 176) 
  The Committee understands the constraints of Airpor ts Authority of India in Jammu and 
Kashmir region. However, all efforts should be made  to ensure that normally no regular 
commercial flights should be disturbed due to lack of coordination with other agencies. (Para 179) 
  In view of the position explained above the Committ ee would like to know what kinds of 
aircraft are being operated by private-operators and what is their experience? (Para 183) 
  The Committee was aware of this position when it ma de this recommendation. Idea of the 
Committee was to ensure that more and more people v isit Kashmir region mainly due to its 
strategic importance. The Committee reiterates its recommendations and feels that there should 
be some kind of regulation of fares to Jammu & Kash mir and not being left to vagaries of 
market forces and may be given relaxation in airfares. (Para 186) 
DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN SRINAGAR  
  The Committee is of the view that delays in 2 to 4 years means the project cost will escalate 
many folds and the revenue loss during the period s hould also to be taken into consideration. 
The total volume of the financial loss to the exche quer is a matter of concern that requires 
urgent attention. The Committee desires that coordi nation among various agencies should be 
made to expedite the works and avoid any further delay. (Para 191) 
  The Committee hopes that the matter is being pursued by the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways for exemption and the response of Depa rtment of Expenditure may be intimated 
to the Committee.   (Para 193) 
  The Committee hopes that the recommendation of the Committee will be implemented 
fully.      (Para 196) 
  The Committee feels that Paramilitary forces could be requested to safeguard the men and 
material in such cases and the procedure for single  window clearance may be made to expedite 
the work.     (Para 199) 

  The Committee notes the replies given by the Ministry. (Para 204) 
  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that it wou ld be ensured that the road agencies 
consult local bodies for proper drainage system. (Para 207) 
  The committee notes the reply. (Para 211) 
ISSUES RAISED BY THE TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT, JAMMU AND KASHMIR  
  The Committee is of the view that Model Driving Tra ining Schools scheme be revived at 
least for the States/Union Territories like Jammu a nd Kashmir who could not give proposals. 
The Committee is surprised to learn that Ministry o f Road Transport and Highways does not 
have anything to do with promotion of use of CNG in  Motor Vehicles. The Committee 
emphasises the need for putting a school in place f or this purpose with the help of Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas.  (Para 220) 
  The Committee would like to know the response of ARAI, Pune as said in para 219 above.    
  The Committee recommends that the State Government should be pursued to utilize the 
funds so that additional funds may be provided. (Para 224)  
CONSERVATION AND MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS IN SRINAGAR CIRCLE  
  The Committee has noted the reply and emphasises the need for providing more resources 
and man power to the ASI in Jammu and Kashmir for c arrying out the on-going work and 
taking up additional ones.  (Para 228) 
  The Committee recommends that all the modalities should be worked out at the earliest to 
ensure that the protection and restoration work is completed in time. (Para 232)  
CONSERVATION AND MAINTENANCE OF MONUMENTS 
  The Committee reiterates its demand for strengthening/expanding the ASI. (Para 235)  
  The Committee has noted the reply of the Ministry of Culture. (Para 238) 
  The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the A rchaeological Survey of India in this 
regard, particularly is being able to take up preservation of painting inside the monasteries.   
 
STRUCTURAL REMAINS  
  The Committee notes the view and desires that the proposal may be expedited. (Para 247)  
PUBLICATIONS  
  The Committee notes the reply. (Para 250) 
  The Committee notes the reply. (Para 253) 
BUDGET  
  The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 256)  
 

TICKETED MONUMENTS  
  The Committee feels that revenue generation measure s like hike in fee for using the sites 
for commercial purposes may be considered by the Ministry. (Para 263)  
TOURIST AMENITIES AT THE MONUMENTS  
  The Committee notes the reply. (Para 266)  
TOURIST AMENITIES AT THE MONUMENTS AND SECURITY OF MONUMENTS  
  The Committee desires that its recommendation is im plemented fully to fill the vacancies 
of Group D employees and Monuments Attendants. (Para 271)  
HORTICULTURAL ACTIVITIES  
  The Committee desires that to attract more tourist Sound and Light Show (S&L show) 
should be started at the earliest. (Para 274) 
  The Bangus valley of Jammu and Kashmir is a virgin area with full of scenic beauty and great 
tourism potential. However, the area is visited by very less tourists due to lack of basic amenities, 
infrastructure and development in and around the area. If it is developed properly the area has all the 
potential to become one of the major tourist spots of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Govt. of India should include this area for development as a mega tourist spot and 
adequate funding may be provided for overall development of the area.                                             (Para 275) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING  
  The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday the 9th February, 2010 in Committee Ro om ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT 
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury      -----     Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
 4.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 5.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
 6.  Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
  LOK  SABHA  
 8.  Shri Mahesh Joshi 
 9.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil   
 10.  Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 11.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 13.  Shri S.D. Shariq 
 14.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 15.  Shri K. Sugumar 
 16.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 17.  Shri Kabir Suman 
 18.  Shri K.C. Venugopal 
  SECRETARIAT  
Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director  
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
 * *                                                          * 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s of the Committee. Thereafter, the 
Committee took up the draft 152nd and 153rd Reports  on the Action Taken by the Government on its 
recommendations/observations contained in 140th Rep ort on ‘Promotion of Tourism in Jammu and 
Kashmir’ and 149th Report on ‘Development of Touris m Infrastructure and Amenities for the 
Commonwealth Games 2010, respectively, for consider ation and adoption. The Committee adopted 
both the reports with minor additions/ modifications. 
3.   The Committee authorized its Chairman to nomin ate the Members to present the reports to the 
Parliament during the ensuing Budget Session. 

4.   While considering the Reports, the Committee n oted the inordinate delay in preparing the 
Action Taken Report on the 149th Report. The Commit tee was informed that this delay was due to 
late submission of action taken notes by the Minist ry of Culture. The Chairman informed the 
Committee that after a number of reminders, the Min istry submitted the ATNs on the 4 th   February, 
2010, nearly one year after the presentation of Report to the Parliament. 
5.  While examining the action taken replies of the  Ministry of Tourism, the Committee noticed 
that to a large number of its recommendations, the Ministry had replied that it has forwarded the 
recommendations to the concerned agencies. The Comm ittee was of the view that the Ministry of 
Tourism should have obtained the responses of those agencies and provided to it for taking a view. By 
not doing so, the Ministry has not taken the Commit tee’s recommendations as seriously as they 
deserved. It expressed its concern about inordinate  delay in submitting action taken replies and also 
about not giving proper/complete replies. The Commi ttee directed the Secretariat to convey its 
concern to the Ministries of Culture and Tourism. 
6. * *                                                              * 
7. * *                                                              * 
8. * *                                                              * 
9. * *                                                              * 
10. * *                                                              * 
11. * *                                                              * 
12. * *                                                              * 
13. * *                                                              * 
14.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
15.  The meeting adjourned at 5.20 
P.M. 
***Relate to other matters.  
 
 
 