Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
October, 2013/Asvina, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIRST REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 17th October, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 17th October, 2013)
 
REPORT NO. 
201
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
Functioning of National Akademis and other 
Cultural Institutions – Issues and Challenges


Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

53
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FIRST REPORT
Functioning of National Akademis and other
Cultural Institutions – Issues and Challenges
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 17th October, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 17th October, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
October, 2013/Asvina, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (v)
3. T ABLE OF A BBREVIATIONS .................................................................................................. (vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—15
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE 16—24
6. A NNEXURE–I AND II ........................................................................................................... 25—28
7. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 9—36
8. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 37—52

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2011-12)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Shri Satish Sharma
4. Shri Narendra Kashyap
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
6. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
 
#7. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
$8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
%9. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
*10. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
13. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
14. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
15. Shri Hassan Khan
16. Dr. Kruparani Killi
17. Shri Jose K. Mani
18. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
19. Shrimati Jaya Prada Nahata
20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Rajaram Pal
22. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
23. Shri Rudramadhab Ray
24. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shrimati Meena Singh
27. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
@31. Shri Subrata Bakshi
(i)
# V acancy caused due to expiry of the term of Shri Shadi Lal Batra w.e.f. 2 nd April, 2012 and renominated on 4 th May, 2012.
$ Nominated on 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Vikram Verma who ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to expiry of the
term w.e.f. 2 nd April, 2012.
% Nominated on 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Syed Azeez Pasha who ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to expiry of
the term w.e.f. 2 nd April, 2012.
* Nominated on 18 th May, 2012 vice Shri Ramdas Agarwal who ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to expiry
of the term w.e.f. 3 rd April, 2012.
@ Nominated on 2 nd March, 2012 vice Shri Ajit Singh who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his
inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 18 th December, 2011.

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
Ä 10. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
15. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
17. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
@18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Prabodh Panda
20. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
21. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
22. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
@23. Shri K.J. S.P. Reddy
24. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sudhakaran
29. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
*30. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
#31. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
(ii)
Ä Nominated on 12 th February, 2013 vice Shri Thomas Sangma.
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his/her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.
28th October, 2012.
* Nominated on 14 th December, 2012 vice Shri Khagen Das.
# Nominated on 9 th January, 2013 vice Dr. Kruparani Killi, who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent
upon her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28 th October, 2012.

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(iii)

(iv)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, do hereby present on its behalf this Two Hundred First Report on
“Functioning of National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions : Issues and Challenges”.
2. The report encapsulates the functioning of the three National Akademies – The Sahitya
Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi and Sangeet Natak Akademi and other cultural institutions like National
School of Drama, Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts and National Gallery of Modern Arts.
While examining the subject, the Committee heard famous personalities in the field of art and
culture and the representatives of Akademis and Institutions on their functioning. The Committee
also received various written memoranda from the stakeholders and feedback from the Ministry of
Culture which formed the basis for formulating its recommendations. The Committee inter-alia
recommended the review of constitution of akademis, election of their chairmen, overlapping of
functions; malpractices, creation of cultural cadres, establishing an overarching body/Council on the
lines of Press Council of India to govern the affairs of all the akademis, creation of vision
document, bringing in synthesis between SNA and ZCC, etc.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 1
st October, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
1st October, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Asvina 9, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS
CCRT – Centre for Cultural Resources and Training
CCS – Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal Rules)
HPC – High Powered Committee
HRD – Human Resource Development
IFTI – Indian Film and Television Institute
IGNCA – Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts
LKA – Lalit Kala Akademi
MOA – Memorandum of Association
NGMA – National Gallery of Modern Art
NSD – National School of Drama
SA – Sahitya Akademi
SNA – Sangeet Natak Akademi
ZCC – Zonal Cultural Centre
(vi)

1
REPORT
The term culture in its most comprehensive sense refers to diverse creative activities –
literature, art, visual and performing and various forms of artistic self-expression by the individuals
or by the communities which, give a sense of purpose to human existence. At the same time, these
activities provide the reflective poise and energy essential to the maturing of a good society. Thus,
culture refers to a very wide range of activities in which individuals and communities are
perpetually engaged in the course of their social evolution and development. It, therefore,
constitutes an integral part of the social and political existence of human beings and cultural activity
interacts with the constituent part of the entire gamut of activities in which human being is engaged
as a social, economic and political being. In a nutshell, culture constitutes the sublime expression
of the way of life, of the consciousness evolved in the livelihood struggles of individuals in any
given social order.
2. Such being the significance of art and culture to our lives and the role played by the
creative activities in making of a good society, our Founding-Fathers set up, immediately after
Independence, separate institutions such as Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak
Akademi and National School of Drama to protect and promote our arts, literature and other
cultural activities in different domains. Besides, various National Museums and Libraries including
other cultural institutions of national importance such as NGMA, IGNCA and NSD were also
created. These institutions were provided autonomy to enable them to work independently without
any unnecessary control over them by the Government and its agencies.
3. These Akademis laid down well-structured foundation for fulfilling their mandate and came
up with good policies/programmes, schemes for promoting arts and culture on the desired line. But
no sooner did they start functioning than the feeling that their working left much to be desired
started developing in the world of art and culture. Such a feeling was reflected in the constitution
of following three Committees consisting of eminent persons to look into the overall functioning
of these institutions:–
(i) Homi Bhabha Committee, 1964
(ii) Khosla Committee, 1972
(iii) Haksar Committee, 1989
4. When the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture decided to consider the working of these cultural institutions, the Committee, in-fact, was
unaware of the existence of these important and valuable reports. It came to know about them
through a reply to one of its questions furnished by the Ministry. When it enquired about the
action-taken on the Haksar Committee recommendations, the latest one in this regard, the
Committee was informed, to its utter dismay, that the concerned files/papers in the Ministry were
not available and that the efforts were being made to trace them out. The Ministry of Culture,
however, managed to furnish this Committee a copy of the Haksar Committee Report and its
response relating to the implementation of Haksar Committee Report. The Committee considered
these replies in detail and found that replies were incomplete as well as evasive.
5. The fact that three high-powered Committees had to be constituted for reviewing the
functioning of these institutions at regular interval is a clear indication that these
institutions were not working on the expected lines almost from the beginning and that
need was being felt for making them more effective, relevant and visible. Secondly, the fact

2
of missing files relating to these high-powered Committees reflected the lack of required
concern in the Ministry of Culture about working/performance of these bodies or it was
helpless in doing anything in this regard due to reasons beyond its control, perhaps because
of autonomy enjoyed by them. The Committee, therefore, decided to look into these issues
and while examining the matter, it found that its apprehensions were not unfounded and the
problems were deeper than expected.
6. The Haksar Committee consisted of eminent people and had a comprehensive mandate. It
had come out with very valuable and relevant observations/recommendations of farreaching
significance. It had scrutinized the records of the institutions including the agenda and proceedings
of their policy-making bodies, executive and academic bodies and internal committees. It had
consulted a cross-section of the people from the fields of performing and visual arts, language and
literature, education and cultural administration all over the country.
7. The High Power Committee headed by Shri Haksar made various recommendations to revamp
the three Akademis and National School of Drama. Review of the constitutions; Memorandum of
Associations (MoA) and functioning of all the Akademis; extension of programmes and activities to
the length and breadth of the country; increased pay and allowances to the artists and the fellows;
transparency in the selection process involved in Awards; occupation and vacation of the studios in
the Garhi Centre in New Delhi, interaction with schools, colleges and academic institutions; inclusion
of marginalised and excluded communities in the realm of arts; measures to stop infighting at the
higher levels and allegations and counter allegations by the top level functionaries of the cultural
institutions, etc., were some of the recommendations of High Power Committee.
8. This Committee, therefore, took a decision to follow-up the implementation of the
recommendations of the Haksar Committee and report its observations/recommendations to
Parliament to sensitize the Government, Akademis, NSD and the people at large, about the state of
affairs as well as the neglect of these bodies in our nation’s life.
9. The Committee on the basis of the recommendations of Haksar Committee presented its
171
st Report to the Parliament on 17 th August 2011. The Action Taken Replies on the
recommendations were received from the Ministry of Culture. After having studied the replies of
the Akademis and the Government on the recommendations of the Haksar Committee and those of
this Committee, it was decided to make an in-depth inquiry/study of the issues raised.
10. In this connection, the Committee decided to understand what was actually wrong with the
functioning of these premier cultural institutions and how to make them more accountable,
effective, visible and relevant, of course, without impairing their autonomy in any manner.
11. To begin with, the Committee examined thoroughly the Haksar Committee recommendations,
the Government’s replies thereon, its own recommendations as contained in its 171
st Report and the
Actions Taken Notes thereon furnished by the Government. The Committee found that on many
of its own recommendations, the Ministry had not submitted proper reply which were either
evasive or incomplete. While considering this matter, the Committee felt the need to look into two
more important cultural institutions other than Akademis and NSD viz. National Gallery of Modern
Art (NGMA) and Indira Gandhi National Centre for Culture and Arts (IGNCA). The Committee in
the process obtained/received a large number of representations and heard many distinguished
artists and experts representing various art forms. The Committee visited IGNCA and met the
officials to discuss various issues before it.
Brief Introduction
12. Sangeet Natak Akademi (SNA), Sahitya Akademi (SA), Lalit Kala Akedemi (LKA), National
School of Drama (NSD) and Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) are autonomous

3
organizations, engaged at the national level in the promotion of art and culture, in their respective
areas of work.
13. The three National Akademis and the National School of Drama are fully funded by the
Union Ministry of Culture and are being provided Plan and Non-Plan Grants from the Consolidated
Fund of India. IGNCA is given only a Plan grant as its Non-Plan expenses are met out of the
interest earned on the initial Corpus Fund provided by the Government of India.
14. Sangeet Natak Akademi, India’s national academy of music, dance and drama has been
functioning as the apex body in the field of performing arts in the country, preserving and
promoting the vast intangible heritage of India’s diverse culture. The Akademi awards are the
highest national recognition conferred on practicing artists. Akademi gives grants in aid for
research, documentation and publishing in the performing arts. The Akademi’s archives comprising
audio/video tapes, photographs and films is one of the largest in the country and is extensively
drawn upon for research on the performing arts. It also organizes festivals, workshops and
exhibitions. They also promote cultural exchange programmes.
15. Sahitya Akademi is the central institution for literary dialogue, publication and promotion in
the country and the only institution that undertakes literary activities in 24 languages including
English. Sahitya Akademi confers 24 awards for original and creative writing every year. It
publishes nearly 300 books per year in all its recognized languages. It conducts around 400
programmes annually and also regularly organizes book exhibitions throughout the country.
16. Lalit Kala Akademi is the national academy of art and culture that focuses its activities in the
filed of visual arts. It presents exhibitions and educational programmes, it runs a library, art collection
archives, conservation laboratory and publishes books and journals of intellectual nature. LKA is
involved in cultural exchange programmes, national exhibition of art, lectures, seminars etc. The
Akademi provides financial assistance to State Art Akademis and various other not-for-profit art and
cultural organizations for conducting activities and promoting Indian art in various States of India.
17. National School of Drama is one of the foremost theatre training institutions in the country.
NSD is involved in training theatre personalities, development of suitable patterns of teaching in all
branches of drama. NSD has two performing wings: Repertory Company and Theatre in Education
Company. Repertory Company is a regular performing wing of the school, Theatre in Education
is educating children through creative and meaningful theatre.
18. The Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts is one of the major research centre for arts
and culture. It undertakes research and publication, it also provides a forum of creative dialogue and
it is facilitating the understanding of the dynamic of culture. To achieve its objective, IGNCA is
regularly bringing out publications on Indian arts, crafts, literature, fundamental texts and philosophy.
It also organizes exhibitions, seminars, conferences workshops, cultural festivals, lectures, etc.
19. National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA) is the premier museum of modern art. It functions
as a repository of modern and contemporary visual, plastic and new media arts. Through cultural
exchanges, NGMA showcases international art in our country and promotes modern and
contemporary Indian art abroad. It also organises exhibitions. NGMA is run and administered as
a subordinate office of the Ministry of Culture. Based primarily in New Delhi, the NGMA has its
regional centres at Mumbai and Bangaluru. For convenience, throughout the report ‘Akademis’ has
been used to describe all the above six institutions.
Review of Constitutions of Akademis
20. Foremost issue that came up before the Committee was the need for making certain
fundamental changes in all of these Institutions to enable them to function creatively and

4
independently without unnecessary intervention of the Ministry of Culture or the Government
dictating their actions. Many of the those who appeared before the Committee emphasised the need
for reviewing the constitution and composition of these cultural institutions.
21. It was argued before the Committee that the central issue in the functioning of these
Akademis is the running tussle between representation/nomination and excellence. After the turmoil
of Partition of the country, a cultural integration through representation may have been felt
necessary. But in the changed global scenario of arts today, excellence and innovation alone can
succeed and attract attention and admiration. The representation principle, it was argued before the
Committee, has governed the structures and policies of these Akademis that has impacted the
achievement of full potential of these Institutions adversely. However, in the changed scenario the
representation has become, more or less, irrelevant in the fields of performing arts, literature and
visual arts in India. The autonomy they enjoy has virtually become the license to self-serving
bureaucracy without accountability. Akademis have been emptied out of creative dynamism and
concern for excellence and their well entrenched bureaucratic structures are ruining them merrily,
it was argued.
22. The Committee notes that though the Haksar Committee had also recommended for
review of the constitutions in 1990s, nothing could be done by the Government till now. The
Committee was informed that the Committees have been constituted for Lalit Kala
Akademi and NSD to review their constitutions and this Committee is not aware of their
outcome. The Committee would like to be apprised about this.
Election of Chairmen of the Akademis
23. The Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that the President of the Sahitya Akademi
is elected by the General Council, the Supreme Body of the Akademi. However, in case of Lalit
Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi, and National School of Drama, the Chairmen were
appointed by the President of India. In case of IGNCA, the President is appointed by the Trustees
from amongst themselves.
24. It was submitted to the Committee that Chairmen of all the Akademis should be elected.
Presently only the Sahitya Akademi Chairman is elected. The Electorate should consist of all the
awardees of the Akademis including those of State Akademis and the Fellows. The Chairmen thus
elected would be responsible to their electorate rather than to the Ministry. Government nominees
tend to perpetuate government culture which is precisely what should not happen. Bureaucrats have
the tendency (unfortunately) to create routines that kill any kind of creative initiative. Akademis
should keep pace with the changing time, it was contended.
25. Regarding the election of Chairmen of the Akademis, the reply of the Ministry of Culture
was quite evasive wherein it was stated that it would require amendments in Constitutions/MOAs
of Akademis. As regards the suggestion that the electorate should consist of all the awardees of
all the Akademis including those of State Akademis and the Fellows, the Ministry replied that it was
a policy matter which needed to be examined with various stakeholders.
26. The Committee agrees that having autonomous cultural institutions with a link to
Government remains a valuable notion in principle. The fundamental problem, however, is
that these were set up at a different time altogether, and they are alleged to have not been
able to connect with the actual arts constituencies of the day in the desired manner. The
Committee feels that this problem expresses itself in the linked areas of mandate;
structure; accountability; inclusiveness; networks; and imaginative outreach of programmes.
Culture in general and the arts in particular can never work with an unchanging or
unresponsive or bureaucratic template. If the basic driver of the akademis is to be

5
autonomous and imaginative support for dynamic, ever-changing and heterogeneous arts
practices and practitioners, the institutions need to be re-energised from time to time. We
have unfortunately failed on that account. Emphasizing the urgent need for doing so, the
Committee recommends that the Government should come out with a road map in this
regard in the light of our experience so far. The Committee would like to be informed about
steps to be taken for this purpose.
27. The Committee feels that the entire field of art and culture did not get the required
attention for decades, despite the foresight and commitment of the Founding-Fathers who
knew the significance of ‘culture and arts’ in our efforts for the nationbuilding. They set
up these institutions because they knew that this power is superior to other forms of power.
But unfortunately, these institutions, over the time, are alleged to have developed the
vested interests - monopolized by a few persons or group who have earned titles of ‘Culture
Vultures’ or ‘Culture Czars/Czarinas’, etc. Their products are described as being
uninspiring, not showcasing the composite culture of India. India is not known even to
Indians precisely because these agencies have not been able to live upto the expectations.
These have still remained merely as subordinate offices instead of becoming institutions of
national glory. Be that as it may, the Committee feels a deeper review of their organisation,
composition, functioning and vision is called for urgently. Professionalism of the highest
order alone can salvage these institutions from the patronage of unscrupulous people. The
persons entering the portals of our premier cultural bodies, apart from being from the field
of art and culture also should be an evolved human being. In view of this, the Committee
recommends a comprehensive review of the Constitution as well as working of these
autonomous bodies - Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi,
National School of Drama, Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts and National Gallery of
Modern Arts to attune them to the present day realities and requirements. The aim should
be to get rid of the vested interests that may have led to ‘cronyism’ and ‘self-perpetuating
administration’. Only artists should get opportunity to manage these bodies to make them
truly professional, more responsive and accessible. Their autonomy should be preserved at
all costs, but we should ensure that it does not lead to autocracy of a few. Autonomy and
accountability are two sides of the same coin, one cannot exist without the other.
Overlapping responsibilities - Need for building synergy
28. Another overarching concern brought before the Committee requiring urgent attention was
the manner in which cultural programming is happening in India. We have over the years arrived
at a disintegrated approach, thereby underestimating the role it can play in keeping together the
cultural fabric of India. The Committee feels that art and culture are inextricably linked with
our traditions which should be viewed as an evolving and organic thing. At the same time,
these are not merely a thing of the past, they have close correlation with the present as
well as the future. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts have to be made to
create a composite, holistic understanding  of culture that can happen only if our premier
cultural organizations such as the various Akademis have a proper synergy amongst
themselves.
29. The Committee found that currently we have a number of institutions/organizations having
dual and overlapping responsibilities. For instance, Sangeet Natak Akademi, NSD, IFTI Pune and
Kathak Kendra relate to dance and drama. Lalit Kala Akademi, NGMA and IGNCA look after
painting related issues in common, whereas the definition of “Lalit Kala”, encompass all fine arts.
There is no interaction between National School of Drama and Film Institute, Pune and both the
institutions are not synergising their professional knowledge and wisdom to enrich one another.
Sahitya Akademi, National Book Trust, Publications Division, etc. are another example in this

6
regard. They function under different Ministries as well. The Ministry of Culture argued that all
the autonomous organisations under it function as per their respective Constitutions/Memorandum
of Associations/Rules and Regulation in their respective areas. The workings of these institutions
are different and there is no question of duplication of work among these institutions. The Ministry
of Culture, however, conceded that in terms of activities and Schemes some overlapping may occur
among these institutions, even though the mandate of each one is laid down clearly. However,
sometimes overlapping is only perceived because the ultimate goal of these institutions is common
i.e., to promote excellence in the fine arts and performing arts. There is, however, considerable
scope for building synergy amongst these institutions, to maximize their potential and output.
30. The Committee feels that there is hardly any contradiction between what the
Committee found and the argument given by the Ministry of Culture about overlapping of
their mandates/activities. The Committee also agrees that strict compartmentalization in
this regard may neither be possible nor desirable. But the Committee is convinced and
Haksar Committee also talked about this, that there is a scope for avoiding duplication of
activities which causes wastage of resources and efforts. This may be streamlined to reduce
such duplications to a great extent. Thus, the activities of the institutions need to be
synergised for promotion and protection of our art and culture in more efficient and
effective way.
Interaction among Akademis and educational institutions
31. It was brought before the Committee that currently there was a disconnect between our
cultural bodies and educational institutions. The Committee was informed that all the arts – from
literature to dance – have a vital relationship with each other. The Akademis and Institutions are
currently working as islands of knowledge. Presently, most of our institutions of higher learning
have little interaction with these cultural institutions and their activities.
32. Our cultural akademis do not seem to interact nor do they have any sustained or
meaningful dialogue with schools, colleges and universities – even in the metros, leave
alone the vast remainder of the country. As a result, the akademis, for the most part, work
like museums in the wilderness. In the existing scenario, the Committee feels that our
schools need to integrate cultural education as part of their curriculum. This has to become
mandatory for it to be effective.
33. Education and culture are inseparable and will remain incomplete without one
another. The Committee, therefore, feels that the mandate of the akademis needs to be re-
articulated to emphasise links among the akademis as well as with a range of educational
institutions. They should interact with the Indian universities and educational institutions
with a view to propagate, preserve, and enrich our heterogeneous culture. Such a link would
also promote arts education, essential if we are to build a new generation of culture and
arts “managers” with a vision.
Creating programmes for reaching out to young people
34. India is said to have ‘demographic dividend’ where more than 40% of our population today
is less than 25 years of age. If that is so, there is an additional responsibility in terms of educating
and sensitizing young people of our rich cultural traditions. Most do not know names of well
known artistes (including Bharat Ratnas), names of instruments, have no idea of genres or different
systems of Indian music and this can be an endless list.
35. The Committee is of the opinion that a cultural akademi would be meaningless if
it does not have programmes to reach out to the people at large, especially the youth. In

7
addition to interventions in educational spaces, this also calls for more planned
involvement with the community in general and the youth in particular by organizing
workshops, short term appreciation courses, residencies in colleges and schools. Besides,
equally important is to have a closer interface with the Media - print, electronic and social
media through Internet. All the artists and art forms may be provided with adequate
platforms. Akashvani and Doordarshan may be roped in to provide more opportunities to
the artists and art forms. They should be used as a platform to disseminate art and
culture and various art forms. In other words, their mandate needs to be re-articulated
to balance the existing emphasis on showcasing with a more inclusive approach that takes
the akademis to people.
36. The Committee notes that the efforts in India are largely targeted at getting
children to learn art forms – namely dance and music. Many drop out very soon and few
see this as a real career option. Incentives are far and few to get them engaged and
interested. The Committee feels that to avoid this disinterest, another level of intervention
is required, to make them aware of what these traditions are; at least to a point where they
can identify some very basic ideas of the performing and visual arts. While the Ministry of
Culture set up the CCRT with somewhat a similar idea of reaching out and creating
opportunities for young children, especially from smaller cities, and all regions including the
North-East, the program needs to be seriously reviewed and updated. Further it should be
linked with other ongoing efforts of the Ministry.
Cultural Cadre
37. The idea of a ‘cultural cadre’ distinct from the regular administrative cadre was taken up
with the Ministry of Culture. The Ministry in their written reply informed the Committee that the
suggestion needs to be discussed with Akademis in detail. The Committee found that the
Secretariat of these cultural institutions were manned by the people who have little idea/
knowledge about how to manage Arts and Culture. Many of them lack professionalism
required for the field. The Committee feels that a cultural cadre distinct from the regular
administrative cadre needs to be created to man the functioning of the Akademis, Museums
and other cultural institutions. This should consist of individuals who may be ‘generalists
in the arts’. Courses would have to be introduced for educating them in the arts to make
them conversant with different forms of theatre, dance, music, poetry and literature,
painting, sculpture and architecture. Courses in ‘art administration’ could be part of the
regular educational stream or even special courses created under the Ministries of HRD and
Culture to produce right kind of persons to administer our cultural institutions in a better
way. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should seriously consider the
creation of cultural cadre on the above lines.
Malpractices in Akademis and transparency in decision making
38. The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Culture the instances of financial,
administrative and other kinds of bungling that may have come to Government’s notice, formally
or informally, during the last ten years and the steps taken by the Government. In response thereto,
the following were submitted to the Committee:–
(i) Sahitya Akademi
39. Recently complaints of alleged biased recommendations of writers for awards, illegal claim
of travelling allowance and massive expense of travel by Secretary, Sahitya Akademi have come to
light. On enquiry by the Ministry, the Sahitya Akademi has informed that the concerned Secretary

8
has been put under suspension and a Committee has been constituted to enquire into the financial
and administrative irregularities allegedly committed by Secretary, Sahitya Akademi.
40. Regarding Sahitya Akademi, it was brought to the notice of the Committee that the quality
of translations is not generally upto the mark. The awards are decided in secrecy and the required
transparency of the process of award is missing. There are allegations that the process of selection
of grants, awards and other benefits are not transparent in cultural institutions and were being
given to favoured ones even in non-deserving cases.
(ii) Sangeet Natak Akademi
41. It came to the notice of the Ministry that the extension/re-appointment of the then Secretary
of the Sangeet Natak Akademi (SNA) was done by the Executive Board without following the
prescribed procedure. SNA was asked to take appropriate action in the matter as per Rules. SNA
obtained legal opinion in the matter which gave clean chit to the actions of Executive Board of
SNA. The Ministry, however, referred the matter to Ministry of Law and Justice for fresh opinion.
Ministry of Law and Justice opined that the re-appointment of the incumbent is in violation of the
existing Rules, Regulations and Bye-laws. In view of the legal opinion, SNA’s Chairman was asked
to take prompt action to set aside the illegal decision of the Executive Board and to discontinue
the appointment of the incumbent. The incumbent, however, resigned.
42. The distinguished and famous artists who appeared before the Committee bemoaned that
Sangeet Natak Akademi is doing little to record and publish the works of several maestros. Sangeet
Natak Akademi is not paying to the artists what they deserve for their performances.
(iii) Lalit Kala Akademi
43. Recently, the Government has received representation from various quarters about financial,
administrative and other irregularities in respect of Lalit Kala Akademi, which have since been
referred to the CBI.
44. Regarding Lalit Kala Akademi, there were serious allegations of malpractices and counter
allegations by its Chairman and Secretary. The Garhi studios were occupied by vested interests and
the guidelines for allotment of studios could not be implemented properly. There were complaints
regarding missing/damages of missing large number of famous/rare art works and paintings due to
mishandling during upkeep or transportation. Immediate enquiry and action is recommended to
place responsibility and to evolve mechanism to stop the recurrence. Proper record should be
maintained of all the art works in LKA possession. The Committee recommends that an inquiry
may be ordered to find out the truth and fix responsibility for missing/damaging of art
works. Appropriate mechanism should be evolved to prevent the recurrence of such
incidents. The Committee also recommends that appropriate punishment may be imposed on
those found guilty. A proper record should be maintained of all the art works in possession
of Lalit Kala Akademi.
(iv) I GNCA
45. Complaints of alleged administrative/financial irregularities have been received in the Ministry
in respect of officials of IGNCA, which are being examined in consultation with IGNCA
46. Overstaffing of some of the institutions by generalists are another complaint received by the
Committee.
47. The Committee was informed that the lack of inclusiveness is, perhaps, one of the biggest
problems in the functioning of the akademis. Cliques and cronyism do not make for a healthy arts

9
support programme. The same people show up, make decisions, and the same group of
practitioners get supported/“rewarded”. This affects the critical role of the Akademis: it is
impossible to make judgements on what is of value in either acclaimed or upcoming arts practice/
work if the juries and selection committees are not as wide-ranging and inclusive as our arts
communities or the country they practice in.
48. Indeed, the Members of the General Council either institutionally or individually become
beneficiaries of the system. Decision-making in the matter of ‘awards’, recognition, grants,
publication, financial support for projects, can be subject to lobbying or pressures. There are other
systemic insufficiencies which needed to be corrected, specially in the areas of the literature, visual
and performing arts. The question remains, how to ensure that the decision makers of these
institutions do not become beneficiaries themselves, directly or indirectly. This is a very tricky issue
that remains difficult to resolve till date.
49. The Committee reiterates all its observations made about the functioning of our
premier cultural institutions in its 171
st Report on the “Functioning of Sahitya Akademi,
Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and National School of Drama” and 167 th
Report on the “Functioning of National Museum” submitted earlier to Parliament. In fact,
the report in hand is a result of the callousness and apathy noticed on the part of akademis
as well as the Government to any attempt to reform these institutions. Fate of a number
of important reports such as Bhabha Committee (1964), Khosla Committee (1972), Haksar
Committee (1989) including Parliament’s Reports is a testimony to this as no actions have
been taken on recommendations of these Committees. These akademis are always mired in
one controversy or the other. Our Founding-Fathers gave them autonomy to keep the
politics away from culture but today politics seems to have crept into them from the back
door. The Founding-Fathers of these institutions had strong faith in the integrity of the
community of writers and artists but could not foresee the problems plaguing these
institutions today.
50. The result is a lack of transparency in process and accountability in terms of
outcomes. In fact, their autonomy without transparency and accountability has become a
double-edged weapon to be used as per one’s convenience. In administrative parlance,
accountability is not about control but about responsibility for which autonomy has to be
exercised. In other words, accountability is not an administrative tool but a moral obligation
on those who have the responsibility to give an account of their work and performance.
Besides, legitimacy and credibility of these institutions can only be established if they
observe adequate transparency in their functioning. Unfortunately, these elements are
currently conspicuous by their absence. As a result, these institutions have failed to live
upto the expectations and are being misused by those in power selectively by marginalizing/
ignoring deserving others. This crisis situation has been further compounded by the role of
the Ministry of Culture characterized by apathy, lack of concern and sometimes
helplessness. There is hardly any mechanism to ensure accountability and transparency in
their working by the Ministry. Once or twice, the Ministry did try to become pro-active in
this regard, it was met with stiff resistance and the matter went up to highest level in the
executive ladder. As such, normally the Ministry has little option but to keep off. It
interferes only when it feels that it should.
51. When asked about the differences between the Chairman and the Secretary, the
Ministry of Culture submitted that when the then Secretary of the Lalit Kala Akademi was
dismissed under Rule 19 of the CCS (CCA) Rule by the then Chairman in December, 2011,
the Ministry of Culture being the Appellate Authority issued an order dated 16.01.2012
revoking the dismissal order and directed to inquire into the various lapses and failures in

10
the dismissal order by following prescribed procedure. The Committee, however, received
views of the other side alleging highhandedness and unwarranted interference in the affairs
of LKA. The Committee also received a copy of the joint representations given by
Secretaries of all the Akademis emphasizing the need for their restructuring.
52. They raised the issue of excessive use of powers by the Chairmen vis-à-vis Secretaries.
The administrative power is vested with the Chairmen of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi and
Sangeet Natak Akademi as their Presidents are the Chairmen of the General Council and Executive
Council and take decisions on their behalf when circumstances so warrant, subject to ratifications
by the respective authority at its subsequent meeting.
53. The Secretaries of the three Akademis are the Principal Chief Executive Officers and are
the custodians of the records and, subject to the general supervision and control of the Executive
Board, to manage the property and funds of the Akademi for the purpose for which they are
granted or allocated.
54. In the case of National School of Drama, the Chairman does not enjoy any administrative
and financial powers. In case of IGNCA the Member Secretary exercises all such authority for the
purpose of executing the decisions of the Trustees and the Executive Committee.
55. As per their constitution/MoS, Secretaries are the executive head of the Akademis.
In fact, their constitutions are vague about the limits of Presidential authority and
therefore, sometimes the Chairmen try to exercise powers which they do not have and
intervene directly in day-to-day administration. Many of the decisions taken by them are
not put to ratification by General Council or Executive Council. Responsibility for any lapse/
violation done by the Secretaries while implementing the direction of the Chairman, ratified
or not, would obviously lie with the Secretaries and not the Chairmen. It has resulted, more
often than not, in a running feud between the two. In such a situation, main work of the
Akademis gets a back seat as most of the time, energy and scarce funds are wasted on
unproductive/unwarranted things as cases go to the Court quite too often. It has been found
that during this running feud between the Chairmen and the Secretary, Ministry either
remains a mute spectator or it intervenes only when it feels to do so. The Committee
emphasizes the need for delineation of power between the Chairmen and Secretaries on the
one hand and Government of India on the other to avoid any possibility of violation of rules
and regulations in the course of exercise of administrative powers by the Chairmen/
Secretaries of these Akademis.
56. Such a situation, the Committee strongly feels, cannot be allowed to linger on and
feels it is high time something has to be done for setting these Akademis in order. The
Committee feels that these bodies get funds from the Consolidated Fund of India and their
Demands for Grants are approved every fiscal by the Parliament on the recommendations
of this Parliamentary Committee. As such, this Committee with all sense of responsibility
says that the funds allocated to these institutions need closer and regular monitoring by
conducting their performance audit every year. There should be a regular review of the
functioning of our cultural institutions. These reviews should be conducted by external
persons/ committees which should be included in their Annual Reports that are placed
before Parliament.
High Power Committee
57. The Ministry should constitute a High Powered Committee (HPC) comprising eminent
persons mainly from the field of art and culture to examine the issues raised in this report
as well as those contained in Bhabha Committee, Khosla Committee and Haksar Committee

11
constituted by the Government in the years 1964, 1972 and 1989. The proposed HPC can
review the mandate, composition, etc. of these bodies and suggest measures to monitor
their performance and a coordination mechanism for these institutions.
58. Major recommendations made by the earlier Committees remain as relevant as these
would have been when made decades ago. The Committee reiterates its anguish on those
major recommendations not acted upon till date. That the proposed HPC does not meet the
fate of earlier Committees, this Committee recommends that it may be kept informed
about the decision/action taken in this regard at every step including the final outcome. The
Committee feels that it should be done at the earliest with a sense of urgency that it
deserves.
Accessibility of the resources of the Akademis
59. Accessibility to resources in these Akademis - their libraries, their heritage material
and their publications was another major concern expressed before the Committee. As of
now, all these exist in isolated inaccessible spaces not easily available to people. The
Committee is of the view that a real push needs to be made to take stock of what material
exists; to digitalise archival material; and to do all this in collaboration with educational/
cultural institutions and organisations all over India, as well as in collaboration with
research scholars and arts practitioners who are not necessarily in the usual over-used
circles of the akademis. All the libraries of the akademis need to be re-organised and made
more freely available to people. To begin with, people should be made aware that they exist;
and have specific material of use to students, scholars and practitioners.
60. The Committee is of the view that accessibility would also be promoted by the
practice of External Fellows coming in and looking at how the archives can be made to
work. This would not only mean bringing in their own material, but also helping with the
great need to catalogue and make archival material usable, and accessible to more people.
Proactive disclosure of information
61. The akademis need to constantly provide information about themselves and their
ongoing programmes to their constituencies. Better use of online communication and
existing media is critical. The Akademis should not feature in the press only when there
is complaint or controversy about any action/decision taken by them. More use of ICT and
media, the Committee feels, would also help strengthening the transparency process of
officials in the akademis, and the artists usually involved. The Committee notes that the
websites of the Akademis and Cultural Institutions are not updated, many of the
information provided are either incomplete or out of date. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the websites of all the Akademis and Cultural Institutions should be
updated on real time basis. All the programmes and activities should be prominently
published in their websites. There should be a system of proactive dissemination and
publication of all the relevant information.
Support by the Akademis
62. The Committee was informed that the arts speak to each other constantly and if an arts
institution is to reflect this reality, there must be more planned inter-disciplinary and multi-
disciplinary programmes and schemes. Thus, the interdisciplinary outlook must become an integral
part of the approach of each Akademi to its public events, grants, fellowships, awards,
documentation, etc.

12
63. Support needs to be imaginative, not merely official. An over emphasis on numbers/regional
representation means that quality of the arts supported can be compromised; local cliques
promoted; certain genres privileged; and other categories/themes ignored. For example, programmes
should also address themes to do with women, dalits, tribals, minorities – the marginalized sections
of society who have a lot to contribute but do not necessarily have the artistic space. To present
India as something homogenous or at best officially and tamely diverse, takes away from the reality
of all arts practice and expression, the sharpness and liveliness of competing systems of cultural
practice and conflicting voices.
64. The Committee observes that the specific forms of support by the akademis are
crucial to nurture existing and new forms of arts practice. Grants, residencies in
educational institutions, travel etc should be made completely transparent in terms of
selection process, and all information and lists should be freely available on the akademis’
website. Whether it is awards, grants, fellowships, residencies, or travel aboard, it makes
more sense, on the whole, for a body of work to be recognised/supported/ rewarded rather
than a single work.
Ownership of Culture
65. It is ironic that India, a cultural leader, a storehouse of rich traditions, values and
beliefs, is itself struggling to keep together these exceptional treasures, particularly those
that do not reach urban centres – the local and folk cultures.
66. It is fact that these traditions and art forms have survived centuries through several
political and social ups and downs. Where is the innovative programming, the creative
content, the quality and the aesthetics of the production/product? Although administrative
and structural reforms are important, the greater need is to have trained, efficient and
informed personnel. This is ownership in addition to accountability. If one were only to look
at the various organizations, the objectives for their existence, it would seem that the
objectives of preserving, promoting spreading culture and so on should be wonderfully
achieved in this country! Ownership is, therefore, crucially missing.
Centre for Tribal and Folk Art
67. The Committee emphasizes the need for a separate Akademi for Tribal and Folk
Arts. The Committee feels that this specialized Centre could, if set up, be a vehicle for the
propagation of folk and tribal art forms concertedly. This would also mean nurturing these
forms and preserving them in their original form as well as encouraging innovation in
presentation without destroying the authenticity of these art forms. This could perhaps also
be a way to raise the status as well as the remuneration of these artists to levels
comparable to those of the classical artists. In addition, it can facilitate a cultural dialogue
between all art forms from classical to traditional.
Access to Medical Help/Legal advice
68. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that in recent years there have been several
instances where artists lost their lives because of their inability to access timely medical care,
beyond their means. Invariably they need help for an immediate, sometimes critical, problem.
Several communities of artists are simply unable to afford health care.
69. When the matter was taken up with the Ministry, they have simply explained away the issue
by saying that Sangeet Natak Akademi has a scheme named Artist Aid Fund to provide financial
aid for medical relief to awardees and fellows. Under this scheme, a maximum of Rs.1.50 lakh is

13
reimbursed to the claimant in a year. Regarding the Scheme of Karnataka Government to provide
health insurance to Artists, the Ministry of Culture feigned ignorance.
70. While there have been suggestions and actual efforts to get artists to insure their skill (for
e.g. A singer can insure their voice), but most artists find this highly complicated. A simpler
membership facility or subsidy needs to be provided to them for specific kinds of illnesses.
71. We need to look for low cost insurance models that can treat a preset list of illnesses
such as heart problems, Asthma, kidney malfunctions and so on. The Committee feels the
medical insurance scheme named ‘Yashaswini Health Care’ for artists in Karnataka can be
taken as a model for such a Scheme.
72. The Committee notes that the Artist Fund caters to very few artists and the amount
provided is meagre. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
come out with an insurance scheme to cover all the deserving artists to ensure sufficient
medical care to meet their medical needs. Any such social security measures should also be
extended to related communities such as instrument makers, etc.
Reviving and replicating Festivals
73. The Committee was informed that the festivals could be a forum to revive some of the
previously successful and enriching initiatives of the Ministry of Culture. Some initiatives can
possibly be repeated such as the Lok Utsavs , or the Ocatve festival in the North East. The folk
dances get meager representations in events such as the Republic Day Parade, where too all is not
well. The Committee, therefore, feels that festivals need for focussed attention and
recommends that various forms of Festivals may be revived and replicated to provide art
and artist a platform to display.
Support to State Akademis
74. The National Akademis must work in close coordination with State Akademis,
recognized art communities/organisations, universities and other cultural and educational
institutions for promoting art and culture, for an integrated growth and functioning of art
associations and moreover to fulfil and implement their own charters. But working of
these Akademis/organizations in States also leave much to be desired; strengthening/
equipping State Akademis is equally important otherwise it will be difficult to take
activities down to the local level. The Committee would like to reiterate the Haksar
Committee recommendations in this regard for streamlining and strengthening State
Akademi’s and other regional organisations by involving/associating them in the activities
undertaken by the National Akademis. Support should also be extended to research and
documentation aspects in all forms of arts and revival and support of regional and local
traditional art forms.
Authority to Govern Culture
75. The Committee reiterates that there should be an overarching body consisting of
eminent people to look after the affairs of all the Akademis, NSD, IGNCA, NGMA, National
Museum and the Libraries etc. This body should be entrusted to ensure that the functioning
and performance of all the Akademis and organisations are conducted as per their mandate,
constitution and rules prescribed for them. The body should see that the cultural Akademis
and other institutions are not working at cross purposes. They should ensure and oversee
interaction and cooperation among all those institutions to achieve the objectives of each of
the institutions. Duplications of activities of these bodies should be minimised and synergy

14
is obtained. The Committee feels that it would be a facilitator not as regulator or
controlling body.
76. It could be a Council like the ‘Press Council of India’ in the field of culture and
arts. Any deviant functioning could be reported to it. The people constituting it should be
chosen in the same manner as the members of the Press Council of India are chosen. The
presence of this body will have a healthy influence. A writer or an artist should have, at
least, one place where he can go and complain about the way these academies function. The
Committee would like to have response of the Government in this regard.
Vision document
77. All the Cultural Institutions and Akademis are working on some sort of adhocism.
There should be a vision document for all these institutions. The documents should explain
what it is going to do in the next 4-5 years and how they are going to function. Keeping
the autonomy intact, there should be definite accountability to the people of this country
who are paying them and whose money they are spending. There should be a clear system
of answerability.
Zonal cultural centres
78. There are seven Zonal Cultural Centers (ZCCs) to provide facilities for the creative
development of performing arts, visual arts, literary work, folk traditions and tribal art forms in
the respective regions. The seven Zonal Cultural Centers are (i) West Zonal Cultural Centre;
(ii) North Zone Cultural Centre; (iii) South Zone Cultural Centre; (iv) Eastern Zonal Cultural Centre;
(v) North East Zone Cultural Centre; (vi) South Central Zone Cultural Centre; and (vii) North
Central Zone Cultural Centre.
79. The key objectives of the Centres are to preserve, innovate, promote and disseminate the
arts under the broad disciplines of Sangeet (Music), Natak (Theatre), Lalit Kala (the field of visual
arts such as paintings, sculptures, graphics, photography, ceramics and other allied arts) and
Sahitya (Literature). Music, dance and fine arts are highlighted with due emphasis on folklore
tradition. In order to take mileage out of the synergies of like-minded organizations, the Centre
conducts collaborative programmes with the Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi, Sahitya
Akademi and National School of Drama. In addition to revival of the dying art forms, Research
and Documentation of some of the rare folk and tribal art forms are also the objectives of the
Centre. To achieve these objectives, various programmes and activities are organized at village level,
taluka, district, state, inter and intrazonal levels throughout the country in collaboration with various
state, Central Akademis and voluntary organizations.
80. The Committee was informed that the concern of Zonal Cultural Centre is how to engage
more with the Akademis so that they could really gain a lot from support of the Akademis as
Cultural Centres are engaging a lot of artists and it is becoming very difficult to find platforms to
engage them in processes of documentation. Creating realistic livelihood options for a lot of the
artists who are a part of Zonal Cultural Centres is another area of concern. It could only be
realistically worked out when both the agencies communicate, cooperate and coordinate for
the dissemination of arts. Concerted efforts, no doubt, in that direction would certainly
provide livelihood and artistic ventilation to all the regional and national artists. The
Committee recommends that the Zonal Cultural Centres should be part of the Akademis
and the artists who are engaged by the Cultural Centres should be given adequate financial
support and livelihood as the art cannot flourish on an empty stomach. The National
Akademis should take it as their bounden duty to protect the artists and the art forms
throughout India who are part of the Zonal Cultural Centres. The Ministry of Culture

15
should formulate proper guidelines and schemes in coordination with the Akademis to
achieve the goal of protection of artists and promotion of art forms.
SNA and ZCC’s
81. The Committee was informed that there has been little interaction between the Zonal
Cultural Centres (ZCC) and the Sangeet Natak Akademi, although there is considerable overlap in
their objectives. It was emphasized that the ZCC need to be treated as satellite centres of the SNA.
There are immense possibilities of bringing together these organizations in meeting the larger
mission of preserving and promoting cultural forms in this country and elsewhere . ZCC have over
the years only become offices with little creative programming and energy left in them. The two
organizations need to be represented in each others’ policy and decision-making bodies to help
forge a symbiotic relationship.
82. The matter was referred to the Ministry for their comments and they have replied that zonal
cultural centres cannot be treated as satellite centres of SNA as ZCC and SNA have separate
mandates.
83. The Committee feels that the views expressed by the Ministry are quite rudimentary
and do not represent the need of the time. The Committee recommends that the mandates
of ZCCs and SNA should be reviewed afresh and the synergy of both should be amalgamated
to produce a better cultural scenario which is beneficial to the Art and Artists.
More funds for promotion of art and culture
84. The Committee finds that our National Akademis and other cultural institutions face
severe constraints of resources. There is a large mismatch between the Government
financing and the monetary needs of these cultural institutions. In fact, the funds allocated
to Ministry as a whole is too meagre that needs to be adequately enhanced. However, it is
also worthwhile to note here that the Ministry, its subordinate offices including the
Akademis and Cultural Institutions on their part must also follow sound financial
principles. Complaints in this regard were received by this Committee on the mis-utilization
of funds and non-routing of projects through ‘Projects Monitoring Cell’ in IGNCA. The
Committee feels that the Ministry of Culture should keep a close watch on the financial
transactions of these Institutions to prevent any sort of financial irregularities.
National Centre for Arts and Culture
85. A National Centre for Arts and Culture is essential for the promotion of excellence
and the preservation of India’s rich cultural heritage and vibrant traditions. In India we
have no national centre for the arts. A complex, befitting the cultural richness of the
country to function as a vibrant centre for the promotion of art and culture is the pride
of any capital city. Unfortunately, Delhi does not have a National Arts Complex. The
Committee recommends that the huge vacant land at IGNCA can be developed into a
National Arts Complex consisting of Auditoriums, theatres, multiplex, studios etc. It should
be a multi-venue, multipurpose cultural centre.
86. The underground at the Rabindra Bhawan Gallery at New Delhi can also be developed
into a multiplex for performing arts.

16
16
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE —
AT A GLANCE
The fact that three high-powered Committees had to be constituted for reviewing the
functioning of these institutions at regular interval is a clear indication that these
institutions were not working on the expected lines almost from the beginning and that
need was being felt for making them more effective, relevant and visible. Secondly, the fact
of missing files relating to these high-powered Committees reflected the lack of required
concern in the Ministry of Culture about working/performance of these bodies or it was
helpless in doing anything in this regard due to reasons beyond its control, perhaps because
of autonomy enjoyed by them. The Committee, therefore, decided to look into these issues
and while examining the matter, it found that its apprehensions were not unfounded and the
problems were deeper than expected. (Para 5)
Review of Constitutions of Akademis
The Committee notes that though the Haksar Committee had also recommended for
review of the constitutions in 1990s, nothing could be done by the Government till now. The
Committee was informed that the Committees have been constituted for Lalit Kala
Akademi and NSD to review their constitutions and this Committee is not aware of their
outcome. The Committee would like to be apprised about this. (Para 22)
Election of Chairmen of the Akademis
The Committee agrees that having autonomous cultural institutions with a link to
Government remains a valuable notion in principle. The fundamental problem, however, is
that these were set up at a different time altogether, and they are alleged to have not been
able to connect with the actual arts constituencies of the day in the desired manner. The
Committee feels that this problem expresses itself in the linked areas of mandate;
structure; accountability; inclusiveness; networks; and imaginative outreach of programmes.
Culture in general and the arts in particular can never work with an unchanging or
unresponsive or bureaucratic template. If the basic driver of the akademis is to be
autonomous and imaginative support for dynamic, ever-changing and heterogeneous arts
practices and practitioners, the institutions need to be re-energised from time to time. We
have unfortunately failed on that account. Emphasizing the urgent need for doing so, the
Committee recommends that the Government should come out with a road map in this
regard in the light of our experience so far. The Committee would like to be informed about
steps to be taken for this purpose.
The Committee feels that the entire field of art and culture did not get the required
attention for decades, despite the foresight and commitment of the Founding-Fathers who
knew the significance of ‘culture and arts’ in our efforts for the nationbuilding. They set
up these institutions because they knew that this power is superior to other forms of power.
But unfortunately, these institutions, over the time, are alleged to have developed the
vested interests - monopolized by a few persons or group who have earned titles of ‘Culture
Vultures’ or ‘Culture Czars/Czarinas’, etc. Their products are described as being
uninspiring, not showcasing the composite culture of India. India is not known even to
Indians precisely because these agencies have not been able to live upto the expectations.

17
These have still remained merely as subordinate offices instead of becoming institutions of
national glory. Be that as it may, the Committee feels a deeper review of their organisation,
composition, functioning and vision is called for urgently. Professionalism of the highest
order alone can salvage these institutions from the patronage of unscrupulous people. The
persons entering the portals of our premier cultural bodies, apart from being from the field
of art and culture also should be an evolved human being. In view of this, the Committee
recommends a comprehensive review of the Constitution as well as working of these
autonomous bodies - Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi,
National School of Drama, Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts and National Gallery of
Modern Arts to attune them to the present day realities and requirements. The aim should
be to get rid of the vested interests that may have led to ‘cronyism’ and ‘self-perpetuating
administration’. Only artists should get opportunity to manage these bodies to make them
truly professional, more responsive and accessible. Their autonomy should be preserved at
all costs, but we should ensure that it does not lead to autocracy of a few. Autonomy and
accountability are two sides of the same coin, one cannot exist without the other.
(Paras 26 and 27)
Overlapping responsibilities - Need for building synergy
Another overarching concern brought before the Committee requiring urgent attention was
the manner in which cultural programming is happening in India. We have over the years arrived
at a disintegrated approach, thereby underestimating the role it can play in keeping together the
cultural fabric of India. The Committee feels that art and culture are inextricably linked with
our traditions which should be viewed as an evolving and organic thing. At the same time,
these are not merely a thing of the past, they have close correlation with the present as
well as the future. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts have to be made to
create a composite, holistic understanding of culture that can happen only if our premier
cultural organizations such as the various Akademis have a proper synergy amongst
themselves. (Para 28)
The Committee feels that there is hardly any contradiction between what the
Committee found and the argument given by the Ministry of Culture about overlapping of
their mandates/activities. The Committee also agrees that strict compartmentalization in
this regard may neither be possible nor desirable. But the Committee is convinced and
Haksar Committee also talked about this, that there is a scope for avoiding duplication of
activities which causes wastage of resources and efforts. This may be streamlined to reduce
such duplications to a great extent. Thus, the activities of the institutions need to be
synergised for promotion and protection of our art and culture in more efficient and
effective way. (Para 30)
Interaction among Akademis and educational institutions
Our cultural akademis do not seem to interact nor do they have any sustained or
meaningful dialogue with schools, colleges and universities – even in the metros, leave
alone the vast remainder of the country. As a result, the akademis, for the most part, work
like museums in the wilderness. In the existing scenario, the Committee feels that our
schools need to integrate cultural education as part of their curriculum. This has to become
mandatory for it to be effective. (Para 32)
Education and culture are inseparable and will remain incomplete without one
another. The Committee, therefore, feels that the mandate of the akademis needs to be re-
articulated to emphasise links among the akademis as well as with a range of educational

18
institutions. They should interact with the Indian universities and educational institutions
with a view to propagate, preserve, and enrich our heterogeneous culture. Such a link would
also promote arts education, essential if we are to build a new generation of culture and
arts “managers” with a vision. (Paras 32 and 33)
Creating programmes for reaching out to young people
The Committee is of the opinion that a cultural akademi would be meaningless if it
does not have programmes to reach out to the people at large, especially the youth. In
addition to interventions in educational spaces, this also calls for more planned involvement
with the community in general and the youth in particular by organizing workshops, short
term appreciation courses, residencies in colleges and schools. Besides, equally important is
to have a closer interface with the Media - print, electronic and social media through
Internet. All the artists and art forms may be provided with adequate platforms. Akashvani
and Doordarshan may be roped in to provide more opportunities to the artists and art forms.
They should be used as a platform to disseminate art and culture and various art forms.
In other words, their mandate needs to be re-articulated to balance the existing emphasis
on showcasing with a more inclusive approach that takes the akademis to people.
The Committee notes that the efforts in India are largely targeted at getting
children to learn art forms – namely dance and music. Many drop out very soon and few
see this as a real career option. Incentives are far and few to get them engaged and
interested. The Committee feels that to avoid this disinterest, another level of intervention
is required, to make them aware of what these traditions are; at least to a point where they
can identify some very basic ideas of the performing and visual arts. While the Ministry of
Culture set up the CCRT with somewhat a similar idea of reaching out and creating
opportunities for young children, especially from smaller cities, and all regions including the
North-East, the program needs to be seriously reviewed and updated. Further it should be
linked with other ongoing efforts of the Ministry. (Paras 35 and 36)
Cultural Cadre
The idea of a ‘cultural cadre’ distinct from the regular administrative cadre was taken up
with the Ministry of Culture. The Ministry in their written reply informed the Committee that the
suggestion needs to be discussed with Akademis in detail. The Committee found that the
Secretariat of these cultural institutions were manned by the people who have little idea/
knowledge about how to manage Arts and Culture. Many of them lack professionalism
required for the field. The Committee feels that a cultural cadre distinct from the regular
administrative cadre needs to be created to man the functioning of the Akademis, Museums
and other cultural institutions. This should consist of individuals who may be ‘generalists
in the arts’. Courses would have to be introduced for educating them in the arts to make
them conversant with different forms of theatre, dance, music, poetry and literature,
painting, sculpture and architecture. Courses in ‘art administration’ could be part of the
regular educational stream or even special courses created under the Ministries of HRD and
Culture to produce right kind of persons to administer our cultural institutions in a better
way. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should seriously consider the
creation of cultural cadre on the above lines. (Para 37)
Malpractices in Akademis and transparency in decision making
The Committee reiterates all its observations made about the functioning of our
premier cultural institutions in its 171
st Report on the “Functioning of Sahitya Akademi,

19
Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and National School of Drama” and 167th
Report on the “Functioning of National Museum” submitted earlier to Parliament. In fact,
the report in hand is a result of the callousness and apathy noticed on the part of akademis
as well as the Government to any attempt to reform these institutions. Fate of a number
of important reports such as Bhabha Committee (1964), Khosla Committee (1972), Haksar
Committee (1989) including Parliament’s Reports is a testimony to this as no actions have
been taken on recommendations of these Committees. These akademis are always mired in
one controversy or the other. Our Founding-Fathers gave them autonomy to keep the
politics away from culture but today politics seems to have crept into them from the back
door. The Founding-Fathers of these institutions had strong faith in the integrity of the
community of writers and artists but could not foresee the problems plaguing these
institutions today.
The result is a lack of transparency in process and accountability in terms of
outcomes. In fact, their autonomy without transparency and accountability has become a
double-edged weapon to be used as per one’s convenience. In administrative parlance,
accountability is not about control but about responsibility for which autonomy has to be
exercised. In other words, accountability is not an administrative tool but a moral obligation
on those who have the responsibility to give an account of their work and performance.
Besides, legitimacy and credibility of these institutions can only be established if they
observe adequate transparency in their functioning. Unfortunately, these elements are
currently conspicuous by their absence. As a result, these institutions have failed to live
upto the expectations and are being misused by those in power selectively by marginalizing/
ignoring deserving others. This crisis situation has been further compounded by the role of
the Ministry of Culture characterized by apathy, lack of concern and sometimes
helplessness. There is hardly any mechanism to ensure accountability and transparency in
their working by the Ministry. Once or twice, the Ministry did try to become pro-active in
this regard, it was met with stiff resistance and the matter went up to highest level in the
executive ladder. As such, normally the Ministry has little option but to keep off. It
interferes only when it feels that it should.
When asked about the differences between the Chairman and the Secretary, the
Ministry of Culture submitted that when the then Secretary of the Lalit Kala Akademi
was dismissed under Rule 19 of the CCS (CCA) Rule by the then Chairman in December,
2011, the Ministry of Culture being the Appellate Authority issued an order dated
16.01.2012 revoking the dismissal order and directed to inquire into the various lapses and
failures in the dismissal order by following prescribed procedure. The Committee,
however, received views of the other side alleging highhandedness and unwarranted
interference in the affairs of LKA. The Committee also received a copy of the joint
representations given by Secretaries of all the Akademis emphasizing the need for their
restructuring. (Paras 49, 50 and 51)
As per their constitution/MoA, Secretaries are the executive head of the Akademis.
In fact, their constitutions are vague about the limits of Presidential authority and
therefore, sometimes the Chairmen try to exercise powers which they do not have and
intervene directly in day-to-day administration. Many of the decisions taken by them are
not put to ratification by General Council or Executive Council. Responsibility for any lapse/
violation done by the Secretaries while implementing the direction of the Chairman, ratified
or not, would obviously lie with the Secretaries and not the Chairmen. It has resulted, more
often than not, in a running feud between the two. In such a situation, main work of the
Akademis gets a back seat as most of the time, energy and scarce funds are wasted on
unproductive/unwarranted things as cases go to the Court quite too often. It has been found

20
that during this running feud between the Chairmen and the Secretary, Ministry either
remains a mute spectator or it intervenes only when it feels to do so. The Committee
emphasizes the need for delineation of power between the Chairmen and Secretaries on the
one hand and Government of India on the other to avoid any possibility of violation of rules
and regulations in the course of exercise of administrative powers by the Chairmen/
Secretaries of these Akademis.
Such a situation, the Committee strongly feels, cannot be allowed to linger on and
feels it is high time something has to be done for setting these Akademis in order. The
Committee feels that these bodies get funds from the Consolidated Fund of India and their
Demands for Grants are approved every fiscal by the Parliament on the recommendations
of this Parliamentary Committee. As such, this Committee with all sense of responsibility
says that the funds allocated to these institutions need closer and regular monitoring by
conducting their performance audit every year. There should be a regular review of the
functioning of our cultural institutions. These reviews should be conducted by external
persons/committees which should be included in their Annual Reports that are placed before
Parliament. (Paras 55 and 56)
High Power Committee
The Ministry should constitute a High Powered Committee (HPC) comprising eminent
persons mainly from the field of art and culture to examine the issues raised in this report
as well as those contained in Bhabha Committee, Khosla Committee and Haksar Committee
constituted by the Government in the years 1964, 1972 and 1989. The proposed HPC can
review the mandate, composition, etc. of these bodies and suggest measures to monitor
their performance and a coordination mechanism for these institutions.
Major recommendations made by the earlier Committees remain as relevant as these
would have been when made decades ago. The Committee reiterates its anguish on those
major recommendations not acted upon till date. That the proposed HPC does not meet the
fate of earlier Committees, this Committee recommends that it may be kept informed
about the decision/action taken in this regard at every step including the final outcome. The
Committee feels that it should be done at the earliest with a sense of urgency that it
deserves. (Paras 57 and 58)
Accessibility of the resources of the Akademis
Accessibility to resources in these Akademis - their libraries, their heritage material
and their publications was another major concern expressed before the Committee. As of
now, all these exist in isolated inaccessible spaces not easily available to people. The
Committee is of the view that a real push needs to be made to take stock of what material
exists; to digitalise archival material; and to do all this in collaboration with educational/
cultural institutions and organisations all over India, as well as in collaboration with
research scholars and arts practitioners who are not necessarily in the usual over-used
circles of the akademis. All the libraries of the akademis need to be re-organised and made
more freely available to people. To begin with, people should be made aware that they exist;
and have specific material of use to students, scholars and practitioners.
The Committee is of the view that accessibility would also be promoted by the
practice of External Fellows coming in and looking at how the archives can be made to
work. This would not only mean bringing in their own material, but also helping with the
great need to catalogue and make archival material usable, and accessible to more people.
(Paras 59 and 60)

21
Proactive disclosure of information
The akademis need to constantly provide information about themselves and their
ongoing programmes to their constituencies. Better use of online communication and
existing media is critical. The Akademis should not feature in the press only when there
is complaint or controversy about any action/decision taken by them. More use of ICT and
media, the Committee feels, would also help strengthening the transparency process of
officials in the akademis, and the artists usually involved. The Committee notes that the
websites of the Akademis and Cultural Institutions are not updated, many of the
information provided are either incomplete or out of date. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the websites of all the Akademis and Cultural Institutions should be
updated on real time basis. All the programmes and activities should be prominently
published in their websites. There should be a system of proactive dissemination and
publication of all the relevant information. (Para 61)
Support by the Akademis
The Committee observes that the specific forms of support by the akademis are
crucial to nurture existing and new forms of arts practice. Grants, residencies in educational
institutions, travel etc should be made completely transparent in terms of selection process,
and all information and lists should be freely available on the akademis’ website. Whether
it is awards, grants, fellowships, residencies, or travel aboard, it makes more sense, on the
whole, for a body of work to be recognised/supported/rewarded rather than a single work.
(Para 64)
Ownership of Culture
It is ironic that India, a cultural leader, a storehouse of rich traditions, values and
beliefs, is itself struggling to keep together these exceptional treasures, particularly those
that do not reach urban centres – the local and folk cultures.
It is fact that these traditions and art forms have survived centuries through
several political and social ups and downs. Where is the innovative programming, the
creative content, the quality and the aesthetics of the production/product? Although
administrative and structural reforms are important, the greater need is to have trained,
efficient and informed personnel. This is ownership in addition to accountability. If one
were only to look at the various organizations, the objectives for their existence, it would
seem that the objectives of preserving, promoting spreading culture and so on should
be wonderfully achieved in this country! Ownership is, therefore, crucially missing.
(Paras 65 and 66)
Centre for Tribal and Folk Art
The Committee emphasizes the need for a separate Akademi for Tribal and Folk
Arts. The Committee feels that this specialized Centre could, if set up, be a vehicle for the
propagation of folk and tribal art forms concertedly. This would also mean nurturing these
forms and preserving them in their original form as well as encouraging innovation in
presentation without destroying the authenticity of these art forms. This could perhaps also
be a way to raise the status as well as the remuneration of these artists to levels
comparable to those of the classical artists. In addition, it can facilitate a cultural dialogue
between all art forms from classical to traditional. (Para 67)

22
Access to Medical Help/Legal advice
We need to look for low cost insurance models that can treat a preset list of illnesses
such as heart problems, Asthma, kidney malfunctions and so on. The Committee feels the
medical insurance scheme named ‘Yashaswini Health Care’ for artists in Karnataka can be
taken as a model for such a Scheme.
The Committee notes that the Artist Fund caters to very few artists and the amount
provided is meagre. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
come out with an insurance scheme to cover all the deserving artists to ensure sufficient
medical care to meet their medical needs. Any such social security measures should also be
extended to related communities such as instrument makers, etc. (Paras 71 and 72)
Reviving and replicating Festivals
The Committee was informed that the festivals could be a forum to revive some of the
previously successful and enriching initiatives of the Ministry of Culture. Some initiatives can
possibly be repeated such as the Lok Utsavs , or the Ocatve festival in the North East. The folk
dances get meager representations in events such as the Republic Day Parade, where too all is not
well. The Committee, therefore, feels that festivals need for focussed attention and
recommends that various forms of Festivals may be revived and replicated to provide art
and artist a platform to display. (Para 73)
Support to State Akademis
The National Akademis must work in close coordination with State Akademis,
recognized art communities/organisations, universities and other cultural and educational
institutions for promoting art and culture, for an integrated growth and functioning of art
associations and moreover to fulfil and implement their own charters. But working of these
Akademis/organizations in States also leave much to be desired; strengthening/equipping
State Akademis is equally important otherwise it will be difficult to take activities down to
the local level. The Committee would like to reiterate the Haksar Committee
recommendations in this regard for streamlining and strengthening State Akademi’s and
other regional organisations by involving/associating them in the activities undertaken by
the National Akademis. Support should also be extended to research and documentation
aspects in all forms of arts and revival and support of regional and local traditional art
forms. (Para 74)
Authority to Govern Culture
The Committee reiterates that there should be an overarching body consisting of
eminent people to look after the affairs of all the Akademis, NSD, IGNCA, NGMA, National
Museum and the Libraries etc. This body should be entrusted to ensure that the functioning
and performance of all the Akademis and organisations are conducted as per their mandate,
constitution and rules prescribed for them. The body should see that the cultural Akademis
and other institutions are not working at cross purposes. They should ensure and oversee
interaction and cooperation among all those institutions to achieve the objectives of each of
the institutions. Duplications of activities of these bodies should be minimised and synergy
is obtained. The Committee feels that it would be a facilitator not as regulator or
controlling body.
It could be a Council like the ‘Press Council of India’ in the field of culture and
arts. Any deviant functioning could be reported to it. The people constituting it should

23
be chosen in the same manner as the members of the Press Council of India are
chosen. The presence of this body will have a healthy influence. A writer or an artist
should have, at least, one place where he can go and complain about the way these
academies function. The Committee would like to have response of the Government in
this regard. (Paras 75 and 76)
Vision document
All the Cultural Institutions and Akademis are working on some sort of adhocism.
There should be a vision document for all these institutions. The documents should explain
what it is going to do in the next 4-5 years and how they are going to function. Keeping
the autonomy intact, there should be definite accountability to the people of this country
who are paying them and whose money they are spending. There should be a clear system
of answerability. (Para 77)
Zonal cultural centres
The Committee was informed that the concern of Zonal Cultural Centre is how to engage
more with the Akademis so that they could really gain a lot from support of the Akademis as
Cultural Centres are engaging a lot of artists and it is becoming very difficult to find platforms to
engage them in processes of documentation. Creating realistic livelihood options for a lot of the
artists who are a part of Zonal Cultural Centres is another area of concern. It could only be
realistically worked out when both the agencies communicate, cooperate and coordinate for
the dissemination of arts. Concerted efforts, no doubt, in that direction would certainly
provide livelihood and artistic ventilation to all the regional and national artists. The
Committee recommends that the Zonal Cultural Centres should be part of the Akademis
and the artists who are engaged by the Cultural Centres should be given adequate financial
support and livelihood as the art cannot flourish on an empty stomach. The National
Akademis should take it as their bounden duty to protect the artists and the art forms
throughout India who are part of the Zonal Cultural Centres. The Ministry of Culture
should formulate proper guidelines and schemes in coordination with the Akademis to
achieve the goal of protection of artists and promotion of art forms. (Para 80)
SNA and ZCC’s
The Committee feels that the views expressed by the Ministry are quite
rudimentary and do not represent the need of the time. The Committee recommends that
the mandates of ZCCs and SNA should be reviewed afresh and the synergy of both should
be amalgamated to produce a better cultural scenario which is beneficial to the Art and
Artists. (Para No. 83)
More funds for promotion of art and culture
The Committee finds that our National Akademis and other cultural institutions
face severe constraints of resources. There is a large mismatch between the Government
financing and the monetary needs of these cultural institutions. In fact, the funds
allocated to Ministry as a whole is too meagre that needs to be adequately enhanced.
However, it is also worthwhile to note her e that the Ministry, its subordinate offices
including the Akademis and Cultural Institutions on their part must also follow sound
financial principles. Complaints in this regard were received by this Committee on the
mis-utilization of funds and non-routing of projects through ‘Projects Monitoring Cell’ in
IGNCA. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Culture should keep a close watch on

24
the financial transactions of these Institutions to prevent any sort of financial
irregularities. (Para 84)
National Centre for Arts and Culture
A National Centre for Arts and Culture is essential for the promotion of excellence
and the preservation of India’s rich cultural heritage and vibrant traditions. In India we
have no national centre for the arts. A complex, befitting the cultural richness of the
country to function as a vibrant centre for the promotion of art and culture is the pride
of any capital city. Unfortunately, Delhi does not have a National Arts Complex. The
Committee recommends that the huge vacant land at IGNCA can be developed into a
National Arts Complex consisting of Auditoriums, theatres, multiplex, studios etc. It
should be a multi-venue, multipurpose cultural centre.
The underground at the Rabindra Bhawan Gallery at New Delhi can also be
developed into a multiplex for performing arts. (Paras 85 and 86)

25
ANNEXURE

27
ANNEXURE-I
Witnesses who appeared before the Committee
1. Dr. (Shrimati) Kapila Vatsyayan, Ex-Member of Parliament.
2. Ms. Shubha Mudgal
3. Shri N.K. Sharma
4. Ms. Maya Rao
5. Shri Asghar Wajahat
6. Shri Anis Azmi
7. Shri Asad Zaidi
8. Shri Gulammohammed Shiekh
9. Ms. Nilima Sheikh
10. Shri Vivan Sundaram
11. Shri Ram Rahman
12. Ms. Vidya Shah
Centre for Cultural Resources and Training
13. Shri Girish Joshi
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts
14. Shri V .B. Pyarelal
Sangeet Natak Akademi
15. Ms. Helan Acharaya
Sahitya Akademi
16. Shri A. Krishnamurthy
Lalit Kala Akademi
17. Shri Sudhakar Sharma
National School of Drama
18. Dr. Anuradha Kapur

28
28
ANNEXURE-II
Persons/Organisations who submitted written Memorandum before the Committee
1. Dr. (Shrimati) Kapila Vatsyayan, Ex-Member of Parliament.
2. Shri Shyam Benegal
3. Ms. Githa Hariharan
4. Shri Vivan Sundaram
5. Ms. Vidya Shah
6. Shri Asghar Wajahat
7. Shri Ashok Vajpeyi
8. Shri Amit Mukhopadhyay
9. Shri Roop Chand Sharma
10. Shri J.N. Kaushik
11. Shri Ravi Prakash Tekchandani
12. Shri Piyush Kanti Ray
13. Shri M.L. Gupta
14. Shri Altaf Ahmed
15. Shri M.K.Raina
16. NAAD – Nartan
17. Rajasthani Bhasha Panarsh Mandal

29
MINUTES

30

31
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 14 th June, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Thomas Sangma
3. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Mahesh Joshi
7. Shri Hassan Khan
8. Dr. Kruparani Killi
9. Shri Jose K. Mani
10. Shri Rudramadhab Ray
11. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
WITNESSES FROM THE DIFFERENT FIELDS OF ART AND CULTURE
1. Ms. Shubha Mudgal
2. Shri N.K. Sharma
3. Ms. Maya Rao
4. Shri Asghar Wajahat
5. Shri Anis Azmi
6. Shri Asad Zaidi
7. Shri Gulammohammed Shiekh
8. Ms. Nilima Sheikh
9. Shri Vivan Sundaram
10. Shri Ram Rahman
11. Ms. Vidya Shah
31

32
*** Relates to other matter.
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, witnesses were called and the Chairman welcomed them. He explained the reasons for
taking up the functioning of our Cultural Akademis for examination. He also wanted to know if, the three
Akademis were able to meet the challenges in present day environment and how they can be made more
accountable without infringing upon their autonomy in any manner.
4. The witnesses appreciated the Committee for taking cognizance of the Haksar Committee
Report, which was submitted wayback in 1990. However, they informed that its recommendations
were of great significance, but most of them are still waiting to be noticed even after 22 years.
They emphasized the need for having a re-look on composition, elections, etc. held in these
Akademis. The role of private sector in helping the artists by way of setting up private galleries
was also underlined. The need to review the amount given as grants-in-aid by Sangeet Natak
Akademi also came in for discussion. They also emphasized the need for having a review of the
courses in National School of Drama. The witnesses were of the view that autonomy is pre-
requisite for the effective functioning of these Akademis, but the use of autonomy for promotion
of art and culture need to be monitored to ensure that the autonomy did not degenerate into
autocratic functioning. Digitization of recordings of performance of artists lying at various places
should be taken up for the benefit of people as well as artists. The witnesses also emphasized the
need for protection of traditional knowledge and the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).
5. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for presenting their views and requested them to
submit in writing any additional information, if they desire, to the Secretariat.
6. The Committee decided to take up functioning of Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts and
National Gallery of Modern Arts also for consideration in its subsequent meetings.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The meeting adjourned at 1.45 
P.M.

33
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 26 th July, 2012 in Committee Room A,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Shri Thomas Sangma
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
7. Shri Hassan Khan
8. Dr. Kruparani Killi
9. Shri Jose K. Mani
10. Shrimati Ranee Narah
11. Shri Rajaram Pal
12. Shrimati Meena Singh
13. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
14. Shri Rakesh Singh
15. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Office
Invitee
Dr. (Shrimati) Kapila Vatsyayan, Ex-Member of Parliament, Founder Member of Indira
Gandhi National Centre for Arts
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and Dr. (Shrimati) Kapila
Vatsyayan, a doyen in the field of art and culture and former Member of Parliament. While
providing the background, the Chairman informed that the Committee is presently examining the
33

34
functioning of our National Akademis, National School of Drama and Indira Gandhi National Centre
for Arts to assess the achievement of the objectives for which they were set up. The Chairman
stated that the Committee also wanted to know whether these institutions remained insulated and
isolated from each other in general and the people in particular and the need for accountability
without compromising the autonomy of these institutions.
3. Dr. (Shrimati) Kapila Vatsyayan stated that she had been associated with the process of
setting up of these institutes when they were conceived by the then Prime Minister after
independence. The Institutes were set up with a view to give due attention by the State. These
were the consortiums of discussions and not considered as Government of India’s instrumentality
of patronage. She emphasized the need to define the term ‘Culture’ in right perspective and to have
critical discourses on Culture in the university system. She also stressed on the need for
microfilming and digitizing the millions of unpublished manuscripts which are lying in the country.
Dr. Kapila Vatsyayan emphasized that there are ways of ensuring the autonomy and accountability
but the institutes have to be made self sufficient or partly self sufficient. The revenue generated
by these Institutions should be kept within these institutes and not go to Consolidated Fund of India
so that over a period of time they are self-sufficient.
4. The Chairman while summing up the points expressed thanks to Dr. (Shrimati) Kapila
Vatsyayan for her views/suggestions on the subject.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 5.45 
P.M.

35
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 1 st October, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
LOK SABHA
8. Yogi Adityanath
9. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
10. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
13. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
14. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
16. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
***
35
*** Relates to other matter.

36
*** Relates to other matter.
The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and requested them to offer their
comments/suggestions on the draft 201 st Report on the ‘Functioning of National Akademis and
Other Cultural Institutions–Issues and Challenges’ circulated to them. After some discussions, the
Committee adopted the Report with minor modifications.
2. * * *
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The meeting adjourned at 4.10 P.M.

37
37
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
List of Reports
Sl.
No.
1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Report No.
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Report’s Name
3
Demands for Grants, 1993-94 of Department
of Tourism
Goernment Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings
and Repeal) Bill, 1992
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment) Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of Department
of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of Ministry of
Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North East
National Highway System
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of Department
of Tourism
Date of Presenation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993
08.12.1993
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
26.04.1995

38
1
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
2
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
3
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of Department
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of Ministry of
Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill, 1995
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of Department
of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of Ministry of
Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98) Department of
Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of Ministry
of Surface Transport
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance Air
Demands for Grants of Department of
Tourism for the year 1998-99
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
4
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
28.02.1996
28.02.1996
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998
06.07.1998

39
1
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
2
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
3
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of Ministry of
Surface Transport
The Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of Ministry
of Tourism
Demands for Grants of Ministry of Civil
Aviation for the year 1999-2000
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) Ministry of
Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at the
Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of Ministry
of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd.
Chartering and Management of flights for Haj
Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of Lighthouses
and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
4
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
08.03.1999
04.03.1999
19.04.1999
19.04.1999
19.04.1999
07.03.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
22.08.2000
15.12.2000
15.12.2000
23.03.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001

40
1
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
2
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
3
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (exemption from taxes and duties
on fuel and lubricants) Bill, 2000
Function of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003), (Demand
No. 79) of the Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003), (Demand
No. 80) of the Department of Culture
Demands  for Grants (2002-2003), (Demand
No. 77) of the Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003), Demand
No. 7) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003), (Demand
No. 76) of the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways
Development of Tourism in the country
The Airports Authority of India  (Amendment)
Bill, 2000
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2001
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-Eighth Report
on Demands for Grants 2002-2003 of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its Fifty-Seventh Report on
Demands for Grants 2002-2003 of Ministry of
Shipping
4
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
27.11.2001
12.12.2001
24.04.2002
24.04.2002
24.04.2002
24.04.2002
24.04.2002
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003

41
1
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
2
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
3
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-2004), (Demand
No. 91) of Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-2004), (Demand
No. 76) of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-2004), (Demand
No. 90) of Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-2004), (Demand
No. 9) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-2004), (Demand
No. 83) of Ministry of Shipping
The Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report on
Development of Tourism in the Country
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-Sixth Report
on Demands for Grants (2003-2004),
(Demand No. 91) of Department of Tourism
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-Seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004)
of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventieth Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of Ministry
of Shipping
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-Eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004)
of Ministry of Culture
4
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
03.12.2003
03.12.2003
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004

42
1
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
2
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
3
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its Sixty-Ninth Report on Demands
for Grants (2003-2004) of Ministry of Civil
Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-2005), (Demand
No. 9) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-2005), (Demand
No. 93) of Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-2005), (Demand
No. 20 ) of Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-2005), (Demand
No. 86) of Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-2005), (Demand
No. 79) of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways
Eighty-Third Report on functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-2006), (Demand
No. 86) of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for grants (2005-2006), (Demand
No. 20) of Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) (Demand
No. 85) of Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-2006), (Demand
No. 93) of Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-2006), (Demand
No. 9) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2004
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modem Airports
Functioning of the Archaeological Survey
of India
4
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
06.12.2004
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005

43
1
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
2
92
93
94
95
96
97
98.
99
100
101
3
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Fifth Report
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Ministry
of Culture
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Sixth Report
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Eighth
Report on Demands for grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth Report on
the ‘Development of Airport Sector with
Special Emphasis on New Modern Airports’
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-Third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the Commission
of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage by Road Bill, 2005
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
17.03.2006
21.03.2006

44
1
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.
2
102.
103.
104.
105.
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
3
Demands for Grants (2006-2007), (Demand
No. 85) of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-2007), (Demand
No. 19) of Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-2007), (Demand
No. 92) of Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-2007), (Demand
No. 84) of Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-2007), (Demand
No. 84) Of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-First Report
on functioning of the Archaeological Survey of
India
Functioning and Performance of India Tourism
Development Corporation Limited
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2006
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Second Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Road Transport
and Highways
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Third Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07)
of Department of Culture
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its One Hundred and Fourth Report
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of
Department of Tourism
4
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007

45
1
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
2
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
3
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its One Hundred and Fifth Report
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of
Department of Shipping
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its One Hundred and Sixth Report
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-2008), (Demand
No. 9) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-2008), (Demand
No. 84) of Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-2008), (Demand
No. 85) of Department of Road, Transport
and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of
Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry
of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra Stretch
of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia Stretch of East
Coast Canal, Charbatia-Dhamra Stretch of Matai
River and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006
The National Waterway Kakinada-Pondicherry
Stretch of Canals and The Kaluvelly Tank,
Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River
Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch
of River Krishna) Bill, 2006
The Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
11.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
16.08.2007
16.08.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
20.11.2007

46
1
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131.
132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
2
126
127
128.
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
3
The Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Eighteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Department of road
Transport and Highways
Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of The
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Seventeenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Department of Shipping
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports
and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority
of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Department
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Department
of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry
of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Culture
4
20.11.2007
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008

47
1
138.
139.
140.
141.
142.
143.
144.
145.
146.
147.
148.
2
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
3
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicles Amendment Bill, 2007
Promotion of Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the related
Issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/cbservations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-2009 of The Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of The
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-2009 of The Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-2009 of the Ministry of Tourism
One Hundred and Forty-Sixth Report on
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants
2008-2009 of the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-2009 of The Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
4
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
20.08.2008
20.08.2008
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
17.02.2009

48
1
149.
150.
151.
152.
153.
154.
155.
156.
157.
158.
159.
2
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
3
Development of Tourism Infrastructure and
Amenities for the Commonwealth Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage Sites
Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
impact on the Civil Aviation Sector (updated
on 03 March, 2010)
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fortieth Report on Promotion of Tourism in
Jammu And Kashmir
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Forty Ninth Report on Development of
Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities for the
Commonwealth Games 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) Ministry of
Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-l1) of Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Thirty First Report on Closure of Bangalore
and Hyderabad Airports; One Hundred and
Forty First Report on Modernisation of
Airports; and One Hundred and Forty Second
Report on Functioning of Private Airports
4
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
06.05.2010

49
1
160.
161.
162.
163.
164.
165.
166.
167.
168.
169.
170.
171.
2
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
3
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-2011) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-2011) of the Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred Fifty
Seventh Report on Demands (For Grants
(2010-2011) Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-2011) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) -
Issues and Challenges
Helicopter Operations in India
Modernization of Major Ports
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and National
School of Drama
4
28.07.2010
01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
11.03.2011
04.05.2011
04.05.2011
11.08.2011
17.08.2011

50
1
172.
173.
174.
175.
176.
177.
178.
179.
180.
181.
182.
2
172
173
174.
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
3
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of
Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
One Hundred Seventy Ninth Report on Action
Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty
Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of National
Museum’
One Hundred Eightieth Report on Action Taken
by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of  the Committee contained in
its One Hundred and Seventy Second report
on Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
One Hundred Eighty First Report on Action
Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty
Eighth Report on the Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty
Ninth Report on the Helicopter Operations in
India
4
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
27.04.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012

51
1
183.
184.
185.
186.
187.
188.
189.
190.
191.
192.
193.
2
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
3
Action Taken By The Government on The
recommendations/observations of The
Committee Contained in its One Hundred
Seventy Seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of The
Committee Contained in its One Hundred
Seventy Sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee Contained in its One Hundred and
Seventy Fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee Contained in its One Hundred and
Seventy Fifth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee Contained in its One Hundred and
Seventy Eighth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety
Development of National Waterways-Potential
and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
27.02.2013
27.02.2013
27.02.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013

52
1
194.
195.
196.
197.
198.
199.
200.
201.
202
203
2
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
3
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry
of Tourism
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region : Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the
Committee Contained in its One Hundred and
Eighty Ninth Report on the Development of
National Waterways-Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National Highways
and Water Transport in Kerala and Cochin
Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and other
Cultural Institutions : Issues and Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
4
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
07.08.2013
07.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committies ➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.