REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
REPORT 
 
 
            Inland Waterways is an important mode of transport having potential for future development at places where
 Inland Traffic originate and terminates from the water front. At a time when the pollution caused by the vehicular
 traffic is playing havoc with the environment in India, the eco friendly inland waterways mode of transport can be of
 some help.  Unfortunately this important mode of transport have played little and negligible role in transportation of
 goods in India. The Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. is the only public sector undertaking, which has
 been engaged in the activity of transportation of cargo through inland Waterways in the country.  Besides it, the
 CIWTC has also been engaged in construction and repair of vessels. 
2.         The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport & Tourism, in order to have a view of
 the problems of cargo transportation by Inland Waterways, decided to examine the functioning of the CIWTC.           
 The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Shipping, Ministry of Surface Transport and the representatives of
 Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC), at its meeting held on 6
th July 2000, on the “Functioning
 and Revival of Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd.” 
3.         The Committee was apprised that the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd., was set up as a
 Government of India Undertaking on 22
nd February, 1967 after taking over the assets and certain liabilities of the
 erstwhile River Steam Navigation Company Ltd. Under the orders of Calcutta High Court on 3rd May, 1967, the
 Corporation started functioning as an independent Company under the administrative control of the Ministry of Surface
 Transport from May 1967 and commenced its business from 5
th June 1967. The Corporation, which has 2626
 employees (as on 01.04.2000) on its pay roll, is headed by a full-time Chairman-cum-Managing Director, who is
 assisted by the Board of Directors. The principal activities of the Corporation includes:
Transportation by Inland Waterways from Calcutta to Bangladesh and to Assam (NW-II) and lighterage operations on
 the river Hooghly. 
Transportation by Inland Waterways from Calcutta to Allahabad    (NW-I) 
Construction and repair of small and medium sized vessels.
 Repair of ocean – going vessels. 
Ferry and Charter, General Engineering etc.
 4.         The Corporation has its Head Office at Calcutta.  There are three main divisions viz Rivers Service Division
 (RSD), Rajabagan Dock Yard (RBD) and Deep Sea Ship Repairs Division (DSSR).
RIVER SERVICES DIVISION (RSD) 
5.         It is the main earning division of the Corporation and engaged in riverine operations in Eastern (NW-I) and in
 the North Eastern (NW-II) regions of the country through Bangladesh.  The total number of employees in this division
 is 1300. 
6.            CIWTC is presently the principal IWT operator in the country with a fleet of 19 tugs (each capable of towing 2
 nos. 750 Tonnes capacity Dumb Barges), 16 nos. (600 Tonnes capacity each) self-propelled general cargo carriers, 3
 nos. self-propelled POL Tankers having average carrying capacity of 1350 Tonnes, 58 nos. (750 Tonnes capacity each)
 Dumb Barges and 5 nos.   Over Dimensional Cargo (ODC) carriers with average capacity of 500 Tonnes. 
The fleet of the company has been deployed for operation in the following routes:
 
Calcutta – Pandu – Guwahati – Calcutta on National Waterway-II serving Dhubri – Jogigopa – Pandu river stations. 
Calcutta – Karimganj – Calcutta serving Karimganj – Badarpur river stations. 
Calcutta – Bangladesh – Calcutta serving Khulna, Mongla and Narayanganj river stations in Bangladesh. 
Haldia – Calcutta – Patna – Varanasi – Allahabad on National Waterway No.1 route serving Farakka – Bhagalpur –
 Munger – Barauni Patna and Allahabad river stations.
 Sauger, Haldia, Diamond Harbour, Calcutta for lighterage operations. 
8.         The Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport & Tourism undertook the study visit
 to Calcutta and inter-alia held discussions with the representatives of the CIWTC on its functioning and performance in
 the month of June 2000. In the course of discussion the Committee was informed about the main reasons/constraints for
 poor performance and operating losses of the Corporation. The representatives of CIWTC submitted that the River
 Services Division is facing the following Operational Constraints in Inland Water Transportation sector: -
 

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 (1)       Lack of proper navigational aids:
 
  (a)  Channel marking: No marking in the rivers indicating the draft. 
      (b)  Draft: Absence of fair way having required draft (2 meters. LAD) to achieve further capacity utilisation of IWT
 vessels round the year. 
Night Navigational facilities: No night navigation facilities exist along NW 1 From Haldia to Allahabad. However,
 night navigation facilities, which are available for ocean going vessels from Haldia to Calcutta, cannot be used for
 movement of IWT vessels. 
 Mooring facilities: Mooring buoys are absent which are very much required during high Tides.
 Communication facilities: Vessels of the Corporation are of very old models.  No Modern Communication
 facility/technology is provided to the vessels.
 
(2) Development of Rail and Road modes of transportation: Freight charges of road & rail modes of transportation
 are cheaper than the Inland water transport. Inland Water Transport is available only for few months i.e. 6-7 months
 where as Rail & Road Transport is available through out the year. 
(3) Slower speed of movement of Vessels. 
(4) In most of the routes, cargo availability is only on one side. 
(5) Seasonal character of Rivers: Many rivers are of seasonal character and are fit for vessel movement for a few
 months of the year. 
(6) Financial constraints for development. 
(7)            Availability of special product vessels: Corporation has only two to three types of vessels. These vessels are
 not fit to transport perishable item like fish due to absence of   refrigerated rooms/cabins. Neither do they have tankers
 to carry oil/crude etc. 
(8)            Allocation of Cargo: Central Government and State Governments have not earmarked the minimum
 percentage of their cargo to Inland water transport, in spite of, many requests made by the Corporation. 
(9)        Lack of infrastructural facilities required at river terminals: Permanent jetties with mechanical handling
 arrangements, back-up space and godown, weighbridge and proper approach roads are not available at river terminals. 
9.         The continuous poor performance on account of the above factors has resulted into regular drain of scarce
 resources available with the Corporation.  As a result, the Corporation has defaulted in payment of statutory dues and
 has been dependent on non-plan support from the Government.  Various remedial measures adopted by the Corporation
 to improve its financial performance such as reduction of manpower through VRS, increased cargo handling, enhanced
 profitable lighterage operations etc., have not yet yielded the desired result.
 10.       River Services Division had also a chronic problem of contract – labour militancy, which has been successfully
 addressed to in end 1998.  Since January 1999, it has shown a consistent and sustainable level of growth.  It has
 operating offices in Calcutta and Haldia in West Bengal, Dhubri/Pandu/Guwahati/Karimganj/Badarpur in Assam, Patna
 in Bihar and Allahabad in U.P. Besides, the traditional route between Calcutta-Bangladesh-Assam,  it has opened up a
 new route in Calcutta-Allahabad stretch of river Ganga for effective exploitation of the potential of Inland Water
 Transport across Bihar and U.P. In line with the demand for survival, it has developed alternative cargo like molasses,
 stone-slabs, etc.  It is expected to handle large volume of export cargo to Bangladesh in tune with the thrust, of the 1999
 renewal of Indo-Bangladesh Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade, towards expansion of Bilateral trade.  This is
 expected to increase significantly IWT movement in the country. 
11.       The Committee was apprised about the Steps being Taken for better Navigation in National Waterways and
 submitted that the funds to the tune of Rs.42 crores have been made available to the Inland Waterways Authority of
 India for proper up keep of National Waterways.  The Inland Waterways Authority of India will be focusing its
 attention in maintaining 2 meter LAD from Allahabad to Haldia.  Vessels of 600 tonnes capacity can be run from
 Allahabad to Haldia for at least 330 days in a year.  
12.       The Committee is constrained to note that even after lapse of more than thirty years the Government has not
 taken adequate steps to provide proper navigational aids, which has not only affected the efficiency of River Services
 Division of the Corporation but also led to under utilization of such a cheap and eco friendly mode of transportation for
 cargo.  The Channel marking in rivers, provision of required draft of 2 meters LAD, night navigational facilities and
 mooring buoys are the main functions of Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) which is also under the
 administrative control of Ministry of Surface Transport and is responsible for regulation and development of Inland
 waterways for the purposes of shipping and navigation.  The Committee is surprised to know that after having well
 recognised the Inland Waterways as an important mode of Transport, Ministry of Surface Transport has not bothered to

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 provide even basic navigational facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Surface Transport
 should take concrete steps in this regard and instruct Inland Waterways Authority of India to provide basic needs of
 navigation in National Waterways. As the adequate funds have been made available to Inland Waterways Authority of
 India (IWAI) this year, the Committee hopes that the route from Allahabad to Haldia will be navigable and CIWTC
 will be able to establish its credibility and attract private and other agencies to put in more vessels, which will not only
 enhance utilisation of all the waterways but also the traffic of Inland Waterways will go up. The Committee further
 recommends that for providing facilities i.e. terminal facilities, handling facilities, which are not being used regularly,
 private investment should be encouraged.  The dredging handling and channel marking need be intensified to increase
 the availability of draft throughout the year.    If night navigation of the vessels of Corporation becomes possible, then
 the functioning   and performance of the Corporation will definitely go up and will make the Organisation profitable. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that early steps be taken to provide the requisite navigational facilities.
 
VESSELS OF THE CORPORATION
 
13.       The Committee was also informed that Corporation has vessels of very old models.  No modern communication
 facility/technology has been provided to these vessels.  The Corporation also does not have sufficient number of special
 product vessels.  It has only two to three types of special product vessels. These vessels are also not fit for transport of
 perishables items like fish due to the absence of refrigerated rooms/cabins.  The Corporation does not have sufficient
 number of tankers to carry petroleum products i.e. crude oil etc. 
14.       Giving details of the fleet utilisation, the representatives of the Corporation submitted before the Committee that
 presently 58 vessels out of 143 are in operation and earning revenue.  The vessels are required to undergo statutory
 repairs over 4 years cycle. However, non-availability of adequate funds and capital repair of more than 7-8 vessels per
 year could not be undertaken for the last few years.  There is now a huge backlog of such repairs.  In view of four
 yearly statutory docking repair and maintenance, about 80 vessels could not be employed for cargo transportation. 
 Considering the future growth potential, the changes in economic prospects of Eastern Region of the Country,
 importance of Indo-Bangladesh trade vis-à-vis movement in inland water route through both the countries and in
 consideration of the primary objective of reaching Break – Even point within next 5 years, one time grant of Rs.13
 crores is considered necessary.  
15.       The Committee is of the view that the paucity of modern technology and communication facilities in the
 vessels has severely affected the functioning of the River Service Division, which is the nodal working
 establishment of the Corporation.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the vessels of the Corporation
 should be equipped with modern technology and communication facilities.  The Committee also recommends
 that the adequate number of special product vessels and tankers should be made available to the Corporation so
 as to increase its expertise in transportation of perishable items and petroleum products. 
16.       The Committee is surprised to note that the out of 143 vessels, only 58 vessels of the Corporation are in
 operation.  The Ministry of Surface Transport has not provided even minimum funds required for statutory
 repairs of vessels, which resulted in non-utilisation of 80 vessels.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that for
 the maintenance and repair of vessels, the Ministry of Surface Transport should provide adequate funds, which
 will enable the Corporation to improve fleet utilisation and therefore, the Corporation should be granted, as
 requested, one time grant of Rs.13 crores for repairing work of its vessels.
 
INDO-BANGLADESH PROTOCOL ON INLAND WATER TRANSIT & TRADE
 
17.       The Committee was informed that the Corporation has the responsibility to execute transit and trade protocol
 between India and Bangladesh.   The existing Indo-Bangladesh Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade has been
 renewed upto 3
rd October, 2001.  The following are the main routes under the existing Protocol:-
 
Calcutta – Haldia – Raimongal – Chalna – Khulna – Mongla – Kaukhali – Barisal – Hizla – Chandpur – Narayanganj –
 Aricha – Sirajganj – Bahadurabad -  Chilmari – Dhubri -Pandu. 
Pandu – Dhubri – Chilmari – Bahadurabad – Sirajganj – Aricha – Narayanganj – Chandpur – Hizla – Barisal – Kaukhali
 – Mongla – Khulna – Chalna – Raimongal – Haldia – Calcutta. 
Calcutta – Haldia – Raimongal – Mongla – Kaukhali – Barisal – Hizla – Chandpur – Narayanganj – Bhairab Bazar –
 Ajmiriganj – Markuli – Sherpur – Fenchuganj – Zakiganj – Karimganj. 

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
Karimganj – Zakiganj – Fenchuganj – Sherpur – Markuli – Ajmiriganj – Bhairab Bazar – Narayanganj – Chandpur –
 Hizla – Barisal – Kaukhali – Mongla – Raimongal – Haldia – Calcutta. 
Rajshahi – Godagari – Dhulian. 
Dhulian – Godagari – Rajshahi. 
Karimganj – Zakiganj – Fenchuganj – Sherpur – Markuli – Ajmiriganj – Bhairab Bazar – Narayanganj – Chandpur –
 Aricha – Sirajganj –    Bahadurbad – Chilmari – Dhubri – Pandu. 
Pandu – Dhubri – Chilmari – Bahadurbad – Sirajganj – Aricha – Chandpur – Narayanganj – Bhairab Bazar – Ajmiriganj
 – Markuli – Sherpur –  Fenchuganj – Zakiganj.
 
18.       During the negotiation in November 1999, an additional port of call namely Sirajganj was included to facilitate
 transportation of POLs from Numaligarh refinery.  Also the protocol provides transportation of Cargo from NE states to
 Bangladesh directly, which was not permitted as per the previous protocol. 
19.       The Committee was further apprised that the transportation of cargo to the North – East through Bangladesh as
 per Indo – Bangladesh Protocol is of utmost strategic importance.  This assumes further importance during the flood
 season when IWT becomes practically the only mode of transport to reach essential commodities like food grains etc.
 to the Cachar and Barak Valley of Assam through CIWTC’s vessels and terminals at Karimganj and Badarpur.  The
 Karimganj terminal of CIWTC has already been modernized with the funds made available by Ministry of Surface
 Transport.  Recently, North – Eastern Council, Shilong (NEC), Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India has
 sanctioned a scheme for development of CIWTC’s Badarpur Ghat river terminal and has entrusted the execution of the
 project to IWT, Assam. 
20.       The Committee was informed that the Numaligarh Refinery of Assam would reach optimum production level in
 early 2001.  Considering the usage of POL in North–East, and maximum available capacity of the Railway and road
 transportation, at least half a million Ton of POL will have to be transported from the refinery to Bangladesh and West
 Bengal by river.  To achieve the same, the following steps are required: 
The refinery has to lay pipeline of approximately of 26 kms. from its premises to the river front. 
About 25 tankers of 1000 Ton capacity each have to be acquired to carry the refinery products to Bangladesh. 
 Alternatively 45 similar tankers will be required to carry the refinery products to Calcutta/Haldia. 
21.       It is the well-known fact that CIWTC is the only Indian operator engaged in inter – country traffic between India
 and Bangladesh.  Calcutta - Bangladesh – Calcutta route is navigable round the year but this also lacks night
 navigation.  However, there are some major difficulties standing in the way of optimal capacity utilization for
 movement of inter – country traffic as mentioned below: - 
As per stipulation of Indo-Bangladesh Protocol on Transit & Trade Narayanganj, Khulna, Mongla and Sirajganj are
 designated Ports of call in Bangladesh.  Ashuganj may be included in that list to increase the cargo movement to North
 – Eastern region specially Tripura for movement of foodgrain including general/containerized cargo. 
Non-availability of godown facilities adjacent to the above Ports of  call for better movement of cargo. 
Non-availability of mechanical cargo handling facilities in almost all designated ports of call in Bangladesh. 
22.       The Committee noted the value of bilateral relations with the neighbouring countries and appreciates the CIWTC
 for maintaining Indo – Bangladesh Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade, despite incurring loss in each voyage
 made there under to Bangladesh.  However, the Committee feels that while honouring the Indo-Bangla protocol, the
 losses of CIWTC can be reduced if the facilities of godown and mechanical cargo handling are improved.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of India should initiate dialogue with Bangladesh for
 providing godown and mechanical cargo handling facilities at all the designated Ports of Call in Bangladesh.  The
 matter may be taken up with Bangladesh to have Ashuganj as an additional Port of Call to facilitate the transportation
 of food grains.  The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Surface Transport should provide sufficient
 funds for acquisition of oil tankers by the Corporation as projected by it, for carrying POL products from Numaligarh
 Refinery of Assam to Bangladesh and West Bengal.  The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Petroleum &
 Natural Gas may also be approached for laying of pipeline from premises of the refinery to the river front, so that the
 potential of Corporation in POL cargo handling may be utilised.
 
CARGO AVAILABILITY TO THE CORPORATION
 
23.       It was submitted before the Committee that one of the major constraints for its development is the availability of
 single route cargo.  In all the major routes where CIWTC operates IWT vessels, only one-way cargo is available.  The
 Committee was informed that there is hardly any cargo available from Pandughat to Calcutta, Karimganj to Calcutta

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 and Calcutta to Allahabad.  The Corporation has been pre-dominantly dependent on availability of cargo in
 Saugar/Haldia/Diamond Harbour – Calcutta route (for lighterage operation of mother vessels) and Haldia – Budge
 Budge route (for POL).  With the change in import policy by way of steep rise in duty on import of various
 commodities like sugar, wheat etc., import of these cargoes to Calcutta Dock System has almost dried up from the first
 quarter of the current financial year.  Similarly the movement of POL in Haldia – Budge Budge sector, specially for
 white oil, have also become negligible due to installation of an under water pipeline by I.O.C. between  Haldia – Budge
 Budge.  The effect of such probable huge reduction in lighterage cargo on the optimum utilization of fleet can be
 gauged from the fact that the quantum of POL transported in the Haldia – Budge Budge sector was 1,18,400 tonnes in
 1997-98, dropping to 24,572 Tonnes in 1998-99, further no cargo was available during 1999-2000 and there may not be
 any change in the situation during the current financial year. 
24.       To overcome this situation, the Corporation has commenced transportation of molasses between Haldia and
 Nurpur, transportation of stone slabs between Chunar and Narayanganj in Bangladesh, transportation of coal between
 Assam and Bangladesh, prospective transportation of Government cargo for the state of U.P. from Calcutta/Haldia to
 various destinations in NW-I, development and growth of Indo – Bangladesh export trade through Calcutta like export
 of tyres from Calcutta to Narayanganj, etc. 
25.       In reply to a point about the Government proposal to have reservation of cargo transportation through inland
 waterways, the representative of Ministry of Surface Transport submitted that the user Ministries of Government of
 India were requested to identify their requirement of the Inland Waterways transportation.  The Cabinet Secretary also
 asked the Ministries to indicate the availability of cargo for the purpose.  In response thereto, a number of user
 Ministries have assured of making available cargo for transportation by CIWTC. 
 26.       The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Corporation to reduce its over dependence on
 lighterage/POL cargo.  The Committee is of the view that user Ministries/Departments of the Government of India have
 to play active role for promotion of Inland Waterways transportation.  The Committee therefore, recommends that the
 users agencies of the Government of India and Public Sector Undertakings should earmark some percentage of their
 cargo for Inland water transportation.  The Committee hopes that the cargo support from the Government Organisations
 and private sector will boost movement of Inland Waterways Transportation traffic.  The Committee also feels that the
 Ministry of Surface Transport has failed to create general awareness about the   Inland Waterways as important mode
 of transport.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Surface Transport should take adequate steps
 to provide wide publicity about the utility of Inland waterways as an eco friendly mode of transport, among the various
 quarters of business community. The Committee also recommends that marketing efforts should be intensified by the
 Corporation to generate more and more cargo in the above routes. 
 
B)            RAJABAGAN DOCKYARD (RBD) 
27.            Rajabagan Dockyard, the main factory establishment in Calcutta is engaged in shipbuilding and ship-repair
 activities.  Rajabagan Dockyard with around 1050 employees has a chequered history of ship-building/repair of more
 than 150 years. It has now been languishing due to extremely low orderbook position and huge fixed overhead.  It now
 only builds and repairs vessels of its sister unit RSD.  
28.       The Committee was apprised that due to lack of maintenance for years together and pending implementation of
 the proposal for modernisation of Rajabagan Dockyard under Indo-Dutch Bilateral Cooperation Programme, the
 condition of the existing facilities at RBD viz. Dry Dock, Shipways, Cranes etc. have become extremely dilapidated. 
 Considering the immediate and continuous requirement of dry-docking of a large number of vessels belonging to River
 Services Division certain minimum facilities need to be modernised at RBD. With the projected growth of RSD and its
 increasing demand for operational vessels, RBD expects to do more repairs of vessels of RSD.  It, however, is
 exploring various other sources of revenue and new customers.  Recently, it has successfully repaired a vessel of Coast
 Guard Authority. 
29.       The Committee was further apprised that the Corporation is doing down sizing of Rajabagan Dock Yard by
 selling the surplus land available to it.  In this connection reduction of facilities, approximately 17.00 acres of land
 including one dry dock and 300 meter of river frontage representing about 52% of the total area of RBD has been
 identified as surplus.  This surplus land comprises of open space as well as some existing facilities like Hull Shop,
 overhead Water Reservoir with Deep Tube Well and Pump, sewage plant etc.  These important facilities will be
 relocated and, therefore, the fund required for relocating these facilities will be arranged from the sale proceeds of the
 surplus land. 
30.       In the light of down-sizing of RBD, the following four shops will be closed down:
 

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
Forge Shop
Foundry Shop
Old Machine Shop
Old Saw Mill
 
31.       Bays vacated by the above shops will be used for shifting the present Hull Shop, Electrical Shop, Shipwright
 Shop (being included in the surplus area), Stores etc. Also the equipments fitted therein will be disposed off.
 
32.       The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Corporation for its revival and restructuring by way of selling
 the surplus land.  The Committee hopes that the financial position of the Corporation will, to some extent, get improved
 and that the Corporation will be able to modernise and provide modern technology and facilities at Rajabagan Dock
 Yard, which will in turn improve its functioning and expertise in repairing of vessels.
 
C)        DEEP SEA SHIP REPAIR DIVISION (DSSR)
 
33.       The Committee was informed that the principal function of this division is to undertake all types of repair work
 for ocean – going vessels belonging to SCI, DCI, various port authorities and other Government Departments.  It is a
 small division of around 100 employees with a very low asset base.  The existing DSSR division is located on CPT land
 and building.  It does not have any cost by machinery/equipment.  This unit works with only some portable machines
 and hand tools.  Due to decline in number of vessels calling at the Port of Calcutta, its traditional business of repairing
 the ocean-gong vessels has suffered.  It has now been diversifying into repair of RSD vessels and other activities.  
34.       As a part of its revival measures, it was submitted by the representative of the Corporation that there is no need
 to have a separate division for ocean going vessels.  Therefore, Deep Sea Ship Repair Division (DSSR) should be
 merged with Rajabagan Dock Yard. 
35.       The Committee agrees with the Corporation and is of the opinion that it is not necessary to continue Deep Sea
 Ship Repair Division (DSSR) as a separate Division.  This can serve at the most as an extended arm of the RBD of the
 Corporation.  However, for locational advantage and to cater to vessels under repair at Calcutta Dock System, this may
 be designated as an outdoor unit of the RBD.  It will however remain under the administrative control of River Services
 Division.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the DSSR division should be merged with the Raja Bagan Dock
 Yard Division and be designated as out door unit of RBD.
 
REVIVAL STRATEGY FOR CIWTC
 
36.            Furnishing the details of the financial structure of the Corporation, the Ministry of Surface Transport
 informed the Committee that the present authorised share capital of the company is Rs.120.00 crores with a paid up
 capital of Rs.104.23 crores being contributed as follows:
            a)            Government of India                            :            Rs.103.95 crores
            b)            Government of West Bengal              :            Rs.    0.11 crores
            c)            Government of Assam                          :            Rs.    0.17 crores
 
37.       The capital investment made by the Government of India for modernization/expansion of fleet and facilities at
 Rajabagan Dockyard under various plan schemes is enumerated below:
 
a)                     UNDER 6
TH PLAN SCHEMES                             (RS. IN CRORES)
            i)            Acquisition of 45 vessels                                                  36.80
            ii)            Renovation of Dock Nos.3 & 4                                                        10.51
            iii)            Capital Repair of vessels                                                  2.03
            iv)            Improvement of cargo handling                                                            3.74
                        terminal at T.T. Sheds
                                                                        Total                                       53.08
 
b)                     UNDER 7
TH,8TH & 9TH PLAN SCHEMES                 (RS. IN CRORES)
                        ( upto 1999 - 2000)

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 
i)            Acquisition of vessels                                                               78.37
ii)            Modernisation of facilities at RBD                                        21.85
iii)         Capital repair of vessels                                                              25.23
iv)            Installation of Weigh Bridge                                                  0.30
v)         Other ongoing schemes                                                                       1.65
                                                            Sub Total :                      127.40
                                                            Total (a) + (b)                                180.40
 
38.       The performance of the units during the period 1996-97 to 1999-2000 is furnished below:
 
A. River Services Division 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
(Unaudited)
Cargo Transportation (Lakh
 Metric Tonne)
1.89 2.43 1.41 2.51
Freight Earned(Rs. In Lakhs) 718.43 802.35 814.68 1202.36
B. (i) Ship Building Rajabagan
 Dockyard
1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
a)Number of vessels on which
 work has been carried out
8 7 7 6
B. (i) Ship Building Rajabagan
 Dockyard
1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
b) Out of i (a) above, the number
 of vessels which have been
 completed and delivered
1 - 1 -
ii) Ship Repairing 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
a) Number of vessels on which
 repair work has been carried out
12 9 14 9
ii) Ship Repairing 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
b) Out of the vessel at ii (a) above
 the number of vessels which have
 been completed and delivered
6 6 7 6
iii) Value of Production (Rs. In
 Lakh)
1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
(Unaudited)
 448.75 373.25 439.05 520.60
C) Deep Sea Ship Repair Division
iii) Value of Production (Rs. In
 Lakh)
1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
(Unaudited)
 77.90 238.00 79.65 114.00
 
39.       The total earnings, operating loss and Ways and Means Loans provided by the Central Government during the
 period 1996 – 1997 to 1999-2000 are enumerated below:
(Rs. In Lakh)
YEAR EARNINGS/VOP OPERATING LOSS WAYS & MEANS LOAN
1996-1997 1301.61 1442.66 900.00
1997-1998 1478.52 2227.13 1340.00
1998-1999 1602.38 2826.26 1420.00
1999-2000
(Unaudited)
1836.96 2167.00 1420.00
           
40.       The Committee was informed that M/s A.F. Ferguson & Company was appointed as consultant in December
 1996 by the Corporation at the instructions of the Ministry of Surface Transport, the Government of India to formulate
 a Turnaround Strategy for the Company.  The consultants submitted their report in July 97 and the same was forwarded
 to the Ministry of Surface Transport.  Subsequently, the Consultants also made presentations in the Ministry of Surface

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 Transport regarding implementation of Turnaround strategy.  In January 1998 clarifications on the report were also
 forwarded to the Ministry of Surface Transport.  The Turn-around strategy for the Corporation is presently under
 consideration of the Ministry.
 
41.       On the question of long pendency of the clearance of the revival package of CIWTC, the Committee was
 apprised that the M/s A.F. Ferguson in its report actually recommended the closure of the Corporation.  However, the
 Corporation has of its own prepared another revival package, which they have already presented to the Ministries of
 Surface Transport and Finance.  The Secretary of Ministry of Surface Transport also submitted that the Ministry also
 favoured the idea of revival of the Corporation and taken steps accordingly. 
 
42.       In its submission before the Committee, Chairman and Managing Director of the Corporation informed that M/s
 A.F. Ferguson & Co., Consultant which was appointed for working out “Turn–around Package” for the Corporation
 recommended a recurring subsidy of Rs.7 crore for River Services Division and one time repair grant of Rs.6 crores for
 re-habilitation of the vessels of the Division.  It was further submitted before the Committee that the Corporation has
 defaulted in payment due to the following Major Constraints: - 
 
1.            Outstanding provident fund/pension bills.
 
2.            Employees arrear dues on revision of pay scales.
 
3.         Release of fund for Voluntary Retirement Scheme in 2000-2001.
 
4.            Requirement of Plan Fund Account for acquisition of vessel.
 
5.            Payment of Punjab National Bank.
 
43.       The Committee also informed that the Corporation requires urgently the following funds for maintaining
 harmonious Industrial Relations, uninterrupted productivity & achieving break even point at the earliest: -
(Rs. In Crore)
S.L.No. PARTICULARS AMOUNT
A) Statutory Liabilities
 PF/Pension dues 6.50
 Arrear of Salary & Wages 15.00
 E.S.I. 0.50
 Total 22.00
B) Other Statutory Liabilities
 Sales Tax, Municipal Tax, Income Tax and Professional Tax 0.80
 Total 0.80
C) Liabilities Under the Head Charged Expenditure
 M/s N.N. Shipbuilders & Engineers Pvt. Ltd. 4.32
 M/s Sesa Goa Ltd. 1.31
 Punjab National Bank,BRBB Road Branch, Calcutta 1.38
 Total 7.01
D) Non-Statutory Liabilities
 Sundary Creditors for Plan Expenditure like Braithwaite,AFCONS
 etc.
2.40
 Sundary Creditors for Operating Expenditure 1.50
 Total 3.90
 Total (a) + (b) + (c) + (d) = 33.71
 
 
44.       The Committee further informed that after the submission of the report by A.F. Ferguson & Co., the Division
 has undergone certain quantitative changes in terms of its operational thrust, contour of growth and asset base –
 specially related to its vessels. The Corporation has taken and proposes to take certain further measures to improve

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 productivity and operational efficiency through measures for qualitative changes in Management techniques.  These
 may be divided into short term and long-term categories.  Most of the steps are specially related to River Services
 Division, which is ultimately the NODAL operating agency of the Corporation:-
 
A)            Measures already taken
 
Utilisation of Rajabagan Dockyard water front and vacant unutilised space for   handling of Over Dimensional Cargo
 and wooden logs. 
Improvement in attendance through installation of punch card system. 
Repair of terminals and cargo handling facilities. 
Hard – standing and construction of additional sheds at the loading/unloading points at T.T. Sheds to facilitate
 continuation of work during inclement weather. 
Rationalisation of manpower on laid up vessels.
 
B) Measures to be taken
 
B.I) Short Term
 
Reduction of manpower through continuous encouragement for  opting retirement under VRS. 
Improved cargo handling by installation of mechanized handling equipment at various operating terminals. 
Installation of Computerised “ Decision Support System” for improved and integrated management of fleet. 
Surrendering surplus/unutilized cargo godowns at J.Ghat, Calcutta.. 
Continuous up gradation of technical and operating competence of vessel operating staff through  training
 programme/refresher courses. 
Rationalisation of various “Work Group” strength for optimum use of manpower. 
Introduction of LPG in place of coal/SKO in the kitchens of the operating vessels.
 
B.II)     Long Term
 
i)            Decommissioning old vessels and acquisition of new vessels including on   leased basis. 
Increasing the fleet strength by repairing old vessels. 
Reduction of turn around period of barges specially after provision of night navigation. 
Around the year uninterrupted cargo movement in NW-Ii after achieving 2 mtr. LAD.
 
45.       The Committee was further apprised that the Corporation for its survival and restructuring will take the
 following steps for reduction/elimination of unproductive expenditures. Some of the measures have already been
 introduced and/of are proposed to be implemented in due course:
Rigid compliance of various directives for reduction in wasteful expenditures, issued by the Administrative Ministry
 and other Ministries from time to time. 
Reduction in manpower through Voluntary Retirement Scheme with a projection of approximately 812 over five years
 ending 31.3.2005.
 
Elimination of overtime in unproductive zones and minimizing O.T. in productive zones. 
Reduction in fuel costs of operating vessels by better maintenance of combustion equipments of the machinery. 
Reduction in consumption of consumables like gas, welding electrodes, cleaning gear, lube oil etc. for various repair
 jobs. 
Introduction of LPG in place of coal and SKO for the kitchens of operating vessels and canteens. 
Use of LPG in place of Acetylene for cutting materials etc. 
Introduction of Mobile (Floating) repair gang for beak down repair of operating vessels so as to being down the lead-
time of repair. 
Measures for curtailment/reduction of electricity consumption for non-industrial usage. 
Rationalisation of manpower of laid up vessels.
 
46.       The Committee appreciates the measures and efforts made by the Corporation for reducing its unnecessary and

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 unproductive expenditure.  These measures and efforts would require involvement of the organisation as a whole and
 CIWTC should involve the employees viz officers and workers in this process.    The Committee feels that the
 important National Highways are already overloaded.  The State Highways and other minor roads are in bad shape. 
 The Railways are also nearly saturated.  On the other hand India has about 4000 Km. Of Inland Waterways mainly in
 Assam, West Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Tamilnadu and Kerala.  In such a scenario, the importance of IWT mode of
 transport in India is bound to increase manifolds in the near future. The Committee is of the view that the revival and
 restructuring of the Corporation is urgently required, which will go in long way in reducing pressure on roads, roads
 accidents and pollution.  The Committee also reiterates its earlier recommendation made in the Forty-third Report on
 Demands for Grants (2000-2001), Ministry of Surface Transport that necessary steps be taken for the revival of CIWTC
 and adequate funds should be made available to it.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Corporation should
 be provided the adequate funds at the earliest possible, which will enable it to pay its statutory and non-statutory
 liabilities and dues to the tune of   Rs. 33.71 Crores.
 
47.       The Committee also appreciates the Ministry of Surface Transport for having adopted a favourable approach in
 considering the revival of the Corporation rather than disinvestment.  The Committee has no doubt that with the support
 of Ministry of Surface Transport, the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. will become a viable unit in
 shortest possible time.
OBSERVATION/CONCLUSION/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
                       
RIVER SERVICES DIVISION (RSD)
 
The Committee is constrained to note that even after lapse of more than thirty years the Government has not taken
 adequate steps to provide proper navigational aids, which has not only affected the efficiency of River Services
 Division of the Corporation but also led to under utilization of such a cheap and eco friendly mode of transportation for
 cargo.  The Channel marking in rivers, provision of required draft of 2 meters LAD, night navigational facilities and
 mooring buoys are the main functions of Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) which is also under the
 administrative control of Ministry of Surface Transport and is responsible for regulation and development of Inland
 waterways for the purposes of shipping and navigation.  The Committee is surprised to know that after having well
 recognised the Inland Waterways as an important mode of Transport, Ministry of Surface Transport has not bothered to
 provide even basic navigational facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Surface Transport
 should take concrete steps in this regard and instruct Inland Waterways Authority of India to provide basic needs of
 navigation in National Waterways. As the adequate funds have been made available to Inland Waterways Authority of
 India (IWAI) this year, the Committee hopes that the route from Allahabad to Haldia will be navigable and CIWTC
 will be able to establish its credibility and attract private and other agencies to put in more vessels, which will not only
 enhance utilisation of all the waterways but also the traffic of Inland Waterways will go up. The Committee further
 recommends that for providing facilities i.e. terminal facilities, handling facilities, which are not being used regularly,
 private investment should be encouraged.  The dredging handling and channel marking need be intensified to increase
 the availability of draft throughout the year.    If night navigation of the vessels of Corporation becomes possible, then
 the functioning   and performance of the Corporation will definitely go up and will make the Organisation profitable. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that early steps be taken to provide the requisite navigational facilities.
(Para 12)
VESSELS OF THE CORPORATION
 
The Committee is of the view that the paucity of modern technology and communication facilities in the vessels has
 severely affected the functioning of the River Service Division, which is the nodal working establishment of the
 Corporation.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the vessels of the Corporation should be equipped with
 modern technology and communication facilities.  The Committee also recommends that the adequate number of
 special product vessels and tankers should be made available to the Corporation so as to increase its expertise in
 transportation of perishable items and petroleum products.
 
The Committee is surprised to note that the out of 143 vessels, only 58 vessels of the Corporation are in operation.  The
 Ministry of Surface Transport has not provided even minimum funds required for statutory repairs of vessels, which
 resulted in non-utilisation of 80 vessels.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that for the maintenance and repair of
 vessels, the Ministry of Surface Transport should provide adequate funds, which will enable the Corporation to improve

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 fleet utilisation and therefore, the Corporation should be granted, as requested, one time grant of Rs.13 crores for
 repairing work of its vessels.
(Paras 15 & 16)
 
INDO-BANGLADESH PROTOCOL ON INLAND WATER TRANSIT & TRADE
 
The Committee noted the value of bilateral relations with the neighbouring countries and appreciates the CIWTC for
 maintaining Indo – Bangladesh Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade, despite incurring loss in each voyage made
 there under to Bangladesh.  However, the Committee feels that while honouring the Indo-Bangla protocol, the losses of
 CIWTC can be reduced if the facilities of godown and mechanical cargo handling are improved.  The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that the Government of India should initiate dialogue with Bangladesh for providing godown
 and mechanical cargo handling facilities at all the designated Ports of Call in Bangladesh.  The matter may be taken up
 with Bangladesh to have Ashuganj as an additional Port of Call to facilitate the transportation of food grains.  The
 Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Surface Transport should provide sufficient funds for acquisition
 of oil tankers by the Corporation as projected by it, for carrying POL products from Numaligarh Refinery of Assam to
 Bangladesh and West Bengal.  The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas may also be
 approached for laying of pipeline from premises of the refinery to the river front, so that the potential of Corporation in
 POL cargo handling may be utilised.
(Para 22)
CARGO AVAILABILITY TO THE CORPORATION
 
The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Corporation to reduce its over dependence on lighterage/POL
 cargo.  The Committee is of the view that user Ministries/Departments of the Government of India have to play active
 role for promotion of Inland Waterways transportation.  The Committee therefore, recommends that the users agencies
 of the Government of India and Public Sector Undertakings should earmark some percentage of their cargo for Inland
 water transportation.  The Committee hopes that the cargo support from the Government Organisations and private
 sector will boost movement of Inland Waterways Transportation traffic.  The Committee also feels that the Ministry of
 Surface Transport has failed to create general awareness about the   Inland Waterways as important mode of transport. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Surface Transport should take adequate steps to provide
 wide publicity about the utility of Inland waterways as an eco friendly mode of transport, among the various quarters of
 business community. The Committee also recommends that marketing efforts should be intensified by the Corporation
 to generate more and more cargo in the above routes.
(Para 26)
 
RAJABAGAN DOCKYARD (RBD)
 
The Committee notes the steps being taken by the Corporation for its revival and restructuring by way of selling the
 surplus land.  The Committee hopes that the financial position of the Corporation will, to some extent, get improved
 and that the Corporation will be able to modernise and provide modern technology and facilities at Rajabagan Dock
 Yard, which will in turn improve its functioning and expertise in repairing of vessels.
(Para 32)
DEEP SEA SHIP REPAIR DIVISION (DSSR)
 
The Committee agrees with the Corporation and is of the opinion that it is not necessary to continue Deep Sea Ship
 Repair Division (DSSR) as a separate Division.  This can serve at the most as an extended arm of the RBD of the
 Corporation.  However, for locational advantage and to cater to vessels under repair at Calcutta Dock System, this may
 be designated as an outdoor unit of the RBD.  It will however remain under the administrative control of River Services
 Division.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the DSSR division should be merged with the Raja Bagan Dock
 Yard Division and be designated as out door unit of RBD.
(Para 35)
REVIVAL STRATEGY FOR CIWTC
 
The Committee appreciates the measures and efforts made by the Corporation for reducing its unnecessary and
 unproductive expenditure.  These measures and efforts would require involvement of the organisation as a whole and

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 CIWTC should involve the employees viz officers and workers in this process.    The Committee feels that the
 important National Highways are already overloaded.  The State Highways and other minor roads are in bad shape. 
 The Railways are also nearly saturated.  On the other hand India has about 4000 Km. Of Inland Waterways mainly in
 Assam, West Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Tamilnadu and Kerala.  In such a scenario, the importance of IWT mode of
 transport in India is bound to increase manifolds in the near future. The Committee is of the view that the revival and
 restructuring of the Corporation is urgently required, which will go in long way in reducing pressure on roads, roads
 accidents and pollution.  The Committee also reiterates its earlier recommendation made in the Forty-third Report on
 Demands for Grants (2000-2001), Ministry of Surface Transport that necessary steps be taken for the revival of CIWTC
 and adequate funds should be made available to it.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Corporation should
 be provided the adequate funds at the earliest possible, which will enable it to pay its statutory and non-statutory
 liabilities and dues to the tune of   Rs. 33.71 Crores.
 
The Committee also appreciates the Ministry of Surface Transport for having adopted a favourable approach in
 considering the revival of the Corporation rather than disinvestment.  The Committee has no doubt that with the support
 of Ministry of Surface Transport, the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. will become a viable unit in
 shortest possible time.
(Paras 46 & 47)
NOTE OF DISSENT BY
 
BISHNU PADA RAY                                                                130, North Avenue,
Member of Parliament                                                                    New Delhi - 110001
(Lok Sabha)                                                                             Phone: 3793807(R)
                                                                                                Fax: 3793807
 
 
NO:BPR/29/99                                                                                    Date: 6.12.2000
 
To
 
            The Chairman
            Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism
            Rajya Sabha Secretariat
            Parliament House Annexe
            New Delhi.
 
Dear Sir,
 
            I am sending herewith a dissent note on the draft report on CIWTC under rules 274 for information and
 necessary action.
 
                                                With regards,
 
                                                                                                Yours sincerely
 
 
                                                                                                            Sd/-
                                                                                                (BISHNU PADA RAY)
DISSENTING NOTE
Central Inland Water Transport Company Limited commenced its business on 5.6.1967 and present employment
 strength as on 1.4.2000 is 2626 which is headed by a full time Chairman-cum-Managing Director.  The principal
 activities of the corporation includes:-
 
Transportation by inland waterways from Calcutta to Bangladesh and to Assam and Lighterage opeation on the River

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 Hoogli.
 
Transportation by Inland waterways from Calcutta to Allahabad. 
Construction and repair of a small and medium size vessels. 
Repair of ocean going vessels. 
Ferry and charter, general engineering.
 
RIVER SERVICES DIVISON:  
 
Total number of employees in this division is 1300 and in this route only 16 vessels (600 tonnes capacity each) self –
 propelled general cargo carriers, 3 nos. self propelled POL tankers, average  capacity 1350 tonnes and five numbers
 over dimensional cargo carriers with average capacity of 500 tonnes.  In addition 19 tugs (each capable of toing 2 nos.
 750 tonnes capacity Dumb Barges 58 numbers (750 tonnes each).
 
            CIWTC is operating huge losses every year and its performance is very poor.  This corporation cannot survive
 for the reasons given below:-
 
The vessels are of old models and of very lower speed. 
The required draft for the old vessels are not available.  Vessels have no night navigation facilities. 
No modern communication facility/technology is provided to the old vessels. 
Freight charges of road and rail modes of transportation are cheaper than the island water transportation and in every
 year plans funds have been allocated on rail and road sector for connecting new routes with a view to easy
 transportation of the its cargo.  Island water transport vessels are of very old models with less draft cannot ply through
 out the year and its service is limited for fare weather i.e. about 5 to 6 months.  Many rivers are of seasonal character
 and are fit for vessels employment for a few months of the year.  As a result about 6 months vessels are lying idle and
 the corporation have to pay for the salary and allowances and other overhead expenditure.  This corporation cannot
 survive at any cost.  The present routes (cargo availability) is only on the side i.e. cargo  vessels come empty and the
 corporation has to bear the operating cost i.e. oil, pay and allowances of the employees.  The oil tankers is of old model
 and are of no use as the transport oil/crude oil etc. has different scope of transportation i.e. laying pipelines, by road or
 by rail.  This corporation is not getting sufficient cargo to its existing routes. 
Lack of infrastructure facilities required at various terminals i.e. permanent jetties with mechanical handling
 arrangements etc. resulting delay of discharging cargo and without the infrastructure facilities as mentioned above. 
 This corporation cannot survive.  To meet this infrastructure a huge amount is required which is not feasible. 
            From the above factors taking into consideration which shows the poor performance of the corporation and
 making huge losses every year.  As per chart given below the total earnings and operating loss, ways and means loans, 
 the Central Govt. provided 50 crores loans during the last 4 years to this Corporation.  The financial position of the
 corporation is not in a position to pay money in the future.
 
YEAR EARNINGS/VOP OPERATING LOSS WAYS &  MEANS
 LOAN
1996-1997 1301.61 1442.66 900.00
1997-1998 1478.52 2227.13 1340.00
1998-1999 1602.38 2826.26 1420.00
1999-2000
(Unaudited)
1836.96 2167.00 1420.00
 
 
SUGGESTIONS
 
            The Corporation has not procured proper navigational aids since 30 years due to its financial problems.  In the
 revival scheme committee proposed to procure new vessels, night navigational facilities and moring buoys.  The
 Committee also recommended for providing facilities i.e. terminal facilities, handling facilities etc.  The river Ganga
 has a problem of water tide or depth.  The depth of Ganga depends on water tides.  As a result the shipping services has
 come down to Calcutta dock and in future the main port will be haldia, so this corporation with its existing vessels and

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 its present operational facilities is not feasible.  “Therefore the funds to the tune of Rs. 42 crores for navigational/other
 purposes as mentioned above should not be paid to the CIWTC.
 
            As per page 8 of the draft items no. 14 indicates that CIWTC that only 58 vessels out of 143 are in operation. 
 This shows 85 vessels are lying idle.  Though as per the rules vessels will have to go for statutory repairs after 4 years
 cycle even its ply or not ply.  The Corporation has no money to repair vessels in time and as per report about 80 vessels
 cannot be employed for cargo transportation due to not complying statutory repairs.  Though the Committee
 recommends for adequate number of special product vessels and tankers to be provided to the Corporation.  The
 Committee also recommended the Ministry of Surface Transport to provide funds for its maintenance and repair and
 proposed to grant one time grant of 13 crores for repairing work of vessels.  Therefore I strongly objects the
 recommendations of the committee to provide any money to this Corporation as its committee report shows that the
 corporation after long service of 40 years have no money to maintain its statutory repairs and about 85 vessels are lying
 idle for many years with idle payments and the present oil tankers are not suitable for transportation of POL.  Therefore
 no payment should be made to this corporation.
 
            As per suggestions at page-11 item no. 22 committee recommends that the Ministry of Surface Transport should
 provide sufficient funds for acquisition of oil tankers and also recommends that Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
 may also be approached for laying pipeline.  I strongly protest the recommendations made by the Committee as this
 corporation is not feasible for various reasons as stated above.  The Committee in its report at page-14 item no. 26
 recommends that the Govt. of India and Public Sector Undertakings should earmark some percentage of their cargo for
 island water transportation.  Also suggest the Ministry of Surface Transport should take adequate steps with publicity
 for using service under island waterways as mode of transportation.  I strongly protest these suggestions made by the
 Committee.  I may add that the main function of the Union Govt. is to run the Administration and not to indulge in any
 business.  Moreover rates are cheaper in road/rail than the water transportation so the question of earmarking some
 percentage of cargo for Central Inland Water Transport Corporation does not arise.  The infrastructure in Jetty side is
 not adequate.  Therefore the loading and unloading is not feasible.  As a result this corporation is not to be suitable for
 revival.
 
DEE SEA SHIP REPAIR DIVISION
 
            In the note at page no. 16 of the draft report shows that this division is having 100 employees with very low asset
 based and the repairing division does not have minimum required machinery/equipments.  As a result most of
 employees may be sitting idle but drawing salary.  The Committee suggested at page no. 17 at item no. 35 that deep sea
 ship repair division not to be continued as a separate division and committee also suggested that DSSR division should
 be merged with the Rajabagan Dockyard Division.
 
            The Rajabagan Dockyard Division is having 1050 employees.  Due to lack of maintenance for years together
 and modernization the condition of the RBD and its existing facilities such as Drydock, Slipways, cranes etc. have
 become extremely dilapidated.  The conditions of the repair facilities of the corporation is very poor which reflects in
 page – 19 in item ‘B’.
 
            During 1996-97 to 1999-2000 altogether 72 vessels work has been carried out, out of which 27 vessels have
 been completed and delivered.
 
            From the above reports shows that the repairing section is in a very bad conditions and this should not be revived
 at any cost.  In the report at page no. 18 items no. 36 total paid up capital of Rs. 104.23 crores out of which Govt. of
 India contributed Rs. 103.95 crores and Govt. of West Bengal Rs. 0.11 crores and the Govt. of Assam Rs. 0.17 crores. 
 Also at page no. 18 at s.no. 37 the Govt. of India under various schemes (i.e. 6
th, 7th, 8th and 9th schemes) had
 contributed for modernization/expansion of fleet facilities at Rajabagan Dockyard Rs. 180.40 crores.  The peculiar
 point is the Govt. of West Bengal where this corporation is situated, the contribution is only Rs. 0.11 crores.  It seems
 the Govt. of West Bengal has understood very well that contribution of any funds to this corporation is anything but a
 wastage of money.  One of the main problems in West Bengal i.e. trade unionism and on several occasions the Chief
 Minister West Bengal requested for work culture but this corporation has not responded.  Although the Govt. of India

REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/45threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:50:07]
 has tried its best to revive this unit and paid huge amount as stated above.
 
            In its draft report at page no.21 the corporation has a liability in respect of payments such as
 PF/Pension/Bills/employees arrears, dues and revision of scale of pay, payment of banks and other organization
 altogether comes to Rs. 33.71 crores.  Ministry of Surface Transport appointed M/s A.F. Ferguson & Co. as a
 consultant in 1996 and the consultant recommended the closure of the corporation.  Thereafter the corporation has
 prepared another revival package and presented to the Ministries of Surface Transport and Finance.  As per note at page
 no. 20 item no. 41, the Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport also submitted that the Ministry also favoured the idea
 of revival of the corporation and taken steps accordingly.  The letter/contents of the steps being taken not enclosed with
 the draft report.  The Committee in its report at page no. 24 item no. 46 recommends that importance of Inland Water
 transport mode of transport is bound to increase manifolds in the near future.  I disagree with these recommendations
 and no payment should be made by the Ministry of Surface Transport for Rs. 33.71 crores to the Corporation to pay its
 statutory arrears.
 
            It has also been observed that world over Govt. involvement in business has not produced encouraging results. 
 This corporation do not come under strategic public sector enterprise so the question of revival does not arise.
 
 
                                                                                                                                                Sd/-    
 
(BISHNU PADA RAY)
Member
 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Transport andTtourism