PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT
The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th July, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th July, 2017 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2017/Ashada, 1939 (Saka)
249
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FORTY NINTH REPORT
The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th July, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th July, 2017 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2017/Ashada, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-69
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV A TIONS — A T A G LANCE................................................... 70-75
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 77-84
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 85-300

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-2017)
1. Shri Mukul Roy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
6. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
7. Kumari Selja
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri P . Kumar
18. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
19. Yogi Aditya Nath
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
23. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy

(ii)
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
25. Shri Prathap Simha
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri P. P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, having been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf this Two Hundred
Forty Ninth Report on "The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016*".
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 16th December, 2016. In pursuance of rules relating
to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred**
the Bill to the Committee on the 12t January, 2017 for examination and report within three months. On
the request being made by the Chairman of the Committee, Hon'ble Chairman had granted extension of
time for a period of three months, i.e., upto 12th July, 2017.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Director-General (Shipping)
and other senior officers of Ministry of Shipping and Ministry of Law and Justice in its meeting held
on the 12th May, 2017. The Committee during its study visit to Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Kochi, heard
the views of all the Major Ports, seafarer representatives and other stakeholders on the Bill. The
Committee also received written memoranda from various stakeholders and individuals.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 12th July, 2017.
5. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Officers of Ministry of Shipping and Ministry
of Law and Justice for placing before the Committee the material and information desired in connection
with the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016. The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of
representatives of various stakeholders and individuals who submitted their valuable suggestions on the
provisions of the Bill.
  N
EW D ELHI; MUKUL ROY
12 July, 2017 Chairman
Ashada 21, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture
Rajya Sabha
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 16th December, 2016.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 56225, dated 13th January, 2017.

ACRONYMS
BBCD : Bareboat-Charter cum Demise
CBA : Collective Bargaining Agreement
CMMI : Company of Master Mariners of India
COC : Carrier Owned Container
COP : Customs of the Port
EEZ : Exclusive Economic Zone
GMDSS : Global Maritime Distress and Safety Systems
IALA : International Association of Marine Aids to Navigation and
Lighthouse Authorities
IMU : International Maritime Organisation
INSA : Indian National Shipowners Association
ISPS : International Ships and Port Security
LLMC : Convention on Limitation of Liability for Marine Claims
LLP : Limited Liability Partnership
M.S. Act : Merchant Shipping Act, 1958
MARPOL : International Convention for Prevention of Pollution from Ship
(Marine Pollution)
MLC : Maritime Labour Convention
MMD : Mercantile Marine Department
MODU : Mobile Offshore Drilling Limited
NSB : National Shipping Board
NWBS : National Welfare Board for Seafarers
SOLAS : Safety of Life at Sea
STCW : Seafarers Training Certification and Watch keeping
VTS : Vessel Traffic Service
WCA : World Cargo Association
(iv)

REPORT
The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016 (Annexure-I) was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 16th December,
2016. The Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12th January,
2017, referred the Bill to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture for examination and report within three months. The Committee could not take up the Bill
immediately for discussion due to the reasons that works related to examination of Demands for Grants
2017-18 of the Ministries of Civil Aviation; Culture; Road Transport and Highways; Shipping and Tourism
were under consideration by the Committee during that time. The Committee in its meeting held on 10th
April, 2017 decided to get extension of time for submission of the report on 'The Merchant Shipping
Bill, 2016' to the Parliament from the Hon'ble Chairman of Rajya Sabha. Accordingly, the Committee
placed the request before the Hon'ble Chairman of Rajya Sabha for extension of time and he granted
extension for a further period of three months, i.e., upto 12th July, 2017 for submission of the report
to Parliament.
2. The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 governs matters relating to merchant shipping in India. The Act,
inter-alia, provides for registration, certification, safety and security of Indian ships, prevention of
marine environmental pollution as well as for promotion of seafarer's welfare. The Act has been amended
from time to time in the light of experience gained in its implementation and also to give effect to the
provisions of various International Conventions to which India is a party.
3. The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 had become a bulky piece of legislation as a result of seventeen
amendments made to the Act between 1966 and 2014. The Act consisted of 461 sections spread over
XVIII Parts and, as a result of amendments, the number of sections subsequently increased to more than
560 sections. The Act had also become cumbersome for stake-holders. Besides, the Act contained
sections on procedural and process aspects which require frequent upgradation in tune with modern
business practices and uniformity with international usage thereby causing implementation bottlenecks.
To set right these bottlenecks further amendments to the Act became inevitable.
4. Certain provisions of the 1958 Act are considered to have become obsolete and needed revision,
for example, the provisions relating to pilgrimage by sea (now undertaken principally by air), nuclear
ships etc. (4 sections consolidated to 1 section). Some other provisions such as trading licenses for
Indian vessels and port clearances relating to such licences, crew engagement and discharge before the
Shipping Master etc. have become redundant. More importantly, the provisions of 1958 Act required
consolidation and simplification for promoting an ease of doing business.
5. In the existing regulatory regime, introducing a set of reforms was felt to be crucial for growth
and development of Indian maritime sector. Reforms were indispensable on aspects relating to augmenting
Indian tonnage and promoting coastal shipping. It was also necessary to usher in a legislative framework
which facilitates compliance by the industry and implementation by the government. To strengthen the
security of Indian coast, it was necessary to enable registration of all seagoing vessels. Further, there
was a need to legislate on measures relating to facilitate seafarers' welfare. The existing penalty provisions,

2
particularly the monetary penalty, were meagre and warranted enhancement to ensure effective compliance.
Besides, a set of international maritime conventions, to which India has already become a party or those
to which India proposes to become a party were also to be incorporated in the Merchant Shipping Act,
1958, in force.
6. Therefore, the Government has decided to introduce a fresh legislation in the form of Merchant
Shipping Bill, 2016 in supersession of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
7. In the Bill it is proposed to repeal two legislations namely the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and the
Coasting Vessels Act, 1838. The Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 is a legislation of the British era which
provides for registration of non-mechanically propelled vessels to a limited jurisdiction of Saurashtra and
Kutch. The Coasting Vessels Act already stands partially repealed by the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
Since provisions have been introduced in the Bill for registration of all vessels, including those non-
mechanically propelled vessels covered under the Coasting Vessels Act, 1838, a provision is made in the
Bill for repeal of the Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 as a whole.
8. In order to save all actions taken under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, provision has been made
in the Bill to that effect.
9. In the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the Ministry of Shipping stated that in order to ensure
that old and redundant provisions of the laws are replaced with contemporaneous provisions, it has been
decided to consolidate and amend the laws relating to merchant shipping to ensure compliance with the
country's obligation under the International Conventions and maritime treaties to which India is a party
and also to ensure the efficient maintenance of Indian mercantile marine in a manner best suited to serve
the national interest.
10. The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016, inter-alia, seeks to provide for the following, namely:–
(a) to register all seagoing vessels, whether propelled or not, including certain residuary category
of vessels not covered under any statute;
(b) to allow substantially-owned vessels and vessels chartered on Bareboat-Charter-cum-
Demise(BBCD) contract by Indian entities to be registered as Indian flag vessels, to recognize
Indian controlled tonnage as a separate category, and dispense with the requirement for issuing
licences to Indian flag vessels for coastal operation, so as to facilitate augmentation of Indian
tonnage and promotion of coastal shipping;
(c) to simplify and consolidate the regime for survey, inspection and certification of vessels which
are scattered in various Parts of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 by placing them together,
for convenience of the Indian shipping industry;
(d) to monitor the maritime education leading to grant of certificate of competency or certificate
of proficiency in accordance with either the provisions of International Convention or otherwise
to impart quality education to prospective seafarers, and to facilitate Indian seafarers to work
onboard vessels with respective certificate and qualification;

3
(e) to entitle the seafarers held in captivity of pirates to receive wages till they are released from
captivity and reach home safely so as to ensure welfare of seafarers;
(f) to make insurance compulsory for the crew engaged on vessels including fishing, sailing, non-
propelled vessels and vessels whose net tonnage is less than fifteen and solely engaged in
coasting trade of India, by the owner of the vessel;
(g) to dispense with the requirement of signing of articles of agreement by the crew before the
Shipping Master so as to facilitate early employment of seafarers;
(h) to make provisions for security-related aspects with respect to vessels, which will enable
identification and ensure coastal security;
(i) to make provisions so as to give effect to seven Conventions of International Maritime
Organisation, namely, (i) the Intervention Convention, 1969, (ii) the Search and Rescue
Convention, 1979, (iii) the Annex VI to the International Convention on Prevention of Pollution
from Ships, (iv) the Convention for Control and Management of Ships Ballast Water and
Sediments, 2004, (v) the Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention,2007, (vi) the Salvage
Convention,1989 and (vii) the International Convention for Bunker Oil Pollution Damage, 2001;
(j) to repeal the Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 and the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
11. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee that the following changes and reforms were
introduced in the Bill:
(i) For augmentation of Indian tonnage vessels
(a) Ownership requirement for registration under Indian flag has been changed from 'wholly
owned' to 'substantially owned'. Substantially owned means, ownership of more than
fifty percent shares of the vessel. Vessels owned by joint owners, where Indian owners
have a majority stake in the vessel, will be able to be registered under Indian flag. This
will encourage vessels owned jointly by Indian and foreign entities to be registered under
Indian flag, and it will be easy for small ship-owners to acquire and register the vessels.
It will facilitate development of tonnage under Indian flag.
(b) New Chapter on registration of Bareboat Charter-cum-Demise (BBCD) vessels introduced
in the Bill. The objective is to promote an increase in the tonnage under Indian flag, as
small ship-owners or entities who cannot invest a huge sum of money for purchase of
vessel, may charter/hire the vessel on BBCD basis having an intention to transfer the
ownership to an Indian owner, and register such vessel as an Indian vessel.
(c) Indian controlled tonnage vessels have been recognised as a distinct category of vessels.
Vessels owned by Indian entities may be allowed to be registered outside India (foreign
flag) subject to certain conditions and such vessels will be known as Indian controlled
vessel This will promote the Indian tonnage by way of controlled tonnage mechanism,
where Indian Government can put certain conditions like placement of Indian seafarers

4
on vessels allowed to be registered under foreign flag and thereby increasing employment
opportunities for Indian seafarers. These vessels are owned by Indian entities, but are
registered under foreign flag (s). These vessels can be strategically available to India for
requisition by the Indian government for energy, fuel and food security reasons apart
from other national contingencies.
(d) The scope of the definition of coasting trade of India has been broadened to include
services/activities in as much as they relate to shipping activities within territorial waters
/ exclusive economic zone (EEZ). Government can regulate the coastal trade of India by
way of cabotage and licensing provisions contained under Part XII. Indian Coastal ships
(899 as on 31.01.2017) will get first right of refusal against the foreign vessels coming
to India for coastal trade /services in Indian coastal waters.
(ii) To promote coastal shipping and facilitate ease of doing business
(e) Registration of all seagoing vessels under single legislation. All sea-going vessels irrespective
of their size [gross tonnage], regardless of their area of operation & whether propelled
or not are mandated to be registered under this proposed Bill. This provision has been
introduced to give effect to the recommendations of the National Committee for
Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security for ensuring the security of Indian coasts.
(f) Requirement of general trading license for Indian ships to engage in Indian coastal trade
has been done away with. Indian vessels will no longer be mandated to have a license
from the Directorate General of Shipping for engaging themselves in the coasting trade
of India which will provide an ease of doing business to Indian vessels and in turn
promote coastal shipping in India. Further, this will enable Indian vessels to obtain port
clearance without trading licence or other statutory certificates required under the Bill
since the issuance of port clearance through customs authorities currently provisioned
under the existing Act has been done away with.
(g) For framing separate rules for coastal ships, provision has been added in the relevant
parts for safety, pollution prevention, manning, survey and certification. The simpler
regulatory regime for Indian coastal vessels shall benefit Indian coastal ships.
(h) Consolidation of provisions related to survey and certification done to provide a simple
regime for convenience. The ship-owners will have single Chapter/Part to look for
application of regulations w.r.t survey and certification.
(i) Clarity introduced between the terms 'seagoing' and 'inland' vessel. The term 'sea-going'
has been redefined to align with the definition of inland waters as defined in the proposed
draft Inland Vessels Bill, 2016 as "sea-going", in relation to a vessel, means a vessel
proceeding to sea beyond waters declared to be inland waters by the Central Government
or State Government by notification. This will remove the ambiguity between the
applications of the proposed Bill to vessels operating in the sea vis-a-vis vessels operating
in the inland waters of India.

5
(iii) Measures for welfare of seafarers:
(j) The seafarers and ship-owners will no longer be required to visit the Shipping Master
office for entering into agreement of employment. Now both parties may enter into
agreement and submit the copy of the same the Shipping Master. This will provide an
ease of business to the ship-owners and the seafarers.
(k) Recruitment of seafarers by authorised persons has been made mandatory to protect
Indian seafarers from being exploited by unscrupulous persons/entities. Indian seafarers
will now be recruited only through the owners or the registered entities thereby rights
of seafarers in emergency situations like death or distress will be protected.
(l) The extant powers of hearing grievances of seafarers by the Shipping Masters have been
debottlenecked and their powers for the redressal of seafarer's grievances have been
enhanced. The present cap of 5 lakh rupees for hearing a grievance of seafarers related
to wages by Shipping Master has been removed and now seafarers may approach the
Shipping Master for grievance redressal of any amount, thereby giving a platform to
Indian seafarer for approaching the Government machinery before resorting to the court
proceedings.
(m) Provisions enabling seafarers held in captivity to get wages have been incorporated.
Seafarer held in captivity including in piracy situations will receives wages till they are
released and reach home safely. This will benefit Indian seafarers in case of unfortunate
situations of hostages by pirates or otherwise.
(n) Provisions introduced for insurance of crew engaged on fishing, sailing, vessels without
mechanical means of propulsion and vessels with less than 15 net tonnage. Earlier there
was a provision for framing a scheme for such crew, however, no such scheme was
framed. Now, the owners of such vessels have been made responsible for taking an
insurance policy for the crew of the vessels, for an amount, which is to be notified by
the Central Government thereby benefiting the seafarers working on such vessels which
are otherwise not covered under Maritime Labour Convention, 2006.
(o) Provisions to give effect to the Seafarers Training Certification and Watchkeeping (STCW)
Convention have been added in the Bill. Incorporation of the provisions of STCW
Conventions, which were not adequately reflected in the Act earlier, will enable an
effective monitoring of maritime training and education leading to grant of Certificate of
Competency & Certificate of Proficiency in accordance with the mandate of the STCW
Convention, 1978. This will improve the quality of Indian seafarers and make them more
competitive in global market.
(iv) Requirement of reforms w.r.t. safety, security and environmental protections:
(p) The provisions empowering the Central Government to give directions to the ship-owners
for taking security measures as may be necessary have been added in the Bill, for
ensuring the security of life, vessel, cargo and other properties.

6
(q) The provisions of Annex-VI [Control of Air Pollution from ships] to International
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) have been incorporated
in the Bill. It will facilitate the control of air pollution from ships and thereby contribute
in clean and safe environment.
(r) International Convention on Civil Liability for Bunker Oil Pollution Damage [Bunker
Convention] has been incorporated. The Convention requires ships over 1,000 gross
tonnage to maintain insurance or other financial security. It will ensure adequate, prompt,
and effective compensation to persons who suffer damage caused by spills of oil in
Indian waters, when oil is carried as fuel in ships' bunkers. India proposes to become
a party to this Convention upon enactment of this Bill.
(s) Nairobi International Convention on the Removal of Wrecks has been incorporated. The
registered ship-owner is required to maintain compulsory insurance or other financial
security to cover liability under the convention. It provide the legal basis for States to
remove, or have removed, shipwrecks that may have the potential to affect adversely the
safety of lives, goods and property at sea, as well as the marine environment. India is
a party to this Convention.
(t) International Convention on Salvage has been incorporated. It provides the salvage award
taking into account the skill and efforts of the salvors in preventing or minimizing damage
to the environment. India is a party to this Convention.
(u) International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships' Ballast Water and
Sediments has been incorporated. All ships will be required to have a Ballast Water and
Sediments Management Plan and to carry a Ballast Water Record Book international
ballast water management certificate. It will ensure the safe and clean marine environment
and protect Indian water from pollution. India proposes to become a party to this
Convention upon enactment of this Bill.
(v) International Convention Relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution
Casualties has been incorporated. It will give the Central Government the right to take
such measures on the high seas as may be necessary to prevent, mitigate or eliminate
danger to its coastline or related interests from pollution by oil or the threat thereof,
following upon a maritime casualty on high seas. India is a party to this Convention.
(w) For the purpose of safety and management, the provisions related to International Ships
and Port Security [ISPS] and International Safety Management [ISM] code have been
incorporated into the Bill. Such provisions will enable the safety and security management
of Indian ships, thereby ensuring the safety and security.
(v) Provisions relating to effective compliance of the Act:
(x) Amount of penalties has been revised with power of imposing the same through the
Principal Officer [PO] of Mercantile Marine Departments [MMDs] with an appellate

7
mechanism vested with DG Shipping. However, power of imprisonment to be vested
with the courts only. For small violation, the action in the courts may delay the movement
of the vessels, which will cause financial and other losses, hence imposition of fine by
POs will facilitate the ship-owners from lengthy court proceedings
(vi) Other reforms introduced in the Bill:
(i) Pilgrim ships are no longer relevant in the current context and those provisions being
anachronistic now, have been deleted, after due consideration.
(ii) The volume of the Bill (560 sections) have now been meticulously shortened to 280
sections in the Bill. Similarly, 25 Chapters/Parts have been reduced to 16 Chapters/Parts.
(iii) Procedural matters have been delinked from the Bill and in lieu they are proposed to be
prescribed through secondary legislations (Rules/Regulations) or tertiary legislations
(executive instructions) drawing powers from the substantive provisions of the Bill.
(vii) Merchant Shipping Bill and its interface with the Ports:
(a) Shipping and port facilities are closely related. The obligations of the member states
relating to safety, security, reception facilities for vessels calling at the ports, safe navigation
and control measures for the ships while in ports and welfare & re-creation of seafarers
visiting the port area largely depend on the ports. Part VI of the Merchant Shipping Bill,
2016 deal with the safety and security management. This Part makes the ports responsible
to comply with the requirements as may be prescribed for safety and security management
in accordance with the ISPS Code. The Central Govt. has been authorized to set different
levels of security and is responsible to provide information of the levels of security to
all the port facilities and the vessels entering these facilities. This Part also provides for
the audit of the port facility to see whether it complies to the ISPS Code. Part VI of the
proposed Bill dealing with 'Safety and Security', empowers the ports, terminals, anchorages
and port facilities to prevent any vessel from entering into their facility without proper
insurance and certification relating to classification and condition of vessel or any other
relevant requirements as may be prescribed.
(b) Similarly, Part VII of the draft Bill deals with the reception facilities. This Part also states
that the ports, offshore facilities and terminals shall provide such reception facilities and
surveillance, supervision and guidance as may be prescribed. The Central Govt. can give
directions to the port facilities and terminals, for providing reception facility within its
territory so that the wastes generated during operation, repair and re-cycling of vessels
are collected, handled, treated and disposed of in a safe and environmentally sound
manner. This Part also empowers the port to provide reception facilities in accordance
with the requirements of the MARPOL Convention and impose such charges for the use
of such facilities as notified, by the Central Govt.
(c) India is also a party to the Safety Convention (SOLAS) which requires that obligations
relating to Radio Communications and Safety of Navigation are complied by the ports in

8
India. The SOLAS Convention deals with Global Maritime Distress and Safety Systems
(GMDSS) and obligates the Member States to make arrangements for registering the
Global Maritime Distress and Safety Systems (GMDSS) identities and for giving information
about these identities to the rescue coordination centres on a 24 hour basis. The identities
of these centres are also to be made available to the international organizations maintaining
registration of these identities. This Convention also requires the contracting parties to
establish Vessel Traffic Services (VTS) to provide safe and efficient navigation to the
vessels for protection of the marine environment adjacent to shore areas. Establishment
of VTS becomes the sole responsibility of the ports. The ports who plan and implement
VTS have to follow the guidelines developed by the International Maritime Organization.
The SOLAS Convention also requires the ports to provide such aids to navigation as the
volume of traffic justifies and the degree of risk require. In order to achieve uniformity
in the aids of navigation, the ports have to take into account the international
recommendations and guidelines of IALA when establishing such aids. The ports have
to also arrange to disseminate information relating to aids of navigation to all concerned.
As far as practicable, the ports are also to avoid any changes in the position-fixing
systems as they adversely affect the performance of receivers fitted in the ships.
(vii) Expected Benefits:
(a) Through this Bill significant improvements are envisaged across the various operational
areas such as maritime safety, maritime security, marine environmental pollution control,
maritime education and training, seafarer's welfare etc. The provisions relating to substantial
ownership, bare-boat charter-cum-demise, Indian controlled tonnage, inter-alia, are
expected to stimulate investment in the Indian shipping industry, leading to a potential rise
in the Indian shipping tonnage/merchant shipping fleet. The British era enactment of
Coasting Vessels Act 1838 will stand repealed as a whole and several archaic provisions
will be dispensed with. The Bill is expected to usher in a more simpler, user-friendly,
transparent, cost effect, stable system for sustainable development and growth of Indian
shipping industry.
12. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary , Ministry of Shipping, and other senior officials
of the Ministry on the provisions of the Bill on the 12th May, 2017. The Committee during its study visit
to Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Kochi, heard the views of all the Major Ports, seafarer representatives and
other stakeholders on the Bill. Besides, the individuals/organizations who submitted written memoranda
to the Committee on different aspects to various clauses of the Bill are given in Annexure-II. The
Committee also sought comments from the Ministry of Shipping on the points raised in various
representations received by it. The Committee also considered the background note and replies to queries
furnished by the Ministry of Shipping while preparing the report.
13. The Committee considered all the Clauses of the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016 in details. The
succeeding paragraphs will explain the views of various stakeholders interacted with the Committee, the
feedback received from the Ministry of Shipping, observations made by the Committee and its
recommendations on various Clauses of the Bill.

9
14. Clause 2
2. (1) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act shall apply to,—
(a) any vessel which is registered in India; or
(b) any vessel which is required by this Act to be so registered, wherever it may be.
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act which apply to vessels other
than those referred to in sub-section (1) shall so apply only while any such vessel is within
India or in waters within the jurisdiction of India.
(3) Subject to sub-section (2) and unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act
shall not apply to Indian controlled tonnage vessels.
Notes on Clauses
15. Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for application of the Bill. It specifies the application of the
Bill to the vessels registered, vessels required to be registered and vessels other than preceding two
categories. It also specifies the extent of application of the Bill to Indian controlled tonnage vessels.
16. One of the stakeholder pointed out that Section 2 (1), (2), (3) brings in the expression, "unless
otherwise expressly provided", which restricts the application of the provision of the Act left to varied
interpretations and comes in the way of Ease of Business.
17. However, the Ministry of Shipping did not accept this issue raised, and they have submitted to the
Committee that apart from Indian vessels there are two other categories of vessels, that is foreign vessels
and Indian controlled tonnage vessels. Clause 2 (2) will apply to foreign vessels and Indian controlled
tonnage vessels while in Indian waters. Under clause  2 (3) the provisions of the Bill will not apply on
Indian controlled tonnage vessels when they are not in Indian waters.
18. However, the term 'unless expressly provided' has been used to cover those Parts of the Bill where
an express provision has been made for applicability of that part/section to foreign vessels and/or Indian
controlled tonnage vessels. Therefore, it only removes ambiguity and does not create ambiguity. The
Ministry of Shipping further submitted that this is the legal formulation for application of an Act and duly
vetted by the Ministry of Law.
19. The Ministry of Shipping has further clarified that the purpose of clause 2(2) is to clarify the
applicability of the provisions of the Bill to foreign vessels when they are in Indian waters. The purpose
of Clause 2(3) is to clarify that the provisions of the Bill that are applicable to foreign vessels in Indian
waters would also be applicable to Indian Controlled Tonnage vessels when they are in Indian waters.
This is a definition clause for Indian Controlled tonnage vessel.
20. The Committee notes the explanation given by the Ministry of Shipping as regards the
concerns raised by the stakeholders. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of shipping
may clear all the ambiguities in this Clause in the final Bill.
21. Clause 3
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) "1992 Liability Convention" means the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution
Damage, 1992;

10
(2) "Anti-Fouling Systems Convention" means International Convention on control of harmful
antifouling systems on ships, 2001;
(3) "audit" means a systematic and independent examination to determine whether the Management
System as provided in safety convention complies with the planned arrangements and such
arrangements are implemented effectively and are sufficient to achieve the desired objectives;
(4) "Ballast Water Management Convention" means the International Convention for the Control
and Management of Ships' Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004;
(5) "certificate of competency" or "certificate of proficiency" means the certificate of competency
or certificate of proficiency, as the case may be, granted under subsection (1) of section 52;
(6) "coasts" include the coasts of creeks and tidal waters.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression "tidal waters" means any part
of the sea and any part of a river within the ebb and flow of the tide at ordinary spring tides
and not being a harbor;
(7) "Coasting trade of India" means,—
(a) the carriage by sea of goods, passengers from any port or place in India to any other
port or place in India, or
(b) performing any service within waters in the jurisdiction of India, including the zones as
defined under the Territorial Water, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zones and
other Maritime Zones of India Act, 1976;
(8) "company" means a company as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act,
2013;
(9) "convention" means any International Convention or Treaty or Agreement in relation to maritime
matters and their Protocols to which India is a party;
(10) "convention certificate" means a certificate issued under the provisions of any convention;
(11) "court", in relation to any proceedings, includes any court having jurisdiction in the matter to
which the proceedings relate;
(12) "Director-General" means the Director-General of Shipping appointed under sub-section (1) of
section 6;
(13) "distressed seafarer" means a seafarer engaged under this Act, who has been discharged or
left behind or abandoned including by reason of any captivity not in accordance with law, or
shipwrecked, is in distress;
(14) "equipment", in relation to a vessel, includes boats, tackle, machinery, boilers, cargo handling
gear, pumps and any fitting, anchor, propeller, apparels, furniture, life-saving appliances of
every description, spars, masts, rigging and sails, fog signals, lights, shapes and signals of
distress, medicines and medical and surgical stores and appliances, charts, radio installations,
appliances for preventing, detecting or extinguishing fires, buckets, compasses, axes, lanterns,
loading and discharging gears and appliances of all kinds and all other stores and spares or
articles belonging to or to be used in connection with or necessary for the navigation,
propulsion, security, pollution prevention and safety of the vessel;

11
(15) "family" means: —
(i) in the case of male, his wife, his children whether married or unmarried, his dependent
parents and his deceased son's widow and children:
Provided that if a person proves that his wife has ceased under the personal law governing
him or the customary law of the community to which the spouses belong, to be entitled
to maintenance, she shall no longer be deemed to be a part of such person's family for
the purposes of this Act, unless such person subsequently intimates by express notice
in writing to the Central Government that she shall continue to be so regarded; and
(ii) in the case of female, her husband, her children, whether married or unmarried, her
dependent parents, her husband's dependent parents and her deceased son's widow and
children:
Provided that if a person by notice in writing to the Central Government expresses her
desire to exclude her husband from the family, the husband and his dependent parents
shall no longer be deemed to be a part of such person's family for the purpose of this
Act, unless such person subsequently cancels in writing any such notice.
Explanation.— In either of the above two cases, if the child, or, as the case may be, the child
of deceased son of a person has been adopted by another person and if, under the personal
law of the adopter, adoption is legally recognised, such a child shall be considered as excluded
from the family of the first mentioned person;
(16) "fishing vessel" means a vessel which is exclusively engaged in fishing in the seas;
(17) "gross tonnage" means the measure of the overall size of a vessel determined in accordance
with the rules made in this behalf;
(18) "High Court", in relation to a vessel, means a High Court within the limits of whose appellate
jurisdiction,—
(a) the port of registry of the vessel is situate, or
(b) the vessel is for the time being, or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises;
(19) "Indian consular officer" means the consul-general, consul, vice-consul, consular agent and
pro consul appointed as such by the Central Government and includes any person authorised
by the Central Government to perform the functions of consul-general, consul, vice-consul,
consular agent and pro consul;
(20) "Indian controlled tonnage vessel" means an Indian vessel, other than an fishing vessel or
sailing vessel, registered at a port or place in a country other than India under sub-section (2)
of section 14;
(21) "Indian ship" or "Indian vessel" means a ship or a vessel, as the case may be, which is
substantially owned by the person referred in sub-section (3) of section 14;
(22) "LLMC Convention" means the convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims,
1976;
(23) "Maritime Labour Convention" means the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006;
(24) "MARPOL Convention" means the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution
from Ships, 1973 and Protocols;

12
(25) "master" includes any person (except a pilot or a Harbour Master) having command or charge
of a vessel;
(26) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression "notified"
shall be construed accordingly;
(27) "owner", in relation to a vessel means the person to whom the vessel or a share in the vessel
belongs;
(28) "passenger" means any person carried on board a vessel, except—
(a) a person employed or engaged in any capacity on board the vessel on the business of
the vessel;
(b) a person on board the vessel either in pursuance of the obligations laid upon the master
to carry shipwrecked, distressed or other persons or by reason of any circumstances
which neither the master nor the charterer, if any, could have prevented or forestalled; and
(c) a child under one year of age;
(29) "passenger vessel" means a vessel carrying more than twelve passengers;
(30) "Pollution damage" means,—
(a) loss or damage caused outside the vessel resulting from the escape, emission or discharge
of cargo, oil or any other material from the vessel, wherever such escape, emission or
discharge may occur, or
(b) the costs of preventive measures and further loss or damage caused by preventive
measures;
(31) "Pollution prevention convention" means any convention relating to prevention of pollution
from vessels, to which India is a Party; including MARPOL
Convention, Anti-fouling Systems Convention and Ballast Water Management Convention;
(32) "port" means the port as defined in clause (4) of section 3 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
(33) "port authority" means,—
(a) in relation to any major port, the Board of Trustees, or, as the case may be, the Board
of Directors, in respect of that port constituted under any law for the time being in force;
(b) in relation to any other port, the conservator of the Port appointed under section 7 of
the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
(c) in relation to any terminal or place not forming a part of a port, the person under whose
supervision the terminal or place is operated;
(34) "port of registry", in relation to a vessel, sailing vessel, fishing vessel or any other vessel,
means the port at which she is registered or is to be registered;
(35) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(36) "Principal Officer" means an officer referred to in section 9 of this Act;
(37) "proceeding" includes any suit, appeal or application under this Act;
(38) "proper officer" means the officer designated by the Central Government to be the proper
officer at the port or place and in respect of the matter to which the reference is made in the
provision of this Act, in which the expression occurs;

13
(39) "proper return port" means such port as is agreed upon by the seafarer, and his employer in
the agreement or otherwise, or in the absence of agreement, the port where the seafarer was
employed or joined the vessel;
(40) "property", in relation to a seafarer, includes personal effects;
(41) "reception facilities", in relation to a port, terminal ship yard, ship repair facility or ship
recycling facility, means facilities for enabling vessels using the port, terminal ship yard, ship
repair facility or ship recycling facility to discharge or deposit any substance subject to control
by the Pollution prevention conventions;
(42) "Registrar" means the Registrar referred to in section 15;
(43) "registered owner" means the person or persons registered as the owner of the vessel;
(44) "removal" means any form of prevention, mitigation or elimination of the hazard created by
a wreck, and the expressions "remove", "removed" and "removing" shall be construed
accordingly;
(45) "rule" means the rule made under this Act;
(46) " Safety Convention" means the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974
and its Protocols;
(47) "sailing vessel" means any wooden vessel of primitive build provided with sufficient sail area
for navigation under sails alone, whether or not fitted with mechanical means of propulsion,
but does not include a pleasure craft.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause "wooden vessel of primitive build" means a
wooden vessel of traditionally built not primarily propelled;
(48) "Salvage" means any act or activity undertaken to assist a vessel or any other property in
danger in navigable waters or in any other waters whatsoever;
(49) "Salvage Convention" means the International Convention on Salvage, 1989;
(50) "salvor" means any person rendering services in direct connection with salvage operation;
(51) "sea-going", in relation to a vessel, means a vessel proceeding or intending to proceed beyond
waters declared to be inland waters by the Central Government or State Government by
notification;
(52) "seafarer" means any person who is employed or engaged or works in any capacity on board
a sea-going vessel, but does not include,-
(i) a person who is in the employment or engagement or work on board in any capacity in
a warship or any Government vessel used for military or noncommercial purposes, or
(ii) any other person as the Central Government may, by notification, specify;
(53) "seafarer's employment office" means the seafarer's employment office established under sub-
section (1) of section 11;
(54) "seafarer's welfare officer" means the seafarer's welfare officer appointed under sub-section
(1) of section 12;
(55) "seaworthy", in respect of a vessel, means, if she is in possession of all valid certificates
required under this Act and is in a fit state as to the material, construction, condition of hull
and equipment, and machinery; management of safety, security and pollution prevention, the
stowage of ballast or cargo, the number, and in every other respect, fit for the voyage or
service including with the living and working conditions on board the vessel to not pose a
threat to the health, safety or welfare of the vessel's seafarers;

14
(56) "ship" means any watercraft, used or capable of being used in navigation by its own propulsion,
in, above, or under the water, but does not include fishing vessels or sailing vessels;
(57) "ship owner" means the owner including the registered owner, bareboat charterer, manager and
operator of the vessel;
(58) "shipping master" means the shipping master appointed under section 10; Provided that in
relation to any seafarer for the purposes of section 89, means a shipping master referred to
in that section,—
(a) for the port at which the seafarer entered into, or is believed to have entered into, an
agreement, or
(b) where the seafarer did not enter into his agreement in India, for the port to which the
seafarer has returned, or is expected to return, on the completion of his latest voyage;
(59) "shipping office" means the shipping office established under section 10;
(60) "special trade" means the conveyance of large number of passengers by sea within the areas
specified in the STP Agreement;
Explanation:—The expression "STP Agreement" means the Special Trade Passenger Ship
Agreement, 1971 and Protocol on Space Requirement for Special Trade Passenger Ships,
1973;
(61) "special trade passenger" means a passenger carried in special trade passenger vessel in spaces
on the weather deck or upper deck or between decks which accommodate more than eight
passengers;
(62) "special trade passenger ship" means a mechanically propelled ship carrying more than thirty
special trade passengers;
(63) "STCW Convention" means the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification
and Watchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978;
(64) "surveyor" means a person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(65) "tanker" means a vessel constructed or adapted primarily to carry liquid or gas in bulk in its
cargo space and includes combination carriers and any other type of vessel when it is carrying
a cargo or part cargo of liquid or gas in bulk;
(66) "tindal" means the person in command or charge of a sailing vessel;
(67) "Tribunal" means the Tribunal constituted under sub-section (1) of section 83;
(68) "unseaworthy vessel" is a vessel which is not seaworthy;
(69) "vessel" includes every description of water craft used or capable of being used in the marine
environment, such as ship, boat, sailing vessel, fishing vessel, submersible, semi-submersible,
hydrofoils, non-displacement crafts, amphibious crafts, wing-in-ground crafts, pleasure crafts,
barges, lighters, Mobile Offshore Drilling Units, Mobile Offshore Units, or of any other
description;
(70) "wages" include emoluments;
(71) "wreck" includes the following on a maritime casualty, namely:—
(a) a sunken or stranded vessel;
(b) any part of a sunken or stranded vessel, including any object or goods or cargo that is
or has been on board such a vessel;

15
(c) any object or goods or cargo that is lost at sea from a vessel and that is stranded, sunken
or adrift at sea;
(d) a vessel that is in distress or is about, or may reasonably be expected, to sink or to
strand, where effective measures to assist the vessel or any property in danger are not
already being taken; or
(e) a vessel abandoned without hope or intention of recovery.
22. The Clause 3 of the Bill contains definitions of various expressions used in the Bill. It defines the
expressions, inter-alia, "costs", "coasting trade of India", "convention", "distressed seafarer", "family",
"Indian controlled tonnage vessel", "port of registry", "sailing vessel", "ship", "special trade", "vessel".
23. Some of the stakeholders in their written memoranda have furnished the following suggestions in
the definitions and the committee sought the opinion of the Ministry of Shipping in this regard. The
suggestions put by the stakeholders and the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping are given in the
following table:
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping
3. Part 1 Section 3 (7). The definition of Coasting
trade should be reworded follows: (1) Coasting trade
- the carriage by sea of goods, Excluding export or
import containerized cargo and empty containers
originating from any port in India or destined to any
port in India or transshipped at any port or place in
India, passengers from any port or place in India to
any other port or place in India or.... Views: It is
suggested and in view that the export/import container
are not cargoes and are exempt from Import duty
unless domesticated and are the assets of the shipping
Company. Further, the issue is whether export
containers cleared by customs at a destination port
in India and transshipped through another Indian port
(Export containers) or import containers received
from a foreign port and transshipped through an
Indian port to another Indian port where it is customs
cleared and duty paid (import containers) should fall
under the definition of coastingtrade. These are NOT
COASTINGTRADE but foreign trade and therefore
should be excluded from definition of coasting trade
and should not be brought under the purview of
cabotage. Moreover, as to ensure Ease of Doing
Business and to reduce transport and logistics costs.
Not accepted. The carriage of cargo from one
Indian port to other Indian port is covered in the
coastal trade of India and such is protected by
way of principles of cabotage. The protection is
required for development of coastal shipping and
coastal trade of India. The inclusion of EXIM
cargo in 'Coasting trade' is as per the existing
policy which has consciously been adopted to
protect India's shipping industry and such policy
is adopted by most of the countries to protect
their domestic shipping industry. Foreign container
shipping lines already transship more than 98%
of the EXIM container cargo. Acceptance of
CSLA's views will enable foreign container
shipping lines to transport EXIM containers from
one Indian port to another Indian port, without
obtaining any license for Coasting Trade from
the Directorate General of Shipping. As per the
existing policy, Directorate General of Shipping
grants licence for coasting trade to foreign flag
ships if no Indian ship is available to transport
goods at a price being offered by the foreign
vessel. Further, Clause 240(5) of the Bill also
empowers the Central Government to exempt any
class of vessel from the provision of licensing
for coasting trade if required for promotion of
coasting trade.

16
110. Section 3-subclause 15 -definition of —family
should be simplified & up dated. "Family means
lawfully wedded spouse and children below 18 years
and dependent parents for the purpose of this act.
Not accepted. This is an existing definition taken
from the existing Act. The removal of provisos
in this case may result in unintended legal
complications.
Clause 3 (8) —company means a company as defined
in clause (20) of section 2 of the Company Act
2013. Additional Comments: Does this agree with all
conventions definition of company. Can a single
person (a proprietor) not own a ship?
Not accepted. The specific definition of company
for the purposes of Convention requirement has
been incorporated in the specific Part eg. Part
VI.
Clause 3(18). High court definition be expanded to
be in line with the Admiralty bill and should be open
to all high courts of the country.
Not accepted. Definition is as per normal practice
followed in civil matters under Civil Procedure
Code. The admiralty Bill gives power to coastal
High courts only for specified maritime claims.
Clause 3(20) — Indian controlled tonnage vessel
means an Indian vessel, other than a fishing vessel
or sailing vessel, registered at a port or place in a
country other than India under
Clause 3 (22) LLMC Convention should read as
"means the Convention on Limitation of Liability for
Maritime Claims, 1976, as may be amended thereafter.
Views: The LLMC has gone through various changes,
new one being 1996 which India is party to. Similarly
wherever, the Conventions are listed elsewhere in
the definition wordings "as may be amended
thereafter.
This is a definition clause for Indian Controlled
tonnage vessel.
Not accepted. The suggestion may not be
accepted as incorporation of the words "as may
be amended thereafter" is redundant as the
amendments once done to a convention become
part of the convention itself.
Clause 3 - subsection 28- -Passenger. Why only
child below one year of age? Para C -any child
under 18 years of age, unless one is more than 16
years of age and is employed as trainee / apprentice
on board the ship and is duly bound by the terms of
employment.
Not accepted. This is an existing definition which
has stood the test of time. The minimum age of
seafarer/trainee is as per Maritime Labour
Convention.
Clause 3 (31) the definition reads as India is a party,
including Marpol... " may be amended to read as "...
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping
Not accepted. The term pollution prevention
convention is defined in Cl. 3 (31) as any
Clause 3 (15): is unnecessary in MS Act. Not accepted. Definition of the term 'family' in
Cl. 3 (15) is essential as the term has been used
in the Bill. This is an existing definition taken
from MS Act, 1958 and is interpreted while
dealing with issues relating to seafarers claims
especially in case of some mishappenings.

17
India is a party, and shall include but not limited to
Conventions as Marpol..." Views: The drafting in
such a manner shall ensure the new Conventions
that India is party to can be included too.
convention relating to prevention of pollution from
vessels to which India is a party'. This is an
inclusive definition and any new pollution
prevention convention to which Indian may
become a party shall be covered.
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping
33. Views: Section 3 The term ICTL has to be defined
through the rules and hence the' subsection may be
modified to bring in clarity. In the present condition,
it is not clear whether the ICTL vessel will have
Indian Flag or foreign flag so that the Indian Seafarers
interests can be protected.
Not accepted. It appears that ICTL is referred
for Indian Controlled Tonnage Vessels. A term
which is used in the Bill has to be defined in the
Bill itself. Indian Controlled Tonnage vessel will
be having a flag of the country in which it is
registered.
Clause 3(46). To include amendments along with
protocols.
Not accepted. Amendment is part of the principal
Convention and are not required to be mentioned
separately.
Clause 3(47) Sailing vessel should include any other
vessel including wooden vessel such as Fiber glass
and any other such material allowed for ship.
Not accepted. As per the definition given under
SOLAS Convention sailing vessels are wooden
vessels of primitive construction.
Clause 3, (52). Seafarer definition is not in line with
ILOs Maritime Labor Convention, it may be amended.
(The present definition does not include Trainee,
Cadet or any person, even though they are also
engaged in ships by the shipowner).
Not accepted. The definition of seafarer is taken
from the existing Act which was introduced taking
into consideration the definition of seafarer' in
the MaritimeLabour Convention, 2006 (MLC).
MLC defines seafarer as —any person who is
employed or engaged or works in any capacity
on board a ship to which this Convention applies".
The words —in any capacity cover trainee, cadet
or any person engaged on the ships
Clause 3 - sub section 52- seafarer -there are dispute
and arguments about cadets & trainees being a
seafarer and not covered under MLC. These ranks
must be covered under MLC to remove ambiguity.
Do we still need to have indentures and shipping
masters, when MLC is in place? Trainee seafarer —
should include cadets and trainees, in any ship and
any other person subject to tripartite exemption
provisions.
Not accepted. Cadets and trainees are covered
under MLC.
Clause 3 (52) — Seafarer means any person who is
employed or engaged or works in any capacity on
board a sea-going vessel, but does not include,-
Not accepted. The definition of seafarer is taken
from the existing Act which was introduced vide
an amendment in December 2014. The said

18
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping
(i) a person who is in the employment or engagement
or work on board in any capacity in a warship or
any Government vessels used for military or
noncommercial purpose, or (ii) any other person as
the Central Government may, by notification,
specify;Recommendations Trainees, special personnel
and supernumerary etc. are not seafarers and
accordingly proposed to be excluded. Explanatory
remark Self explanatory. The concept of —trainees
is absent in other countries and therefore they have
not been referred to in their national legislation. Due
to the tonnage tax scheme, the Indian ship-owners
are training cadets to become officers. Legally and
technically, a cadet can only become a seaman upon
his or her completing the training. Therefore, even
legally trainees cannot be called as seafarers'. The
Maritime Union of India which represents officers
have also agreed and submitted in writing that they
have no objection to trainees not being classified
as—seafarers. This had been submitted to the office
of the Director General of Shipping.
definition was introduced taking into consideration
the definition of seafarer in the Maritime Labour
Convention, 2006. Maritime Labour Convention
defines seafarer as —any person who is employed
or engaged or works in any capacity on board a
ship to which this Convention applies". It further
defines ship as a —ship other than one which
navigates exclusively in inland waters or waters
within, or closely adjacent to, sheltered waters or
areas where port regulations apply". Maritime
Labour Convention applies to all ships, whether
publicly or privately owned, ordinarily engaged in
commercial activities, other than ships engaged
in fishing or in similar pursuits and ships of
traditional build such as dhows and junks. This
Convention does not apply to warships or naval
auxiliaries. Maritime Labour Convention applies
to all the seafarers. MLC provides that in the
event of doubt as to whether any categories of
persons are to be regarded as seafarers for the
purpose of this Convention, the question shall be
determined by the competent authority in each
Member after consultation with the shipowners'
and seafarers' organizations concerned with this
question. Accordingly in the proposed Bill the
seafarer has been defined as any person who is
employed or engaged or works in any capacity
on board a sea-going vessel, but does not include,-
(i) a person who is in the employment or
engagement or work on board in any capacity in
a warship or any Government vessel used for
military or noncommercial purposes, or (ii) any
other person as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify. The present definition does
not exclude the trainee cadet. Unless any category
of person is specifically excluded same would be
covered under the proposed Bill.
Clause 3(55). To include —securing of cargo Not accepted. The definition of seaworthy is wide
enough to cover any aspect which makes the
vessel unfit for the voyage.

19
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping
Unseaworthy vessel: Following new provision has
been introduced in the Bill— Sec. 3(55) — Seaworthy
in respect of a vessel, means, if she is in possession
of all valid certificates required under this Act and is
in a fit state as to the material, construction, condition
of hull and equipment, and machinery; management
of safety, security and pollution prevention, the
stowage of ballast or cargo, the number, and in
every other respect, fit for the voyage or service
including with the living and working conditions on
board the vessel to not pose a threat to the health,
safety or welfare of the vessel's seafarers. The
following sentence should be added after the words
—the number'' in the fourth line — "Description and
qualifications of the crew including officers
Accepted. The definition will be accordingly
modified.
Clause 3(57): Ownership definition is vague as it
includes operator as well. As per the certificate of
Registry issued to vessel, operator cannot be owner
unless his name is in the COR, thus they are
contradicting each other, and therefore this sub-clause
may be amended.
Not accepted. Cl. 3 (57) defines the term ship
owner and the term ownership is not defined in
the Bill. Under the proposed Bill ship owner is
defined as the owner including the registered
owner, bareboat charterer, manager and operator
of the vessel. As per the definition the operator of
the vessel could be someone who is other than
the registered owner which implies that his name
would not be included in the certificate of registry.
The proposed Bill intends to cover both the
registered owner and the operator of the vessel
as it is considered to be the ship owner under the
Maritime Labour Convention, 2006.
Clause 3 - sub clause 60, 61, 62 special trade and
special trade passenger ships should be deleted,
applying applicable provisions to this kind of category.
Not accepted. These are based on Special Trade
Passenger (STP) Convention to which India is a
party.
Clause 3 and sub clause 65 —tanker should be further
divided as per practice prevailing now.
Accepted. The definition will be re-examined in
light of Chapter-I of SOLAS Convention and
existing definition under MS Act, 1958.
Clause 3 (67) Tribunal defined under Section /Rule
83 does not take into consideration the tripartite
requirement as per MLC Convention to which India
is signatory.
Not accepted. Tribunal defined under Clause 3(67)
is not related to MLC, 2006.

20
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping
Clause 3 (70) - in present act wages is defined as —
include emoluments. This is not correct and will
affect many and clarity should be desirable. Normally
owners pay as per CBA and then pay additional perks
/allowances to retain the seafarer .WCA has its own
definition we should follow MLC. Compensations
should be linked to one of the following two
definitions should be redefined in two parts or detail
left for enabled rules: (i) Basic pay or wages means
the pay, however composed, for normal hours of
work; it does not include payments for overtime
worked, bonuses, allowances, paid Leave or any other
additional remuneration; (ii) Consolidated wage means
a wage or salary which includes the basic pay and
other Pay-related benefits; a consolidated wage may
include compensation for all overtime hours which
are worked and all other pay-related benefits.
Not accepted. This is an existing definition which
covers both (i) and (ii) and is in the interest of
seafarers.
37. Views: Section 3(70) wages definition must be
aligned to the definition of the ILOs MLC.
Not accepted. This is a definition taken from the
present Act. Emoluments will cover various
requirements and aspects given under the MLC.
Clause 3, point 7, Definition to be amended as follows:
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(7) "Coasting trade of India" means,— the carriage
by sea of goods, passengers from any port or place
in India to any other port or place in India, or
performing any service within waters in the
jurisdiction of India, including the zones as defined
under the Territorial water............... Reasons: The
issue is whether EXIM traffic i.e. export containers
cleared by customs at a destination port in India and
transshipped through another Indian port (Export
containers) or import containers received from a
foreign port and transshipped through an Indian port
to another Indian port where it is customs cleared
and duty paid (import containers) should fall under
the definition of coastal traffic. These are NOT
COASTING TRAFFIC but foreign trade and therefore
should be excluded from definition of coasting trade
and should not be brought under the purview of
Not accepted. The carriage of cargo from one
Indian port to other Indian port is covered in the
coastal trade of India and is protected by way of
principles of cabotage. The protection is required
for development of coastal shipping and coastal
trade of India. The inclusion of EXIM cargo in
'Coasting trade' is as per the existing policy which
has consciously been adopted to protect India's
shipping industry and such policy is adopted by
most of the countries to protect their domestic
shipping industry. Foreign container shipping lines
already transship more than 98% of the EXIM
container cargo. Acceptance of CSLA's views
will enable foreign container shipping lines to
transport EXIM containers from one Indian port
to another Indian port, without obtaining any
license for Coasting Trade from the Directorate
General of Shipping. As per the existing policy,
Directorate General of Shipping grants licence

21
cabotage. Water, Continental Shelf, Water, Exclusive
Economic Zones and other Maritime Zones of India
Act, 1976, Provided that the carriage of export or
import goods whether containerized or not including
empty containers, originating from any port in India
or destined to any port in India or transhipped at any
port or place in India or performing any service
related to above within waters in the jurisdiction of
India, including the zones as defined under the
Territorial Water, Exclusive Economic Zone and other
maritime Zones of India Act, 1976 will not be treated
as Coasting Trade of India.
for coasting trade to foreign flag ships if no Indian
ship is available to transport goods at a price
being offered by the foreign vessels. Further,
Clause 240(5) of the Bill also empowers the Central
Government to exempt any class of vessel from
the provision of licensing for coasting trade if
required for promotion of coasting trade.
95. The definition of Coasting Trade has been
expanded to include "performing any service within
waters in the jurisdiction of India including EEZ....".
Views: IADC requests to exclude all offshore drilling
activities performed by MODUs from the definition
of Coasting Trade as the nature of services of
MODUs are very different from the services
performed by Ships and other vessels used in trade.
To illustrate some of the differences, it may please
be noted that: Self-propelled MODUs are attached to
the seabed at a given drilling location and stays there
for a few months, before moving to a new location
and are not involved in any transport of goods or
passengers. Most of the crew on-board are highly
trained and specialised in their respective areas and
even the marine crew are trained to respond to
emergencies In a different manner as compared to
any other passenger or cargo ship/vessel. The crews
are replaced every 28 days by means of a helicopter,
from which they are trained to escape even
underwater, In case of any mishap.
Not accepted. The carriage of cargo from one
Indian port to other Indian port or providing
services using vessels are covered in the coastal
trade of India and need to be protected by way
of principles of cabotage. The protection is
required for development of coastal shipping and
coastal trade of India. The foreign flag vessel
including MODU will be required to have license
from DGS. However, if such an Indian vessel is
available and is willing to provide the service at
the price offered by the foreign flag vessel, then
license will not be issued to such foreign flag
vessels. Clause 240(5) empowers the Central
Government to exempt any class of vessel from
the provision of licensing for coasting trade under
Clause 240.
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping

22
24. The Committee agrees with the views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping on the issues
raised by stakeholders. However, Committee recommends that the necessary changes as accepted
by the Ministry of Shipping may be carried out in the Bill.
25. Clause 4
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish a National Shipping Board (hereinafter
referred to as the Shipping Board) for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Shipping Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) six members of Parliament of whom four shall be elected from amongst themselves by
members of the House of the People and two from among themselves by the members
of the Council of States,
(b) such number of other members, not exceeding sixteen as the Central Government may
think fit to appoint to the Shipping Board, to represent,-
(i) the Central Government,
(ii) ship-owners,
(iii) seafarers, and
(iv) such other interest as in the opinion of the Central Government ought to be
represented on the Shipping Board: Provided that the Shipping Board shall include
an equal number of persons representing the ship owners and seafarers.
(3) The term of a member elected under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall come to an end as
soon as he ceases to be a member of the House from which he was elected.
(4) The Central Government shall nominate one of the members of the Shipping Board to be the
Chairperson of the Shipping Board.
(5) The Shipping Board shall advise the Central Government,-
(a) on matters relating to Indian shipping including the development thereof; and
(b) on such other matters arising out of this Act as the Central Government may refer to
it for advice.
(6) The Shipping Board shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
(7) The Central Government may make rules for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the term of office of members of the Shipping Board;
(b) the manner of filling vacancies in the Shipping Board;
(c) the travelling allowances and other allowances payable to the members of the Shipping
Board;
(d) the manner of appointment of officers and other employees of the Shipping Board and
the terms and conditions of their service.
26. Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide for establishment of the National Shipping Board. It provides
for the composition of the Board, consisting of six members of Parliament; sixteen members to be

23
appointed by the Central Government and equal number to be included in the Board representing the ship
owners and seafarers; and the term of its members, its power to advise the Central Government.
27. In a written memorandum received by the Committee it was given that Clause 4 (2) for the
Constitution of National Shipping Board, the Government, is trying to find ways and means to improve
employment avenues for the nation's youth. There is a move to increase India's share in the global
seafarer supply. Accordingly, representatives of foreign employers' associations should be included in the
National Shipping Board or NSB constituents enabled by rules under this part. Clause 4(2) (5) the
National Shipping Board should also advise the Government on how to increase employability of seafarers
on foreign ships and thus increase India's share in the supply of seafarers to the world fleet.
28. However, the Ministry of Shipping did not accept this and clarified that in the national interest, it
is not advisable to nominate a body representing foreign interest in the statutory policy making body. The
inputs from these associations can always be obtained by NSB before making a recommendation. As
regards clause 4 (2) (5) (a), the Ministry stated that this clause provides that the National Shipping Board
(NSB) shall advise on matters relating to Indian shipping including development. Therefore, how to
increase employability' can be done by NSB within the existing provisions of the Bill.
29. The Committee notes the issues raised by the stakeholders and the reply furnished by the
Ministry of Shipping on certain sub clauses in the Bill. The Committee suggests that the Government
of India should make all efforts to increase the employment avenues to Indian seafarers. The
Committee recommends that while upholding the national interest National Shipping Board
should be properly represented by all the important stakeholders in the Shipping sector.
30. Clause 5
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute a Seafarers Welfare Board (hereinafter
referred to as the Welfare Board) for the purposes of advising the Central Government on the
measures to be taken for promoting the welfare of the seafarer under this Act, generally and
in particular the following matters, namely:—
(a) the establishment of hostels or boarding and lodging houses for seafarer;
(b) the establishment of clubs, canteens, libraries and other like amenities for the benefit of
seafarer;
(c) the establishment of hospital and provision of medical treatment for seafarer;
(d) the provision of educational and other facilities for seafarer;
(e) the measures to be taken for welfare of distressed seafarer;
(f) the measures to be taken in the case of seafarer who is a foreigner but abandoned in the
waters within the jurisdiction of India;
(g) any other measures to be taken for promoting the welfare of seafarer.
(2) The Central Government may make rules providing for,—
(a) the composition of the Welfare Board and the term of office of members thereof;

24
(b) the procedure to be followed in the conduct of business by the Welfare Board;
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to the members of the Welfare Board;
(d) the rate of levy of fee payable by owners of vessels for the purposes of providing
amenities to seafarer and for taking other measures for the welfare of the seafarer;
(e) the procedure by which any such fee may be collected or recovered and the manner
in which the proceeds of such fees, after deduction of the cost of collection, shall
be utilised for the purpose specified in clause (d).
31. Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of the Seafarer Welfare Board to advise
the Central Government on the measures for promoting the welfare of the seafarers.
32. In a written memorandum, one of the stakeholders submitted to the Committee that this clause
exclusively defines various aspects of National Shipping Board and gives independence for all its activity.
Since the Seamen welfare board is also an important aspect dealing with welfare of seafarers, it is
prudent that this section may also be re-written in line with the section related to NSB.
33. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee that the existing provisions with respect to
National Shipping Board (NSB) and National Welfare Board for Seafarers (NWBS) have been retained in
the proposed Bill from the present Act. The formulation in the Bill is as per the role and functions of
each Board. The role, functions and composition of NSB are entirely different from that of NWBS and
hence the parity is un- desirable.
34. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping.
35. Clause 7
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint at such port or place as it may consider
necessary, as many persons as it may think fit to be surveyors for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), in case of cargo vessel, the Central
Government, may, by notification, authorise any person or body of persons, on such terms
and conditions as may be specified therein, to be surveyor or surveyors for the purposes of
this Act.
Explanation.— For the proposes of this sub-section, "cargo vessel" means a vessel which is
not a passenger vessel.
(3) The surveyor shall be nautical surveyor, ship surveyor, engineer and ship surveyor or junior
ship surveyor and includes Deputy Nautical Advisor, Deputy Chief Surveyor, Deputy Chief
Ship Surveyor, Principal Of ficer, Chief Ship Surveyor , Chief Surveyor and Nautical Advisor.
(4) At any port or place at which no surveyor appointed under this section is available, the Central
Government may, by notification, appoint any qualified person to perform the functions of a
surveyor under this Act.

25
36. This clause of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint Surveyors at such port or place
as it may consider necessary. It further empowers the Central Government to authorise any person or
body of persons, as surveyor in case of cargo vessel.
37. The Committee was informed by a represenationist that in clause 7 (3) the Nautical Advisor and
Chief Surveyor should not be clubbed with other surveyors and their role should be specified in the Act.
38. Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee that Nautical Advisor and Chief Surveyor are
nomenclatures used in the hierarchy of the post of Surveyor. The statutory function of survey is imposed
on the Surveyor under the Bill whereas the role of Nautical Adviser/Chief Surveyor is overall supervision
and responsibility in accordance with their Recruitment Rules.
39. The Committee recommends that the duties and responsibilities of the Nautical Advisor and
the Chief Surveyors and their eligibilities for selection to those posts should be clearly mentioned
while making rules to this Clause.
40. Clause 14
14. (1) Every Indian vessel, shall be registered under this Part at a port or place in India, as the Central
Government may, by notification, declare to be a port of registry under this Act:
Provided that the vessels registered under the provisions of the Coasting Vessels Act, 1838
shall be re-registered under the provisions of this Part within a period of one year from the
date of coming into force of this Part:
Provided further that any vessel registered on the commencement of this Act at any port in
India under any enactment repealed by this Act, except the vessels registered under the
Coasting Vessel Act, 1838, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Part and shall
be recognised as an Indian vessel:
Provided also that, subject to any exemptions or modifications, as the case may be, made by
the Central Government, all vessels belonging to the Government, other than vessels of the
Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, Customs Authorities, Central Paramilitary Forces, Coastal
Police and other Police Agencies, shall be registered under this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an Indian vessel, may be, subject to
such conditions as may be prescribed, registered in a country other than India.
(3) No vessel shall be an Indian vessel or an Indian controlled tonnage vessel unless such vessel
is substantially owned by any of the following persons, namely,—
(a) a citizen of India; or
(b) a company or a body established by or under any Central Act or State Act which has
its principal place of business in India; or
(c) a co-operative society registered or deemed to be registered under the Co-operative
Societies Act, 1912 or any other law relating to a co-operative society for the time being
in force in any State.

26
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "substantially owned" means having more
than fifty per cent. of the shares of the ownership of the vessel.
(4) If an Indian vessel is proceeding to sea without its valid certificate of registry, such Indian
vessel shall be detained until it produces its valid certificate of registry to the proper officer.
41. Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to impose obligation for registration of every vessel. It provides that
every Indian vessel shall be registered under Part III at such port or place of registry as may be notified
by the Central Government. It further provides that the vessels registered under the Coasting vessels Act,
1838, which has been proposed for repeal by this Bill, shall be re-registered under the provisions of this
Bill within one year of coming into force of the Bill and the vessels registered under the existing Act shall
be deemed to be registered under this Bill. It also provides that all vessels belonging to the Government,
other than vessels of the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, Customs Authorities, Central Paramilitary
Forces, Coastal Police and other Police Agencies, shall be registered under this Bill.
42. Following are the crux of the various memoranda received by the Committee with respect to various
provisions of the Clause 14 and reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping to each point:
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping
Clause 14(2) — An Indian vessel, may be, subject
to such conditions as may be prescribed, registered
in a country other than India
This Clause enables the Government to prescribe
conditions under which an Indian vessel can be
registered outside the country.
Clause 14(2). Sec. 3(21) — Indian vessel means a
vessel, which is substantially owned by the person
referred in Sec. 14(3).
This Clause defines ownership requirement of an
Indian vessel.
Clause 14(3) — No vessel shall be an Indian vessel
or an Indian controlled tonnage vessel unless such
vessel is substantially owned by any of the following
persons, namely — A citizen of India, or (b) A
company or a body established by or under any
Central or State Act, which has its principal place of
business in India, or (c) A co-operative society
registered or deemed to be registered under the
cooperative Societies Act 1912 or any other law
relating to cooperative society for the time being in
force in any State. Explanation-Substantially owned
means having more than 50 % of the shares of the
ownership of the vessels. Purpose of introducing
the above provisions in the Bill is not Clear
This is an existing clause slightly modified to
allow minority share holding in a vessel by foreign
nationals/entities.
Clause 14 (3) a, b, c, are new sections, it is suggested
that words after "unless such vessels is registered in
Not accepted. Cl. 14 (3) (a), (b), (c) exists in
section 21 of the present Act (i.e. Merchant

27
India and is owned! may be added, to bring in clarity
and such vessels under the ambit of the provisions
of the Act.
Shipping Act, 1958). The only change is the new
concept of substantially owned vessel
incorporated in the Bill in place of wholly owned'.
In compliance with Clause 14(2), what shall be the
conditions for permitting an Indian vessel to be
registered outside India? Important conditions should
be incorporated in the Act while the remaining
conditions, if any, may be decided by the Central
Government after consulting Indian shipowners'
association, seafarers' unions and National Shipping
Board.
As above.
Clause 14 (4) appears to be out of place. It should
be separate clause after Clause 19 (1). (Basically,
only after a vessel is registered can the act state the
consequences of putting to sea without a valid
certificate of registry.
Not accepted. The sequence in the proposed Bill
is in order as obligation comes first than grant of
certificate.
Clause 14 (3) No vessel shall be Indian vessel or an
Indian controlled tonnage vessel unless Such vessel
is substantially owned by any of the following
persons namely;- (a) a citizen of India; or (b) a
company or a body established by or under any
central Act or State Act which has its principal place
of business in India; or (c) a co-operative society
registered or deemed to be registered under the Co-
operative Societies Act, 1912 or any other law relating
to co-operative society for the time being in force in
any State. Explanation - for the purposes of this
sub-section, —substantially owned means having
more than fifty percent of the shares of the
ownerships of the vessel INSA recommendation: The
Act should also permit a Limited Liability Partnership
(LLP) as a person who can own and operate a
shipping company. We recommend that we should
add the following should be permitted as 14(3) (d).
Clause 14(3) (d) a Limited Liability Partnership
incorporated under the provisions of Limited Liability
Partnerships Act 2008 or any amendments
thereto.Explanatory remarks: An LLP is currently being
Not accepted. Limited Liability Partnership firms
are not allowed to register a vessel as the liability
of the partners in case of loss will be limited. For
the same reason, it will not be advisable to include
LLP's to be eligible to register the vessels in its
name. Therefore, LLP was not included as a
matter of conscious policy decision.
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping

28
promoted by the GoI as a easy and convenient method
of a corporate business vehicle that provides the
benefits of the limited liability but allows its member
the flexibility of organizing their internal structure as
a partnerships based on a mutually arrived agreement.
It is a legal entity separate from its partners and has
perpetual succession. Alongwith a citizen and a body
corporate a coming together of citizens through an
LLP should be permitted. An LLP is similar to a
company and yet has ease in compliance (INSA note:
Please not that the requirement is now to —
Substantially! own this earlier it was wholly.)
43. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping may have a relook into the
amendments suggested by the stakeholders and make changes in the Bill wherever possible.
44. Clause 15
15. (1) At any port, the Principal Officer of the Mercantile Marine Department, shall be the Registrar
of Indian vessels at that port, and at any other place in India such authority as the Central
Government may, by notification, appoint, shall be the Registrar of Indian vessels at that place.
(2) Every Registrar shall keep a register book and entries in that book be made, and maintain the
records of vessels registered under the provisions of this Act, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
45. Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to appoint the Registrar of Indian vessels. It provides that at any port,
the Principal Officer of the Mercantile Marine Department, shall be the Registrar of Indian vessels at that
port, and at any other place in India such authority as the Central Government may, appoint, shall be
the Registrar of Indian vessels at that place. It further provides that every Registrar shall keep a register
book and shall make entries in that book be made, and maintain the records of vessels registered under
this Bill, in such manner as may be provided by rules.
46. Indian National Ship Owners Association in their written memorandum has suggested that one more
clause may be added to the Clause as 15(3) as given below:
(3) the entries in the register book shall be in accordance with the following provisions:-
(a) The property in a ship shall be divided into ten shares;
(b) subject to the provisions of this Act with respect to joint owners or owners by transmission,
not more than ten individuals shall be entitled to be registered at the same time as owners
of any one ship; but this rule shall come into affect the beneficial interest of any number
of persons represented by or claiming under or through any registered owner or joint
owner;
Views of the individual/organization Views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping

29
(c) A person shall not be entitled to be registered as owner of a factual part of a share in
a ship, but any number of persons not exceeding five may be registered as joint owners
of a ship or of any share or shares therein.
(e) A company, a co-operative society or a LLP may be registered as owner by its name.
47. The stakeholder has justified that these suggestions are in line with Clause 25 of Merchant Shipping
Act, 1958, duly amended vide MS (Amendment) Act 40 of 2007. There is need to have clarity on the
number of shares in ship. Reference to —share in the vessel is made in various clauses of the Act and
within this section itself. Not including the number of share into the legislation will leave it open for
change and interpretation and the number of shares is needed to be specified since this would also be
related to provisions regarding mortgage of the vessel and providing security to the lender. This is also
followed by various other legislation such as the United Kingdom and others.
48. The Ministry of Shipping in their reply to this suggestion, submitted to the Committee that the
suggestions are in the nature of procedure which will be incorporated in the secondary legislation in
consultation with the stakeholders.
49. T he Committee notes the views of the Ministry of Shipping and recommends that necessary
provisions may be incorporated while framing Rules/Regulations in order to address the concerns
raised by the stakeholder.
50. Clause 19
19. (1) On completion of the registry of an Indian vessel, the Registrar shall grant a certificate of
registry containing the particulars respecting her as entered in the register book.
(2) A tonnage certificate shall be issued to every vessel, the gross tonnage and net tonnage of
which have been determined in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(3) In the event of the certificate of registry of an Indian vessel being defaced or mutilated, the
Registrar of her port of registry may, on the delivery to him of that certificate or on submission
of a declaration by the owner to the effect that certificate has been lost or destroyed, grant
a new certificate in lieu of her original certificate.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "net tonnage" means the measure of the useful
capacity of a vessel determined in accordance with the rules made in this behalf.
51. Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to provide for grant of certificate of registry. It provides that on
completion of registry, the certificate of registry shall be granted to Indian vessel. It also provides for
issuance of tonnage certificate and granting of new certificate of registry in case it is defaced or
mutilated or lost or destroyed.
52. One of the stakeholders in the Shipping industry pointed out that there are vessels which may
continue on cross trades and may not come into India. It is important that the maritime administration
does not make it compulsory for a vessel top come to India in order to get a Permanent Registry and
hence the request that a Consular officer or any other person authorized by the Central Government

30
should be empowered to issue Permanent Certificate of Registry while the vessel is in a foreign country.
They have suggested that accordingly, the Clause 19 (1) to be amended as follows: (1) On completion
of the Register of an Indian vessel, (a) the Registrar or (b) Indian Consular Officer, or (c) a person
authorized by the Central Government shall grant a certificate of registry containing the particulars
respecting her as entered on in the register book.
53. However, the Ministry of Shipping did not accept this suggestion. They have specified that the
recommendation cannot be accepted as the permanent certificate of registry can only be issued by the
Registrar of vessels of the port where the vessel is to be registered.
54. With respect to clause 19 (2) it was pointed out that states under this clause a tonnage certificate
should be issued. This seems to be superfluous as Clause 112 states list of conventions a vessel needs
to comply with- which includes tonnage as well as others.
55. Ministry of Shipping clarified that issuance of tonnage figures is a prerequisite for registration of
vessel.
56. The Committee notes that the suggestions made by the stakeholders have certain merit.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Shipping may include provisions for
addressing the issues raised by the stakeholders regarding the vessels on cross trade.
57. Clause 20
20. (1) The certificate of registry shall be used only for the lawful navigation of the vessel, and shall
at all times remain in the custody of the person in charge of the vessel, and shall not be subject
to detention by reason of any title, lien, charge or interest whatever, had or claimed by any
owner, mortgagee or other person to, on or in the vessel.
(2) No person, whether interested in a vessel or not who has in his possession, or under his
control the certificate of registry of a vessel, shall refuse or omit without reasonable cause
to deliver such certificate on demand to the person entitled to the custody thereof for the
purposes of the lawful navigation of the vessel, or to any Registrar or other person entitled
by law to require such delivery.
(3) If the master or owner of an Indian vessel uses or attempts to use for her navigation a
certificate of registry not legally granted in respect of the vessel, he shall be guilty of an
offence under this sub-section and the vessel shall be liable to forfeiture.
58. Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to provide for custody and use of certificate. It provides that the
certificate of registry shall be used only for the lawful navigation of the vessel, and shall at all times
remain in the custody of the person in charge of the vessel; and shall not be subject to detention by
reason of any title, lien, charge or interest whatever had or claimed by any owner, mortgagee or other
person to, on or in the vessel and such certificate may be delivered to person entitile to demand the
certificate. It further provides the possession of illegal certificate of registry as an offence.
59. In one of the representation on this Clause, it was pointed out that how does the Master of the Ship
know that the certificate of registry is a genuine one and there should be provisions for Master to verify
it (e.g. Master Checker).

31
60. The Ministry of Shipping explained that clause 20 (3) provides that if the master or owner of an
Indian vessel, uses or attempts to use for her navigation a certificate of registry not legally granted in
respect of the vessel, he shall be guilty of an offence under this sub-section and the vessel shall be liable
to forfeiture. The master of a vessel has enough experience in the field of navigation and is expected
to verify with the concerned authorities or the maritime administrator on the genuineness of the registration
of the vessel. This provision already exists under section 35(4) of M.S Act, 1958.
61. The Committee is of the view that the point raised by the stakeholders needs to be considered
seriously and there should be some provisions/tools with the master of the Ship to verify the
authenticity of the certificate, as the technology has so advanced that people misuses it and
make documents which looks as perfect as the original ones.
62. Clause 30
30. (1) Where there is only one registered mortgagee of a vessel or share, he shall be entitled to
recover the amount due under the mortgage by selling the mortgaged vessel or share without
approaching the High Court: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall prevent
the mortgagee from recovering the amount so due in the High Court as provided in sub-section
(2).
(2) Where there are two or more registered mortgagees of a vessel or share they shall be entitled
to recover the amount due under the mortgage in the High Court.
(3) Every registered mortgagee of a vessel or share who intends to recover the amount due under
the mortgage by selling the mortgaged vessel or share under sub-section (1) shall give an
advance notice of fifteen days relating to such sale to the Registrar of the vessel's port of
registry.
(4) The notice under sub-section (3) shall be accompanied with the proof of payment of the
wages.
63. Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to provide the rights of mortgagee. It provides that where there is only
one registered mortgagee of a vessel or share, he shall be entitled to recover the amount due under the
mortgage by selling the mortgaged vessel or share without approaching the High Court. It further
provides that where there are two or more registered mortgagees of a vessel or share they shall be
entitled to recover the amount due under the mortgage in the High Court.
64. One of the stakeholder pointed out that clause 30 (4) is not clear as to whom should the wages
be paid when the notice of sale is issued by the mortgagee. Further, this clause need not be included
in the act, but should be included in the rules as to how a mortgagee should proceed with sale of vessel.
These rules currently exist.
65. The Ministry of Shipping did not accept the suggestion and stated that this is an existing provision.
The onus is cast on the mortgagee to ensure payment of wages to seafarers. This aspect requires to
be covered as a substantive provision in the Bill so that procedural aspects can be covered in the Rules.

32
66. The Committee recommends that necessary provisions may be given while framing Rules
so that there should not be any room for ambiguity as regards how a mortgagee should proceed
with sale of vessel.
67. Clause 34
34. Every Indian vessel shall be described by such name, call sign and official number in such manner
as may be prescribed.
68. Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Indian vessel shall be described by name, call sign
and an official number for the purpose of proper identification of the vessel.
69. One of the individual stakeholders suggested that IMO number required for Indian flagged vessels
to be stamped under this Clause.
70. The Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee that this is a procedural issue and will be suitably
incorporated in the secondary legislation.
71. The Committee recommends that necessary provisions regarding stamping of IMO number
should be incorporated in the Rules.
72. Clause 49
49. (1) The vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum -demise by an Indian charterer may be registered
under this Chapter.
(2) The procedure for registration of the vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cumdemise shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(3) The bareboat charter-cum-demise contract shall include the following provisions, namely:—
(a) the period for hiring the vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum-demise shall be for not
less than three years;
(b) the possession and control of the vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cumdemise, including
the right to appoint its master and other seafarers, shall vest with the Indian charterer;
and
(c) the ownership of the vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum-demise, after the charter
period shall stand transferred to the Indian charterer.
(4) The registration of a vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum-demise shall remain in force
till the end of the charter period:
Provided that if any provision of this Act is violated, the registration of such vessel may be
closed before the chartered period.
(5) The Registrar shall, after registration or closure of registration of a vessel chartered on
bareboat charter-cum-demise contract, send the information of such registration or closure,
as the case may be, to the authority of registration of the country where such vessel is
registered.

33
(6) The vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum -demise registered under this Chapter shall be
an Indian vessel entitled to fly the Indian flag.
(7) If the bareboat charter-cum-demise contract is terminated before the charter period due to
breach of the agreement or any other reason, the Indian charterer shall inform the Registrar
and, on receipt of such information, the Registrar shall close the registry and forward the
information to the authority of registration of the country where such vessel is registered.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions relating to the owner of an
Indian vessel under this Act shall, subject to such modification as the Central Government may
consider necessary, apply to the Indian charterer for the vessels registered under this Chapter.
73. Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to provide for registration of vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum-
demise contract and the procedure to be followed and the provisions of the validity of registration period,
its closure with power to hoist Indian flag, etc.
74. In a written memorandum received by the Committee, it was stated that the Bareboat Charter-Cum-
Demise by Indian Charterer under Clause 49, there is a potential mischief as the BBCD vessels are entitled
to fly as Indian vessels and will be allowed to participate in Coasting Trade of India. Considering the
BBCD vessels do not become Indian owned upon until the charter period is over and the right of
termination remains, it is a possibility that the parties may take the vessels on BBCD and terminate the
same stating breach of the intent of the policy makers for inserting BBCD vessels. It is suggested that
a specific lock in period is stated and any exigencies that arise to terminate should be clearly demonstrated
and subject to strict compliances.
75. The Ministry of Shipping however did not accept this suggestion and they have submitted to the
Committee that the charterer is, under clause 49 (7), mandated to inform the Registrar when BBCD
contract is terminated before the charter period. Default in compliance of this stipulation has been made
punishable under the Bill. The Ministry of Shipping further stated that the concerns raised by the
stakeholder will be addressed through secondary legislation to be made under Clause 50 (2) (a) of the
Bill wherein rules can be made regarding the conditions for registration of an Indian vessel, under sub-
section (2) of Section 14.
76. The Committee notes the concerns pointed out by the stakeholders regarding the BBCD vessels
getting permission for costing trade in India. The Committee, taking into account, the reply given by the
Ministry of Shipping, recommends that the concerns raised by the stakeholder should be addressed
through secondary legislation to be made under Clause 50 (2) (a) of the Bill.
77. Clause 50
50. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the conditions for registration of an Indian vessel, under sub-section (2) of section 14;

34
(b) the manner of keeping the register book and making entries therein and maintenance of
the records of vessels registered under this Act under sub-section (2) of section 15;
(c) the form and manner of making application for registry of an Indian vessel under section
16;
(d) the manner of marking, survey, measurement and ascertainment of tonnage of an Indian
vessel under sub-section (1) of section 17;
(e) the other particulars descriptive of the identity of vessel under sub-section (2) of section
17;
(f) the manner of making endorsement under section 21;
(g) the procedure for issuing a provisional certificate of registry under sub-section (1) of
section 23;
(h) the form of instrument for description of vessel under sub-section (5) of section 24;
(i) the form for making and signing a declaration under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 26;
(j) the form of mortgage under sub-section (1) of section 29;
(k) the form of instrument effecting the transfer under sub-section (1) of section 32;
(l) the manner of description of the name, call sign and official number of Indian vessel
under section 34;
(m) the manner of registration of vessel anew under section 37;
(n) the fee for inspection of register book and a certified copy of any entry of the register
book under sub -section (1) of section 45;
(o) the procedure for registration of vessel chartered on bareboat charter -cumdemise under
sub-section (2) of section 49;
(p) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.
78. Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes covered under Part III of the Bill.
79. One of the stakeholders specified that if the Central Government is allowed to prescribe the
conditions, then the power to do so should be incorporated in Sec. 50 - Power to make rules in respect
of matters of Part III.
80. The Ministry of Shipping clarified that the provision already exist in Clause 50(2)(a).
81. The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping over the issue raised by
the stakeholder.
82. Clause 52
52. (1) The Central Government shall, subject to the provisions of STCW Convention, grant a certificate
of competency or certificate of proficiency, as the case may be, for such different grades of
seafarers with such requirements and such procedures as may be prescribed.

35
(2) No certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency shall be granted, under sub-section
(1) unless the seafarer fulfils the requirements in respect of service, age limit, medical fitness,
training, qualifications and examination in accordance with the STCW Convention.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), the Central Government may
grant such other certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency with such requirements
and procedures as may be prescribed.
(4) A certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency, as the case may be, granted under
sub- sections (1), (2) and (3) shall be in such form and on payment of such fee and valid
for such period as may be prescribed, and record of such certificate shall be kept in such
manner as may be prescribed.
83. Clause 52 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to grant certificate of competency or
certificate of proficiency subject to fulfillment of requirements in respect of service, age limit, medical
fitness, training, qualifications and examination in accordance with the STCW Convention subject to
payment of such fee.
84. Stakeholders submitted to the Committee that the word "documentary evidence" for completion of
DG approved courses to be added after COC and COP and STCW 2010 has envisaged three types of
Certificates and not just COC and COP. These two are granted by Government, whereas DoC evidence
may be granted under a DGs approved process by MTI/RPS and on board vessels. For example
completion of a Preparatory course like 2nd Mates, or Sea time is documentary evidence.
85. The Ministry of Shipping replied to the above point and stated that provision for recruitment and
placement are adequately covered under Part V [Seafarer]. The procedural matters like documentary
evidence may not be appropriate to be mentioned in the Bill. These may be taken care of secondary or
tertiary legislations.
86. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping on the point raised
pertaining to the instant Clause and recommends that the procedural matters may be addressed
at the secondary or tertiary legislations.
87. Clause 53
53. (1) The Director-General shall administer, supervise and monitor all activities relating to training
and assessment for grant of certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency.
(2) The Director-General shall approve the training institute, training courses and method of
conduct of such training course for grant of certificate of competency or certificate of
proficiency under section 52:
Provided that no certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency shall be granted, unless
the training required for such certificate has been imparted in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(3) The Director-General may, for the purposes of this Part authorise any person to inspect any

36
maritime training institute and the person so authorised in this behalf shall submit the report
to the Director-General.
(4) The Director-General may, after receipt of the inspection report under sub-section (3), if he
is satisfied that the maritime training institute has contravened any provisions of this Part, after
giving an opportunity of being heard, suspend or withdraw the approval granted to such
maritime training institutes under sub-section (2).
88. Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to empower the Director-General to administer, supervise and monitor
all activities related to training and assessment for grant of certificate of competency or certificate of
proficiency and to approve training institute, courses and the method of conducting training for granting
such certificates and also with power to authorize any person to conduct inspection and submit report
to him.
89. Regarding the provisions of this Clause, one of the stakeholders in their written memorandum
submitted that the objective of the Bill is to empower the Central Government to discharge the functions
as agreed to by the Honorable Members of Parliament; however it is noted that in many sections the
authority has been vested on to Executives (DG Shipping) whereas at other sections it is vested to the
Central Government. There is lack of uniformity in delegation of power which needs be addressed. In
Clause 53 (1), the Director General shall administer, supervise and monitor all activities relating to training
and assessment for grant of certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency. Documentary Evidence
as defined by STCW 2010 amendments may be included.
90. Another stakeholder also commented on this provision that far sweeping powers have been vested
in the Director General to the extent that it could be construed as tail wagging the dog. Instead of DG ,
it should be Central Govt. (with powers vested under these rules) who should be administering, supervising
etc.
91. Ministry of Shipping replied to these points and submitted that Director General of Shipping is a
statutory authority under this Bill for the purpose of exercising or discharging the powers, authority or
duties conferred on or imposed under the Bill (Clause. 6). There is one statutory provision in the Bill
where the powers have been granted to Director-General directly i.e. Clause 53 which relates to
administering, supervising and monitoring of training and assessment for grant of certificate of competency
or certificate of proficiency. As these are purely operational and technical matters, it is felt Director-
General, the maritime administrator in India, will be the appropriate authority for the same.
92. The Committee recommends that the reasonable power should remain with the Government
of India.
93. Clause 57
57. (1) Every master of a foreign vessel shall, before proceeding to sea from any port or place in
India, ensure that the vessel has the requisite numbers of seafarer of appropriate grades as
specified in the Safety Convention and STCW Convention.
(2) A surveyor or any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government may, at any

37
reasonable time, go on board a vessel for the purpose of ensuring that the seafarers holding
certificates issued in accordance with the Safety Convention and STCW Convention are
actually appointed and are present, and satisfy himself about the adequacy of such seafarers
for the watch keeping duties in ports and at sea.
(3) If any report made under sub-section (2) by a surveyor or any person authorized in this behalf
by the Central Government, reveals any deficiency in a foreign vessel in relation to the
requirements of the Safety Convention and STCW Convention and the Central Government is
satisfied that it shall be unsafe for such vessel to proceed to sea, that vessel may be detained
by the proper officer till such requirements are fulfilled.
94. This Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to provide that foreign vessel shall not proceed to sea from any
port or place of India without the requisite number of seafarers of appropriate grades and empowers the
surveyor to board the vessel for the purpose of ensuring that the seafarers holding certificates are
actually appointed and are actually present and are adequate in number for the watch keeping duty in
ports and at sea. It also empowers the Central Government to detain a foreign vessel in case of
deficiency on the report of the surveyor.
95. One of the memoranda received by the Committee suggested that in Clause 57 (1) & 57 (3) it would
incorporate the word "Indian" before the word "foreign vessel" wherever it appears in this clause.
96. The Ministry of Shipping accepted the suggestion and informed the Committee that Clause 57 (1)
& 57(3) will be suitably modified to include Indian vessels also.
97. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Shipping and recommends that necessary
amendments may be carried out to Clause 57 (1) & 57(3) to include the Indian vessels.
98. Clause 61
61. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Maritime Labour Certificate" means a Certificate issued by the Central Government or any
officer, authority or organisation authorised by it in this behalf, in accordance with the
provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention;
(b) "recruitment and placement service" means any person, company, institution, agency or other
organisation, in public or private sector which is engaged in recruiting seafarers on behalf of
employers or placing seafarers with the employers.
99. Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to define certain expressions which are specified Part V .
100. Memorandum received by the Committee from the Seafarer unions suggested that under clause 61
(b) "recruitment and placement service" may be defined properly as the clause is incomplete and should
apply to —engaged in recruiting seafarers on behalf of employers or placing seafarers with
employers on board their ships. (Else it could be construed that any employment ashore is also covered
by this rule).

38
101. However, the Ministry of Shipping did not accept their suggestion and explained that Part V
[seafarers], under which clause 61 falls, deals with the seafarer to be placed onboard ships, hence there
appears to be no ambiguity.
102. The Committee recommends that "recruitment and placement service" may be clearly
mentioned while framing the Rules and any ambiguity as pointed out by the stakeholders may
be addressed properly.
103. The Committee further recommends that while framing the recruitment and placement
service rules (RPS Rules), abundant care should be taken to safeguard the welfare of the Indian
seafarers working in outside Indian waters and also those working for foreign ship owners. The
RPS rules should be in tune with the Maritime Labour Convention.
104. Clause 62
62. (1) The Central Government may make rules for the classification of seafarers into different
categories, the minimum manning scale of seafarers of such categories, and the different
scales for different classes of ships.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the provisions
of this Act shall apply to the seafarer employed or engaged as a member of the crew of a
ship.
105. Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for the classification
of seafarers into different categories, minimum scale and the different scale for different classes of ships
and application of the provisions to the seafarer employed or engaged as a member of the crew of a
ship.
106. The stakeholders have suggested that it should be ensured that as provided in international instruments
dealing with fixing minimum manning scale the most representative organization of ship-owners and
seafarers should be consulted.
107. However, the Ministry of Shipping not accepted this point and submitted to the Committee that it
is a matter of policy that any change in the Act/Rules/Regulations is carried out only after consulting all
the stakeholders as per the policy of compulsory pre-legislative consultation. Therefore, all Rules,
including under 62 (1) will be formulated only after pre-legislative consultation with all stakeholders
including ship-owners and seafarers.
108. The Committee agreed to the views expressed by Ministry of Shipping and recommends that
stakeholders may be consulted while framing the Rules under this clause.
109. Clause 63
63. (1) The provisions relating to maritime labour standards as contained in the Maritime Labour
Convention, shall apply to all seafarers and ships registered under this Act, but does not
include,—
(a) ships which navigate exclusively in inland waters or waters within, or closely adjacent
to, sheltered waters or areas where any law for the time being in force relating to ports
apply;

39
(b) ships engaged in fishing activities;
(c) traditionally built ships such as dhows and junks;
(d) ships of war or naval auxiliaries.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central Government may, on the recommendation
of the Director-General, by order, extend the provisions of the said sub-section to any category
of ship with such exceptions and modifications as it may consider necessary.
(3) Every Indian ship referred to in sub-section (1), wherever it is, and every ship other than an
Indian ship while within the jurisdiction of India shall, subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, be in possession of a certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of the
Maritime Labour Convention.
(4) No ship shall proceed to sea unless it is in possession of certificate issued under
Sub-Section (3).
110. Clause 63 of the Bill seeks to provide for application of maritime labour standards to seafarers and
ships registered under this Bill, except ships which navigate exclusively in inland waters or waters within,
or closely adjacent to, sheltered waters or areas where any law for the time being in force relating to
ports apply; ships engaged in fishing activities; traditionally built ships such as dhows and junks and ships
of war or naval auxiliaries. It further provides that the Central Government shall have power on
recommendation of the Director-General to extend the provision of this clause to any category of ships
and the ships to possess certificate in accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention
and also prohibits the ships to proceed to sea without possessing the certificate.
111. Stakeholders sought clarification regarding clauses 63(3) and 63(4) as regards which type of
vessels can call at Indian ports as per the above Clauses to which the Ministry of Shipping replied that
Vessels registered in a country not party to Maritime Labour Convention (MLC) can call on Indian ports
provided they meet the prescribed conditions and are also in possession of a certificate issued in
accordance with the provisions of Maritime Labour Convention.
112. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping.
113. Clause 64
64. It shall be the duty of shipping masters,—
(a) to monitor the engagement and discharge of seafarer in the manner provided under this Act;
(b) to issue such continuous discharge certificate and seafarer's identity document as may be
prescribed;
(c) to hear and decide disputes between a master, owner or agent of ship and any of the crew
of the ship including those under section 77;
(d) to transmit the complaint of any dispute of a foreign seafarer of a ship, registered in a country
other than India, in Indian territorial waters, with the master, owner or agent to the competent
authority of the country of registration and to forward a copy of such complaint to the
Director-General of International Labour Organisation;

40
(e) to perform such other duties relating to seafarers and merchant ships under this Act as the
Central Government may, by general or special order, specify.
114. Clause 64 of the Bill seeks to enumerate the duties of the shipping master.
115. Memorandum received from the Seafarer association in connection with this Clause pointed out an
incident that the duties of the Shipping Master is lacking teeth in as much as there are so many cases
of unpaid wages and Indian seafarers serving even on Indian flag ships are stranded. For example,
presently 9 ships of Gol Offshore are at anchorage points in Mumbai and there is absolutely no
movement forward as far recovering the wages of such seafarers are concerned in spite of repeated
complaints to the Shipping Master. The seafarers are left stranded without food or water and the
association supplied cooked food and water to around 100 seafarers on 9 ships. They have also supplied
provisions on their own accord and forced the company to supply fuel. The association on its own
volition is planning to have the ships arrested in Mumbai High Court for recovery of wages. Had there
been no such efforts, the recovery by such blatant defaulters will still continue.
116. They have also requested that the Shipping Master or the Maritime Administration should be given
the powers to do something practical, efficiently under the revised Merchant Shipping Act to give justice
to seafarers against the defaulters. The individual seafarers do not have financial status to incur heavy
legal expenses to take matters to the Courts.
117. Therefore, they suggested that Section 64 (a.) - Duties have been imposed -for monitoring but the
prescribed procedure is not mentioned, which will leave room for interpretation, therefore such delegation
of responsibility may be made with prescribed procedures of rules.
118. The Ministry of Shipping did not accept the suggestion above. The Ministry has furnished to the
Committee that the term ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act as defined in Cl.
3 (35) of the Bill. Duties of Shipping Master are clearly indicated under this clause which envisages that
due procedure will be followed by such officers. The Central Government may also by general or special
order under this clause assign/specify duties to him.
119. The Ministry of Shipping has further submitted that the Shipping Master under clause 64 and 77
has the power to decide on the dispute between the seafarer and the owner or agent. The earlier limit
of 5 lakhs for submission of dispute to the Shipping Master has been removed and seafarers may now
approach the Shipping Master for redressal of grievances related to wages for any amount.
120. Further, an award made under clause 77 may be enforced by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class
or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, in the same manner as an order of payment of wages
made by such Magistrate under the proposed Bill. It is also mentioned that the provision of Maritime
Labour Convention 2006 has been incorporated in the MS Bill. As per the said Convention, the ship
owners are required to place a proof of financial security on board to ensure repatriation of stranded
seafarers. The amount of such financial security should also cover four months of wages of the entire
contingent of the crew on board. The financial security can be en-cashable by the Maritime Administration.
This provision is expected to take care of such situations in the future.

41
121. The Committee observes the issues raised by the seafarer unions regarding the state of
seafarers in the stranded ships where the seafarers are ill treated by the ship owners and
masters. The Committee took a serious view of the matter. The Committee recommends that
Ministry of Shipping should have some mechanism to consider and handle such instances seriously
and the concerns as explained above may be rigorously addressed and necessary provisions may
be included in the Bill.
122. Clause 66
66. (1) The seafarer shall be engaged only by,—
(a) recruitment and placement service possessing the licence issued under the provisions of
section 65; or
(b) owners in the case of Indian vessel for the vessel owned by them.
(2) no person, other than an owner of Indian vessel in respect of the vessel owned by him, shall
carry on the business of recruitment and placement service unless he is in possession of a
valid licence issued under section 65.
(3) No person shall engage any seafarer under this Act in any ship, unless the seafarer is in
possession of a continuous discharge certificate and seafarer's identity documents issued
under sub-section (4) except as otherwise exempted.
(4) The continuous discharge certificate and seafarer's identity document referred to in sub-
section (3) shall be issued in such form and manner and on payment of such fees as may be
prescribed.
(5) No person under the age of sixteen years shall be engaged or carried to sea to work in any
capacity in any ship.
(6) The Central Government may, by order, direct that the seafarers generally or any category of
seafarers in particular shall not be engaged or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any
ship or in any class of ships so specified, unless each one of them possesses such qualifications
as may be prescribed.
(7) Except as otherwise provided under the rules made under sub-section (6), no person shall
engage or carry to sea any seafarer to work in any capacity in any ship or in any class of
ships specified in this behalf by the Central Government, unless the seafarer is in possession
of a certificate to the effect that he is medically fit to be employed in that capacity granted
in such form by such authority as may be prescribed.
(8) Any person who claims to represent the interests of seafarers shall not demand or receive,
either directly or indirectly, from any seafarer or person seeking employment as seafarer or
any person on his behalf, any remuneration or donation or fees or compulsory subscription
of any kind attributable from such seafarer or person's employment as seafarer, other than the
fees authorised by this Act.

42
(9) There shall be no discrimination between seafarers,—
(a) on the ground of their membership in any particular union claiming to represent the
interests of seafarers and membership in such union shall not be a pre-condition,
(b) on the basis of training institute from where they obtained training or place of issue of
their continuous discharge certificates, for their recruitment and engagement on board
any ship.
(10) The Central Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf, if satisfied that in the
national interest or in the interest of seafarer it is necessary so to do, may, by order in writing,
prohibit the master or owner or his agent of any ship other than an Indian ship specified in
the order from engaging any person to serve as a seafarer on such ship.
(11) The Central Government may, by notification, fix the fees which shall be payable upon all
engagements and discharges of the seafarer.
(12) The services of the seafarer engaged in contravention of sub-section (1) shall not be recognised
for the purposes of certification under Part IV.
123. Clause 66 of the Bill seeks to provide for the engagement of seafarer by licensed recruitment and
placement service and the owners of Indian vessels. It prohibits a person other than the owner of the
vessel to carry on the business of recruitment and placement of service without license; to engage the
seafarers without possession of continuous discharge certificate and identity documents; and the person
under sixteen years for engagement or carried to sea to work in any capacity without such qualifications
specified by the Central Government. It also prohibits the engagement of seafarer in a ship without
possessing a medical fitness certificate and any person who claims to represent the interests of seafarers
shall not demand or receive, either directly or indirectly, from any seafarer or person seeking employment
as seafarer or any person on his behalf, any remuneration or donation or fees or compulsory subscription
of any kind attributable from such seafarer or person's employment as seafarer, other than the fees
authorised by the provisions of this Bill.
124. Clause 66 also provides that the Central Government may, by notification, fix the fees which shall
be payable upon all engagements and discharges of the seafarer and the services of the seafarer engaged
in contravention thereof shall not be recognised for the purposes of certification under Part IV.
125. The Seafarers associations represented that Clause 66(8) says 'any person who claims to represent
the interests of seafarers'. This word 'any person' may mean only 'individual' or also includes 'company'
or 'organization'. Only a trade union claims to represent the interest of seafarers. The Trade Unions
suggested deletion of the words "who claims to represent the interests of seafarer", "donations", "fees"
and "compulsory subscription" from this clause. They further stated that every trade union has financial
expenses which are met by donations and membership subscription from its membership it represents.
It is a fundamental principle permissible under the Trade Union Act also under which the trade unions
are registered. This formulation of words is only in the Shipping sector and in no other sector. The Hon.
Supreme Court has also allowed Trade Unions to receive donations in Balmer Lawrie Workers' Union,...

43
vs Balmer Lawrie And Co. Ltd. And Ors on 21 December, 1984. They alleged that the intent is to stop
the exploitation of seafarers as due to shortage of jobs, lot of money changes hands. But in the bargain,
the legitimate finance of a registered trade union should not be scuttled under this section. This should
be safeguarded. They proposed the following wordings after deletions as follows: Clause 66(8) 'No
person shall demand or receive, either directly or indirectly, from any sea farer or person seeking
employment as seafarer or any person on his behalf, any of any kind attributable from such seafarer or
person's employment as seafarers, other than the fee authorized by this Act'.
126. The Ministry of Shipping partially accepted the suggestions given by the trade unions. The Ministry
further submitted that in the existing formulation the restriction is only on donation/subscription relating
to employment of seafarers. However, to clear any ambiguity or unintended restriction on Trade Unions
in collecting subscriptions this Clause will be suitably reformulated.
127. The Committee noted the apprehensions raised by the Trade Unions and replies furnished
by the Ministry of Shipping. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Shipping in consultation
with the trade unions of seafarers may reformulate Clause 66 so that the apprehensions raised
by the unions are suitably addressed.
128. The Committee takes a view that the role of the Trade Unions should be clearly recognized
in the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016 in the mutual interest of both seafarers and ship owners for
which express provisions may be made in the M.S.Act.
129. Clause 67
67. (1) The master of an Indian ship, or owner of every Indian ship or his agent shall enter into an
articles of agreement in such form and manner as may be prescribed with every seafarer
whom he engages and shall submit a copy thereof to the shipping master.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, the master of an Indian
ship registered at a port outside India, or owner of such ship or his agent who has an
agreement with the seafarer made in due form according to the law of that port or of the port
in which her seafarer were engaged, may engage in any port in India—
(a) a seafarer who is not a citizen of India and who holds a continuous discharge certificate
or any other similar document of identity issued by the competent authority of the
country in which the ship is registered or, as the case may be, of the country in which
the said agreement was made, or
(b) a seafarer who is a citizen of India and who holds a continuous discharge certificate
issued under this Act, and any seafarer so engaged under clause (a) or clause (b) may
sign the agreement aforesaid and it shall not be necessary for him to sign an agreement
under this Act.
(3) A seafarer's right,—
(a) to wages and provisions shall be taken to begin either at the time at which he commences
work or at the time specified in the agreement for his commencement of work or
presence on board whichever first happens;

44
(b) of wages shall not depend on the earning of the freight and seafarers are entitled to
demand and recover the same notwithstanding that freight has not been earned.
(4) A seafarer shall not by any agreement forfeit his lien on the ship or be deprived of any remedy
for the recovery of his wages to which, in the absence of the agreement, he shall be entitled,
and shall not by any agreement abandon his right to wages in case of the loss of the ship or
abandon any right that he may have or obtain in the nature of salvage, and every stipulation
in any agreement inconsistent with any provisions of this Act shall be void.
130. Clause 67 of the Bill seeks to provide that every master or owner or his agent shall for the purpose
of engagement of seafarer enter into an articles of agreement with the seafarer and submit a copy of
such agreement to the shipping master. It specifies certain provisions therein for engagement of a
seafarer who is not a citizen of India. It further specifies the time when the wages and provisions shall
be taken to begin, and provides that no agreement shall forfeit the lien on the ship or deprive of any
remedy for recovery of wages of the seafarer and every stipulation inconsistent with the provisions of
this Bill will be void.
131. The stakeholders submitted that Clause 67(a) leaves room for interpretation of employment of
foreigners on board Indian ships at the expense of Indian Seafarers. The ship owners may employ this
section for their gain and exploit cause unemployment of Indian seafarers, thus request deletion.
132. The Ministry of Shipping has replied that the apprehension of the seafarer Union that Indian vessel
may employ foreign seafarers has been taken care of under clause 51. Indian vessels will be manned
by Indian seafarers except as prescribed under the rules by Central Government.
133. The Committee notes that the apprehension raised by the Seafarer Union appears to be a
genuine one and the Committee recommends that this aspect may be considered seriously and
necessary safeguards may be provided to ensure maximum job opportunities to Indian seafarers.
134. Clause 69
69. (1) Where the service of any seafarer engaged under this Act terminates before the date specified
in the agreement by reason of the wreck, loss or abandonment of the ship or by reason of
his being left on shore at any place outside India under a certificate granted under this Act
of his unfitness or inability to proceed on the voyage, the seafarer shall be entitled to receive,—
(a) in the case of wreck, loss or abandonment of the ship,—
(i) wages at the rate to which he was entitled at the date of termination of his service
for the period from the date his service is so terminated until he is returned to and
arrives at a proper return port:
Provided that the period for which he shall be entitled to receive wages shall be not
less than one month, and
(ii) compensation for the loss of his effect,—
(A) in the case of a seafarer employed on a ship engaged for coasting trade, of
not more than one month's wages; and

45
(B) in the case of a seafarer employed on a foreign-going ship, of not more than
three month's wages;
(b) in the case of unfitness or inability to proceed on the voyage, wages for the
period from the date his service is terminated until he is returned to and arrives
at a proper return port.
(2) A seafarer shall not be entitled to receive wages under sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-
section (1) in respect of any period during which,—
(a) he was, or could have been, suitably employed; or
(b) through negligence he failed to apply to proper authority for relief as adistressed or
destitute seafarer.
(3) Any amount payable by way of compensation under sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-
section (1) shall be deposited with the shipping master at the port of engagement in India for
payment to the seafarer, or, in the case of deceased seafarer, to the person nominated by him
in this behalf under section 85 or if he has not made any such nomination or the nomination
made by him is or has become void, to his legal heirs.
(4) A seafarer shall be entitled to continue receiving the wages at the same rate till such time he
returns home, if such seafarer is held in the captivity including in case of piracy in the course
of his employment.
Explanation.—For the purposes of item (B) of sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of subsection (1)
of this section, "foreign-going ship" means a ship employed in trading between any port or
place in India and any other port or place outside India, or between ports and places outside
India.
135. Clause 69 of the Bill seeks to entitle the seafarer to receive wages or compensation for loss of
effects in case or wreck, loss or abandonment of the ship or by reason of his being left on shore at
any place outside India under a certificate granted under this Bill for his unfitness or inability to proceed
on the voyage however he shall not be entitled to receive wages if through negligence he failed to apply
to proper authority for relief as a distressed or destitute seafarer. It further provides the amount of
compensation shall be deposited with the shipping master at the port of engagement in India for payment
to a seafarer or in the case of a deceased seafarer with the person nominated by him or in case he has
not made any nomination or nomination has become void, to his legal heirs. The seafeaver is entitled to
receive wages during captivity including incidence of piracy in the course of his employment.
136. Under Clause 69. (4) the seafarer associations have suggested that a seafarer shall be entitled to
continue receiving the wages at the same rate till such time they return home, if such seafarers is held
in the captivity including in case of piracy in the course of his employment.
(i) Any dispute on an Indian seafarer, on a vessel registered in a country other than India, in
Indian territorial waters, with the master, owner of the ship or his agent may be submitted
to the shipping master.

46
(ii) The shipping master shall hear and decide the dispute submitted under Sub-section (1) and (2)
and make an award which shall be conclusive to the rights of parties and any document
relating to such dispute on award itself shall be prima facie evidence thereof.
137. The Ministry of Shipping has furnished their reply stating that the remarks at last of the observation
of CMMI, indicate that their views in the matter have not been firmed up by them. However, the
provision in Clause 69(4) has been incorporated after extensive consultations with the stakeholders to
protect the interest of Indian seafarers who become victim of piracy.
138. The Committee recommends that the amendments as suggested by the unions may be
suitably incorporated in the Bill.
139. The Committee also recommends that the DG Shipping should be given powers to penalize
the manning agents or the ship owners in case they fail to make due payment of wages to
seafarers. The Government should protect the seafarers from the exploitation by manning agents
and the ship owners. The Committee recommends that necessary provisions may be incorporated
in the Bill to safeguard the interests of the seafarers.
140. Clause 83
83. (1) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that any dispute between seafarer or any class
of seafarers or of any union of seafarers and the owners of ships in which such seafarers
are employed or are likely to be employed exists or is apprehended and such dispute relates
to any matter connected with or incidental to the employment of the seafarers, the Central
Government may, by notification, constitute a Tribunal consisting of one or more persons,
having knowledge of maritime matter, and refer the dispute for adjudication.
(2) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice.
(3) The Tribunal shall also not be bound by the rules of evidence contained in the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872.
(4) The Tribunal shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, have power
to regulate its own procedure and shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(b) compelling the production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;
(e) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(5) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.

47
(6) No party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner in any proceeding
before the Tribunal except with the consent of the other party or parties to the proceeding
and with the leave of the Tribunal.
(7) The Tribunal shall dispose of the reference within a period as may be specified in the
notification under sub-section (1) and submit its award to the Central Government.
(8) On receipt of the award, the Central Government shall cause it to be published and the award
shall become enforceable on the expiry of thirty days from the date of such publication:
Provided that where the Central Government is of the opinion that it shall be inexpedient on
public grounds to give effect to the award or any part of it, it may before the expiry of the
said period of thirty days by order in the Official Gazette either reject the award or modify
it, and where the Central Government does so, the award shall not become enforceable or shall
become enforceable subject to the modifications, as the case may be.
(9) An award which has become enforceable under this section shall be binding on—
(a) all parties to the dispute;
(b) where any party to the dispute is the owner of the ship, his heirs, successors, or assigns.
(10) Save as otherwise provided in the award, an award shall remain in operation for a period of
one year from the date on which it becomes enforceable and shall thereafter continue to
remain in operation until a period of two months has elapsed from the date on which notice
is given by any party bound by the award to the other party or parties intimating its intention
to terminate the award.
(11) Unless otherwise directed by the Central Government, the Tribunal shall cease to exist on the
expiry of a period of thirty days after publication of the award.
(12) Any money due to a seafarer from the owner of a ship under an award may be recovered
as wages.
(13) Nothing contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, shall apply to any dispute between
seafarers or any class of seafarers or any union of seafarers and the owners of ships in which
such seafarers are employed or are likely to be employed.
(14) During the pendency of proceedings under this section,—
(a) no seafarer or class of seafarers or union of seafarers shall go or remain on strike or
otherwise act in a manner prejudicial to the normal operation of the ships in which the
seafarer is employed or are likely to be employed; and
(b) no owner of a ship shall,-
(i) alter to the prejudice of the seafarer concerned in the dispute, the conditions of
service applicable to them immediately before the commencement of such proceedings;
or

48
(ii) discharge or punish any seafarer in respect of any matter connected with the
dispute.
141. Clause 83 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to refer the dispute between
seafarer and their employer to the Tribunal for adjudication.
142. The seafarer unions have pointed out that this Clause will create unnecessary hardship for seafarers
to represent his / her case and Clause 83 (8) and (10) are unconstitutional.
143. The Mini stry of Shipping replied that this provision already existed in section 150 the MS Act 1958.
The objective is to ensure that seafarers, class of seafarers, union of seafarers, and the owners of ships,
have an opportunity to alternate dispute redressal forum as against the lengthy process of the Civil Court.
How it is unconstitutional is not clear from the observations made by the seafarer union.
144. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping in this regard.
145. Clause 90
90. If a seafarer states to the master that he desires to make a complaint to a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, or other proper officer against the
master or any of the crew, the person authorised by the Central Government in this behalf shall,—
(a) if the ship is then at a place where there is a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a
Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, or other proper officer, as soon after such
statement as the service of the ship shall permit, and
(b) if the ship is not then at such place, as soon after her first arrival at such place as the service
of the ship shall permit, allow the complainant to go ashore or send him ashore under proper
protection so that he may be enabled to make the complaint.
146. Clause 90 of the Bill seeks to enable seafarer to make a complaint against the master or any member
of the crew if the ship is at a place where there is a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan
Magistrate or when the ship reaches a place where such Magistrate is available.
147. The individual stakeholder submitted that complaint procedure should perhaps include that D.G
Shipping will investigate the complaint subject to an appellate authority. Perhaps minimum wages for
seafarers on Indian flag vessels may be referred to, with an annual publication of revised minimum
wages.
148. The Ministry of Shipping has furnished a reply to this point which stated that in Clause 90, there
option is available to the seafarer to either go to the judicial magistrate or a proper officer appointed by
the Central Government. The existing minimum wages declared under labour laws will apply to seafarers
also and no separate minimum wages for seafarers are proposed in the Bill.
149. The Committee notes the point raised and the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
recommends that there should be proper forum and procedure available for the seafarers to
lodge their complaints and the provisions may be clearly mentioned in the Rules/Regulations.

49
150. Clause 125
125. (1) Every vessel, company or port facility, as the case may be, shall comply with such requirements
as may be prescribed for safety management and security management.
(2) The Central Government or a person authorised by it shall arrange for the audit of the vessel,
company or port facility for the purpose of sub-section (1).
(3) The Central Government or a person authorised by it, may set different levels of security and
provide such information thereof to all the port facilities, and all vessels entering into any port
facility.
151. Clause 125 of the Bill seeks to provide for implementation of safety and security management of
the vessels and the port facilities where the vessels have an interface. It further provides for maintaining
different levels of security by vessels and ports depending on the security situation in the country.
152. The seaf arer union has submitted that under Clause 125(1) — Before paying off or discharging a
seaman, master shall deliver a full account of the wages and of all deductions made there from on any
account may be included.
153. The Ministry of Shipping however, did not accept the suggestion. The Ministry has explained that
the omitted sections are related to MLC which shall be incorporated in the rules to be framed under
clause 68 of the Bill.
154. The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry and recommends that necessary provisions
as pointed out by the stakeholder may be considered at the time of framing of rules/Regulations.
155. Clause 129
129. Save as otherwise provided, this Part shall apply to,—
(a) every Indian vessel;
(b) every vessel other than an Indian vessel;
(c) vessel not entitled to fly the flag of India but which operate under the authority of India;
(d) any vessel that enters a port, shipyard, or offshore terminal or place in India or within the
territorial waters of India or any marine areas adjacent thereto over which India has, or may
hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in regard to control of pollution under the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or
any other law for the time being in force; and
(e) any incident of marine casualty or any act relating to such casualty occurring with grave and
imminent danger to Indian coast line or maritime zones of India or related interests from
pollution or threat of pollution in the sea or air either by deliberate, negligent or accidental
release of oil, ballast water, noxious liquid substance, garbage, sewage, waste, harmful anti-
fouling substances, harmful emissions or any other harmful substance including such incidents
occurring on the high seas;

50
(f) port shipyard or offshore terminal for the purpose of providing reception facilities.
156. Clause 129 of the Bill seeks to specify the application of Part VII. It applies, inter alia, to Indian
vessels, ports and foreign vessels on matters related to prevention of pollution.
157. The stakeholders have submitted the following suggestions:
(i) Clause 129(1) — The master, owner or agent shall pay to every seaman his wages within 4
days of his discharge and the seaman shall receive on account a sum of one-fourth of the
balance due to him at the time of discharge.
(ii) Clause 129(2) — If the master, owner or agent fails without reasonable cause to make
payment as stated above, he shall pay to the seaman not exceeding 2 days pay for each day
commencing from the day of discharge during which payment is delayed as decided by the
shipping master, maximum 10 days double pay. It would be appropriate to include the above
provisions in the Bill.
158. The Ministry of Shipping has stated that the omitted sections are related to MLC which shall be
incorporated in the rules to be framed under clause 68 of the Bill.
159. The Committee notes the points raised and the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
recommends that necessary provisions may be incorporated in the Rules/Regulations.
160. Clause 136
136. (1) When an incident in which the cargo or harmful substances, as covered under this Part or
the Pollution prevention convention is escaping or likely to escape from a vessel and may
cause or threaten to cause pollution of air, any part of coasts or coastal waters of India, the
master of every vessel shall report the particulars of such incident to such authority in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The vessel referred to in sub-section (1) being abandoned, or a report from such vessel being
incomplete, the Central Government shall fix the responsibility on the master of that vessel.
(3) Where the Central Government is satisfied that the cargo or harmful substances as covered
under this Part or the Pollution prevention convention is escaping or likely to escape and may
cause or threaten to cause pollution of air, any part of coasts or coastal waters of India, it
may direct the owner, agent, master, charterer, operator, lessee or licensee of the vessel by
notice served on him, to take following action, namely:-
(a) to prevent the escape of harmful substances from the vessel, as may be specified in such
notice;
(b) to remove the cargo or oil or noxious liquid substance or harmful substance from the
vessel, in such manner and to such place, if any, as may be specified in the notice;
(c) to remove the vessel to a place, if any, as may be specified in the notice;

51
(d) to remove the cargo or oil or noxious liquid substance or harmful substance slicks on
the surface of the sea in such manner, if any, as may be specified in the notice; and
(e) to prohibit the removal of the vessel including any cargo or stores therein, from a place
specified in the notice.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the Central Government may, if it is
of the opinion that the pollution caused or likely to be caused by release of harmful substances
has or may present a grave and imminent danger to the coastline or related interest from
pollution or threat of pollution, proceed to take such measures as may be deemed necessary
to prevent, mitigate or eliminate such threat or danger and any measures so taken shall be
deemed to have been taken under this section.
(5) Where any person fails to comply, or fails to comply in part, with any notice served on him
under sub-section (3), the Central Government may, whether or not such person is convicted
of an offence under this Part by reason of his having so failed to comply, cause such action
to be taken as it may deem necessary for,—
(a) carrying out the directives given in the notice issued under sub-section (1); and
(b) containing the pollution already caused or preventing the pollution threatened to be caused,
of any part of the coast of India by any harmful substance escaped or threatening to
escape from the vessel.
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Part any expenditure or liability incurred by the Central
Government in, or by reason of, the exercise of powers under sub-section (4) in relation to
any vessel in respect of which a notice had been issued under sub-section (3), shall be a debt
due to the Central Government by the person or persons on whom the notice was served and
may be recovered from that person, or as the case may be, from all or any of those persons
and shall be a charge upon all or any vessel owned by that person or persons which may be
detained by the Central Government until the amount is paid.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3) to (6), to prevent, mitigate or eliminate
grave and imminent danger to the coastline or related interests from pollution or threat of
pollution following upon a maritime casualty or acts relating to such casualty on the high seas
which may reasonably be expected to result in major harmful consequences to the Indian
coastal water, the Central Government shall take such measures as may be necessary.
(8) The Central Government may make national or regional arrangement system for responding
promptly and effectively to pollution incidents occurring within the zones under the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or
any other law for the time being in force.
161. Clause 136 of the Bill seeks to obligate the master of a vessel to make a report to the authority
designated by the Central Government, whenever an incident in which the cargo or harmful substances
as covered under Part VII or the pollution prevention convention is escaping or likely to escape and may

52
cause or threaten to cause pollution of air, any part of coasts or coastal waters of India and the
responsibility of the master for failure in making such reports. It empowers the Central Government to
direct the owner, agent, master, charterer, operator, lessee or licensee of the vessel through a notice, to
take immediate necessary action to prevent or control pollution, in case an incident of pollution occurs
or likely to occur and also empowers the Central Government to take any suitable and appropriate
measures, as deemed necessary, to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the threat or danger from pollution,
whenever a pollution is caused or likely to be caused by release of harmful substances, or whenever a
grave and imminent danger to the coastline or related interest is likely from an incident of pollution or
threat of pollution.
162. As regards Prevention, Containment Pollution From vessel and response Clause the stakeholders
submitted that Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act which apply to vessels
other than those referred to in sub-section (1) shall so apply only while any such vessel is within India
or in waters within the jurisdiction of India. We believe the applicability of the Act of different zones
under the Territorial Waters Act is possible only with suitable notification issued under clause 7 of the
Territorial Water, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zones and other Maritime Zones of India Act,
1976, and it cannot be in extended in any other manner.
163. The Ministry of Shipping did not accept the suggestion and submitted that the geographical limit
of application of a legislation is to be mentioned in that legislation itself. The Merchant Shipping Act 1958
also had similar provisions e.g., coastal waters has been defined to include Exclusive Economic Zone
(EEZ) under section 356B(d).
164. The Maritime Zones of India Act declares the limits of all zones and section 7 of that Act enables
alteration of that limit by notification. Section 7 of Maritime Zones Act also provides for extending any
enactment i.e. an Act already in force. In this case the Bill itself provides for application upto the limits
mentioned in Cl. 136 (8).
165. Clause 140
140. Every vessel, company, port facility, shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities
or terminal shall, unless exempted, be in possession of such certificates as may be prescribed.
166. Clause 140 of the Bill seeks to provide that every vessel shall possess the prescribed certificates,
as may be specified under the rules.
167. The stakeholders suggested that under Clause 140- certificates the Committee should consider
adding a clause regarding electronic certification system for development and implementation. It is time
we develop & move to electronic format system of ships certifications, as well that of seafarers. Since
24 June 2016, Denmark has been issuing electronic ship certificates to ships flying the Danish flag. In
order to verify the validity and authenticity of electronic ship certificates, one can enter the Tracking ID
No. of the relevant certificate together with either the ship's IMO number or the certificates date of issue.
Enabling every vessel, company, port facility, ship yard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore
facilities or terminal shall, unless exempted, be in possession of such certificates as may be prescribed.
As such, the central Government may prescribe, acceptability of such certificates, documents in electronic

53
formats, available on board the unit. These certificates shall be digitally signed by the issuing authority
and can be verified through a verification system.
168. The Ministry of Shipping has in their reply submitted that format and registration procedures of ship
certificates will be specified in detail in the secondary legislation i.e. M.S Rules. Electronic means of
facilitation need not be provided as a statutory provision in the Bill as this is a policy measure. The
Government has already taken this initiative to provide services to stakeholders through e-governance.
169. The Committee notes the reply and recommends that necessary provisions may be provided
under the rules to accommodate the suggestion on ship certificates under this clause.
170. Clause 150
150. In every case of collision between two vessels it shall be the duty of the master or person in-charge
of each vessel, in and so far as he can do so without danger to his own vessel, crew and
passengers, if any,-
(a) to render to the other vessel, her master, crew and passengers, if any, such assistance as may
be practicable and may be necessary to save them from any danger caused by the collision
and to stay by the other vessel until he has ascertained that she has no need of further
assistance; and
(b) to give to the masters or persons in-charge of the other vessels the name of his own vessel
and of the port to which she belongs and also the names of the ports from which she comes
and to which she is bound.
171. Clause 150 of the Bill seeks to impose a duty on the master of a vessel to assist the other vessel
in case of collision between two vessels without endangering his vessel, crew and passengers. It requires
the master to save the other vessel from any danger caused by the collision and to standby near the other
vessel until the other vessel needs no further assistance and also requires the master to exchange
information such as name of its ship, port of registry, last port and next port of call.
172. It was submitted to the Committee that in every case of collision between two vessels it shall be
the duty of the master or person in-charge of each vessel, in and so far as he can do so without danger
to his own vessel, crew and passengers, if any, —
(a) to render to the other vessel, her master, crew and passengers, if any, such assistance as may
be practicable and may be necessary to save them from any danger caused by the collision
and to stay by the other vessel until he has ascertained that she has no need of further
assistance; and
(b) to give to the masters or persons in-charge of the other vessels the name of his own vessel
and of the port to which she belongs and also the names of the ports from which she comes
and to which she is bound.
173. No specific penalty has been prescribed in the table under Sec. 256(2) for not complying with the
above section.

54
174. The Ministry of Shipping has replied to this point that Clause 209 empowers the Central Government
to cancel or suspend any certificate granted to seafarers for violation of the provision under Clause150.
Hence separate penalty for this purpose is not required. Any willful act of collision will attract the
provision of Indian Penal Code, 1860.
175. The Committee notes that there were instances of killing of fishermen of small fishing
boats or collision of small boats along the Indian shores. The issues are serious and need to be
addressed effectively. The Committee recommends that the Government should come out with
proper policy in this regard and appropriate punishments provisions should be made in the Bill.
176. Clause 169
169. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-sections (2) and (3) of this section, the owner of a ship
at the time of an incident or where the incident consists of a series of occurrences, at the
time of first of such occurrence, shall be liable for any pollution damage caused by the ship
as a result of the incident.
(2) No liability for pollution damage shall attach to the owner, if he proves that the pollution
damage,—
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a natural phenomenon
of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or
(b) was wholly caused by an act or omission done with intent to cause damage by a third
party.
(3) Where the owner proves that the pollution damage resulted wholly or partially either from an
act or omission done with intent to cause damage by the person who suffered the damage
or from the negligence of that person, the owner may be exonerated wholly or partially from
his liability to such person.
(4) No claim for compensation for pollution damage may be made against the owner otherwise
than in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(5) Subject to sub-section (6), no claim for compensation for pollution damage under this Chapter
or otherwise may be made against,—
(a) the servants or agents of the owner or the members of the crew;
(b) the pilot or any other person who, without being a member of the crew, performs
services for the ship;
(c) any charterer (by whatever name called including a bareboat charterer), manager or
operator of the ship;
(d) any person performing salvage operations with the consent of the owner or on the
instructions of a competent public authority;
(e) any person taking preventive measures;

55
(f) all servants or agents of persons mentioned in clauses (c), (d) and (e), unless the damage
resulted from their personal act or omission, committed with the intent to cause such
damage, or recklessly and with knowledge that such damage may probably result.
(6) Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any right of recourse of the owner against third parties.
177. Clause 169 of the Bill seeks to provide for the liability of owner for any pollution damage caused
by the ship. It further provides for exemption of the owner from liability if he proves that the pollution
damage is the result of an act of war, hostility, civil war, etc., and was wholly caused by an act or
omission done with intent to cause damage by a third party and also the damage caused intentionally by
a person who suffered the damage or from negligence of that person and specifies the persons against
whom the claim for compensation for pollution damage under this Chapter or otherwise cannot be made.
178. The stakeholders have pointed out that under this clause, the Ship owner is not liable for pollution
damage as stated in the following section of the Bill - Sec. 169(2) — No liability for pollution damage
shall attach to the owner, if he proves that the pollution damage–
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a natural phenomenon of an
exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or
(b) was wholly caused by an act or omission done with intent to cause damage by a third party.
However the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage states one more
exception under which the ship owner shall not be liable, as follows —Article III Para. 2(c) — No
liability for pollution damage shall attach to the owner if he proves that the damage was wholly
caused by the negligence or other wrongful act of any Government or other authority responsible
for the maintenance of lights or other navigational aids in the exercise of that function.
Considering that India has ratified the above CLC Convention it is imperative that the said Para, of
the convention is incorporated in Sec. 169 (2) of the Bill.
179. The Ministry of Shipping accepted the point and submitted that provisions of the international
convention will be incorporated.
180. The Committee recommends that provisions for international conventions may be incorporated
in Clause 169.
181. Clause 179
179. (1) Rights of compensation under this Chapter shall be extinguished unless an action is brought
within a period of three years from the date when the damage occurred:
Provided that, no action shall be made for compensation after six years from the date of the
incident which caused the damage.
(2) If incident consists of a series of occurrences, the period of six years shall start from the date
of the first occurrence.

56
182. Clause 179 of the Bill seeks to provide for the limitation period of three years for claiming
compensation from the date of oil pollution damage or six years, if the incident consists of a series of
occurrences.
183. The stakeholders have in their written memoranda to the Committee requested that under Clause
179. (1) Right of compensation under this Chapter shall be extinguished unless an action is brought
within a period of three years from the date when the damage occurred, Provided that no action shall
be made for compensation after six years from the date the incident which caused the damage
(2) If incident consists of a series of occurrences, the period of six years shall start from the date
of the first occurrence.
184. The Ministry of Shipping did not accept this suggestion and stated that the period in which the right
of compensation gets extinguished is clearly mentioned in Clause 179(1). These dates are part of CLC
Convention. Therefore, the suggestion may not be accepted.
185. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping.
186. Clause 185
185. (1) No liability for pollution damage shall be incurred by the ship owner under this Chapter, if he
proves that such damage,—
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a natural phenomenon
of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or
(b) was wholly caused by any act or omission done with an intent to cause such damage
by any person other than an employee or agent of the owner.
(2) If the shipowner proves that the pollution damage resulted wholly or partially either from an
act or omission done with intent to cause damage by the person who suffered the damage
or from the negligence of that person, then, he shall be wholly or partially exonerated from
his liability to such person.
187. Clause 185 of the Bill seeks to exempt from liability for the ship owner, in certain situations such
as, if the pollution damage is caused due to act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a natural
phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or was wholly caused by any act or
omission done with an intent to cause such damage by any person other than an employee or agent of
the owner. It further provides to exonerate the liability of the ship owner when it is proved that the
person suffered the damage has intentionally done the damage or due to negligence an oil pollution
damage was caused.
188. The stakeholders in their written memorandum to the Committee has stated that Liability of ship
owner for bunker oil pollution damage Ship owner is not liable for pollution damage as stated in the
following section of the Bill under Clause 185(1) if he proves that such damage —
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a natural phenomenon of an
exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or

57
(b) was wholly caused by an act or omission done with an intent to cause such damage by any
person other than an employee or agent of the owner.
However the International Convention on Civil Liability for Bunker Oil Pollution Damage states
one more exception under which the ship owner shall not be liable, as follows:
Article 3 Para. 3(c) — No liability for pollution damage shall attach to the ship-owner if he
proves that the damage was wholly caused by the negligence or other wrongful act of any
Government or other authority responsible for the maintenance of lights or other navigation
aids in the exercise of that function. Considering that India has ratified the above Bunker
Convention it is imperative that the said Para, of the convention is incorporated in Sec. 185(1)
of the Bill.
189. The Ministry of Shipping accepted this matter and agreed to include provisions of the international
convention.
190. The Committee notes that due diligence and care was not taken while drafting the Bill. The
mistake has been realized by the Ministry only when the stakeholders have pointed it out. The
Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry and recommends that the provisions as
mentioned by the stakeholders may be incorporated in the Bill under Clause 185.
191. Clause 189
189. (1) The right to claim compensation under this Chapter shall be extinguished if such claim is not
made within a period of three years from the date of occurrence of damage: Provided that
in no case, such claim may be made after six years from the date of incident which caused
such damage.
(2) Where the incident consists of a series of occurrences, the period of six years shall run from
the date of the first of such occurrence.
192. Clause 189 of the Bill seeks to stipulate the limitation period of three years for claiming compensation
from the date of bunker oil pollution damage or six years if the incident consists of a series of
occurrences.
193. The Memorandum received by the Committee stated that under Clause 189.
(1) the right to claim compensation under this Chapter shall be extinguished if such claim is not
made within a period of three years from the date of occurrence of damage;
Provided that in no case, such claim may be made after six years from the date of incident which
caused such damage
(2) Where the incident consists of a series of occurrences, the period of six years shall run from
the date of the first of such occurrence.
194. The Ministry of Shipping furnished the reply to this issue and submitted that the period in which
the right of compensation gets extinguished is clearly mentioned in Clause 189(1). These dates are part
of Bunker Convention. The suggestion may not be accepted.

58
195. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping, in this regard.
196. Clause 207
207. (1) For the purposes of investigations and inquiries under this Part, a marine casualty shall be
deemed to be an event, or sequences of events that has resulted in any of the following and
has occurred directly by, or in connection with the operations of Indian vessels and vessels
other than Indian vessels, when,—
(a) on or near the coast of India, any vessel is lost, abandoned, stranded or materially
damaged;
(b) on or near the coast of India, any vessel causes loss or material damage to any other
vessel;
(c) any loss of life or presumed loss of life, ensues by reason of any casualty happening,
or otherwise, to or on board any vessel, on or near the coast of India;
(d) any loss of life or presumed loss of life, ensues by reason of any casualty happening,
or otherwise, to an Indian national on board any vessel, anywhere in the world;
(e) in any place, any such loss, abandonment, stranding, material damage or casualty as
mentioned above occurs to or on board any Indian vessel, and any competent witness
thereof is found in India;
(f) any Indian vessel is lost or is supposed to have been lost, and any evidence is obtainable
in India as to the circumstances under which she proceeded to sea or was last heard of;
(g) in any place within the zones under the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive
Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, pollution, or the potential threat of
such pollution to the environment, or severe damage to the environment, or the potential
to severe damage to the environment is caused of a vessel;
(h) a fire or explosion takes place on any Indian vessel anywhere in the world, or a fire or
explosion takes place on a vessel other than an Indian vessel, while such vessel is on,
or near, the coast of India.
(2) In the cases mentioned in sub-section (1), the owner, manager, operator, company, pilot,
harbour-master, master, or other person in charge of the vessel, or, where two vessels are
concerned, in charge of each vessel at the time of the marine casualty, as the case may be,
shall, within twenty-four hours of the occurrence, give notice of the marine casualty to the
officer appointed in this behalf by the Central Government.
(3) Wherever any such officer receives the notice of the marine casualty under sub-section (2),
he shall forthwith report in writing the information to the Central Government and may
proceed to make preliminary inquiry into the marine causalty and shall furnish the report on
completion of independent inquiry into the incident.

59
(4) The Central Government may, for the purposes of the investigation, appoint a body to conduct
a marine safety investigation in accordance with the Safety Convention.
(5) The body appointed under sub-section (4) shall, make preliminary assessment of the marine
casualty and conduct a marine safety investigation for ascertaining its causes and circumstances
and submit its report to the Central Government.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Part, the word ''company'' has the same meaning as
assigned to it in clause (a) of section 111.
197. Clause 207 of the Bill seeks to define the marine casualty and mandate on the owner, manager,
operator, company, pilot, harbour-master, master, or other person in charge of the vessel, to give notice
of the occurrence of casualty within twenty-four hours of such occurrence to the office appointed by
the Central Government for the purpose and such officer shall forthwith report in writing the information
to the Central Government and may proceed to make preliminary inquiry into the marine casualty and
shall furnish the report on completion of independent inquiry into the incident. It further empowers the
Central Government to appoint a body to make preliminary assessment of the marine casualty and
conduct a marine safety investigation for ascertaining its causes and circumstances and submit its report
to the Central Government.
198. The pres ent Bill does not incorporate the innovative, constructive steps adapted by other countries
such as United Kingdom (SOSREP), Stake holders participation in the board which governs maritime
administration, the Concept of Merchant Navy Training Board (MNTB), Merchant Ship Accident and
Investigation Board (MAIB) of UK, etc.
199. The Ministry of Shipping has submitted that it is not desirable to have a permanent body for
accident matters as it may involve financial and administrative burden. For investigation of accidents, as
proposed in Clause 207 (4) of the Bill, a body can be constituted as and when required. The Bill already
envisages two types of the Boards as below; National Shipping Board, to advise the Government on
matters relating to Indian shipping and Seafarer Welfare Board for advising the Central Government on
measures to be taken for promoting the welfare of seafarers, in which ship-owners, seafarers and other
stakeholders are represented.
200. The Committee agreed to the points as explained by the Ministry of Shipping in this
direction.
201. Clause 209
209. The Central Government may, by order, cancel or suspend any certificate granted under this Act
to any seafarer for any specified period,—
(a) if the inquiry report or investigation report reveals that the seafarer is incompetent or has been
guilty of misconduct;
(b) in a case of collision, the seafarer has failed to render assistance;
(c) if the seafarer has been convicted of any offence under this Act or any nonbailable offence
committed under any other law for the time being in force in India or outside India;

60
(d) the casualty, if any, has been caused by wrongful act or default of the seafarer; or
(e) if the seafarer to whom the certificate has been granted contravenes any provisions of this
Act:
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed unless the person concerned has been
given an opportunity of making a representation against such order.
202. Clause 209 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to cancel or suspend any
certificate granted under this Bill to any seafarer for any specified period, by way of an order, based
on inquiry report or for any other default of seafarer listed under that clause.
203. The stakeholders submitted that he present format of this Clause 209
(c) if the seafarer has been convicted of any offence under this Act or any non-bailable offence
committed under any other law for the time being in force in India or outside India. The stakeholders
commented that Power to cancel certificate etc. is draconian in nature.
204. The Ministry of Shipping replied that Clause 209 empowers the Central Government to cancel or
suspend the certificate of a seafarer for a specified period only in certain circumstances listed in this
clause such as incompetency or misconduct revealed in report after inquiry/investigation; fail to render
assistance in case of a collision; convicted of any offence under this Act or any non-bailable offence
committed under any other law; causing casualty by wrongful act or default of the seafarer; and for
contravening the provisions of this Bill. It is also provided that no order shall be passed unless the person
concerned has been given an opportunity of making a representation against such order.
205. The Committee notes the assurance of the Ministry of Shipping that no order under this
clause shall be passed unless the person concerned has been given an opportunity of making a
representation against such order. The Committee recommends that the person affected should
be given every opportunity to ensure that due process of law is followed in letter and spirit.
206. Clause 224
224. (1) The owner of any wreck in the possession of the receiver upon establishing his claim to the
same to the satisfaction of the receiver within one year from the time at which the wreck
came into the possession of the receiver shall, upon paying the salvage and other charges, be
entitled to have the wreck or the proceeds thereof delivered to him.
(2) Where any articles belonging to or forming part of a vessel other than an Indian vessel which
has been wrecked or belonging to and forming part of the cargo of such vessel, are found
in any area to which this Chapter applies or are brought into any port in India, the consular
officer of the country in which the vessel is registered or, in the case of cargo, the country
to which the owners of the cargo may have belonged shall, in the absence of the owner and
of the master or other agent of the owner, be deemed to be the agent of the owner, with
respect to the custody and disposal of the articles.
(3) Where the owner of the wreck does not appear and claim the balance of the proceeds of sale

61
within one year from the date of sale, the said balance shall become the property of the Central
Government.
207. Clause 224 of the Bill seeks to specify the claims of the owner to wreck and time limit of his
entitlement to possess wreck back which is in possession of receiver of wreck and empowers the
consular officer to act as agent of owner for custody and disposal of the articles from wreck vessel
on behalf of the country where the vessel is registered or, cargo owners belongs to that country within
a period of one year for said claim.
208. As regards Pt XII, Clause 224 on control of ships on the coast the stakeholders suggested that this
Clause should be removed or revised in the light of ICT, BBCD and policy of relaxed cabotage. This part
from the erstwhile MS Act 1958 has not helped in growth of Indian domestic logistics industry.
209. The Ministry of Shipping not accepted this and stated that Clause 224 relates to claims of owners
to wreck and not cabotage.
210. The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping in this regard.
211. The Committee observes that there are lots of probabilities of a grievance that can arise
at any stage of the salvage operation, wreck removal etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that necessary provisions for redressal of grievances should be incorporated suitably in the Bill.
212. Clause 237
237. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect,—
(a) any treaty or arrangement with any foreign country to which India is a party with reference
to the disposal of the proceeds of wrecks on their respective coasts; or
(b) the provisions of section 29 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908, or any person to salvage in respect
of any property recovered by creeping or sweeping in contravention of that section.
213. Clause 237 of the Bill seeks to provide that nothing in Chapter II of Part XI shall affect any treaty
or arrangement with any foreign country to which Indian is a party with reference to the disposal of
wrecks on their respective coasts or the provisions of section 29 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 or any
person to salvage in respect of any property recovered by creeping or sweeping in contravention of that
section.
214. It was submitted by the stakeholders that under Clause 237 (after wordings —the provisions of
section 29 of the Indian Ports Act 1908 the words —as may be amended thereafter. It is required as
this will ensure that exemptions may be given to certain ships or class of ships or kind of cargo carried
or type of passenger vessels. This will also ensure continuity with the current mechanism which is
effective and expeditious.
215. The Ministry of Shipping replied that the suggestion may not be accepted as incorporation of the
words —as may be amended thereafter is redundant as the amendments once done to a convention
become part of the convention itself.

62
216. The Committee notes the comments of the Ministry of Shipping in this regard.
217. Clause 240
240. (1) No vessel, other than a vessel registered under this Act shall engage in the coasting trade of
India or exploration, exploitation or research in the coastal waters of India except under a
licence granted by the Director-General under sub-section (4).
(2) No other vessel chartered by a citizen of India or a company or a co-operative society other
than vessel registered under this Act shall be taken to sea from a port or place within or outside
India except under a licence granted by the Director-General under this section.
(3) An Indian controlled tonnage vessel may be granted a licence under this section subject to
such conditions as may be specified by the Director-General.
(4) A licence granted under this section may be—
(a) a general licence;
(b) a licence for the whole or any part of the coasting trade of India; or
(c) a licence for a specified period or voyage.
(5) A licence granted under sub-section (4), shall be in such form and shall be valid for such
period as may be prescribed, and shall be subject to such conditions as may be specified by
the Director-General:
Provided that the Central Government, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient
in the public interest so to do, it may, by a general or special order, exempt any class of vessels
from the provisions of this section.
218. Clause 240 of the Bill seeks to direct that any vessel engaged in coastal trade or exploration or
exploitation or research in coastal waters of India shall require a licence and stipulates that no vessel
chartered by an Indian citizen, company or cooperative society to be taken to a port or place within India
or outside India without licence granted by the Director-General and the Indian controlled tonnage may
also be granted licence subject to certain conditions. It further provides that the Central Government shall
have the power to exempt any class of vessel by general or special order from the provision of this
clause.
219. Under Clause 240 (5) It is suggested that after the proviso of Sub- section 5 of section 240 that
the original section of section 407 (3) of the existing Merchant Shipping Act be maintained. The wordings
that may be inserted after proviso may be read as —Further the Central Government may, by general
or special order, direct that the provisions of this section shall not apply in respect of any part of the
coasting trade of India or shall apply subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified in
the order.
220. The Ministry of Shipping accepted the suggestions and stated that the proposed proviso after sub
section (5) will be modified to include the suggestion suitably.

63
221. The Committee recommends that the modifications to the Clause 240(5) may be made in
the Bill as per the suggestion given by the stakeholder.
222. Clause 243
243. (1) The Director-General may, if he is satisfied that in the public interest or in the interests of
Indian shipping it is necessary so to do, give, by order in writing, such directions as he thinks
fit,—
(a) in the case of a vessel which has been granted a licence under section 240, with respect
to all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(i) the ports or places, whether in or outside India, to which, and the routes by which,
the vessel shall proceed for any particular purpose;
(ii) the diversion of any vessel from one route to another for any particular purpose;
(iii) the classes of passengers or cargo which may be carried in the vessel;
(iv) the order of priority in which passengers or cargo may be taken on or put off the
vessel at any port or place, whether in or outside India;
(b) in the case of a vessel which has been granted a licence under section 240 with respect
to the order of priority in which passengers or cargo may be taken on the vessel at any
port or place in India from which she is about to proceed for any port or place in India
at which she is to call in the course of her voyage.
(2) The Director-General may, by notice, require,—
(a) the owner, master or agent of any vessel in respect of which a licence granted under
section 240; or
(b) the owner, master or agent of any vessel in respect of which any directions have been
or may be given under clause (b) of sub-section (1), to furnish within the period
specified in the notice the information as to—
(i) the classes of passengers and cargo which the vessel is about to carry or is capable
of carrying or has carried during any specified period;
(ii) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Central
Government may, in public interest, by an order in writing, give such directions as it may
deem appropriate to ban any vessel from entering any port, anchorage or offshore facility in
India.
223. Clause 243 of the Bill seeks to empower the Director-General, in public interest or in the interest
of Indian shipping if it is necessary, to give order in writing or notice for matters stipulated therein and
also empowers the Central Government in public interest to ban any vessel from entering into India,
anchorage or offshore facility in India.

64
224. It was submitted to the Committee that under Clause 243 (2) (b) the wordings —to furnish within
the specified period specified in the notice the information as to —is formatted wrongly as it is read in
continuation to 243 (2) (b). It can be corrected to move the said wordings to next line as it has bearing
on both (a) and (b).
225. The Ministry of Shipping accepted the suggestions.
226. The Committee recommends that the suggestions on clause 243(2) (b) may be carried out
in the Bill.
227. Clause 244
244. (1) If it appears to the Central Government,—
(a) that measures have been taken by or under the law of any foreign country for regulating
or controlling the terms or conditions upon which goods or passengers may be carried
by sea, or the terms or conditions of contracts or arrangements relating to such carriage;
and
(b) that such measures, in so far as they apply to things done or, to be done outside the
territorial jurisdiction of that country by persons carrying on lawful business in India,
constitute an infringement of the jurisdiction which belongs to India, it may, by an order
in writing, direct that this section shall apply to those measures either in whole or to such
extent as may be specified in the order.
(2) Where an order issued under sub-section (1) is in force in relation to any measures, it shall
be the duty of every person in India who carries on business consisting or comprising of the
carriage of goods or passengers by sea to give notice to the Central Government of any
requirement or prohibition imposed or threatened to be imposed on him pursuant to such
measures so far as this section applies to him, including any requirement to submit any
contract or other document for approval thereunder.
(3) Where a notice under sub-section (2) is received from any person or there are grounds to
believe that a notice is likely to be received, the Central Government may, by an order in
writing, give to such person directions prohibiting compliance with any such requirement or
prohibition as it considers proper for maintaining the jurisdiction of India.
(4) If it appears to the Central Government that any person in India has been or may be required
to produce or furnish to any court, or authority of a foreign country any commercial document
which is not within the territorial jurisdiction of that country or any commercial information
to be compiled from documents not within the territorial jurisdiction of that country and that
the requirement constitutes or may constitute an infringement of the jurisdiction which belongs
to India, the Central Government may, by an order in writing, give directions to that person,
prohibiting him from complying with the requirement except to such extent or subject to such
conditions as may be specified in that order.

65
228. Clause 244 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to protect the interest of Indian
shipping from undue foreign intervention and stipulates certain measures by a foreign country which
infringes the jurisdiction of India and which can be brought to notice of the Central Government by the
Indian citizen carrying business in that country and the Central Government may in turn give order in
writing prohibiting Indian citizens from complying with such measure. It further provides that the Central
Government may by order in writing refuse to give commercial information to any court or authority
of a foreign country and prohibits any person from complying with such an order by foreign authority
or court subject to the conditions as specified in the said order.
229. The stakeholders suggested that Clause 244 to be deleted as it is obsolete as the competition law
has evolved and Indian competition law has developed in line with other countries. The convention such
as high seas Intervention, 1969 does not find place in the proposed Bill.
230. The Ministry of Shipping did not accept the suggestion and stated that Clause. 244 deals with the
powers of central government to protect interest of Indian shipping from undue foreign intervention. This
is an existing power of the central government under the MS Act, 1958 and is essential in the interest
of Indian shipping.
231. The Committee notes the explanation given by the Ministry of Shipping.
232. Clause 246
246. (1) Save as otherwise provided, this Part shall apply to vessels of the following description,
namely:—
(a) sailing vessel;
(b) fishing vessel;
(c) vessel without mechanical means of propulsion;
(d) vessel whose net tonnage is less than fifteen and is engaged solely in coasting trade of
India.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the words "net tonnage" means the measure of the
useful capacity of a vessel determined in accordance with the rules made in this behalf.
(2) The provisions of this Act, other than those contained in Part I, Part II, Part III, Part X, Part
XIV and this Part, shall not apply to vessels under sub-section (1):
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification direct that any other provisions of
this Act shall also apply to such vessels subject to such conditions, exceptions and modifications
as may be specified in the notification.
233. Clause 246 of the Bill seeks to provide for application of Part XIII. It applies to sailing vessel,
fishing vessel, vessel without mechanical of propulsion and vessel whose net tonnage is less than fifteen
and engaged solely in coasting trade of India and the extent to which other provisions in the Bill to apply
to such vessel.

66
234. As regards this Clause 246 (2) the stakeholders submitted that the provisions of this Act, other than
those contained in Part 1, II,III, X and XIV and this part shall not apply to such vessel subject to such
conditions, exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the notification. They have suggested
the following moditfications:
Replace section 246 (2) with the following :
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided, no provisions contained in any other part of this Act shall
apply to vessels covered under this part.
(3) The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette, direct that any provisions
of this Act other than those contained in this part which do not expressly apply to these vessels
shall also apply to these vessels subject to such conditions, exceptions and modifications as
may be specified in the notification.
Additional Remarks: Vessels covered under this part include non-self-propelled vessels and
hence provision of other parts of the Act should not apply to these vessels. Part XII should
be a code in itself which regulates non-self-propelled vessels as application of provisions of
any other part to these vessels may lead to unwarranted anomalies.
By means of a notification, the provisions pertaining to 'Registration' and Mortgages' may be
extended to vessels covered under this part.
235. The Ministry of Shipping furnished their comments which stated that all the provisions contained
in Part I, II,III, X and XIV shall apply to vessels under Part XIII, the suggestion may not be accepted.
236. Clause 256
256. (1) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or fails to comply with any provision
thereof, which it was his duty to comply with, shall be guilty of an offence committed under
this Act.
(2) The offences mentioned in column (2) of the Table below shall be punishable to the extent
mentioned in column (4) of the said Table with reference to such offence respectively.
(3) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or fails to comply with any provision
thereof, which it was his duty to comply with, shall be guilty of an offence, and if in respect
of any such offence, no penalty is specially provided in sub-section (2), he shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
(4) The Principal Officer may, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, by order in
writing, impose penalties as specified in column (4) of the said Table.
(5) Any person aggrieved by the order under sub-section (4), may, within a period of thirty days
from the date of receipt of such order, prefer an appeal before the Director-General in such
form and manner as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.
(6) The Director-General may, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, within a

67
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the order under sub-section (5), pass
appropriate order which shall be final and binding on all parties.
237. Clause 256 of the Bill seeks to provide the penalties for the contravention of the provisions as
specified therein. It empowers the Principal Officer to impose the monitory penalty, against which an
appeal shall lie to the Director-General. It further provides that the competency to sentence the imprisonment
has been vested with the Court only and the table, inter alia,  indicates the contravention made and the
penalty to be imposed and specifying the competent authority for imposing such penalty.
238. The stakeholders have submitted in their memorandum to the Committee that no specific penalty
has been prescribed in the table under Sec. 256(2) for not complying with the above section. However
Sec. 256(3) states that — Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or fails to comply with
any provision thereof, which it was his duty to comply with, shall be guilty of an offence, and if in
respect of any such offence, no penalty is specially provided in subsection (2), he shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to Rs.50000.
239. This means that for not complying with Clause 256 the master may be fined only Rs.50000. This
penalty is far too inadequate for the stated offence.
240. In M.S. Act 1958, under Sec. 436(2) item No. 109, the penalty prescribed for the above offence
is 3 months imprisonment or fine of Rs.3000 or both.
In view of the above a specific adequate penalty for not complying with Section 150 needs to be
prescribed in section 256(2) of the Bill.
241. The Ministry of Shipping has replied that the penalty in 256 (3) is a general penalty provision. Over
and above the general provision, Cl. 209 has a specific provision which covers violation of Clause. 150.
242. As regards Clause 256 (6) the stakeholders suggested that the Director General may after giving
the parties an opportunity of being heard, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the
order under sub- section (5), pass appropriate order which shall be final and binding on all parties. It
should also be considered that there may be an appellate authority to hear any appeals from the order
of the DG Shipping.
243. The Ministry of Shipping did not accept the suggestions. They have stated that it is not felt
necessary to provide for a mechanism for second appeal in the administrative setup. The affected parties
can take recourse to judicial remedy available to them.
244. The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the penalty provisions may be revisited
by the Ministry and suitable amendments may be carried out under the above clause.
245. Clause 260
260. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, every person who, at the
time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of its business, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

68
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has
been committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence was committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary, or any other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary, or other
officer shall also be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" includes a co-operative society, a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
246. Clause 260 of the Bill seeks to provide that in case the person committing an offence under this
Bill is a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business, as well as the company, shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly and if
such person proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence, such person need not to be subject to punishment
and at the same time if it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of,
or is attributable to any neglect, such person shall be punished accordingly as per provisions.
247. The stakeholders have pointed out that 'Company' is defined in Section II and later in the Safety
and Security section of the Bill, the definition of 'Company' under Penalty and Procedures section again
is going to be conflicting.
248. The Ministry of Shipping replied that 'Company' as the word has been used generally and also in
some specific part. Definition given in definition clause will be applicable in general while the definition
given in a particular part will be specific to that part.
249. The term 'company' as defined in clause 2 (8) of the Bill will apply to other provisions except for
Part VI and Clause 260 of the Bill wherein the term 'company' has been defined to be made applicable
for that Part/Clause.
250. In Safety and Security Part VI clause 111 (a), the term 'company' covers owner of the vessel, other
organization, etc. who has assumed the responsibility of operation of the vessel and has agreed to take
over all duties and responsibilities imposed by the international safety management code under the safety
convention. This definition is as per the International Safety Management Code of IMO.
251. The term 'company' used in clause 260, which deals with offences committed by companies,
includes offences committed by cooperative society, firm or other association of individuals.
252. The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping and understands that the
definition of 'Company' in this clause is applicable to situations under the Clause 260 only.

69
253. The Committee approved other Clauses of the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016 without any
modification.
General Observations and Recommendations
254. Sections 40-43, 60-63, 101,115, 118, 120, 127, 145, 149, 150, 160, 190, 200, 209, 220, 253 and
many others are too long, confusing, duplicating or containing details not fit for primary legislation.
The Bill has been drafted in a hasty and perfunctory manner leading to many loopholes, lacunae
and possibility of multiple interpretation. The Ministry of Shipping noticed the defects only when
various representationists pointed out them. Therefore, the Committee recommends that all the
clauses of the Bill may be revisited by the Ministry to ensure that the clauses are devoid of
misinterpretation and loopholes.
255. The Committee feels that abundant precaution should be taken against all possible misuse
of the provisions of the Bill, particularly dealing with inspection, control, detention, etc. of the
ships. The Committee strongly recommends that adequate safeguards and preventive mechanism
should be built into the system sought to be put in place for this purpose.

70
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
Clause 2
The Committee notes the explanation given by the Ministry of Shipping as regards the
concerns raised by the stakeholders. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of shipping
may clear all the ambiguities in this Clause in the final Bill. (Para 20)
Clause 3
The Committee agrees with the views/comments of the Ministry of Shipping on the issues
raised by stakeholders. However, Committee recommends that the necessary changes as accepted
by the Ministry of Shipping may be carried out in the Bill. (Para 24)
Clause 4
The Committee notes the issues raised by the stakeholders and the reply furnished by the
Ministry of Shipping on certain sub clauses in the Bill. The Committee suggests that the Government
of India should make all efforts to increase the employment avenues to Indian seafarers. The
Committee recommends that while upholding the national interest National Shipping Board
should be properly represented by all the important stakeholders in the Shipping sector.
(Para 29)
Clause 5
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping. (Para 34)
Clause 7
The Committee recommends that the duties and responsibilities of the Nautical Advisor and
the Chief Surveyors and their eligibilities for selection to those posts should be clearly mentioned
while making rules to this Clause. (Para 39)
Clause 14
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping may have a relook into the
amendments suggested by the stakeholders and make changes in the Bill wherever possible.
(Para 43)
Clause 15
The Committee notes the views of the Ministry of Shipping and recommends that necessary
provisions may be incorporated while framing Rules/Regulations in order to address the concerns
raised by the stakeholder. (Para 49)
Clause 19
The Committee notes that the suggestions made by the stakeholders have certain merit.
70

71
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Shipping may include provisions for
addressing the issues raised by the stakeholders regarding the vessels on cross trade.
(Para 56)
Clause 20
The Committee is of the view that the point raised by the stakeholders needs to be considered
seriously and there should be some provisions/tools with the master of the Ship to verify the
authenticity of the certificate, as the technology has so advanced that people misuses it and
make documents which looks as perfect as the original ones. (Para 61)
Clause 30
The Committee recommends that necessary provisions may be given while framing Rules
so that there should not be any room for ambiguity as regards how a mortgagee should proceed
with sale of vessel. (Para 66)
Clause 34
The Committee recommends that necessary provisions regarding stamping of IMO number
should be incorporated in the Rules. (Para 71)
Clause 49
The Committee notes the concerns pointed out by the stakeholders regarding the BBCD
vessels getting permission for costing trade in India. The Committee, taking into account, the
reply given by the Ministry of Shipping, recommends that the concerns raised by the stakeholder
should be addressed through secondary legislation to be made under Clause 50 (2) (a) of the Bill.
(Para 76)
Clause 50
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping over the issue raised by
the stakeholder. (Para 81)
Clause 52
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping on the point raised
pertaining to the instant Clause and recommends that the procedural matters may be addressed
at the secondary or tertiary legislations. (Para 86)
Clause 53
The Committee recommends that the reasonable power should remain with the Government
of India. (Para 92)
Clause 57
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry of Shipping and recommends that necessary
amendments may be carried out to Clause 57 (1) and 57(3) to include the Indian vessels.
(Para 97)

72
Clause 61
The Committee recommends that "recruitment and placement service" may be clearly
mentioned while framing the Rules and any ambiguity as pointed out by the stakeholders may
be addressed properly. (Para 102)
The Committee further recommends that while framing the Recruitment and Placement
Service Rules (RPS Rules), abundant care should be taken to safeguard the welfare of the Indian
seafarers working in outside Indian waters and also those working for foreign ship owners. The
RPS Rules should be in tune with the Maritime Labour Convention. (Para 103)
Clause 62
The Committee agreed to the views expressed by Ministry of Shipping and recommends that
stakeholders may be consulted while framing the Rules under this clause. (Para 108)
Clause 63
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping. (Para 112)
Clause 64
The Committee observes the issues raised by the seafarer unions regarding the state of
seafarers in the stranded ships where the seafarers are ill treated by the ship owners and
masters. The Committee took a serious view of the matter . The Committee recommends that
Ministry of Shipping should have some mechanism to consider and handle such instances seriously
and the concerns as explained above may be rigorously addressed and necessary provisions may
be included in the Bill. (Para 121)
Clause 66
The Committee noted the apprehensions raised by the Trade Unions and replies furnished
by the Ministry of Shipping. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Shipping in consultation
with the trade unions of seafarers may reformulate Clause 66 so that the apprehensions raised
by the unions are suitably addressed. (Para 127)
The Committee takes a view that the role of the Trade Unions should be clearly recognized
in the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016 in the mutual interest of both seafarers and ship owners for
which express provisions may be made in the M.S.Act. (Para 128)
Clause 67
The Committee notes that the apprehension raised by the Seafarer Union appears to be a
genuine one and the Committee recommends that this aspect may be considered seriously and
necessary safeguards may be provided to ensure maximum job opportunities to Indian seafarers.
(Para 133)

73
Clause 69
The Committee recommends that the amendments as suggested by the unions may be
suitably incorporated in the Bill. (Para 138)
The Committee also recommends that the DG Shipping should be given powers to penalize
the manning agents or the ship owners in case they fail to make due payment of wages to
seafarers. The Government should protect the seafarers from the exploitation by manning agents
and the ship owners. The Committee recommends that necessary provisions may be incorporated
in the Bill to safeguard the interests of the seafarers. (Para 139)
Clause 83
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping in this regard.
(Para 144)
Clause 90
The Committee notes the point raised and the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
recommends that there should be proper forum and procedure available for the seafarers to
lodge their complaints and the provisions may be clearly mentioned in the Rules/Regulations.
(Para 149)
Clause 125
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry and recommends that necessary
provisions as pointed out by the stakeholder may be considered at the time of framing of rules/
Regulations. (Para 154)
Clause 129
The Committee notes the points raised and the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Committee
recommends that necessary provisions may be incorporated in the Rules/Regulations.
(Para 159)
Clause 140
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that necessary provisions may be provided
under the rules to accommodate the suggestion on ship certificates under this clause.
(Para 169)
Clause 150
The Committee notes that there were instances of killing of fishermen of small fishing
boats or collision of small boats along the Indian shores. The issues are serious and need to be
addressed effectively. The Committee recommends that the Government should come out with
proper policy in this regard and appropriate punishments provisions should be made in the Bill.
(Para 175)

74
Clause 169
The Committee recommends that provisions for international conventions may be incorporated
in Clause 169. (Para 180)
Clause 179
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping. (Para 185)
Clause 185
The Committee notes that due diligence and care was not taken while drafting the Bill. The
mistake has been realized by the Ministry only when the stakeholders have pointed it out. The
Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry and recommends that the provisions as
mentioned by the stakeholders may be incorporated in the Bill under Clause 185. (Para 190)
Clause 189
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping, in this regard.
(Para 195)
Clause 207
The Committee agreed to the points as explained by the Ministry of Shipping in this
direction. (Para 200)
Clause 209
The Committee notes the assurance of the Ministry of Shipping that no order under this
clause shall be passed unless the person concerned has been given an opportunity of making a
representation against such order. The Committee recommends that the person affected should
be given every opportunity to ensure that due process of law is followed in letter and spirit.
(Para 205)
Clause 224
The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry of Shipping in this regard.
(Para 210)
The Committee observes that there are lots of probabilities of a grievance that can arise
at any stage of the salvage operation, wreck removal etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that necessary provisions for redressal of grievances should be incorporated suitably in the Bill.
(Para 211)
Clause 237
The Committee notes the comments of the Ministry of Shipping in this regard.
(Para 216)

75
Clause 240
The Committee recommends that the modifications to the Clause 240(5) may be made in
the Bill as per the suggestion given by the stakeholder. (Para 221)
Clause 243
The Committee recommends that the suggestions on clause 243(2) (b) may be carried out
in the Bill. (Para 226)
Clause 244
The Committee notes the explanation given by the Ministry of Shipping. (Para 231)
Clause 256
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the penalty provisions may be revisited
by the Ministry and suitable amendments may be carried out under the above clause.
(Para 244)
Clause 260
The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry of Shipping and understands that the
definition of 'Company' in this clause is applicable to situations under the Clause 260 only.
(Para 252)
The Committee approved other Clauses of the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016 without any
modification. (Para 253)
General Observations
Sections 40-43, 60-63, 101,115, 118, 120, 127, 145, 149, 150, 160, 190, 200, 209, 220, 253 and
many others are too long, confusing, duplicating or containing details not fit for primary legislation.
The Bill has been drafted in a hasty and perfunctory manner leading to many loopholes, lacunae
and possibility of multiple interpretation. The Ministry of Shipping noticed the defects only when
various representationists pointed out them. Therefore, the Committee recommends that all the
clauses of the Bill may be revisited by the Ministry to ensure that the clauses are devoid of
misinterpretation and loopholes. (Para 254)
The Committee feels that abundant precaution should be taken against all possible misuse
of the provisions of the Bill, particularly dealing with inspection, control, detention, etc. of the
ships. The Committee strongly recommends that adequate safeguards and preventive mechanism
should be built into the system sought to be put in place for this purpose. (Para 255)

MINUTES

XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 10 th April, 2017 in Committee Room 'A', Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Sh. Mukul Roy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
5. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
6. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
8. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan
10. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
11. Shri Rajesh Pandey
12. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
13. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. G Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri P. P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting. The Committee
discussed its future course of action alongwith the pending subjects before the Committee. The Chairman
79

80
informed the Committee that the time allotted for examination and consideration of the two Bills viz., 'The
Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016' and 'The Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016' is expiring on the 12th April,
2017. The Committee could not consider the Bills since it was busy with the Motor Vehicles (Amendment)
Bill, 2016 and the examination of Demands for Grants (2017-18). The Committee needs three more
months to examine and submit its reports on the Bills. The Committee accordingly decided to approach
the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to seek extension of three months for submitting its reports on the
two Bills. The Committee then authorized its Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
for seeking extension of time upto 12th July, 2017 to submit its reports.
3. The meeting was adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.

81
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 12th May, 2017 in Committee Room A, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Mukul Roy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
4. Kumari Selja
5. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Subrata Bakshi
7. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
8. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan
10. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
11. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
12. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
14. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
17. Shri Manoj Tiwari
18. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. G . Negi., Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
81

82
Shri Arun Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri P. P. Raumon, Committee Officer
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING
1. Shri Rajive Kumar, Secretary
2. Shri Parvir Krishan, JS (S&Parl.)
3. Shri M. M. Hasija, Adviser
4. Dr. Malini Shankar, DG (Shipping)
5. Shri Amitabh Kumar, Addl. Director Genl. (S)
6. Dr. Amol B. Kirtane, Dy. DG , DGS
7. Shri Ash Mohammad, ADG , DGS
8. Capt. Jaya Kumar, Dy. Nautical Adviser, DGS
9. Shri B. R. Sekhar, Chief Surveyor, DGS
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
10. Shri K. Biswal Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
11. Shri R. K. Pattanayak, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman on behalf of the Committee welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of
Shipping and other Senior Officials from the Ministry, and the Officers from the Legislative Department
to the meeting. The Chairman asked the Secretary to make the presentation on the Merchant Shipping
Bill, 2016 which was referred to the Committee for examination. The DG Shipping, with the permission
of the Chair explained about the salient features of the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016, the genesis of the
Merchant Shipping laws in India; features of the existing Merchant Shipping Act. 1958; the need for a
new Merchant Shipping Act; details of stakeholder consultation made for the new draft; a comparison
ol the existing Act and the proposed Bill; new features of the proposed Bill for promotion of shipping
and coastal shipping and ease of doing business; about seafareres" welfare; registration of vessels; the
International Conventions incorporated; the penal provisions etc.
3. The Members of the Committee raised a number of queries on the Bill and the Secretary replied
to it.
4. *** *** ***
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The meeting then adjourned at 3.55 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

83
XIX
NINTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 12 th July, 2017 in Committee Room A, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Mukul Roy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Kumari Selja
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
7. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
9. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan
11. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
12. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
15. Shri Manoj Tiwari
16. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J. G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri P. P. Raumon, Committee Officer
83

84
2. *** *** ***
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered draft Reports on 'The Merchant Shipping Bill. 2016' and 'The
Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016' for adoption. After some discussion, the Committee adopted both the
Reports without any change. The Committee decided to present/lay these Reports to both the Houses
of Parliament on 18th July, 2017.
4. The Committee, accordingly, authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Kumari Selja, M.P. and
in her absence Shri Lai Sinh Vadodia, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri K. C. Venugopal,
M.P. and in his absence Shri Ram Charitra Nishad, M.P. was authorized to lay the above mentioned
Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th July, 2017.
5. The meeting then adjourned at 2.45 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

85
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING BILL, 2016
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
PART II
ESTABLISHMENT OF B OARDS AND G ENERAL A DMINISTRA TION
CHAPTER I
ESTABLISHMENT OF N ATIONAL S HIPPING B OARD AND S EAFARERS W ELFARE B OARD
4. Establishment of National Shipping Board.
5. Constitution of Seafarer Welfare Board.
CHAPTER II
G
ENERAL A DMINISTRATION
6. Director-General of Shipping.
7. Surveyor.
8 Radio Inspector.
9. Mercantile Marine Department.
10. Shipping Office.
11. Seafarer's Employment Office.
12. Seafarer's welfare officer.
PART III
R
EGISTRATION OF V ESSELS
13. Application of Part.
87

88
CHAPTER I
REGISTRATION OF I NDIAN V ESSELS
CLAUSES
14. Obligation to register
15. Registrar of Indian vessels.
16. Application for registry.
17. Marking, survey and measurement of vessels before registry.
18. Power of Registrar to inquire into title of Indian vessel to be so registered.
19. Grant of certificate of registry.
20. Custody and use of certificate.
21. Endorsement on certificate of change of ownership.
22. Delivery of certificate of vessel lost or ceasing to be an indian vessel.
23. Provisional registration of Indian vessel.
24. Transfer of Indian vessel or shares.
25. Registry of transfer.
26. Transmission of property in Indian vessel on death, insolvency, etc.
27. Order for sale where vessel has ceased to be an Indian vessel.
28. Transfer of vessel on sale by order of court.
29. Mortgage of vessel or share.
30. Rights of mortgagee.
31. Mortgage not affected by insolvency.
32 Transfer of mortgages.
33. Transmission of interest in mortgage in certain circumstance.
34. Description of name, call sign and an official number of Indian vessel.
35. Registry of alterations.
36. Provisional certificate and endorsement where vessel is to be registered anew.
37. Registry anew on change of ownership.
38. Transfer of registry.
39. Restrictions on re-registry of abandoned vessel.
40. National colours for Indian vessels.
41. Concealment of Indian, or assumption of foreign, character.

89
CLAUSES
42. Liabilities of vessel not recognized as Indian vessel
43. Proceedings on forfeiture of vessel.
44. Liability of owners.
45. Evidence of register book, certificate of registry and other documents.
46. Closure of registry.
CHAPTER II
R
EGISTRATION OF VESSELS ON BAREBOAT CHARTER-CUM-DEMISE BY I NDIAN C HARTERER
47. Application of this Chapter
48. Definitions
49. Registration of vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum -demise.
50. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Part.
PART IV
C
ERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY AND CERTIFICATE OF PROFICIENCY
51. Certificates to be held by seafarers.
52. Certificate of competency and certificate of proficiency.
53. Training for grant of certificate of competency and certificate of proficiency
54. Examinations for grant of certificates.
55. Production of certificate of competency.
56. Recognition of certificates of competency granted in other countries.
57. Foreign vessel not to sail without certificated seafarers.
58. Obligations of certain certificate holders to serve the Government or in Indian vessels.
59. Power to make rules.
PART V
S
EAFARERS
60. Application of this Part.
61. Definitions.
62. Classification of seafarer, maritime labour standards and prescription of minimum scale.
63. Application of maritime labour standards to seafarers and ships.
64. Duties of shipping master.
65. Business of seafarer's employment office.

90
CLAUSES
66 Supply or recruitment or engagement of seafarer.
67. Agreements with seafarers.
68. Power to make rules for enforcement of Maritime Labour Convention.
69. Wages on termination of service for wreck, illness, etc.
70. Wages not to accrue during absence without leave, refusal to work or imprisonment.
71. Compensation to seafarers on premature discharge.
72 Restrictions on sale of and charge upon wages.
73. Discharge of seafarers.
74. Wages and property of deceased seafarers and seafarers left behind.
75. Repatriation of seafarer on termination of service at foreign port.
76. Certain undisbursed amounts to be utilised for welfare of seafarers.
77. Decision of questions by Shipping Masters.
78. Power of shipping master to require production of ship's papers.
79. Summary proceedings for wages.
80. Restrictions on suits for wages.
81. Wages not recoverable outside India in certain cases.
82. Remedies of master for wages, disbursements, etc.
83. Power to refer disputes between seafarers and their employers to tribunal.
84. Recovery of wages, etc., of seafarers lost with their ship.
85. Nomination.
86. Relief and maintenance of distressed seafarers.
87. Evidence of distress.
88. Inspection by shipping master, etc.
89. Special provisions for the protection of seafarers in respect of litigation.
90. Facilities for making complaints.
91. Assignment or sale of salvage invalid.
92. Ship not to be boarded without permission.
93. Misconduct endangering life or ship.
94. Desertion and absence without leave.
95. General offences against discipline.

91
CLAUSES
96. Smuggling of goods by seafarer.
97. Entry of offences in official log book.
98. Report of desertions and absences without leave.
99. Entries and certificates of desertion abroad.
100. Facilities for proving desertion in proceedings for forfeiture of wages.
101. Application of forfeitures.
102. Decision of questions of forfeiture and deduction in suits for wages.
103. Payment of fines imposed under agreement to shipping master.
104. Seafarer not to be enticed to desert.
105. Stowaways and seafarers carried under compulsion.
106. On change of master, documents to be handed over to successor.
107. Deserters from foreign ships.
108. Official logbook.
109. Power to make rules for this Part.
PART VI
S
AFETY AND SECURITY
110. Application of this Part.
111. Definitions.
112. Safety and security requirement.
113. Reporting of incidents.
114. Obligation to render assistance on receiving signal of distress and to persons in danger.
115. Search and rescue services.
116. Radio communication requirements.
117. Information about vessel stability.
118. Submersion of load lines.
119. No vessel to carry passenger without a certificate.
120. Vessel not to proceed to sea without valid safety and security certificates.
121. Offences.
122. Vessel not to carry cargo or passengers in contravention of Act.
123. Unseaworthy vessel not to be sent to sea.

92
CLAUSES
124. Obliga tion of owner to crew with respect to seaworthiness
125. Safety and security management.
126. Control measures and detention of vessels.
127. Liability for costs and damage when vessels detained.
128. Power to make rules.
PART VII
PREVENTION, CONTAINMENT OF POLLUTION FROM VESSEL AND RESPONSE
129. Application of this Part.
130. Definitions.
131. Control of discharge or emission of harmful substances or dumping at sea.
132. Requirements of prevention and containment of pollution and response.
133. Vessel not to proceed to sea without valid pollution prevention certificates.
134. Record books.
135. Reception facilities.
136. Powers to take measures for prevention or containment of pollution and reporting of incidents.
137. Power of the Central Government to give directions to certain vessels or persons to render certain
service.
138. Power to make rules
PART VIII
SURVEY, AUDIT AND CERTIFICATION
139. Survey, audit and certification
140. Certificates.
141. Power of surveyor.
142. Compliance of provisions of convention.
143. Recognition of certificates issued outside India.
144. Issue of certificate to foreign vessels in India and Indian vessels in foreign countries.
145. Power to make rules for this Part.
PART IX
MARITIME L IABILITY AND C OMPENSA TION
CHAPTER I
COLLISION, ACCIDENT AT S EA AND L IABILITY
146. Application of this Chapter.
147. Apportionment of liability.

93
CLAUSES
148. Damages for personal injury.
149. Right of contribution.
150. Duty of master of vessel to assist in case of collision.
151. Collision to be entered in official log book.
152. Report to Central Government of accidents to vessels.
153. Notice of loss of Indian vessel to be given to Central Government.
CHAPTER II
LIMITATION OF L IABILITY FOR M ARITIME C LAIMS
154. Application of this Chpater.
155. Limitation of liability for damages in respect of certain claims.
156. Conduct barring limitation.
157. Counter claims.
158. Limits of liability.
159. Limit for passenger claims.
160. Aggregation of claims.
161. Limitation of liability without constitution of a limitation.
162. Constitution of limitation fund.
163. Distribution of the fund.
164. Bar to other actions.
165. Scope of application.
166. Power to make rules.
CHAPTER III
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE
167. Application of this Chapter.
168. Definitions.
169. Liability of owner.
170. Joint and several liability for ships
171. Limitation of liability
172. Constitution of limitation fund.
173. Acquisition of right for compensation by subrogation.

94
CLAUSES
174. Consolidation of claim and distribution of fund.
175. Compulsory insurance or other financial guarantee.
176. Acceptance of certificate issued outside india.
177. Ban on entering or leaving an indian Port without certificate.
178. Direct action against insurer or other person providing financial security.
179. Limitation period.
180. Government ships.
181. Power to make rules.
CHAPTER IV
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR BUNKER OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE
182. Application of this Chapter.
183. Definitions.
184. Liability for bunker oil pollution.
185. Exemption from liability.
186. Right of owner to limitation of liability.
187. Determination of limitation of liability.
188. Consolidation of claims and distribution of amount.
189. Extinguishment of right to claim.
190. Maintenance of compulsory insurance or other financial security.
191. Direct action against insurer or other person providing financial security.
192. Issue of certificate.
193. Ban on entering or leaving Port without certificate.
194. Right of recourse.
195. Recognition and enforcements of decision of the court.
196. Power to make rules.
CHAPTER V
INTERNATIONAL O IL P OLLUTION C OMPENSATION F UND
197. Application.
198. Definitions.
199. Contribution to fund.

95
CLAUSES
200. Contribution payable by persons to the fund.
201. Liability of Fund.
202. Power to call for information.
203. Claims against fund and Jurisdiction of Courts.
204. Extinguishment of claims.
205. Subrogation and right of recourse.
206. Power to make rules.
PART X
INVESTIGATION AND INQUIRIES
207. Marine casualties and report thereof.
208. Power of Central Government to initiate proceedings.
209. Power to cancel, suspend, etc., certificate of seafarers.
210. Re-hearing.
211. Application of this Chapter to wrecks.
PART XI
WRECK AND S ALV AGE
CHAPTER I
WRECK
212. Definitions.
213. Receivers of wreck.
214. Duty to report wrecks.
215. Determination of hazard.
216. Locating and marking of wrecks.
217. Power to pass over adjoining lands.
218. Prohibition of certain acts in respect of wreck.
219. Search warrants where wreck is involved.
220. Measures to facilitate the removal of wrecks.
221. Liability of owner.
222. Maintenance of insurance or other financial security.
223. Exception to liability.

96
CLAUSES
224. Claims of owners to wreck.
225. Extinguishment of right to claim recovery of costs.
CHAPTER II
SALV AGE
226. Application of this Chapter to salvage.
227. Definitions.
228. Salvage award.
229. Salvage payable for saving life, cargo or wreck.
230. Salvage operations controlled by Government or port and public authorities.
231. Salvage Contracts.
232. Duties of salvor, owner and master.
233. Rights and duties of Central Government in relation to salvage operations.
234. Rights of salvors.
235. Adjudi cation of disputes
236. Extinguishment of claims.
237. Savings.
238. Power to make rules respecting wreck and salvage.
PART XII
CONTROL OF I NDIAN V ESSELS AND F OREIGN V ESSELS E NGAGED IN C OASTING T RADE
239. Application of this Part.
240. Licensing of vessels.
241. Revocation, modification or surrender of licence.
242. No port clearance until licence is produced.
243. Power to give direction
244. Powers of Central Government to protect interests of Indian shipping from undue foreign intervention.
245. Power to make rules
PART XIII
SAILING, FISHING AND OTHER VESSELS
246. Application of Part.
247. Decision on whether a vessel falls under this Part.

97
CLAUSES
248. Requirements for safety, security, prevention of pollution and insurance .
249. Vessel not to proceed without valid Certificates.
250. Statement relating to crew of vessels to be maintained.
251. Inquiry to Jettisoning of cargo.
252. Detention of vessel by proper of ficer.
253. Detention of unseaworthy vessels.
254. Power to exempt.
255. Power to make rules.
PART XIV
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
256. Penalties.
257. Place of trial and jurisdiction of court.
258. Special provision regarding punishment.
259. Cognizance of offence.
260. Offences by companies.
261. Depositions to be received in evidence when witness cannot be produced.
262. Power to detain foreign vessel that has occasioned damage.
263. Power to enforce detention of vessel.
264. Levy of wages, etc., by distress of movable property or vessel.
265. Notice to be given to consular representative of proceedings taken in respect of foreign vessel.
266. Service of documents.
PART XV
MISCELLANEOUS
267. Birth and death of persons on board vessel during a voyage.
268. inquiry into cause of death on board or person missing from indian vessel.
269. Certain persons deemed to be public servants.
270. Power of persons authorised to investigate, inquire, etc.
271. Power to permit alternative provisions and arrangement.
272. Control of Nuclear vessels and security measures.
273. Exemption of public vessels, foreign and indian.

98
CLAUSES
274. Power to exempt.
275. General power to make rules.
276. Provisions with respect to rules.
277. Protection of persons acting under the Act.
278. Agreement with other countries.
279. Removal of difficulties.
280. Repeal and savings.

99
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 236 of 2016
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING BILL, 2016
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to merchant shipping to
ensure compliance with the country's obligation under the maritime
treaties and International Instruments to which India is a party and
also to ensure the efficient maintenance of Indian mercantile marine
in a manner best suited to serve the national interest.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification, appoint, and different dates may
be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
2. (1) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this
Act shall apply to,—
(a) any vessel which is registered in India; or
Short title and
commencement.
Application of
Act.
99

100
(b) any vessel which is required by this Act to be so
registered, wherever it may be.
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this
Act which apply to vessels other than those referred to in sub-
section (1) shall so apply only while any such vessel is within India
or in waters within the jurisdiction of India.
(3) Subject to sub-section (2) and unless otherwise expressly
provided, the provisions of this Act shall not apply to Indian controlled
tonnage vessels.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) "1992 Liability Convention" means the International
Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1992;
(2) "Anti-Fouling Systems Convention" means International
Convention on control of harmful antifouling systems on ships, 2001;
(3) "audit" means a systematic and independent examination
to determine whether the Management System as provided in safety
convention complies with the planned arrangements and such
arrangements are implemented effectively and are sufficient to achieve
the desired objectives;
(4) "Ballast Water Management Convention" means the
International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships'
Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004;
(5) "certificate of competency" or "certificate of proficiency"
means the certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency, as
the case may be, granted under sub-section (1) of section 52;
(6) "coasts" include the coasts of creeks and tidal waters.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the
expression "tidal waters" means any part of the sea and any part of
a river within the ebb and flow of the tide at ordinary spring tides
and not being a harbor;
(7) "Coasting trade of India" means,—
(a) the carriage by sea of goods, passengers from any
port or place in India to any other port or place in India, or
(b) performing any service within waters in the jurisdiction
Definitions.

101
of India, including the zones as defined under the Territorial
Water, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zones and other
Maritime Zones of India Act, 1976;
(8) "company" means a company as defined in clause (20)
of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013;
(9) "convention" means any International Convention or
Treaty or Agreement in relation to maritime matters and their Protocols
to which India is a party;
(10) "convention certificate" means a certificate issued under
the provisions of any convention;
(11) "court", in relation to any proceedings, includes any court
having jurisdiction in the matter to which the proceedings relate;
(12) "Director-General" means the Director-General of Shipping
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(13) "distressed seafarer" means a seafarer engaged under this
Act, who has been discharged or left behind or abandoned including
by reason of any captivity not in accordance with law, or
shipwrecked, is in distress;
(14) "equipment", in relation to a vessel, includes boats, tackle,
machinery, boilers, cargo handling gear, pumps and any fitting, anchor,
propeller, apparels, furniture, life-saving appliances of every
description, spars, masts, rigging and sails, fog signals, lights, shapes
and signals of distress, medicines and medical and surgical stores
and appliances, charts, radio installations, appliances for preventing,
detecting or extinguishing fires, buckets, compasses, axes, lanterns,
loading and discharging gears and appliances of all kinds and all
other stores and spares or articles belonging to or to be used in
connection with or necessary for the navigation, propulsion, security,
pollution prevention and safety of the vessel;
(15) "family" means: —
(i) in the case of male, his wife, his children whether
married or unmarried, his dependent parents and his deceased
son's widow and children:
Provided that if a person proves that his wife has ceased
under the personal law governing him or the customary law of
the community to which the spouses belong, to be entitled to
80 of 1976
18 of 2013

102
maintenance, she shall no longer be deemed to be a part of
such person's family for the purposes of this Act, unless such
person subsequently intimates by express notice in writing to
the Central Government that she shall continue to be so
regarded; and
(ii) in the case of female, her husband, her children,
whether married or unmarried, her dependent parents, her
husband's dependent parents and her deceased son's widow
and children:
Provided that if a person by notice in writing to the Central
Government expresses her desire to exclude her husband from
the family, the husband and his dependent parents shall no
longer be deemed to be a part of such person's family for the
purpose of this Act, unless such person subsequently cancels
in writing any such notice.
Explanation.— In either of the above two cases, if the
child, or, as the case may be, the child of deceased son of a
person has been adopted by another person and if, under the
personal law of the adopter, adoption is legally recognised,
such a child shall be considered as excluded from the family
of the first mentioned person;
(16) "fishing vessel" means a vessel which is exclusively
engaged in fishing in the seas;
(17) "gross tonnage" means the measure of the overall size of
a vessel determined in accordance with the rules made in this
behalf;
(18) "High Court", in relation to a vessel, means a High Court
within the limits of whose appellate jurisdiction,—
(a) the port of registry of the vessel is situate, or
(b) the vessel is for the time being, or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises;
(19) "Indian consular officer" means the consul-general, consul,
vice-consul, consular agent and pro consul appointed as such by the
Central Government and includes any person authorised by the Central
Government to perform the functions of consul-general, consul,
vice-consul, consular agent and pro consul;

103
(20) "Indian controlled tonnage vessel" means an Indian vessel,
other than an fishing vessel or sailing vessel, registered at a port or
place in a country other than India under sub-section (2) of
section 14;
(21) "Indian ship" or "Indian vessel" means a ship or a vessel,
as the case may be, which is substantially owned by the person
referred in sub-section (3) of section 14;
(22) "LLMC Convention" means the convention on Limitation
of Liability for Maritime Claims, 1976;
(23) "Maritime Labour Convention" means the Maritime Labour
Convention, 2006;
(24) "MARPOL Convention" means the International Convention
for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973 and Protocols;
(25) "master" includes any person (except a pilot or a Harbour
Master) having command or charge of a vessel;
(26) "notification" means a notification published in the Official
Gazette and the expression "notified" shall be construed accordingly;
(27) "owner", in relation to a vessel means the person to
whom the vessel or a share in the vessel belongs;
(28) "passenger" means any person carried on board a vessel,
except—
(a) a person employed or engaged in any capacity on
board the vessel on the business of the vessel;
(b) a person on board the vessel either in pursuance of
the obligations laid upon the master to carry shipwrecked,
distressed or other persons or by reason of any circumstances
which neither the master nor the charterer, if any, could have
prevented or forestalled; and
(c) a child under one year of age;
(29) "passenger vessel" means a vessel carrying more than
twelve passengers;
(30) "Pollution damage" means,—
(a) loss or damage caused outside the vessel resulting
from the escape, emission or discharge of cargo, oil or any

104
other material from the vessel, wherever such escape, emission
or discharge may occur, or
(b) the costs of preventive measures and further loss or
damage caused by preventive measures;
(31) "Pollution prevention convention" means any convention
relating to prevention of pollution from vessels, to which India is a
Party; including MARPOL Convention, Anti-fouling Systems
Convention and Ballast Water Management Convention;
(32) "port" means the port as defined in clause (4) of section
3 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
(33) "port authority" means,—
(a) in relation to any major port, the Board of Trustees,
or, as the case may be, the Board of Directors, in respect of
that port constituted under any law for the time being in force;
(b) in relation to any other port, the conservator of the
Port appointed under section 7 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
(c) in relation to any terminal or place not forming a part
of a port, the person under whose supervision the terminal or
place is operated;
(34) "port of registry", in relation to a vessel, sailing vessel,
fishing vessel or any other vessel, means the port at which she is
registered or is to be registered;
(35) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;
(36) "Principal Officer" means an officer referred to in section
9 of this Act;
(37) "proceeding" includes any suit, appeal or application under
this Act;
(38) "proper officer" means the officer designated by the
Central Government to be the proper officer at the port or place and
in respect of the matter to which the reference is made in the
provision of this Act, in which the expression occurs;
(39) "proper return port" means such port as is agreed upon
by the seafarer, and his employer in the agreement or otherwise, or
in the absence of agreement, the port where the seafarer was
employed or joined the vessel;
15 of 1908
15 of 1908

105
(40) "property", in relation to a seafarer, includes personal
effects;
(41) "reception facilities", in relation to a port, terminal ship
yard, ship repair facility or ship recycling facility, means facilities for
enabling vessels using the port, terminal ship yard, ship repair facility
or ship recycling facility to discharge or deposit any substance
subject to control by the Pollution prevention conventions;
(42) "Registrar" means the Registrar referred to in section 15;
(43) "registered owner" means the person or persons registered
as the owner of the vessel;
(44) "removal" means any form of prevention, mitigation or
elimination of the hazard created by a wreck, and the expressions
"remove", "removed" and "removing" shall be construed accordingly;
(45) "rule" means the rule made under this Act;
(46) "Safety Convention" means the International Convention
for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974 and its Protocols;
(47) "sailing vessel" means any wooden vessel of primitive
build provided with sufficient sail area for navigation under sails
alone, whether or not fitted with mechanical means of propulsion,
but does not include a pleasure craft.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause "wooden vessel
of primitive build" means a wooden vessel of traditionally built not
primarily propelled;
(48) "Salvage" means any act or activity undertaken to assist
a vessel or any other property in danger in navigable waters or in
any other waters whatsoever;
(49) "Salvage Convention" means the International Convention
on Salvage, 1989;
(50) "salvor" means any person rendering services in direct
connection with salvage operation;
(51) "sea-going", in relation to a vessel, means a vessel
proceeding or intending to proceed beyond waters declared to be
inland waters by the Central Government or State Government by
notification;

106
(52) "seafarer" means any person who is employed or engaged
or works in any capacity on board a sea-going vessel, but does not
include,-
(i) a person who is in the employment or engagement or
work on board in any capacity in a warship or any Government
vessel used for military or non-commercial purposes, or
(ii) any other person as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify;
(53) "seafarer's employment office" means the seafarer's
employment office established under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(54) "seafarer's welfare officer" means the seafarer's welfare
officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(55) "seaworthy", in respect of a vessel, means, if she is in
possession of all valid certificates required under this Act and is in
a fit state as to the material, construction, condition of hull and
equipment, and machinery; management of safety, security and
pollution prevention, the stowage of ballast or cargo, the number,
and in every other respect, fit for the voyage or service including
with the living and working conditions on board the vessel to not
pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the vessel's seafarers;
(56) "ship" means any watercraft, used or capable of being
used in navigation by its own propulsion, in, above, or under the
water, but does not include fishing vessels or sailing vessels;
(57) "ship owner" means the owner including the registered
owner, bareboat charterer, manager and operator of the vessel;
(58) "shipping master" means the shipping master appointed
under section 10;
Provided that in relation to any seafarer for the purposes
of section 89, means a shipping master referred to in that section,—
(a) for the port at which the seafarer entered into, or is
believed to have entered into, an agreement, or
(b) where the seafarer did not enter into his agreement in
India, for the port to which the seafarer has returned, or
is expected to return, on the completion of his latest
voyage;

107
(59) "shipping office" means the shipping office established
under section 10;
(60) "special trade" means the conveyance of large number of
passengers by sea within the areas specified in the STP
Agreement;
Explanation:— The expression "STP Agreement" means the
Special Trade Passenger Ship Agreement, 1971 and Protocol on
Space Requirement for Special Trade Passenger Ships, 1973;
(61) "special trade passenger" means a passenger carried in
special trade passenger vessel in spaces on the weather deck or
upper deck or between decks which accommodate more than eight
passengers;
(62) "special trade passenger ship" means a mechanically
propelled ship carrying more than thirty special trade passengers;
(63) "STCW Convention" means the International Convention
on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for
Seafarers, 1978;
(64) "surveyor" means a person appointed under sub-section
(1) of section 7;
(65) "tanker" means a vessel constructed or adapted primarily
to carry liquid or gas in bulk in its cargo space and includes
combination carriers and any other type of vessel when it is carrying
a cargo or part cargo of liquid or gas in bulk;
(66) "tindal" means the person in command or charge of a
sailing vessel;
(67) "Tribunal" means the Tribunal constituted under sub-
section (1)of section 83;
(68) "unseaworthy vessel" is a vessel which is not
seaworthy;
(69) "vessel" includes every description of water craft used or
capable of being used in the marine environment, such as ship, boat,
sailing vessel, fishing vessel, submersible, semi-submersible,
hydrofoils, non-displacement crafts, amphibious crafts, wing-in-
ground crafts, pleasure crafts, barges, lighters, Mobile
Offshore Drilling Units, Mobile Offshore Units, or of any other
description;

108
(70) "wages" include emoluments;
(71) "wreck" includes the following on a maritime casualty,
namely:—
(a) a sunken or stranded vessel;
(b) any part of a sunken or stranded vessel, including any
object or goods or cargo that is or has been on board such a
vessel;
(c) any object or goods or cargo that is lost at sea from
a vessel and that is stranded, sunken or adrift at sea;
(d) a vessel that is in distress or is about, or may reasonably
be expected, to sink or to strand, where effective measures to
assist the vessel or any property in danger are not already
being taken; or
(e) a vessel abandoned without hope or intention of
recovery.
PART II
ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD AND
GENERAL ADMINISTRA TION
CHAPTER I
ESTABLISHMENT OF N ATIONAL S HIPPING B OARD AND
SEAFARERS W ELFARE B OARD
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish a
National Shipping Board (hereinafter referred to as the Shipping
Board) for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Shipping Board shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) six members of Parliament of whom four shall be
elected from amongst themselves by members of the House of
the people and two from among themselves by the members
of the Council of States,
(b) such number of other members, not exceeding sixteen
as the Central Government may think fit to appoint to the
Shipping Board, to represent,-
(i) the Central Government,
(ii) ship-owners,
Establishment of
National Shipping
Board.

109
(iii) seafarers, and
(iv) such other interest as in the opinion of the
Central Government ought to be represented on the Shipping
Board:
Provided that the Shipping Board shall include an equal number
of persons representing the ship owners and seafarers.
(3) The term of a member elected under clause (a) of sub-
section (2) shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to be a
member of the House from which he was elected.
(4) The Central Government shall nominate one of the members
of the Shipping Board to be the Chairperson of the Shipping
Board.
(5) The Shipping Board shall advise the Central Government,-
(a) on matters relating to Indian shipping including the
development thereof; and
(b) on such other matters arising out of this Act as the
Central Government may refer to it for advice.
(6) The Shipping Board shall have power to regulate its own
procedure.
(7) The Central Government may make rules for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) the term of office of members of the Shipping Board;
(b) the manner of filling vacancies in the Shipping Board;
(c) the travelling allowances and other allowances payable
to the members of the Shipping Board;
(d) the manner of appointment of officers and other
employees of the Shipping Board and the terms and conditions
of their service.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute
a Seafarers Welfare Board (hereinafter referred to as the Welfare
Board) for the purposes of advising the Central Government on
the measures to be taken for promoting the welfare of the seafarer
under this Act, generally and in particular the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the establishment of hostels or boarding and lodging
houses for seafarer;
Constitution of
Seafarer Welfare
Board.

110
(b) the establishment of clubs, canteens, libraries and other
like amenities for the benefit of seafarer;
(c) the establishment of hospital and provision of medical
treatment for seafarer;
(d) the provision of educational and other facilities for
seafarer;
(e) the measures to be taken for welfare of distressed
seafarer;
(f) the measures to be taken in the case of seafarer who
is a foreigner but abandoned in the waters within the jurisdiction
of India;
(g) any other measures to be taken for promoting the
welfare of seafarer.
(2) The Central Government may make rules providing for,—
(a) the composition of the Welfare Board and the term of
office of members thereof;
(b) the procedure to be followed in the conduct of business
by the Welfare Board;
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to the
members of the Welfare Board;
(d) the rate of levy of fee payable by owners of vessels
for the purposes of providing amenities to seafarer and for
taking other measures for the welfare of the seafarer;
(e) the procedure by which any such fee may be collected
or recovered and the manner in which the proceeds of such
fees, after deduction of the cost of collection, shall be utilised
for the purpose specified in clause (d).
CHAPTER II
G
ENERAL A DMINISTRA TION
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a
person to be the Director-General of Shipping for the purposes of
exercising or discharging the powers, authority or duties conferred
on or imposed by or under this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order,
direct that any power, authority or jurisdiction exercisable by it
under or in relation to any such provisions of this
Director General
of Shipping.

111
Act as may be specified in the order shall, subject to such
conditions and restrictions as may be so specified, be exercisable
also by the Director-General or such other officer as may be specified
in the order.
(3) The Director-General may, with the previous approval of
the Central Government, by general or special order, direct that any
power or authority conferred upon or delegated to, and any duty
imposed upon him by or under this Act may, subject to such
conditions and restrictions as he may think fit to impose, be exercisable
or dischargeable also by such officer or other authority as he may
specify in this behalf.
(4) Every officer appointed under this Act shall discharge his
functions under the general superintendence and control of the
Director General.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint at
such port or place as it may consider necessary, as many persons as
it may think fit to be surveyors for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), in
case of cargo vessel, the Central Government, may, by notification,
authorise any person or body of persons, on such terms and conditions
as may be specified therein, to be surveyor or surveyors for the
purposes of this Act.
Explanation.— For the proposes of this sub-section, "cargo
vessel" means a vessel which is not a passenger vessel.
(3) The surveyor shall be nautical surveyor, ship surveyor,
engineer and ship surveyor or junior ship surveyor and includes
Deputy Nautical Advisor, Deputy Chief Surveyor, Deputy Chief Ship
Surveyor, Principal Officer, Chief Ship Surveyor, Chief Surveyor
and Nautical Advisor.
(4) At any port or place at which no surveyor appointed under
this section is available, the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint any qualified person to perform the functions of a surveyor
under this Act.
8. The Central Government may, by notification, appoint, as many
Radio Inspectors as it may consider necessary for the purpose of securing
that the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder relating
to radio communication are complied with.
Surveyor
Radio Inspector

112
Mercantile Marine
Department.
9. (1) The Central Government may establish and maintain at
the ports of Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Kochi, Kandla and such
other ports or places in India, as it may consider necessary, an
office of the Mercantile Marine Department for the administration of
this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) The office of the Mercantile Marine Departments at the
ports of Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Kochi, Kandla and any other
port or place as notified by the Central Government shall be in the
charge of the Principal Of ficer, and the office at any other port or
place shall be in the charge of such officer as the Central Government
may appoint in this behalf.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish
a shipping office at every port in India in which it thinks it necessary
so to do, and shall appoint thereto a shipping master and as many
deputy shipping masters and assistant shipping masters as it may
consider necessary.
(2) The Central Government may direct that at any port at
which no separate shipping office is established, the whole or any
part of the business of the shipping office shall be conducted at the
Mercantile Marine Department, or at the office of the port officer
or at such other office as the Central Government may specify, and
thereupon the same shall be conducted accordingly.
(3) All acts done by or before a deputy shipping master, an
assistant shipping master and the officer to whom any business of
the shipping office is committed under sub-section (2) shall have the
same effect as if done by or before a shipping master for the
purposes of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish
at every port in India in which it thinks it necessary so to do, a
seafarer's employment office and shall appoint thereto a director and
as many deputy directors and assistant directors as it may consider
necessary.
(2) All acts done by or before a deputy director or assistant
director shall have the same effect as if done by or before a director
for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that at
any port at which no separate seafarer's employment office is
Shipping Office.
Seafarer's
Employment
Office.

113
established, the functions of the seafarer's employment office in that
port shall be discharged by such person or body of persons as it
may specify in the notification, and thereupon the office of the
person or body of persons so specified shall be deemed to be the
seafarer's employment office established at that port for the purposes
of this Act.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that, on and from the date of commencement of this Act, all the
existing seamen's employment offices shall be deemed to have been
established as the seafarer employment offices under sub-section (1)
of this section.
12. (1) The Central Government may appoint seafarer's welfare
officers at such ports in or outside India as it may consider
necessary.
(2) A seafarer's welfare officer appointed under sub-section (1)
shall perform,—
(a) in the case of any such officer appointed at any port
in India, such functions in relation to welfare of seafarers as
may be assigned to him by the Central Government;
(b) in the case of any such officer appointed at any port
outside India, such functions in relation to welfare of seafarers
and such functions of an Indian consular officer under Part V
as may be assigned to him by the Central Government.
(3) If any seafarer's welfare officer appointed at any port
outside India performs any functions assigned to an Indian consular
officer under Part V , such functions shall have the same effect as
if they had been performed by an Indian consular officer for the
purposes of that Part.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that, on and from the date of commencement of this Act, all the
seamen's employment officers shall be deemed to have been
appointed as seafarer's welfare officers under sub-section (1) of this
section.
PART III
R
EGISTRATION OF V ESSELS
13. This Part shall apply to sea-going vessels.
Seafarer's welfare
officer.
Application of
Part.

114
CHAPTER I
REGISTRATION OF I NDIAN V ESSELS
14. (1) Every Indian vessel, shall be registered under this Part
at a port or place in India, as the Central Government may, by
notification, declare to be a port of registry under this Act:
Provided that the vessels registered under the provisions of the
Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 shall be re-registered under the provisions
of this Part within a period of one year from the date of coming into
force of this Part:
Provided further that any vessel registered on the commencement
of this Act at any port in India under any enactment repealed by this
Act, except the vessels registered under the Coasting Vessel Act,
1838, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Part and
shall be recognised as an Indian vessel:
Provided also that, subject to any exemptions or modifications,
as the case may be, made by the Central Government, all vessels
belonging to the Government, other than vessels of the Indian Navy,
Indian Coast Guard, Customs Authorities, Central Paramilitary Forces,
Coastal Police and other Police Agencies, shall be registered under
this Act.
(2) Nothwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an
Indian vessel, may be, subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, registered in a country other than India.
(3) No vessel shall be an Indian vessel or an Indian controlled
tonnage vessel unless such vessel is substantially owned by any of
the following persons, namely,—
(a) a citizen of India; or
(b) a company or a body established by or under any
Central Act or State Act which has its principal place of business
in India; or
(c) a co-operative society registered or deemed to be
registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or any
other law relating to a co-operative society for the time being
in force in any State.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "substantially
owned" means having more than fifty per cent of the shares of the
ownership of the vessel.
Obligation to
register.
2 of 1912
19 of 1838
19 of 1838

115
(4) If an Indian vessel is proceeding to sea without its valid
certificate of registry, such Indian vessel shall be detained until it
produces its valid certificate of registry to the proper officer.
15. (1) At any port, the Principal Officer of the Mercantile
Marine Department, shall be the Registrar of Indian vessels at that
port, and at any other place in India such authority as the Central
Government may, by notification, appoint, shall be the Registrar of
Indian vessels at that place.
(2) Every Registrar shall keep a register book and entries in that
book be made, and maintain the records of vessels registered
under the provisions of this Act, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
16. An application for the registry of an Indian vessel shall be
made to the Registrar in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
17. (1) The owner of every Indian vessel in respect of which
an application for registry is made shall cause such vessel to be
marked, surveyed and measured by a surveyor and the tonnage of
the vessel ascertained before registry in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The surveyor shall grant a certificate specifying the tonnage,
build and such other particulars descriptive of the identity of the
vessel as may be prescribed and the certificate of the surveyor shall
be delivered to the Registrar before registry.
18. (1) Where it appears to the Registrar that there is any doubt
as to the title of any Indian vessel to be registered as an Indian
vessel, he may require evidence to be given to his satisfaction that
the vessel is entitled to be registered as an Indian vessel.
(2) If no evidence is given to the satisfaction of the Registrar
that the vessel is entitled to be registered as an Indian vessel under
sub-section (1), the vessel shall be liable to forfeiture.
19. (1) On completion of the registry of an Indian vessel, the
Registrar shall grant a certificate of registry containing the particulars
respecting her as entered in the register book.
(2) A tonnage certificate shall be issued to every vessel, the
gross tonnage and net tonnage of which have been determined in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Registrar of Indian
vessels.
Application for
registry.
Marking, survey
and measurement
of vessels before
registry.
Power of
Registrar to
inquire into title
of Indian vessel
to be so registered.
Grant of
certificate of
registry.

116
(3) In the event of the certificate of registry of an Indian vessel
being defaced or mutilated, the Registrar of her port of registry may,
on the delivery to him of that certificate or on submission of a
declaration by the owner to the effect that certificate has been
lost or destroyed, grant a new certificate in lieu of her original
certificate.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "net tonnage"
means the measure of the useful capacity of a vessel determined in
accordance with the rules made in this behalf.
20. (1) The certificate of registry shall be used only for the
lawful navigation of the vessel, and shall at all times remain in the
custody of the person in charge of the vessel, and shall not be
subject to detention by reason of any title, lien, charge or interest
whatever, had or claimed by any owner, mortgagee or other person
to, on or in the vessel.
(2) No person, whether interested in a vessel or not who has
in his possession, or under his control the certificate of registry of
a vessel, shall refuse or omit without reasonable cause to deliver
such certificate on demand to the person entitled to the custody
thereof for the purposes of the lawful navigation of the vessel, or
to any Registrar or other person entitled by law to require such
delivery.
(3) If the master or owner of an Indian vessel uses or attempts
to use for her navigation a certificate of registry not legally granted
in respect of the vessel, he shall be guilty of an offence under this
sub-section and the vessel shall be liable to forfeiture.
21. Whenever a change occurs in the registered ownership of
an Indian vessel, the owner of the Indian vessel shall, for the purpose
of endorsement of change of ownership, deliver the certificate of
registry to the Registrar who shall make an endorsement for that
purpose in such manner as may be prescribed.
22. In the event of a registered vessel being either actually or
constructively lost, taken by the enemy, burnt or broken up or
ceasing for any reason to be an Indian vessel, or is to be registered
under any other law for the time being in force at the relevant time,
every owner of such vessel shall immediately on obtaining knowledge
of the event, if no notice thereof has already been given to the
Registrar, give notice thereof to the Registrar at her port of registry
Custody and use of
certificate
Endorsement on
certificate of
change of
ownership.
Delivery of
certificate of
vessel lost or
ceasing to be an
Indian vessel.

117
and that Registrar shall make an entry thereof in the register book
and its registry in that book shall be considered as closed except so
far as relates to any unsatisfied mortgages entered therein.
23. (1) If at any port or place a vessel becomes entitled to be
registered as an Indian vessel,—
(a) the Registrar; or
(b) Indian Consular officer; or
(c) a person authorised by the Central Government, may
issue a provisional certificate of registry for a period not
exceeding six months in accordance with such procedure as
may be prescribed and such provisional certificate of registry
shall have the effect of a certificate of registry:
Provided that the Registrar may extend the validity of the
provisional registry for a further period not exceeding three
months.
(2) The provisional certificate issued under sub-section (1) shall
be delivered to the Registrar for cancellation where a vessel has been
permanently registered.
(3) Where a vessel has been provisionally registered and its
registry is not completed within the period specified in sub-section
(1), the provisional registry of the vessel shall be deemed to be
closed (except in relation to any unsatisfied mortgages entered therein),
and the Registrar shall make an entry thereof in the register.
24. (1) No person shall transfer or acquire any Indian vessel or
any share or interest therein at any time during which the security
of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or
external aggression, and a proclamation of emergency issued under
clause (1)  of article 352 of the Constitution is in operation without
the previous approval of the Central Government and any transaction
effected in contravention of this provision, shall be void and
unenforceable.
(2) The Central Government may, if it considers necessary or
expedient so to do for the purpose of conserving the tonnage of
Indian shipping, by order, refuse to give its approval to any such
transfer or acquisition.
Provisional
registration of
Indian vessel.
Transfer of
Indian vessel or
shares.

118
(3) No transfer or acquisition of any Indian vessel shall be valid
unless,—
(a) all mortgage entered in its register, are satisfied or, the
mortgagee and the new owner have given their consent in
writing for the transfer of vessel;
(b) all wages and other amounts due to seafarer in
connection with their employment on that vessel have been
paid in accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(c) any subsisting entry has been made of any court order
prohibiting transfer or any dealing with that vessel;
(d) any unpaid statutory fees that may be levied on the
vessel and has been informed in writing to the Registrar.
(4) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section,
an Indian vessel or a share therein shall be transferred only by an
instrument in writing.
(5) The instrument shall contain such description of the Indian
vessel as is contained in the surveyor's certificate or some other
description sufficient to identify the vessel to the satisfaction of the
Registrar and shall be in such form as may be prescribed and shall
be executed by the transferor in the presence of and be attested by
at least two witnesses.
25.  (1) Every instrument for the transfer of an Indian vessel
or of a share therein when duly executed shall be produced to the
Registrar of her port of registry, and the Registrar shall thereupon
enter in the register book the name of the transferee as owner of the
vessel or share, as the case may be, and shall endorse on the
instrument the fact of that entry having been made with the day and
hour thereof.
(2) Every such instrument shall be entered in the register book
in the order of its production to the Registrar.
26. (1) Where the property in an Indian vessel or share therein
is transmitted to a person on the death or insolvency of any registered
owner, or by any lawful means other than by a transfer under this
Act,-
(a) that person shall authenticate the transmission by
making and signing a declaration in such form as may be
prescribed (in this Act referred to as a declaration of
Registry of
transfer.
Transmission of
property in Indian
vessel on death,
insolvency, etc.

119
transmission) identifying the vessel and also a statement of the
manner in which and the person to whom the property has
been transmitted;
(b) if the transmission is consequent on insolvency, the
declaration of transmission shall be accompanied by proper
proof of such claim;
(c) if the transmission is consequent on death, the
declaration of transmission shall be accompanied by a succession
certificate, probate or letters of administration, as the case may
be, under the Indian Succession Act, 1925 or a duly certified
copy thereof.
(2) The Registrar, on receipt of the declaration of transmission
so accompanied, shall enter in the register book the name of the
person entitled under the transmission as owner of the vessel or
share therein which has been transmitted, and, where there are more
persons than one, shall enter the names of all those persons, but
those persons however numerous shall, for the purpose of the
provisions of this Act with respect to the number of persons claiming
to be registered as owners, be considered as one person:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require the Registrar
to make an entry in the register book under this section, if he is of
opinion that by reason of the transmission the vessel has ceased to
be an Indian vessel.
27. (1) Where by reason of the transmission of any property in
a vessel or a share therein on death, insolvency or otherwise, a
vessel ceases to be an Indian vessel, the Registrar of the port of
registry shall submit a report to the Central Government setting out
the circumstances in which the vessel has ceased to be an Indian
vessel.
(2) The Central Government may, within a period of thirty days
from the date of receipt of report, under sub-section (1), make an
application to the High Court for a direction for the sale to any
citizen of India or any company or body or co-operative
society:
Provided that an application may be admitted after the expiry of
the period of thirty days if the Central Government satisfies the High
Court that it had sufficient cause for not making the application
within the said period.
Order for sale
where vessel has
ceased to be an
Indian vessel.
39 of 1925

120
(3) The High Court may require any evidence in support of
the application as it thinks requisite and may make such order thereon
and on such terms and conditions as it thinks just or may reject the
application in case it finds that the vessel has not ceased to be an
Indian vessel, and in case the vessel or the share is ordered to be
sold, it shall direct that the proceeds of the sale after deducting the
expenses thereof, be paid to the person entitled under such
transmission or otherwise.
28.  Where any court, whether under section 27 or otherwise,
orders the sale of any vessel or share therein, the order of the court
shall contain a declaration vesting in some person named by the
court the right to transfer that vessel or share, and that person shall
thereupon be entitled to transfer the vessel or share in the same
manner and to the same extent as if he were the registered owner
thereof, and every Registrar shall obey the requisition of the person
so named in respect of any such transfer to the same extent as if
such person were the registered owner.
29. (1) A registered vessel or a share therein may be made a
security for a loan or other valuable consideration, and the instrument
creating the security (in this Act called a mortgage) shall be in such
form as may be prescribed, and on the production of such instrument,
the Registrar shall record it in the register book.
(2) Except in so far as may be necessary for making a
mortgaged vessel or share available as a security for the mortgage
debt, the mortgagee shall not, by reason of his mortgage, be deemed
to be the owner of the vessel or share, nor shall the mortgagor be
deemed to have ceased to be owner thereof.
(3) Where a registered mortgage is discharged, the Registrar
shall, on the production of the mortgage deed with a receipt for the
mortgage money endorsed thereon, duly signed and attested, make
an entry in the register book to the effect that the mortgage has been
discharged, and on that entry being made the estate, if any, which
passed to the mortgagee shall vest in the person in whom (having
regard to intervening acts and circumstances, if any) it would have
vested, if the mortgage had not been made.
(4) If there are more mortgages than one recorded in respect
of the same vessel or share, the mortgagees shall, notwithstanding
Transfer of vessel
on sale by order
of court.
Mortgage of
vessel or share

121
any express, implied or constructive notice, have priority according
to the date and time on which each mortgage is recorded in
the register book and not according to the date of each mortgage
itself.
30. (1) Where there is only one registered mortgagee of a vessel
or share, he shall be entitled to recover the amount due under the
mortgage by selling the mortgaged vessel or share without approaching
the High Court:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall prevent
the mortgagee from recovering the amount so due in the High Court
as provided in sub-section (2).
(2) Where there are two or more registered mortgagees of a
vessel or share they shall be entitled to recover the amount due
under the mortgage in the High Court.
(3) Every registered mortgagee of a vessel or share who intends
to recover the amount due under the mortgage by selling the
mortgaged vessel or share under sub-section (1) shall give an advance
notice of fifteen days relating to such sale to the Registrar of the
vessel's port of registry.
(4) The notice under sub-section (3) shall be accompanied
with the proof of payment of the wages.
31. A registered mortgage of a vessel or share shall not be
affected by any act of insolvency committed by the mortgagor after
the date of the record of such mortgage, notwithstanding that the
mortgagor, at the commencement of his insolvency, had the vessel
or share in his possession, order or disposition, or was the reputed
owner thereof, and the mortgage shall be preferred to any right,
claim or interest therein of the other creditors of the insolvent or any
trustee or assignee on their behalf.
32. (1) A registered mortgage of a vessel or share may be
transferred to any person and the instrument effecting the transfer
shall be in such form as may be prescribed or as near thereto as
circumstances permit, and on the production of such instrument,
the Registrar shall record it by entering in the register book the name
of the transferee as mortgagee of the vessel or share and shall, by
memorandum under his hand, notify on the instrument of transfer
that it has been recorded by him stating the day and hour of the
record.
Rights of
mortgage
Mortgage not
affected by
insolvency.
Transfer of
mortgages

122
(2) The person to whom any such mortgage has been
transferred shall enjoy the same right of preference as was enjoyed
by the transferor.
33. (1) Where the interest of a mortgagee in a vessel or share
is transmitted on death, or insolvency, or by any lawful means other
than by a transfer under this Act, the transmission shall be
authenticated by a declaration of the person to whom the interest is
transmitted containing a statement of the manner in which and the
person to whom the property has been transmitted, and shall be
accompanied by the like evidence as is by this Act required in case
of a corresponding transmission of the ownership of a vessel or
share.
(2) The Registrar, on receipt of the declaration and the
production of the evidence referred to in sub-section (1), shall enter
the name of the person entitled under the transmission in the register
book as mortgagee of the vessel or share.
34.  Every Indian vessel shall be described by such name, call
sign and official number in such manner as may be prescribed.
35.  When a registered vessel is so altered as not to correspond
with the particulars relating to her tonnage or description contained
in the register book, then, if the alteration is made at any port having
a Registrar, that Registrar, or if it is made elsewhere, the Registrar
of the first port having a Registrar at which the vessel arrives after
the alteration, shall, on an application being made to him by the
owner stating the particulars of the alteration, either cause the alteration
to be registered or direct that the vessel be registered anew.
36.  Where any Registrar, not being the Registrar of the vessel's
port of registry, on an application as to an alteration in a vessel
directs the vessel to be registered anew, he shall either grant a
provisional certificate describing the vessel as altered, or provisionally
endorse the particulars of the alteration on the existing certificate.
37.  Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, where
the ownership of any Indian vessel is changed, the Registrar of the
port at which the vessel is registered may, on the application of the
owner of the vessel, register the vessel anew in such manner as may
be prescribed, although registry anew is not required under this Act.
38.  The registry of any vessel may be transferred from one
port of registry to another on an application to the Registrar of the
Transmission
of interest in
mortgage in
certain
circumstances.
Description of
name, call sign and
an official number
of Indian vessel.
Registry of
alterations.
Provisional
certificate and
endorsement
where vessel is
to be registered
anew.
Registry anew on
change of
ownership.
Transfer of
registry.

123
existing port of registry of the vessel made by declaration in writing
of all persons appearing in the register to be interested therein as
owners or mortgagees, but that transfer shall not in any way affect
the rights of those persons or any of them and those rights shall in
all respects continue in the same manner as if no such transfer had
been effected.
39.  Where a vessel has ceased to be registered as an Indian
vessel by reason of having been wrecked or abandoned, or for any
reason other than capture by the enemy, the vessel shall not be re-
registered until she has, at the expense of the applicant for the
registry, been surveyed by a surveyor and certified by him to be
seaworthy.
40. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, declare
the proper national colours for all Indian vessels and for all vessels
owned by the Government and different colours may be declared
for different classes of vessels.
(2) Vessels registered under this Part shall hoist the proper
national colours,—
(a) on a signal being made to her by any vessel of the
Indian Navy or Indian Coast Guard;
(b) on entering or leaving any port.
(3) Any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy, any officer
of the Indian Coast Guard, a surveyor or any Indian consular officer,
as the case may be, may board any vessel on which any colours are
hoisted contrary to this Act and seize and take away the colours
which shall be forfeited to the Government.
(4) No person on board a vessel which is not an Indian vessel
shall, for the purpose of making it appear to be an Indian vessel, use
the Indian national colours, unless the assumption of Indian character
has been made for the purpose of escaping capture by the enemy
or by a foreign vessel of war in the exercise of some belligerent
right.
41.  No owner or master of an Indian vessel shall knowingly
do anything or permit anything to be done, or carry or permit to be
carried any papers or documents, with intent to conceal the Indian
character of the vessel from any person entitled by any law for the
time being in force to inquire into the same, or with intent to assume
a foreign character for the vessel, or with intent to deceive any
person so entitled.
Restrictions on
re-registry of
abandoned vessel.
National colours
for Indian vessels.
Concealment of
Indian, or
assumption of
foreign, character.

124
42. Where it is declared by this Act that an Indian vessel shall
not be recognised as such, that vessel shall not be entitled to any
privileges, benefits, advantages or protection usually enjoyed by Indian
vessel or to use the Indian national colours for Indian vessel or to
assume the Indian national character:
Provided that for the payment of dues the liability to fine and
forfeiture and the punishment of offences committed on board such
vessel, or by any person belonging to her, such vessel shall be dealt
with in the same manner in all respects as if she were a recognised
Indian vessel.
43. Where any vessel has either wholly or as to any share
therein become subject to forfeiture under this Part, any
commissioned officer of the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, any
Indian consular officer or any other officer authorised by the Central
Government, may seize and detain the vessel, and bring her for
adjudication before the High Court, and the High Court may thereupon
adjudge the vessel with her equipment to be forfeited to the
Government, and make such order in the case as to the High Court
seems just and may award to the officer bringing in the vessel for
adjudication such portion of the proceeds of the sale of the vessel
or any share therein as the High Court thinks fit.
44. Where any person is beneficially interested otherwise than
by way of mortgage in any vessel or share in a vessel registered in
the name of some other person as owner, the person so interested
shall, as well as the registered owner, be subject to all the pecuniary
penalties imposed by this or any other Act on the owners of vessel
or shares therein, without prejudice that proceedings for the
enforcement of any such penalties may be taken against both or
either of the said parties jointly or severally.
45. (1) A person may on application to the Registrar and on
payment of such fees as may be prescribed, inspect any register
book, and may obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register
book.
(2) A certified copy of an entry in a register book shall be
admissible in evidence in any court and have the same effect to all
intents as the original entry in the register book of which it is a copy.
46. (1) The owner of an Indian vessel may make an application
to the Registrar to close its registry provided that, if there is no,—
Liabilities of
vessel not
recognized as
Indian vessel.
Proceedings on
forfeiture of
vessel.
Liability of
owners.
Evidence of
register book,
certificate of
registry and other
documents.
Closure of
registry.

125
(a) unsatisfied mortgage entered in its register; or
(b) outstanding claims of the master or seafarer of the
vessel in respect of wages which have been intimated.
(2) The owner of an Indian vessel shall, for the purposes of
sub-section (1), specify the name of the vessel, the intended port
and country of registry (if applicable) or otherwise the
reason for the closure in the application and shall be submitted to the
Registrar along with the certificate of registry of the vessel.
(3) On receipt of the application under sub-section (1) and the
certificate of registry under sub-section (2), the Registrar shall, if he
is satisfied, by an order, close the registry of the vessel and make
an entry thereof in the register.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "owner" includes
any transferee of, or any person entitled under a transmission to the
property in, an Indian vessel.
CHAPTER II
REGISTRATION OF VESSELS ON BAREBOA T CHARTER-CUM-DEMISE
BY I NDIAN CHARTERER
47. This Chapter shall apply to any vessel registered under the
law of any country other than India and chartered by an Indian
charterer on bareboat charter-cum-demise contract.
48. In this Chapter unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bareboat charter-cum-demise contract" means a
written contract for chartering a vessel on bareboat charter-
cum-demise;
(b) "charter period" means the period during which the
vessel is chartered on bareboat charter-cum-demise contract;
(c) "Indian charterer" means a person referred to in clause
(a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 14
who has chartered a vessel on bareboat charter-cum- demise
contract.
49. (1) The vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum -demise
by an Indian charterer may be registered under this Chapter.
(2) The procedure for registration of the vessel chartered on
bareboat charter-cum-demise shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Application of
this Chapter.
Definitions.
Registration of
vessel chartered
on bareboat
charter-cum-
demise.

126
(3) The bareboat charter-cum-demise contract shall include the
following provisions, namely:—
(a) the period for hiring the vessel chartered on bareboat
charter-cum-demise shall be for not less than three years;
(b) the possession and control of the vessel chartered on
bareboat charter-cum-demise, including the right to appoint its
master and other seafarers, shall vest with the Indian charterer;
and
(c) the ownership of the vessel chartered on bareboat
charter-cum-demise, after the charter period shall stand
transferred to the Indian charterer.
(4) The registration of a vessel chartered on bareboat charter-
cum-demise shall remain in force till the end of the charter period:
Provided that if any provision of this Act is violated, the
registration of such vessel may be closed before the chartered period.
(5) The Registrar shall, after registration or closure of registration
of a vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum-demise contract, send
the information of such registration or closure, as the case may be,
to the authority of registration of the country where such vessel is
registered.
(6) The vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum-demise
registered under this Chapter shall be an Indian vessel entitled to fly
the Indian flag.
(7) If the bareboat charter-cum-demise contract is terminated
before the charter period due to breach of the agreement or any
other reason, the Indian charterer shall inform the Registrar and, on
receipt of such information, the Registrar shall close the registry and
forward the information to the authority of registration of the country
where such vessel is registered.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
provisions relating to the owner of an Indian vessel under this Act
shall, subject to such modification as the Central Government may
consider necessary, apply to the Indian charterer for the vessels
registered under this Chapter.
50. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out
the purposes of this Part.
Power to make
rules in respect of
matters in this
Part.

127
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the conditions for registration of an Indian vessel,
under sub-section (2) of section 14;
(b) the manner of keeping the register book and making
entries therein and maintenance of the records of vessels
registered under this Act under sub-section (2) of section 15;
(c) the form and manner of making application for registry
of an Indian vessel under section 16;
(d) the manner of marking, survey, measurement and
ascertainment of tonnage of an Indian vessel under sub-section
(1) of section 17;
(e) the other particulars descriptive of the identity of vessel
under sub-section (2) of section 17;
(f) the manner of making endorsement under
section 21;
(g) the procedure for issuing a provisional certificate of
registry under sub-section (1) of section 23;
(h) the form of instrument for description of vessel under
sub-section (5) of section 24;
(i) the form for making and signing a declaration under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(j) the form of mortgage under sub-section (1)  of
section 29;
(k) the form of instrument effecting the transfer under
sub-section (1) of section 32;
(l) the manner of description of the name, call sign and
official number of Indian vessel under section 34;
(m) the manner of registration of vessel anew under
section 37;
(n) the fee for inspection of register book and a certified
copy of any entry of the register book under sub-section (1)
of section 45;

128
(o) the procedure for registration of vessel chartered on
bareboat charter-cum-demise under sub-section (2)  of
section 49;
(p) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
PART IV
CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY AND CERTIFICATE OF PROFICIENCY
51. (1) Every Indian vessel shall be provided the seafarers with
such manning scale as may be prescribed.
(2) The seafarer shall hold such certificate of a grade appropriate
to his station in the vessel or of a higher grade as may be prescribed:
Provided that in relation to different categories of vessel, areas
and types of operations there shall be provided such different manning
scales as may be prescribed:
Provided further that subject to such conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed, the Indian national with foreign certificates of
competency or foreign national with certificate of competency issued
under this Act or foreign certificate of competency, may serve on
Indian vessels.
(3) Every vessel, whether at sea or in any port or place, shall
be manned by such number of persons with such qualifications as
may be prescribed.
52. (1) The Central Government shall, subject to the provisions
of STCW Convention, grant a certificate of competency or certificate
of proficiency, as the case may be, for such different grades of
seafarers with such requirements and such procedures as may be
prescribed.
(2) No certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency
shall be granted, under sub-section (1) unless the seafarer fulfils the
requirements in respect of service, age limit, medical fitness, training,
qualifications and examination in accordance with the STCW
Convention.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and
(2), the Central Government may grant such other certificate of
competency or certificate of proficiency with such requirements
and procedures as may be prescribed.
Certificates to
be held by
seafarers.
Certificate of
competency and
certificate of
proficiency.

129
(4) A certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency, as
the case may be, granted under sub- sections (1), (2) and (3) shall
be in such form and on payment of such fee and valid for such
period as may be prescribed, and record of such certificate shall be
kept in such manner as may be prescribed.
53. (1) The Director-General shall administer, supervise and
monitor all activities relating to training and assessment for grant of
certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency.
(2) The Director-General shall approve the training institute,
training courses and method of conduct of such training course for
grant of certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency under
section 52:
Provided that no certificate of competency or certificate of
proficiency shall be granted, unless the training required for such
certificate has been imparted in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
(3) The Director-General may, for the purposes of this Part
authorise any person to inspect any maritime training institute and
the person so authorised in this behalf shall submit the report to the
Director-General.
(4) The Director-General may, after receipt of the inspection
report under sub-section (3), if he is satisfied that the maritime
training institute has contravened any provisions of this Part, after
giving an opportunity of being heard, suspend or withdraw the
approval granted to such maritime training institutes under sub-
section (2).
54. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a person for
the purposes of examining the qualifications of persons desirous of
obtaining certificates under section 52.
(2) The manner of conducting examination for certificate of
competency or certificate of proficiency, the fee to be charged and
the payment to be made to the examiners appointed under sub-
section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall grant a certificate of
competency or certificate of proficiency, as the case may be, to
every applicant, who is duly reported by the examiners appointed
under sub-section (1) to have passed the examination satisfactorily
Training for
grant of
certificate of
competency and
certificate of
proficiency
Examinations for
grant of
certificates.

130
and to have given satisfactory evidence of his sobriety, experience
and ability and general good conduct on board vessel:
Provided that the Central Government may, if it has reason to
believe that the report has been unduly made, before granting a
certificate, require a re-examination of the applicant including the
inquiry into the applicant's testimonials and character.
(4) If it appears to the Central Government that a person holding
a certificate granted under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of
section 52 has obtained it on the basis of false or erroneous
information, or is guilty of misconduct or on receipt by the Central
Government of any report of incompetency, or any act of omission
or commission or compromise to safety, security or prevention of
pollution by the person holding a certificate which may pose a threat
to life or property or environment, it may, after due investigation, by
order, withdraw, suspend or cancel such certificate:
Provided that no order shall be passed under this sub-section
without giving the person holding the certificate an opportunity of
being heard.
(5) A note of all orders made under sub-section (4) affecting
any certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency, in
pursuance of the powers contained in this Act, shall be entered on
the copy of the certificate kept under section 52.
(6) Whenever a person holding a certificate granted under this
Act proves to the satisfaction of the issuing authority that he has,
lost or been deprived of such certificate, the issuing authority shall,
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, shall grant a copy of
the certificate and such copy shall have all the effect of the
original.
55. (1) The master of every vessel shall, on demand, produce
to the proper officer the certificates of competency of the seafarers
of the vessel along with a list of crew with the particulars of grades
of certificates of master, mates, engineers and ratings.
(2) A surveyor may, at any reasonable time, go on board a
vessel to which any of the provisions of this Part applies for the
purpose of ensuring that the seafarers holding certificates issued in
accordance with the STCW Convention are actually appointed and
Production of
certificate of
competency.

131
are present, and satisfy himself about the adequacy of such seafarers
for the watch-keeping duties in ports and at sea.
56. (1) Where in a country other than India, the certificate of
competency is granted under any law for the time being in force in
that country which is similar to those referred to in this Act, then
if the Central Government is satisfied that,—
(a) the conditions under which any certificate of
competency is granted in that country meets the standards of
competency not lower than those required for the grant under
this Act for corresponding certificates; and
(b) the certificate granted under this Act is accepted in
that country in lieu of the corresponding certificate granted
under the laws of that country, the Central Government may,
by notification, declare that any certificate of competency
granted under the law in force in that country shall be recognised
as equivalent to the corresponding certificate of competency
granted under this Act.
(2) The certificate recognised under sub-section (1) as equivalent
may be issued with a certificate of endorsement as may be
prescribed.
(3) A person holding a certificate of endorsement under
sub-section (2) shall be considered as duly certificated under this
Act.
57. (1) Every master of a foreign vessel shall, before proceeding
to sea from any port or place in India, ensure that the vessel has the
requisite numbers of seafarer of appropriate grades as specified in
the Safety Convention and STCW Convention.
(2) A surveyor or any person authorised in this behalf by the
Central Government may, at any reasonable time, go on board a
vessel for the purpose of ensuring that the seafarers holding certificates
issued in accordance with the Safety Convention and STCW
Convention are actually appointed and are present, and satisfy himself
about the adequacy of such seafarers for the watch keeping duties
in ports and at sea.
(3) If any report made under sub-section (2) by a surveyor or
any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government,
Recognition of
certificates of
competency
granted in other
countries.
Foreign vessel
not to sail
without
certificated
seafarers.

132
Obligations of
certain certificate
holders to serve
the Government
or in Indian
vessels.
reveals any deficiency in a foreign vessel in relation to the
requirements of the Safety Convention and STCW Convention and
the Central Government is satisfied that it shall be unsafe for such
vessel to proceed to sea, that vessel may be detained by the proper
officer till such requirements are fulfilled.
58. At any time during which the security of India is threatened
or during a proclamation of emergency issued under clause (1) of
article 352 of the Constitution, every Indian citizen holding an Indian
certificate of competency, certificate of proficiency or certificate of
recognition granted under this Act shall be liable to serve on Indian
vessel for such period on such terms and conditions as the Central
Government may, by general or special order, specify.
59. (1)  The Central Government may make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Part.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manning scales of the seafarers under sub-section
(1) of section 51;
(b) the certificate of grade appropriate under sub-section
(2) of section 51;
(c) the different manning scales in relation to different
categories of vessel, areas and types of operations under proviso
to sub-section (2) of section 51;
(d) the conditions and restrictions under the second proviso
to sub-section (2) of section 51;
(e) the number of persons to be manned and their
qualifications under sub-section (3) of section 51;
(f) the requirement and procedure for grant of certificate
of competency or certificate of proficiency to the different
grades of seafarer under sub-section (1) of section 52;
(g) the requirement and procedure for grant of certificate
of competency or certificate of proficiency under sub-section
(3) of section 52;
(h) the form of certificate, fees and the valid period of
such certificate and the manner in which the copies of certificate
Power to make
rules.

133
to be kept and recorded under sub-section (4)  of
section 52;
(i) the manner of conducting examination for certificate
of competency or certificate of proficiency, the fee to be charged
and the payment to be made to the examiners under sub-
section (2) of section 54;
(j) the fee for grant of certificate if lost or deprived,
under sub-section (6) of section 54;
(k) the endorsement under sub-section (2) of section 56;
(l) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
PART V
S
EAFARERS
60. Save as otherwise provided, this Part shall apply to,—
(a) every seafarer;
(b) recruitment and placement service;
(c) ship owners.
61. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Maritime Labour Certificate" means a Certificate issued
by the Central Government or any officer, authority or
organisation authorised by it in this behalf, in accordance with
the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention;
(b) "recruitment and placement service" means any person,
company, institution, agency or other organisation, in public or
private sector which is engaged in recruiting seafarers on behalf
of employers or placing seafarers with the employers.
62. (1) The Central Government may make rules for the
classification of seafarers into different categories, the minimum
manning scale of seafarers of such categories, and the different
scales for different classes of ships.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the provisions of this Act shall apply to
the seafarer employed or engaged as a member of the crew of a
ship.
Application of
this Part.
Definitions.
Classification of
seafarer,
maritime labour
standards and
prescription of
minimum scale.

134
63. (1) The provisions relating to maritime labour standards as
contained in the Maritime Labour Convention, shall apply to all
seafarers and ships registered under this Act, but does not include,—
(a) ships which navigate exclusively in inland waters
or waters within, or closely adjacent to, sheltered waters or
areas where any law for the time being in force relating to
ports apply;
(b) ships engaged in fishing activities;
(c) traditionally built ships such as dhows and junks;
(d) ships of war or naval auxiliaries.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central
Government may, on the recommendation of the Director-General,
by order, extend the provisions of the said sub-section to any category
of ship with such exceptions and modifications as it may consider
necessary.
(3) Every Indian ship referred to in sub-section (1), wherever
it is, and every ship other than an Indian ship while within the
jurisdiction of India shall, subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, be in possession of a certificate issued in accordance
with the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention.
(4) No ship shall proceed to sea unless it is in possession of
certificate issued under sub-section (3).
64. It shall be the duty of shipping masters,—
(a) to monitor the engagement and discharge of seafarer
in the manner provided under this Act;
(b) to issue such continuous discharge certificate and
seafarer's identity document as may be prescribed;
(c) to hear and decide disputes between a master, owner
or agent of ship and any of the crew of the ship including
those under section 77;
(d) to transmit the complaint of any dispute of a foreign
seafarer of a ship, registered in a country other than India, in
Indian territorial waters, with the master, owner or agent to the
competent authority of the country of registration and to
forward a copy of such complaint to the Director-General of
International Labour Organisation;
Application of
maritime labour
standards to
seafarers and
ships.
Duties of shipping
master.

135
(e) to perform such other duties relating to seafarers and
merchant ships under this Act as the Central Government may,
by general or special order, specify.
65. It shall be the business of the seafarer's employment office,—
(a) to issue licence, to regulate and control the recruitment and
placement service and to—
(i) ensure that no fees or other charges for recruitment
and placement of seafarers are borne directly or indirectly or
in whole or in part, by the seafarers;
(ii) ensure that adequate machinery and procedures exists
for the investigation, if necessary, of complaints concerning
the activities of recruitment and placement services;
(b) to perform such other functions and duties as may be
prescribed.
66. (1) The seafarer shall be engaged only by,—
(a) recruitment and placement service possessing the
licence issued under the provisions of section 65; or
(b) owners in the case of Indian vessel for the vessel
owned by them.
(2) No person, other than an owner of Indian vessel in respect
of the vessel owned by him, shall carry on the business of recruitment
and placement service unless he is in possession of a valid licence
issued under section 65.
(3) No person shall engage any seafarer under this Act in any
ship, unless the seafarer is in possession of a continuous discharge
certificate and seafarer's identity documents issued under sub-section
(4) except as otherwise exempted.
(4) The continuous discharge certificate and seafarer's identity
document referred to in sub-section (3) shall be issued in such
form and manner and on payment of such fees as may be
prescribed.
(5) No person under the age of sixteen years shall be engaged
or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any ship.
(6) The Central Government may, by order, direct that the
seafarers generally or any category of seafarers in particular shall
Business of
seafarer's
employment
office.
Supply or
recruitment or
engagement of
seafarer.

136
not be engaged or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any ship
or in any class of ships so specified, unless each one of them
possesses such qualifications as may be prescribed.
(7) Except as otherwise provided under the rules made under
sub-section (6), no person shall engage or carry to sea any seafarer
to work in any capacity in any ship or in any class of ships specified
in this behalf by the Central Government, unless the seafarer is in
possession of a certificate to the effect that he is medically fit to be
employed in that capacity granted in such form by such authority
as may be prescribed.
(8) Any person who claims to represent the interests of seafarers
shall not demand or receive, either directly or indirectly, from any
seafarer or person seeking employment as seafarer or any person on
his behalf, any remuneration or donation or fees or compulsory
subscription of any kind attributable from such seafarer or person's
employment as seafarer, other than the fees authorised by this Act.
(9) There shall be no discrimination between seafarers,—
(a) on the ground of their membership in any particular
union claiming to represent the interests of seafarers and
membership in such union shall not be a pre- condition,
(b) on the basis of training institute from where they
obtained training or place of issue of their continuous discharge
certificates, for their recruitment and engagement on board any
ship.
(10) The Central Government or any officer authorised by it in
this behalf, if satisfied that in the national interest or in the interest
of seafarer it is necessary so to do, may, by order in writing,
prohibit the master or owner or his agent of any ship other than an
Indian ship specified in the order from engaging any person to serve
as a seafarer on such ship.
(11) The Central Government may, by notification, fix the fees
which shall be payable upon all engagements and discharges of the
seafarer.
(12) The services of the seafarer engaged in contravention of
sub-section (1) shall not be recognised for the purposes of certification
under Part IV .

137
Agreements with
seafarers.
67. (1) The master of an Indian ship, or owner of every Indian
ship or his agent shall - enter into an articles of agreement in such
form and manner as may be prescribed with every seafarer
whom he engages and shall submit a copy thereof to the shipping
master.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions
of this Act, the master of an Indian ship registered at a port outside
India, or owner of such ship or his agent who has an agreement
with the seafarer made in due form according to the law of that port
or of the port in which her seafarer were engaged, may engage in
any port in India—
(a) a seafarer who is not a citizen of India and who holds
a continuous discharge certificate or any other similar document
of identity issued by the competent authority of the country in
which the ship is registered or, as the case may be, of the
country in which the said agreement was made, or
(b) a seafarer who is a citizen of India and who holds a
continuous discharge certificate issued under this Act, and any
seafarer so engaged under clause (a) or clause (b) may sign the
agreement aforesaid and it shall not be necessary for him to
sign an agreement under this Act.
(3) A seafarer's right,—
(a) to wages and provisions shall be taken to begin either
at the time at which he commences work or at the time specified
in the agreement for his commencement of work or presence
on board whichever first happens;
(b) of wages shall not depend on the earning of the freight
and seafarers are entitled to demand and recover the same
notwithstanding that freight has not been earned.
(4) A seafarer shall not by any agreement forfeit his lien on the
ship or be deprived of any remedy for the recovery of his wages to
which, in the absence of the agreement, he shall be entitled, and
shall not by any agreement abandon his right to wages in case of
the loss of the ship or abandon any right that he may have or obtain
in the nature of salvage, and every stipulation in any agreement
inconsistent with any provisions of this Act shall be void.

138
68. The Central Government may, having regard to the
provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention, make rules in the
matters relating to seafarer's employment officer for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) payment of wages;
(b) hours of work and hours of rest;
(c) entitlement to leave;
(d) repatriation;
(e) compensation, if ship loss or foundering;
(f) manning levels;
(g) service conditions including skill development and
opportunities;
(h) accommodation, recreational facilities, food and
catering;
(i) health protection, medical facilities, welfare and social
security protection;
(j) any other matter which is to be or may be required
for compliance and enforcement of Maritime Labour Convention.
69. (1) Where the service of any seafarer engaged under this
Act terminates before the date specified in the agreement by reason
of the wreck, loss or abandonment of the ship or by reason of his
being left on shore at any place outside India under a certificate
granted under this Act of his unfitness or inability to proceed on the
voyage, the seafarer shall be entitled to receive,—
(a) in the case of wreck, loss or abandonment of the ship,—
(i) wages at the rate to which he was entitled at
the date of termination of his service for the period from
the date his service is so terminated until he is returned to
and arrives at a proper return port:
Provided that the period for which he shall be entitled
to receive wages shall be not less than one month, and
(ii) compensation for the loss of his effect,—
(A) in the case of a seafarer employed on a
ship engaged for coasting trade, of not more than
one month's wages; and
Power to make
rules for
enforcement of
Maritime Labour
Convention.
Wages on
termination of
service for wreck,
illness, etc.

139
(B) in the case of a seafarer employed on a
foreign-going ship, of not more than three month's
wages;
(b) in the case of unfitness or inability to proceed on the
voyage,
wages for the period from the date his service is terminated
until he is returned to and arrives at a proper return port.
(2) A seafarer shall not be entitled to receive wages under sub-
clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) in respect of any period
during which,—
(a) he was, or could have been, suitably employed; or
(b) through negligence he failed to apply to proper authority
for relief as a distressed or destitute seafarer.
(3) Any amount payable by way of compensation under sub-
clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be deposited with the
shipping master at the port of engagement in India for payment to
the seafarer, or, in the case of deceased seafarer, to the person
nominated by him in this behalf under section 85 or if he has not
made any such nomination or the nomination made by him is or has
become void, to his legal heirs.
(4) A seafarer shall be entitled to continue receiving the wages
at the same rate till such time he returns home, if such seafarer is
held in the captivity including in case of piracy in the course of his
employment.
Explanation.—  For the purposes of item (B) of sub-clause
(ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of this section, "foreign-going
ship" means a ship employed in trading between any port or place
in India and any other port or place outside India, or between ports
and places outside India.
70. (1) A seafarer shall not be entitled to wages,—
(a) for any period during which he is absent from duty
without leave; or
(b) for any period during which he unlawfully refuses or
neglects to work when required; or
(c) unless the court hearing the case otherwise directs,
for any period during which he is lawfully imprisoned.
Wages not to
accrue during
absence without
leave, refusal to
work or
imprisonment.

140
(2) A seafarer shall not be disentitled to claim wages for any
period during which he has not performed his duty if he proves that
he was incapable of doing so by reason of illness, hurt or injury,
unless it is proved that,—
(a) his illness, hurt or injury was caused by his own
wilful act or default or his own misbehaviour; or
(b) his illness was contracted or his hurt or injury was
sustained at a proper return port and was not attributable to his
employment; or
(c) he has unreasonably refused to undergo medical or
surgical treatment for his illness, hurt or injury involving no
appreciable risk to his life.
71. (1) If a seafarer having signed an agreement is discharged,
otherwise than in accordance with the terms thereof, without fault
on his part justifying the discharge and without his consent, he shall
be entitled to receive from the master of the ship, owner of the ship
or his agent, in addition to any wages he may have earned, as due
compensation for the damage caused to him by the discharge, such
sum as the shipping master may fix having regard to the circumstances
relating to the discharge:
Provided that the compensation so payable shall not exceed—
(a) in the case of a seafarer who has been discharged
before the commencement of a voyage, one month's wages;
and
(b) in the case of a seafarer who has been discharged
after the commencement of a voyage, three month's wages.
(2) Any compensation payable under this section may be
recovered as wages.
72. (1) As respects wages due or accruing to a seafarer,—
(a) they shall not be subject to attachment by order of
any court;
(b) an assignment thereof made prior to the accruing
thereof shall not bind the person making the same;
(c) the power-of-attorney or authority for the receipt
thereof shall not be irrevocable;
(d) the payment of wages to a seafarer shall be valid in
Compensation
to seafarers on
premature
discharge.
Restrictions on
sale of and charge
upon wages.

141
law notwithstanding any previous assignment of those wages
or any attachment thereof or encumbrance thereon.
(2) The provisions of clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1)
shall not apply to so much of the wages of a seafarer as have been
or are hereafter assigned by way of contribution to any fund or
scheme approved in this behalf by the Central Government, the main
purpose of which is the provision for seafarer of health or social
insurance benefits and the provisions of clauses (a) and (d) of sub-
section (1) shall not apply to anything done or to be done for giving
effect to such an assignment.
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of this
Act or any other law for the time being in force with respect to
allotment notes.
73. (1) A seafarer serving in an Indian ship shall, on termination
of his engagement, be discharged in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) If an Indian ship is transferred or disposed of while she is
at or on a voyage to any port outside India, every seafarer belonging
to that ship shall be discharged at that port, unless he consents in
writing to complete the voyage in the ship if continued.
(3) If a seafarer is discharged from an Indian ship in terms of
sub-section (1), the provisions of section 75 shall apply as if the
service of the seafarer had terminated without his consent and
before the expiration of the period for which the seafarer was
engaged.
(4) Every seafarer discharged in terms of sub-section (2) shall,
if the voyage for which he was engaged is not continued, be entitled
to the wages to which he would have been entitled if his service had
been wrongfully terminated by the owner before the expiration of
the period for which the seafarer was engaged.
(5) The master of an Indian ship shall not,—
(a) discharge a seafarer before the expiration of the period
for which he was engaged, unless the seafarer consents to his
discharge; or
(b) except in circumstances beyond his control, leave a
seafarer behind,
Discharge of
seafarers.

142
without the authority of the officer specified in this behalf by
the Central Government and the officer aforesaid shall certify on the
agreement with seafarer that he has granted such authority, and also
the reason for the seafarer being discharged or the seafarer being
left behind.
(6) The officer aforesaid to whom application is made for
authority in terms of sub-section (5), shall investigate the grounds
on which the seafarer is to be discharged or the seafarer left behind
and may in his discretion grant or refuse to grant such authority:
Provided that he shall not refuse to grant his authority if he is
satisfied that the seafarer, without reasonable cause,—
(a) has failed or refused to join his ship or to proceed to
sea therein; or
(b) has been absent from his ship without leave, either at
the commencement or during the progress of a voyage for a
period of more than forty-eight hours.
(7) The officer aforesaid shall keep a record of all seafarers
discharged or left behind with his authority and whenever any charge
is made against a seafarer under section 94, the fact that no such
authority is so recorded shall be prima facie evidence that it was not
granted.
74. If any seafarer is left behind or lost overboard or is deceased,
the master shall enter in the official logbook a statement of the
amount due to the seafarer in respect of wages at the time when he
was left behind or lost overboard or is deceased of all property left
on board by him, and shall take such property into his charge and
discharge the property in such manner as may be prescribed.
75. (1) When the service of a seafarer terminates without the
consent of the said seafarer at a port outside India, and before the
expiration of the period for which the seafarer was engaged, the
master, owner of a ship or his agent shall, in addition to any other
related obligation imposed on either of them by this Act, make
adequate provision for the maintenance of the seafarer according to
his rank or rating, and for the return of that seafarer to a proper
return port.
(2) If the master, owner of a ship or his agent fails without
reasonable cause to comply with the provisions of sub-section (1),
Wages and
property of
deceased seafarers
and seafarers left
behind.
Repatriation of
seafarer on
termination of
service at foreign
port.

143
the expenses of maintenance and of the journey to the proper return
port shall, if defrayed by the seafarer, be recoverable as wages due
to him, and if defrayed by an Indian consular officer, be regarded
as expenses falling within the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4)
of section 86.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (2), inability to
provide the said expenses shall not, be regarded as reasonable
cause.
76. Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be
prescribed, any amount deposited with or recovered by the shipping
master as wages or for making payment in accordance with the
allotment note made by a seafarer or for being paid to a seafarer or
his nominee may, if such amount remains unclaimed with the shipping
master for a period of not less than six years, be utilised for the
welfare of seafarer in such manner as the Central Government may
direct.
77. (1) Where under the agreement with the seafarer any
dispute arises at any port in India between the master, owner or
agent of a ship and any of the seafarer of the ship, it shall be
submitted to the shipping master.
(2) Any dispute of an Indian seafarer, on a vessel registered in
a country other than India, in Indian territorial waters, with the
master, owner of the ship or his agent may be submitted to the
shipping master.
(3) The shipping master shall hear and decide the dispute
submitted under sub-sections (1) and (2) and make an award which
shall be conclusive as to the rights of parties and any document
relating to such dispute or award itself shall be prima facie evidence
thereof.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the award made by the shipping
master under this section may, within a period of thirty days from
the date of receipt of such award, prefer an appeal before the
Principal officer having jurisdiction over the matter and the Principal
officer may, after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of
being heard, pass an order within a period of forty-five days from
the date of receipt of such appeal.
(5) Any person aggrieved by the order passed by the Principal
Officer under this section may, within a period of thirty days from
the date of receipt of order, prefer second appeal to the Director-
Certain
undisbursed
amounts to be
utilised for
welfare of
seafarers.
Decision of
questions by
Shipping Masters.

144
General who may, after giving the parties to the appeal an
opportunity of being heard, pass an order within a period of forty-
five days.
(6) An award made under this section may be enforced by a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as
the case may be, in the same manner as an order of payment of
wages made by such Magistrate under this Act.
(7) Nothing in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall
apply to any matter submitted to a shipping master for decision
under this section.
78. In any proceedings under this Act before a shipping master
relating to the wages, claims or discharge of a seafarer, the shipping
master may require the owner, master his agent or seafarer to produce
any log books, papers, or other documents in his possession or
power relating to any matter in question in the proceedings, and may
require the attendance of and examine any of those persons being
then at or near the place on the matter.
79. (1) A seafarer or a person duly authorised by him may, as
soon as any wages due to him become payable but not paid, apply
to any Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any Metropolitan
Magistrate, as the case may be, exercising jurisdiction in or near the
place at which his service has terminated or at which he has been
discharged, or at which any person upon whom the claim is made
is or resides, and such magistrate shall try the case in a summary
way and the order made by such magistrate in the matter shall be
final.
(2) An application under sub-section (1) may also be made by
any officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf by
general or special order.
80. A proceeding for the recovery of wages due to a seafarer
shall not be instituted by or on behalf of any seafarer in any civil
court except where,—
(a) the owner of the ship has been declared insolvent;
(b) the ship is under arrest or sold by the authority of any
court;
(c) a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan
Magistrate, as the case may be, refers a claim to the court.
Power of shipping
master to require
production of
ship's papers.
Summary
proceedings for
wages.
Restrictions on
suits for wages.
26 of 1996

145
Wages not
recoverable
outside India in
certain cases.
81. Where a seafarer is engaged for a voyage which is to
terminate in India, he shall not be entitled to sue in any court outside
India for wages unless he is discharged with such sanction as is
required by this Act, and with the written consent of the master, or
proves such ill-usage on the part, or by the authority, of the master,
as to warrant a reasonable apprehension of danger to his life if he
were to remain on board.
82. (1) The master of a ship shall, so far as the case permits,
have the same rights, liens and remedies for the recovery of
his wages as a seafarer has under this Act or by any law or
custom.
(2) The master of a ship or every person lawfully acting as
master of a ship by reason of the disease or incapacity from illness
of the master of the ship shall, so far as the case permits, have the
same rights, liens and remedies for the recovery of disbursements
or liabilities properly made or incurred by him on account of the ship
as a master has for the recovery of his wages.
(3) If in any proceeding in any court touching the claim of a
master in respect of such wages, disbursements or liabilities any set-
off is claimed or any counter claim is made, the court may enter
into, and adjudicate upon, all questions and settle all accounts then
arising or outstanding and unsettled between the parties to
the proceeding and may direct payment of any balance found to be
due.
83. (1) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that
any dispute between seafarer or any class of seafarers or of any
union of seafarers and the owners of ships in which such seafarers
are employed or are likely to be employed exists or is apprehended
and such dispute relates to any matter connected with or incidental
to the employment of the seafarers, the Central Government may, by
notification, constitute a Tribunal consisting of one or more persons,
having knowledge of maritime matter, and refer the dispute for
adjudication.
(2) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid
down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by
the principles of natural justice.
(3) The Tribunal shall also not be bound by the rules of evidence
contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
Remedies of
master for wages,
disbursements,
etc.
Power to refer
disputes between
seafarers and
their employers
to Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
10 of 1872.

146
(4) The Tribunal shall, for the purposes of discharging its
functions under this Act, have power to regulate its own procedure
and shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath;
(b) compelling the production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;
(e) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(5) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be
a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of
the Indian Penal Code.
(6) No party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented by
a legal practitioner in any proceeding before the Tribunal except with
the consent of the other party or parties to the proceeding and with
the leave of the Tribunal.
(7) The Tribunal shall dispose of the reference within a period
as may be specified in the notification under sub-section (1) and
submit its award to the Central Government.
(8) On receipt of the award, the Central Government shall
cause it to be published and the award shall become enforceable on
the expiry of thirty days from the date of such publication:
Provided that where the Central Government is of the opinion
that it shall be inexpedient on public grounds to give effect to the
award or any part of it, it may before the expiry of the said period
of thirty days by order in the official Gazette either reject the award
or modify it, and where the Central Government does so, the award
shall not become enforceable or shall become enforceable subject to
the modifications, as the case may be.
(9) An award which has become enforceable under this section
shall be binding on—
(a) all parties to the dispute;
(b) where any party to the dispute is the owner of the
ship, his heirs, successors, or assigns.
5 of 1908
45 of 1860.

147
(10) Save as otherwise provided in the award, an award shall
remain in operation for a period of one year from the date on which
it becomes enforceable and shall thereafter continue to remain in
operation until a period of two months has elapsed from the date on
which notice is given by any party bound by the award to the other
party or parties intimating its intention to terminate the award.
(11) Unless otherwise directed by the Central Government, the
Tribunal shall cease to exist on the expiry of a period of thirty days
after publication of the award.
(12) Any money due to a seafarer from the owner of a ship
under an award may be recovered as wages.
(13) Nothing contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
shall apply to any dispute between seafarers or any class of seafarers
or any union of seafarers and the owners of ships in which such
seafarers are employed or are likely to be employed.
(14) During the pendency of proceedings under this
section,—
(a) no seafarer or class of seafarers or union of seafarers
shall go or remain on strike or otherwise act in a manner
prejudicial to the normal operation of the ships in which the
seafarer is employed or are likely to be employed; and
(b) no owner of a ship shall,-
(i) alter to the prejudice of the seafarer concerned
in the dispute, the conditions of service applicable to them
immediately before the commencement of such
proceedings; or
(ii) discharge or punish any seafarer in respect of
any matter connected with the dispute.
84. (1) Where a seafarer is lost with the ship to which he
belongs, the Central Government or such officer as the Central
Government may appoint in this behalf may recover the wages and
the compensation due to him from the master or owner of a ship
or his agent in the same court and in the same manner in which the
seafarer's wages are recoverable, and shall deal with those wages in
the same manner as with the wages and compensation due to other
deceased seafarers under this Act.
Recovery of wages,
etc., of seafarers
lost with their ship.
14 of 1947.

148
(2) In any proceeding for the recovery of the wages and
compensation, if it is shown by some official records or by other
evidence that the ship has, twelve months or upwards before the
institution of the proceeding, left any port, she shall, unless it is
shown that she has been heard of within twelve months after the
departure, be deemed to have been lost with all hands on board
either immediately after the time she was last heard of or at such
later time as the court hearing the case may think probable.
85. (1) A seafarer may, for the purposes of sub-section (3) of
section 69, nominate any person or persons:
Provided that if the seafarer has a family, he may nominate for
the purposes aforesaid any one or more members of his family only
and if a seafarer acquires a family after he has made any such
nomination, the nomination shall become void.
(2) The form in which any nomination may be made under
sub-section (1), the cancellation or variation of any such nomination
(including the making of a fresh nomination) and all other matters
connected with such nominations shall be such as may be prescribed.
86. (1) The Indian consular officer at or near the place where
a seafarer is in distress shall, on application being made to him by
the distressed seafarer, provide in accordance with the rules made
under this Act for the return of that seafarer to a proper return port,
and also for the said seafarer's necessary clothing and maintenance
until his arrival at such port.
(2) A distressed seafarer shall not have any right to be
maintained or sent to a proper return port except to the extent and
on the conditions provided for in the rules.
(3) All repatriation expenses, other than excepted expenses,
incurred by or on behalf of the Central Government in accordance
with the provisions of this Act shall constitute a debt due to the
Central Government for which the owner or agent of the ship to
which the seafarer in respect of whom they were incurred belonged
at the time of his discharge or other event which resulted in his
becoming a distressed seafarer shall be liable, and the owner or
agent shall not be entitled to recover from the seafarer any amount
paid by him to the Central Government in settlement or part settlement
of such debt.
Nomination.
Relief and
maintenance of
distressed
seafarers.

149
(4) All excepted expenses incurred by or on behalf of the
Central Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act
shall constitute a debt due to the Central Government for which the
seafarer in respect of whom they were incurred and the owner or
the agent of the ship to which that seafarer belonged at the time of
his discharge or other event which resulted in his becoming a
distressed seafarer shall be jointly and severally liable, and the owner
or agent shall be entitled to recover from the seafarer any amount
paid by him to the Central Government in settlement or part settlement
of such debt, and may apply to the satisfaction of his claim so much
as may be necessary of any wages due to the seafarer.
(5) All excepted expenses incurred in accordance with the
provisions of this Act in respect of any distressed seafarer by the
owner or agent of the ship to which he belonged at the time of his
discharge or other event which resulted in his becoming a distressed
seafarer shall constitute a debt due to the owner or agent for which
the seafarer shall be liable, and the owner or agent may apply to the
satisfaction of his claim so much as may be necessary of any wages
due to the seafarer; but he shall not be entitled to recover from the
seafarer any repatriation expenses other than excepted expenses.
(6) In any proceedings for the recovery of any expenses which
in terms of sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) are a debt due to the
Central Government, the production of an account of the expenses
and proof of payment thereof by or on behalf of or under the
direction of the Central Government shall be prima facie evidence
that the expenses were incurred in accordance with the provisions
of this Act by or on behalf of the Central Government.
(7) Any debt, which may be due to the Central Government
under this section, may be recovered by any officer authorised by
it in writing in this behalf from the person concerned in the same
manner, as the wages are recoverable under section 79.
(8) The Central Government may, make rules with respect to
relief, maintenance and return to the proper port of a seafarer found
in distress in any place out of India and with respect to the
circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which the
seafarer may be relieved and provided with passages under this part
and generally to carry out the provisions of this Part relating to
distressed seafarer.

150
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "excepted expenses" means repatriation expenses
incurred in cases where the cause of the seafarer being left
behind is desertion or absence without leave or imprisonment
for misconduct or discharge from his vessel on the grounds of
misconduct;
(b) "repatriation expenses" means expenses incurred in
returning a distressed seafarer to a proper return port and in
providing him with necessary clothing and maintenance until
his arrival at such a port, and includes in the case of a
shipwrecked seafarer the repayment of expenses incurred in
conveying him to a port after shipwreck and maintaining him
while being so conveyed.
87. In any proceeding under this Part, a certificate of the Central
Government or of such officer as the Central Government may
specify in this behalf, to the effect that any seafarer named therein
is distressed shall be conclusive evidence that such seafarer is
distressed within the meaning of this Act.
88. (1) A shipping master, surveyor, seafarer's welfare officer,
Indian consular officer or any other officer at any port duly authorised
in this behalf by the Central Government shall,—
(a) in the case of any ship upon which the seafarer has
been shipped at that port, at any time, and
(b) in the case of any Indian ship, at any time, and if the
master or three or more of the crew so request, enter on board
the ship and inspect,—
(i) the provisions and water;
(ii) the weights and measures;
(iii) the accommodation for seafarers, with which
the ship is required to be provided by or under this Act and
also the space and equipment used for the storage and
handling of food and water and the galley and
other equipment used for the preparation and service of
meals;
(iv) Maritime Labour Certificate and Declaration of
Maritime Labour Compliance.
Evidence of
distress.
Inspection by
shipping master,
etc.

151
(2) All Indian ships engaged in international voyage or operating
from a port, or between ports, in another country, shall possess a
Maritime Labour Certificate and a Declaration of Maritime Labour
Compliance.
(3) Ships not covered under sub-section (2) shall, unless
exempted by the Central Government, possess such certificate in
such manner and form as may be prescribed.
(4) For the purpose of preventing seafarer from being taken on
board any ship at any port in India contrary to the provisions of this
Act, any shipping master or deputy or assistant shipping master or
any director, deputy director or assistant director of the seafarer's
employment office, may enter at any time on board any such ship
upon which he has reasons to believe that seafarers have been
shipped, and may muster and examine the several seafarers employed
therein.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance" means
a declaration issued by the Central Government or by any
officer, authority or organisation authorised by it in this behalf,
in respect of a ship that it meets with the requirements and
standards set out in the provisions of the Maritime Labour
Convention;
(b) "International voyage" means a voyage from or to a
port or place in India to or from a port or place outside India
or between any ports outside India.
89. (1) A seafarer shall, for the purposes of this Part, be
deemed to be a serving seafarer during any period commencing on
the date of the agreement with the crew and ending thirty days after
the date on which the seafarer is finally discharged from such
agreement.
(2) If any person presenting any plaints, applications or appeal
to any court has reason to believe that any adverse party is serving
seafarer, he shall make a statement accordingly in such plaint,
application or appeal.
(3) If any collector has reason to believe that any seafarers
who ordinarily resides or has property in his district and who is a
party to any proceeding pending before any court is unable to appear
Special provisions
for the protection
of seafarers in
respect of
litigation.

152
therein or is a serving seafarer, the collector may certify the facts
to the court.
(4) If a collector has certified under sub-section (3) or if a
court has reason to believe that a seafarer who is a party to any
proceeding before the court, is unable to appear therein or is a
serving seafarer, the court shall suspend the proceeding and shall
give notice thereof to the shipping master:
Provided that the court may refrain from suspending the
proceeding and giving the notice if,—
(a) the proceeding is one instituted or made by the seafarer,
alone or conjointly with others, with the object of enforcing a
right of pre-emption; or
(b) the interests of the seafarer in the proceeding are, in
the opinion of the court, either identical with those of any other
party thereto and adequately represented by such other party,
or merely of a formal nature.
(5) If it appears to the court before which any proceeding is
pending that a seafarer though not a party to the proceeding is
materially concerned in the outcome of the proceeding and that his
interests are likely to be prejudiced by his inability to attend, the
court may suspend the proceeding and shall give notice thereof to
the shipping master.
(6) If on receipt of a notice under sub-section (4) or sub-
section (5), the shipping master certifies to the court, that the seafarer
is a serving seafarer, the court shall thereupon postpone
the proceeding in respect of the seafarer for such period as it thinks
fit:
Provided that if by reason of the continued absence of the
seafarer the question of any further postponement of the proceeding
in respect of the seafarer arises, the court shall in deciding the
question have regard to the purposes of the provisions of this Act
conferring special protection on seafarer in respect of litigation.
(7) If the shipping master either certifies that the seafarer is
not for the time being a serving seafarer or fails within two months
from the date of the receipt of the notice under sub-section (4) or
sub-section (5), as the case may be, to certify that the seafarer is
a serving seafarer, the court may, if it thinks fit, continue with the
proceeding.

153
(8) Where in any proceeding before a court, a decree or order
has been passed against any seafarer while he was a serving seafarer,
the seafarer, or if he dies while he is a serving seafarer, his legal
representative, may apply to the said court to have the decree or
order to be set aside, and if the court, after giving an opportunity
to the opposite party of being heard, is satisfied that the interests of
justice requires that the decree or order to be set aside as against the
seafarer, the court shall subject to such conditions, if any, as it
thinks fit to impose, make an order accordingly, and may, if it
appears that any opposite party in the proceeding has failed to comply
with the provisions of sub-section (2), award, subject to such
conditions as it thinks fit to impose, damages against such opposite
party.
(9) The period of limitation for an application under sub-section
(8) shall be sixty days from the date on which the seafarer first
ceases to be a serving seafarer after the passing of the decree or
order, or where the summons or notice was not duly served on the
seafarer in the proceeding in which the decree or order was passed,
from the date on which the applicant had knowledge of the decree
or order, whichever is later; and the provisions of section 5 of the
Indian Limitation Act, 1963, shall apply to such applications.
(10) Where the decree or order in respect of which an application
under sub-section (8) is made is of such a nature that it cannot be
set aside as against the seafarer only, it may be set aside as against
all or any of the parties against whom it was made.
(11) Where a court sets aside a decree or order under this
section, it shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit, appeal or
application, as the case may be, in respect of which the decree or
order was passed.
(12) In computing the period of limitation provided in the
foregoing provisions or in the Indian Limitation Act, 1963, or in any
other law for the time being in force, for any suit, appeal or application
to a court to which a seafarer is a party, the period or periods during
which the seafarer has been a serving seafarer, and if the seafarer
has died while he was a serving seafarer, the period from the date
of his death to the date on which his next-of-kin was first informed,
by the shipping master or otherwise, of his death, shall be
excluded:
36 of 1963.
36 of 1963.

154
Provided that this section shall not apply in the case of any suit,
appeal or application instituted or made with the object of enforcing
a right of presumption except in such areas and in such circumstances
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
(13) If any court is in doubt whether, for the purposes of this
section, a seafarer is or was at any particular time or during any
particular period a serving seafarer, it may refer the question to the
shipping master, and the certificate of the shipping master shall be
conclusive evidence on the question.
90. If a seafarer states to the master that he desires to make
a complaint to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan
Magistrate, as the case may be, or other proper officer against the
master or any of the crew, the person authorised by the Central
Government in this behalf shall,—
(a) if the ship is then at a place where there is a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as
the case may be, or other proper officer, as soon after such
statement as the service of the ship shall permit, and
(b) if the ship is not then at such place, as soon after her
first arrival at such place as the service of the ship shall permit,
allow the complainant to go ashore or send him ashore under
proper protection so that he may be enabled to make the
complaint.
91. Subject to the provisions of this Act, an assignment of
salvage payable to a seafarer made prior to the accruing thereof shall
not bind the person making the same, and a power of attorney or
authority for the receipt of any such salvage shall not be
irrevocable.
92. Where a ship has arrived at a port or place in India at the
end of a voyage and any person, not being in the service of the
Government or not being duly authorised by law for the purpose,
goes on board the ship without the permission of the master, the
master of the ship may take such person into custody and deliver
him up forthwith to a police officer to be taken before a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the
case may be, to be dealt with according to the provisions of this
Act.
Facilities for
making
complaint.
Assignment or
sale of salvage
invalid.
Ship not to be
boarded without
permission.

155
Misconduct
endangering
life or ship.
93. No seafarer belonging to an Indian ship wherever it may
be, or to any other ship, while in India, shall knowingly,—
(a) do anything tending to the immediate loss or
destruction of, or serious damage to, the ship, or tending
immediately to endanger the life of, or to cause injury to any
person belonging to or on board the ship; or
(b) refuse or omit to do any lawful act proper and requisite
to be done by him for preserving the ship from immediate loss,
destruction or serious damage, or for preserving any person
belonging to or on board the ship from danger to life or from
injury.
94. (1) No seafarer lawfully engaged shall,—
(a) desert his ship; or
(b) neglect or refuse, without reasonable cause, to join
the ship or to proceed to sea in his ship or be absent without
leave at any time within twenty-four hours of the ship's sailing
from a port either at the commencement or during the progress
of a voyage, or be absent at any time without leave and without
sufficient reason from his ship or from his duty.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the fact that the ship
on which the seafarer is engaged or to which he belongs is
unseaworthy shall be deemed to be a reasonable cause:
Provided that the seafarer has, before failing or refusing to join
his ship or to proceed to sea in his ship or before absenting himself
or being absent from the ship, as the case may be, complained to
the master or a shipping master, surveyor, seafarer's welfare officer,
port health officer, Indian consular officer or any other officer at
any port duly authorised in this behalf by the Central Government,
that the ship is unseaworthy.
(3) If it is shown to the satisfaction of a shipping master that
a seafarer has deserted his ship or has absented himself without
leave and without sufficient reason from his ship or from his duty,
the shipping master shall forthwith make a report to that effect to
the Director-General who may thereupon direct that the
seafarer's continuous discharge certificate and seafarer identity
document shall be withheld for such period as may be specified in
the direction.
Desertion and
absence without
leave.

156
(4) If a seafarer deserts his ship or is absent without leave and
without sufficient reason from his ship or from his duty, the master,
any seafarer, the owner or agent of the owner of the ship may,
without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against the
seafarer under this Act, convey him on board his ship and may for
that purpose cause to be used such force as may be reasonable in
the circumstances of the case.
(5) If, either at the commencement or during the progress of
any voyage, a seafarer engaged in an Indian ship commits outside
India, the offence of desertion or absence without leave or any
offence against discipline, the master, any mate, the owner or agent
of the owner of the ship may, if and so far as the laws in
force in the place shall permit, arrest him without first procuring
warrant.
(6) No person shall convey on board or arrest a seafarer on
improper or insufficient grounds.
(7) Where a seafarer is brought before a court on the ground
of desertion or of absence without leave or of any offence against
discipline, and the master or the owner, or his agent, so requires, the
court, may, in lieu of committing and sentencing him for the offence,
cause him to be conveyed on board his ship for the purpose of
proceeding on the voyage, or deliver him to the master or any mate
of the ship or the owner or his agent, to be by them so conveyed,
and may in such case order any costs and expenses properly incurred
by or on behalf of the master or owner by reason of the conveyance
to be paid by the offender and, if necessary, to be deducted from
any wages which he has then earned or by virtue of his then existing
engagements may afterwards be earned.
95. A seafarer lawfully engaged shall be guilty of an offence
against discipline if he commits any of the following acts, namely:—
(a) if he quits the ship without leave after her arrival at
her port of delivery and before she is placed in security;
(b) if he wilfully disobeys any lawful command or neglects
the duty;
(c) if he continues to wilfully disobey any lawful
commands or continues with wilful neglect of duty;
General
offences
against
discipline.

157
(d) if he assaults the master or any other officer of, or a
seafarer belonging to the ship;
(e) if he combines with any of the crew to disobey lawful
commands or to neglect duty or to impede the navigation of
the ship or retard the progress of the voyage;
(f) if he wilfully damages his ship or commits criminal
misappropriation or breach of trust in respect of, or wilfully
damages any of, her stores or cargo;
(g) if he has received an advance payment on the basis of
his agreement and wilfully or through misconduct fails to attend
his ship or desert therefrom before the payment becomes due
to him.
96. (1) If a seafarer engaged is convicted of an offence of
smuggling any goods, whereby loss or damage is occasioned to the
master or owner of the ship, he shall be liable to pay to that master
or owner a sum sufficient to reimburse the loss or damage and the
whole or a part of his wages may be retained in satisfaction on
account of that liability without prejudice to any other remedy.
(2) If a seafarer engaged is convicted of an offence of smuggling
any goods, the Director-General may direct that the seafarer's
continuous discharge certificate and seafarer's identity document
shall be cancelled or shall be suspended for such period as may be
specified in the direction.
97. (1) If any offence within the meaning of this Act of desertion
or absence without leave or against discipline is committed, or if any
act of misconduct is committed for which the offender's agreement
imposes a fine and it is intended to enforce the fine—
(a) an entry of the offence or act shall be made in the
official log book and signed by the master, the officer on
watch;
(b) the offender, if still in the ship, shall, before the next
subsequent arrival of the ship at any port, or, if she is at the
time in port, before her departure therefrom, be furnished with
a copy of the entry and have the same read over distinctly and
audibly to him and may thereupon make such reply thereto as
he thinks fit;
(c) a statement of a copy of the entry having been so
Smuggling of
goods by seafarer.
Entry of offences
in official log
book.

158
furnished and the entry having been so read over and the reply,
if any, made by the offender shall likewise be entered and
signed in the manner aforesaid; and
(d) in any subsequent legal proceedings the entries by this
section required shall, if practicable, be produced or proved,
and, in default of such production or proof, the court hearing
the case may in its discretion, refuse to receive evidence of the
offence or act of misconduct.
98. Whenever any seafarer engaged outside India on an Indian
ship deserts or otherwise absents himself in India without leave, the
master of the ship shall, within forty-eight hours of discovering
such desertion or absence, report the same to the shipping master
or to such other officer as the Central Government specifies in this
behalf, unless in the meantime, the deserter or absentee returns.
99. (1) In every case of desertion from an Indian ship whilst
such ship is at any place out of India, the master shall produce the
entry of desertion in the official log book to the Indian consular
officer at the place, and that officer shall thereupon make and certify
a copy of the entry.
(2) The master shall forthwith transmit such copy of entry
certified under sub-section (1) to the shipping master at the port at
which the seafarer was shipped, and the shipping master shall, if
required, cause the same to be produced in any legal proceeding.
(3) Such copy of the entry, if purporting to be so made and
certified as provided under sub-section (1), shall, in any legal
proceeding relating to such desertion, be admissible in evidence.
100. (1) Whenever a question arises whether the wages of any
seafarer are forfeited for desertion from a ship, it shall be sufficient
for the person insisting on the forfeiture to show that the seafarer
was duly engaged in or belonged to the ship, and either that he left
the ship before the completion of the voyage or engagement or, if
the voyage was to terminate in India and the ship has not returned,
that he is absent from her and that an entry of his desertion has been
duly made in the official log book.
(2) The desertion shall thereupon, so far as relates to any
forfeiture of wages under this Part, be deemed to be proved, unless
the seafarer can produce a proper certificate of discharge or can
Report of
desertions and
absences
without leave.
Entries and
certificates of
desertion
abroad.
Facilities for
proving desertion
in proceedings for
forfeiture of
wages.

159
otherwise show to the satisfaction of the court that he had sufficient
reasons for leaving his ship.
101. (1) Where any wages or other property are under this Act
forfeited for desertion from a ship, they shall be applied towards
reimbursing the expenses caused by the desertion to the master or
the owner of the ship or his agent of the ship, and subject to that
reimbursement, shall be paid to the Central Government.
(2) For the purposes of such reimbursement, the master, or
the owner or his agent may, if the wages are earned subsequent to
the desertion, recover them in the same manner as the deserter
could have recovered them if not forfeited, and the court in any legal
proceeding relating to such wages may order them to be paid
accordingly.
102. Any question concerning the forfeiture of or deductions
from the wages of a seafarer may be determined in any proceeding
lawfully instituted with respect to those wages, notwithstanding that
the offence in respect of which the question arises, though by this
Act made punishable by imprisonment as well as forfeiture has not
been made the subject of any criminal proceeding.
103. (1) Every fine imposed on a seafarer for any act of
misconduct under his agreement shall be deducted and paid as follows,
namely:—
(a) if the offender is discharged at any port or place in
India and the offence and such entries in respect thereof as
aforesaid are proved to the satisfaction of the shipping master,
the master or owner or agent shall deduct such fine from the
wages of the offender and pay the same to such shipping
master; and
(b) if the seafarer is discharged at any port or place outside
India and the offence and such entries as aforesaid are proved
to the satisfaction of the Indian consular officer, by whose
sanction he is so discharged, the fine shall thereupon be deducted
as aforesaid, and an entry of such deduction shall then be made
in the official log book, if any, and signed by such officer and
on the return of the ship to India, the master or owner shall
pay such fine to the shipping master.
(2) An act of misconduct for which any such fine has been
inflicted and paid shall not be otherwise punishable under the provisions
of this Act.
Application of
forfeitures.
Decision of
questions of
forfeiture and
deduction in suits
for wages.
Payment of fines
imposed under
agreement to
shipping master.

160
(3) The proceeds of all fines received by a shipping master
under this section shall be utilised for the welfare of seafarers in
such manner as the Central Government may direct.
104. (1) No person shall by any means whatever persuade or
attempt to persuade a seafarer to neglect or refuse to join or proceed
to sea in or desert from his ship, or otherwise to absent himself
from his duty.
(2) No person shall harbour or secrete a seafarer who has
wilfully neglected or refused to join or has deserted from his ship,
knowing or having reason to believe the seafarer to have so done:
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not extend
to the case in which the harbour or secreting is by the spouse of
the seafarer.
105. (1) No person shall secrete himself and go to sea in a ship
without the consent of either the owner, agent or master, or of a
mate, or of the person in charge of the ship or of any other person
entitled to give that consent.
(2) Every seafaring person whom the master of a ship is under
the authority of this Act or any other law compelled to take on board
and convey and every person who goes to sea in a ship without
such consent as aforesaid, shall, so long as he remains in the ship,
be subject to the same laws for preserving discipline and to the same
fines, and punishments for offences constituting or tending to a
breach of discipline as if he were a member of, and has signed the
agreement with the crew.
(3) The master of any Indian ship arriving at any port or place
in or outside India and the master of any ship other than an Indian
ship arriving at any port or place in India shall, if any person has
gone to sea on that ship without the consent referred to in sub-
section (1), report the fact in writing to the proper officer as soon
as may be after arrival of the ship.
106. (1) If during the progress of a voyage the master of any
Indian ship is removed or superseded or for any other reason quits
the ship and is succeeded in the command by some other person,
he shall, deliver to his successor the various documents relating to
the navigation of the ship and the crew thereof which are in his
custody and a handing over note enlisting such documents.
Seafarer not to
be enticed to
desert.
Stowaways and
seafarers carried
under compulsion.
On change of
master, documents
to be handed over
to successor.

161
(2) On receipt of such documents and the handing over note,
the successor shall make an entry in the official log book to that
effect which shall also be endorsed by the predecessor.
107. (1) Where it appears to the Central Government that due
facilities are or shall be given by the Government of any country
outside India for recovering and apprehending seafarers who desert
from Indian ships in that country, the Central Government may, by
notification, stating that such facilities are or shall be given, declare
that this section shall apply to seafarers belonging to ships of such
country, subject to such limitations or conditions as may be specified
in the notification.
(2) Where this section applies to seafarers belonging to ships
of any country and a seafarer deserts from any such ship, when
within India, any court that would have taken cognizance of the
matter if the seafarer had deserted from an Indian ship shall, on the
application of a consular officer of that country, aid in apprehending
the deserter and for that purpose may, on information given on oath,
issue a warrant for his apprehension and on proof of the desertion
order him to be conveyed on board his ship or delivered to the
master or mate of his ship or to the owner of the ship or his agent
to be so conveyed and any such warrant or order may be executed
accordingly.
108. (1) Except a ship of less than two hundred tons gross,
there shall be kept an official log book in such form and such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The master, owner or agent of every ship for which an
official log book is required to be kept under this Act shall, deliver
the official log book to the shipping master as and when required by
the shipping master.
(3) No person shall make or procure to be made or assist in
making any entry in any official log book in respect of any occurrence
happening previously to the arrival of the ship at her final port of
discharge more than twenty-four hours after such arrival.
109. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
Deserters from
foreign ships.
Official logbook.
Power to make
rules for this
Part.

162
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely;-
(a) the conditions under sub-section (3) of section 63.
(b) the continuous discharge certificate and seafarer's
identity documents under clause (b) of section 64;
(c) the other functions and duties of the seafarer's
employment offices under clause (b) of section 65;
(d) the form, the manner of the issue of continuous
discharge certificate and seafarer's identity documents and fees
for such discharge certificate and identity documents under
sub-section (4) of section 66;
(e) the qualifications of the seafarer engaged or carried to
sea to in any capacity in any ship under sub-section (6) of
section 66;
(f) the form of certificate to be possessed by seafarer
and the authority who grants that certificate to the effect that
the seafarer is medically fit under sub-section (7) of section
66;
(g) the form of agreement and manner of making
agreement under sub-section (1) of section 67;
(h) the manner of discharge from service of seafarer under
sub-section (1) of section 73;
(i) the manner of discharge of property under section 74;
(j) the restrictions and conditions for utilisation of any
amount deposited with or recovered by shipping master under
section 76;
(k) any other matter relating to functions of the Tribunal
under clause (e) of sub section (4) of section 83;
(l) the form of nomination, cancellation or variation of
such nomination and all other matters connected with the
nominations under sub-section (2) of section 85;
(m) the form of certificate and the manner of possession
of such certificate under sub-section (3) of section 88;
(n) the form and manner of keeping log book under sub-
section (1) of section 108;
(o) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.

163
PART VI
SAFETY AND SECUIRITY
110. This Part shall, unless otherwise exempted, apply to,—
(a) Indian vessel, except vessel covered under Part XIII,
on matters relating to safety and security;
(b) vessel other than Indian vessel when such vessel is
within India, including waters within the jurisdiction of India on
matters relating to safety and security;
(c) port facility, on matters relating to security; and
(d) company, on matters relating to safety and security of
the vessel.
111. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "company" means the owner of the vessel or any
other organisation or person such as the manager, or the bareboat
charterer, who has assumed the responsibility for operation of
the vessel from the owner of the vessel and who on assuming
such responsibility has agreed to take over all the duties and
responsibilities imposed by the international safety management
code under the safety convention;
(b) "port facility" means any location or area including
anchorages or awaiting berths or approaches from seaward as
determined by the Central Government where interface between
vessel or a vessel and a port takes place;
(c) "voyage" means the whole time and distance between
the vessels port or place of departure and her final port or place
arrival;
(d) words and expressions used in this Part but not defined,
shall have the same meanings as assigned to them in the
Conventions as referred to in section 112.
112. (1) Every vessel shall, subject to such conditions as may
be prescribed, comply with the provisions of the following convention
or agreement, as applicable, namely:—
(a) the Safety Convention;
(b) the Load Lines Convention;
(c) the Special Trade Passenger Ships Agreement,1971;
Application of
this Part.
Definitions.
Safety and
security
requirements.

164
(d) the Convention on the International Regulations for
Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972;
(e) the International Convention on Maritime Search and
Rescue, 1979;
(f) the Tonnage Measurement Convention, 1969;
(g) International convention for Safe Containers, 1972;
(h) any other convention or agreement or any treaty relating
to safety or security to which India is a Party:
Provided that vessels, to which the provisions of the above
conventions are not applicable, shall comply with such safety
and security requirements as may be prescribed.
(2) The safety and security requirements for different classes
of vessels and certificates to be held by such vessels shall be such
as may be prescribed.
113. (1) When an incident relating to the safety and security
takes place on a vessel, the master of vessel shall report the particulars
of such incident to such authority in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) When an incident takes place relating to the loss or likely
loss overboard of dangerous goods in packaged form into the sea,
or dangerous goods in solid form in bulk into the sea, or any incident
impeding safe navigation, the master of every vessel shall report the
particulars of such incident to such authority in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(3) The vessel referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
being abandoned, or a report from such vessel being incomplete, the
Central Government shall fix the responsibility on the master of the
vessel.
114. (1) The master of an Indian vessel, on receiving at sea a
signal of distress or information from any source that a vessel or
aircraft is in distress, shall proceed with all speed to the assistance
of the persons in distress (informing them if possible that he is doing
so) unless he is unable or in the special circumstances of the case
considers it unreasonable or unnecessary to do so or unless he is
released from such obligation under the provisions of sub-section
(3) or sub-section (4).
Reporting of
incidents.
Obligation to
render assistance
on receiving signal
of distress and to
persons in danger.

165
(2) Where the master of any vessel in distress has requisitioned
any Indian vessel that has answered his call, it shall be the duty of
the master of the requisitioned vessel to comply with the requisition
by continuing to proceed with all speed to the assistance of the
persons in distress unless he is released from the obligation under
the provisions of sub-section (4).
(3) The master shall be released from the obligation imposed
by sub-section (1) as soon as he is informed of the requisition of
one or more vessels other than his own and that the requisition is
being complied with by the vessel or vessels requisitioned.
(4) The master shall be released from the obligation imposed
by sub-section (1), and if his vessel has been requisitioned, from the
obligation imposed by sub-section (2), if he is informed by the
persons in distress or by the master of any vessel that has reached
the persons in distress that assistance is no longer required.
(5) If the master of an Indian vessel on receiving at sea a
signal of distress or information from any source that a vessel or
aircraft is in distress is unable or in the special circumstances of the
case considers it unreasonable or unnecessary to go to the assistance
of the persons in distress, he shall forthwith cause a statement to
be entered in the official log book or if there is no official log book,
cause other record to be kept of his reasons for not going to the
assistance of those persons.
(6) The master of every Indian vessel for which an official
logbook is required shall enter or cause to be entered in the official
log book every signal of distress or message that a vessel, aircraft
or person is in distress at sea.
(7) The master of every Indian vessel shall render assistance
to every persons found at sea in danger of being lost, unless he is
unable or, in the special circumstance of the case, considers that
such assistance cannot be rendered without serious danger to his
vessel, or the persons thereon.
(8) If the master of an Indian vessel is unable or consider it
unreasonable to go to the assistance of a person found at sea in
danger of being lost, the master shall forthwith cause a statement to
be entered in the official log book or, if there is no official log book,
cause other record to be kept of his reasons for not going to the
assistance of that person.

166
115. The Central Government may make arrangements for search
and rescue services for dealing with distress situation at sea, including
territorial waters of India or any marine areas adjacent thereto over
which India has, or may have jurisdiction under the Territorial Waters,
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones
Act, 1976 or any other law for the time being in force or such
territory under International Convention on Maritime Search and
Rescue, 1979 and agreement related thereto and such services shall
include the establishment of rescue co-ordination centers and sub-
centers.
116. Every Indian vessel shall be equipped and maintained with
such communication equipment, distress and safety equipment
and shall be provided with such certified operators as may be
prescribed.
117. Every Indian vessel shall carry on board such information
relating to the stability of the vessel, and the effects of any damage,
control and general precautions necessary to maintain watertight
integrity of the vessels, duly approved, as required under the
provisions of Safety Convention, and the Load Line Convention, or
the safety and security requirements in accordance with the provisions
of section 112.
Explanation.— For the proposes of this section, "Load Line
Convention" means the International Convention on Load Lines, 1966
and its Protocols.
118. (1) No vessel, other than a vessel exempted from the
provisions of this Part relating to load lines, shall be so loaded as to
submerge in salt water, when the vessel has no list, the appropriate
load line on each side of the vessel, that is to say, the load line
indicating or purporting to indicate the maximum depth to which the
vessel is for the time being entitled under the load line rules to be
loaded.
(2) Without prejudice to any other proceedings under this Act,
any vessel which is loaded in contravention of this section may be
detained until she ceases to be so loaded.
119. (1) No vessel shall carry passengers between ports or
places in India, or to or from any port or place in India from or to
any port or place outside India, unless she has all certificates required
under this Part in force.
Search and rescue
services.
Radio
communication
requirements.
Information
about vessel
stability.
Submersion of
load lines.
No vessel to carry
passenger without
a certificate.

167
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order,
specify the conditions relating to,—
(a) passenger accommodation;
(b) scale of passenger and crew amenities to be provided;
(c) space or disallowance of any space on a vessel ;
(d) scale of provisions and water to be provided;
(e) hospital accommodation and medical facilities;
(f) the conditions for carriage of cargo and livestock; and
(g) any other matter to carry out the purposes of this
Part.
(3) Subject to the conditions specified in sub-section (2), the
master of a passenger vessel departing or proceeding on a voyage
shall make a statement about the passengers on board the vessel in
such form as may be specified by the Central Government in this
behalf.
120. No vessel shall proceed to sea unless there is in force in
respect of such vessel the certificates required under the convention
or agreement referred to in section 112.
121. (1) If any person who, -
(a) being drunk or disorderly attempts to enter a vessel;
or
(b) on board molest or continues to molest any person on
board; or
(c) travels or attempts to travel without payment of fare;
or
(d) wilfully refuses or neglects to quit the vessel on arrival
at destination; or
(e) fails to exhibit his ticket when requested by the master
or other officer; or
(f) misconducts himself in such a manner as to cause
annoyance or injury to persons on board; or
(g) carries any substance that could jeopardize the safety
or security of the vessel, lives onboard or the environment in
general, he shall be guilty of an offence under this sub-section.
Vessel not to
proceed to sea
without valid
safety and security
certificates.
Offences.

168
(2) The master may refuse to receive on board any person
referred to in sub-section (1), and if any such person is on board,
may put him on shore, and the person so refused admittance or put
on shore shall not be entitled to return of any fare he has paid.
(3) The master or other officer of any such vessel and all
persons called by him or other officer to his assistance, without
warrant, may detain any person who commits any offence under
sub-section (1) and convey the offender with all convenient dispatch
before the nearest police station to be dealt with in accordance with
the law.
122. (1) No vessel shall carry or attempt to carry cargo in
contravention of section 120 or shall have on board or in any part
thereof a cargo which is not in accordance with the certificate held
by the vessel.
(2) No vessel shall carry or attempt to carry passengers in
contravention of section 120 or shall have on board or in any part
thereof a number of passengers, which is greater than the number
set forth in the certificate held by the vessel.
(3) If the master of any vessel which carries or attempts to
carry cargo or passengers in contravention of this section he shall
be liable to have his certificate of competency cancelled or suspended
for such a period as the Central Government may, by order, specify
in this behalf.
123. (1) Every person who sends or attempts to send a vessel
which is not in a seaworthy condition to sea so that the life of any
person is likely to be thereby endangered shall, unless he proves that
he used all reasonable means to ensure her being sent to sea in a
seaworthy state or that her going to sea in such unseaworthy state
was under the circumstances reasonable and justifiable, be guilty of
an offence under this sub-section.
(2) Every master of a vessel who knowingly takes a vessel
which is not in seaworthy condition that the life of any person is
likely to be thereby endangered shall, unless he proves that her going
to sea in such unseaworthy state was, under the circumstances,
reasonable and justifiable, be guilty of an offence under this sub-
section.
(3) For the purpose of giving such proof, every person charged
under this section may give evidence in the same manner as any
other witness.
Vessel not to
carry cargo or
passengers in
contravention
of Act.
Unseaworthy
vessel not to be
sent to sea.

169
(4) No prosecution for an offence under sub-section (2) shall
be instituted except by, or with the written consent of the Central
Government.
124. (1) In every contract of service, express or implied
between the owner of a vessel and the master or any seafarer
thereof, there shall be implied, notwithstanding any agreement to the
contrary, an obligation on the owner that such owner and the master,
and every agent charged with the loading of such vessel or the
preparing thereof for sea, or the sending thereof to sea, shall use all
reasonable means to ensure the seaworthiness of such vessel for the
voyage at the time when such voyage commences, and to keep her
in a seaworthy state during the voyage.
(2) For the purpose of verifying that the provisions of this
section have been complied with, the Central Government may, either
at the request of the owner or otherwise, arrange for a survey of
the hull, equipment or machinery of any sea-going vessel by a
surveyor or any person so authorised.
125. (1) Every vessel, company or port facility, as the case
may be, shall comply with such requirements as may be prescribed
for safety management and security management.
(2) The Central Government or a person authorised by it shall
arrange for the audit of the vessel, company or port facility for the
purpose of sub-section (1).
(3) The Central Government or a person authorised by it, may
set different levels of security and provide such information thereof
to all the port facilities, and all vessels entering into any port facility.
126. (1) No vessel shall enter into or sail out of or operate
within the port, terminal, anchorages, port facilities, Indian offshore
facilities or Indian territorial waters without complying with such
provisions with regard to insurance, classification and condition of
vessel or any other relevant requirements for the purposes of this
Part as may be prescribed.
(2) The surveyor may inspect any Indian vessel or any vessel
other than an Indian vessel, whilst at a port or place in India for the
purpose of this Part and if it is found on any inspection that the
vessel is not complying the provisions of this Part or any International
Convention to which India is a party, the surveyor shall report it to
the Principal Officer.
Obligation of
owner to seafarer
with respect to
sea-worthiness
Safety and
security
management.
Control measures
and detention of
vessels.

170
(3) On receipt of report under sub-section (2), the Principal
Officer may take such action as may be necessary, including detention
of such vessel, till such time the vessel is in compliance with the
provisions of this Part or provisions applicable under the International
Conventions, and may allow such vessel to proceed to sea, if it does
not pose an unreasonable threat to safety or security or environment.
127. (1) If it appears that there was no reasonable or probable
cause, by reason of the condition of the vessel or the act or default
of the owner or master, for detention of the vessel, the Central
Government shall be liable to pay to the owner of the vessel his
costs of and incidental to the detention of the vessel and also
compensation for any loss or damage sustained by him by reason of
detention.
(2) If a vessel is detained under this Part by reason of the
condition of the vessel or due to the act or default of the owner or
master, the owner of a vessel shall be liable to pay to the Central
Government its costs of and incidental to the detention and survey
of the vessel and the vessel shall not be released until such costs are
paid and faults are rectified.
128. (1) The Central Government may make rules for safety
and security requirements applicable to vessel, company or port
facility under this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the conditions under sub-section (1) section 112 and
the safety and security requirements under proviso to sub-
section (1) that section;
(b) the safety and security requirements for different classes
of vessels and the certificates under sub-section (2) of section
112;
(c) the manner of reporting the particulars of incidents
and the authority to whom such particulars to be reported
under sub-section (1) of section 113;
(d) the manner of reporting the particulars of incidents
and the authority to whom such particulars to be reported
under sub-section (2) of section 113;
Liability for
costs and damage
when vessels
detained.
Power to make
rules.

171
(e) the communication equipment, distress and safety
equipment to be equipped and maintained, and the certified
operators to be provided under section 116;
(f) the requirements for safety management or security
management under sub-section (1) of section 125;
(g) the provisions with regard to insurance, classification
and condition of vessel or any other relevant requirements
under sub-section (1) of section 126; and
(h) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
PART VII
PREVENTION, C ONTAINMENT OF P OLLUTION F ROM V ESSEL AND R ESPONSE
129. Save as otherwise provided, this Part shall apply to,—
(a) every Indian vessel;
(b) every vessel other than an Indian vessel;
(c) vessel not entitled to fly the flag of India but which
operate under the authority of India;
(d) any vessel that enters a port, shipyard, or offshore
terminal or place in India or within the territorial waters of
India or any marine areas adjacent thereto over which India
has, or may hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in regard to
control of pollution under the Territorial Waters, Continental
Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones
Act, 1976 or any other law for the time being in force; and
(e) any incident of marine casualty or any act relating to
such casualty occurring with grave and imminent danger to
Indian coast line or maritime zones of India or related interests
from pollution or threat of pollution in the sea or air either by
deliberate, negligent or accidental release of oil, ballast water,
noxious liquid substance, garbage, sewage, waste, harmful anti-
fouling substances, harmful emissions or any other
harmful substance including such incidents occurring on the
high seas;
(f) port shipyard or offshore terminal for the purpose of
providing reception facilities.
Application of
this Part.

172
130. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "coastal waters" means any part of territorial waters
of India, or any marine area adjacent thereto over which India
has, or, may hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in regard to
control of marine pollution under the Territorial Waters,
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime
Zones Act, 1976, or any other law for the time being in force;
(b) "harmful substance" means any substance, or form of
energy, which, if introduced into the sea or air, is liable to
create hazards to human health, harm living resources and
marine life, damage amenities or interfere with other legitimate
uses of the sea, air and includes any substance subject to
control by any of the conventions to which India is a party;
(c) "vessel" means a vessel of any type whatsoever
operating in the marine or aquatic environment and includes
hydrofoil boats, air-cushion vehicles, submersibles, floating craft,
fixed or floating platforms, floating storage units and floating
production storage and off-loading units.
131. (1) Unless otherwise expressly provided, all vessels shall
be under an obligation to prevent discharge or emission of harmful
substances or mixtures containing such substances and for that
purpose, the Central Government may make rules requiring Indian
vessel to be fitted with such equipment and to comply with such
requirements relating to construction, survey of equipment and
structure of such vessel and specifying conditions, prior to issuing
a certificate under this Part.
(2) For the purpose of ensuring that the provisions of this
section have been complied with, the Central Government may, either
at the request of the owner or otherwise, arrange for the survey of
the hull, equipment or machinery of any vessel by a surveyor and,
if found fit, shall issue a certificates in accordance with the provisions
of this Act and rules made there under in such form and for such
duration subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may take all steps to prevent the
pollution of the sea by the dumping of waste and other matter by
vessels that is liable to create hazards to human health, to harm
living resources and marine life, to damage amenities or to interfere
with other legitimate uses of the sea.
Definitions.
Control of
discharge or
emission of
harmful
substances or
dumping at sea.

173
132.  Every vessel shall, subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, comply with the provisions of the following convention,
as applicable, namely:—
(a) the MARPOL Convention;
(b) the Anti-Fouling Systems Convention;
(c) the Ballast Water Management Convention;
(d) any other Pollution Prevention Convention or agreement
or treaty to which India is a party:
Provided that the vessel, to which the provisions of the
above conventions are not applicable, shall comply with such
pollution prevention requirements as may be prescribed:
Provided further that the vessel shall possess such different
types of certificates and documents depending on the type,
size, nature and area of operation of the vessel as may be
prescribed.
133.  No vessel shall proceed to sea unless there is in force in
respect of such vessel the certificates required under the convention
or agreement or treaty referred to in section 132.
134. (1) Every Indian vessel shall maintain such books of record
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The manner in which record books shall be maintained, the
nature of entries to be made therein, the custody and disposal thereof,
and all other matters relating thereto shall be such as may be
prescribed.
135. (1) The port, shipyard, ship breaking yards, ship repair
unit, offshore facilities and terminals taking into account the
international standards, shall provide such reception facilities and
surveillance, supervision and guidance thereof as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Central Government may give directions to be compiled
with by the port authorities, shipyard, ship breaking yards ship
repair unit, offshore facilities and terminals to take appropriate
measures in its territory to require that wastes generated during
operation, repair and re-cycling of vessel are collected, handled,
treated and disposed of in a safe and environmentally sound manner,
to protect human health and the environment.
Requirements of
prevention and
containment of
pollution and
response.
V essel not to
proceed to sea
without valid
pollution
prevention
certificates.
Record books.
Reception
facilities.

174
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, in respect of every port or place in India,
the powers of the port authority or such persons under whose
supervision such place is operated shall include the power to provide
reception facilities in accordance with the requirements of the
convention.
(4) A port authority providing reception facilities or a person
providing such facilities by arrangement with the port authority, may
impose charges for the use of the facilities at such rates and may
impose such conditions in respect of the use thereof as may be
notified by the Central Government in respect of the port.
(5) Where the Central Government is satisfied that there are no
reception facilities at any port, shipyard, ship breaking yards, ship
repair unit, offshore facilities and terminals in India or that the
facilities available at such port or place are not adequate for enabling
vessel calling at such port or place to comply with the requirements
of the Convention, the Central Government, may direct, by order in
writing, such authority to provide or arrange for the provision of
such reception facilities as may be specified in the order.
136. (1) When an incident in which the cargo or harmful
substances, as covered under this Part or the Pollution prevention
convention is escaping or likely to escape from a vessel and may
cause or threaten to cause pollution of air, any part of coasts or
coastal waters of India, the master of every vessel shall report the
particulars of such incident to such authority in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) The vessel referred to in sub-section (1) being abandoned,
or a report from such vessel being incomplete, the Central Government
shall fix the responsibility on the master of that vessel.
(3) Where the Central Government is satisfied that the cargo or
harmful substances as covered under this Part or the Pollution
prevention convention is escaping or likely to escape and may cause
or threaten to cause pollution of air, any part of coasts or coastal
waters of India, it may direct the owner, agent, master, charterer,
Powers to take
measures for
prevention or
containment of
pollution and
reporting of
incidents.

175
operator, lessee or licensee of the vessel by notice served on him,
to take following action, namely:-
(a) to prevent the escape of harmful substances from the
vessel, as may be specified in such notice;
(b) to remove the cargo or oil or noxious liquid substance
or harmful substance from the vessel, in such manner and to
such place, if any, as may be specified in the notice;
(c) to remove the vessel to a place, if any, as may be
specified in the notice;
(d) to remove the cargo or oil or noxious liquid substance
or harmful substance slicks on the surface of the sea in such
manner, if any, as may be specified in the notice; and
(e) to prohibit the removal of the vessel including any
cargo or stores therein, from a place specified in the notice.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the
Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that the pollution
caused or likely to be caused by release of harmful substances has
or may present a grave and imminent danger to the coastline or
related interest from pollution or threat of pollution, proceed to take
such measures as may be deemed necessary to prevent, mitigate or
eliminate such threat or danger and any measures so taken shall be
deemed to have been taken under this section.
(5) Where any person fails to comply, or fails to comply in
part, with any notice served on him under sub-section (3), the
Central Government may, whether or not such person is convicted
of an offence under this Part by reason of his having so failed to
comply, cause such action to be taken as it may deem necessary
for,—
(a) carrying out the directives given in the notice issued
under sub-section (1); and
(b) containing the pollution already caused or preventing
the pollution threatened to be caused, of any part of the coast
of India by any harmful substance escaped or threatening to
escape from the vessel.
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Part any expenditure or
liability incurred by the Central Government in, or by reason of, the

176
exercise of powers under sub-section (4) in relation to any vessel in
respect of which a notice had been issued under sub-section (3),
shall be a debt due to the Central Government by the person or
persons on whom the notice was served and may be recovered from
that person, or as the case may be, from all or any of those persons
and shall be a charge upon all or any vessel owned by that person
or persons which may be detained by the Central Government until
the amount is paid.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3) to
(6), to prevent, mitigate or eliminate grave and imminent danger to
the coastline or related interests from pollution or threat of pollution
following upon a maritime casualty or acts relating to such casualty
on the high seas which may reasonably be expected to result in
major harmful consequences to the Indian coastal water, the Central
Government shall take such measures as may be necessary.
(8) The Central Government may make national or regional
arrangement system for responding promptly and effectively to
pollution incidents occurring within the zones under the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other
Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any other law for the time being in
force.
137. (1) Where for the purposes of taking any measures under
sub-section (1) of section 136, the Central Government or any other
officer authorised by it in this behalf may, if deems necessary so to
do, direct, by an order in writing, the owner of any Indian vessel,
tug, barge or any other equipment, to provide such services or
assistance as may be specified in that order.
(2) The owner of any vessel, tug, barge or any other equipment
with respect to which an order under sub-section (1) has been made
shall be entitled to tariff rates of freight and charter hire, at reasonable
rates having regard to current market conditions:
Provided that where tariff rates of freight are not fixed or
where there is any dispute about reasonable rate of charter hire, the
freight or, as the case may be, charter hire, shall be paid at such
rates as may be fixed by the Central Government by an order in
writing, subject to determination of reasonability of such rates of
freight or charter hire by examining such witnesses, documents and
accounts as it may deem necessary.
Power of
the Central
Government to
give directions to
certain vessels or
persons to render
certain service.
80 of 1976

177
138. (1) The Central Government may, having regard to the
provisions of the Pollution prevention convention, make rules to
carry out the purposes of this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions of sub-section (1), such rules may provide for all or any
of the following matter, namely:-
(a) the form and period of the certificate and conditions
on which a certificate may be issued under sub-section (2) of
section 131;
(b) the conditions to comply the provisions of the
conventions under section 132;
(c) the pollution prevention requirements under first proviso
to section 132;
(d) the different types of certificates and documents under
second proviso to section 132;
(e) the form and manner of maintenance of record book
under sub-section (1) of section 134;
(f) the other matter relating to maintenance of record
book under sub-section (2) of section 134;
(g) the reception facilities, surveillance, supervisions and
guidance under sub-section (1) of section 135;
(h) the manner and of reporting the incident to the authority
under sub-section (1) of section 136; and
(i) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
PART VIII
S
URVEY, AUDIT AND CERTIFICA TION
139. (1) Every Indian vessel, company, port facility, shipyard,
ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities or terminals
shall unless otherwise exempted be surveyed or audited for verification
of compliance with such requirements as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government, surveyor or any person authorised
by it in this behalf may, if satisfied that any vessel, company, port
facility, shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities
Power to
make rules.
Survey, audit and
certification.

178
or terminal has been surveyed or audited as per the requirements
under the rules made under this Act or as required by convention to
the extent of applicability, issue the appropriate certificate or, as the
case may be, documents in respect of such vessel, company, port
facility, shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities
or terminal.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any
survey, or, as the case may be, audit of a vessel, company, port
shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities or
terminal facility under this Part has been completed, the owner,
agent or master of such vessel, company, port facility, shipyard,
ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities or terminal
shall not make or cause to be made any alteration in the structure,
equipment, fittings, arrangements, material, systems or scantlings
covered by the survey or audit without the prior written permission
of the Central Government or any person authorised by it in this
behalf.
(4) If the Central Government or any person authorised by it
has reason to believe that since the completion of last survey or
audit, changes have been made to the structure, equipment, fittings,
arrangements, material, systems or scantlings, or they have sustained
any damage or are otherwise found insufficient, then the Central
Government or any person authorised by it in this behalf may require
that the vessel, company, port facility, shipyard, ship breaking yard,
ship repair unit, offshore facilities or terminal to be re-surveyed or
audited to such extent as it may deem fit or may modify or revoke
or suspend or cancel or surrender the certificates and documents in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Subject to any exemption granted by the Central
Government, no vessel shall proceed to sea unless the owner, or
master, of the vessel holds onboard all the applicable certificates or
documents as required under this Act and the rules made thereunder.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Part, the word
"company" or "port facility" shall have the same meaning as assigned
to it under clauses (a) or (b) of section 111, respectively.
140.  Every vessel, company, port facility, shipyard, ship breaking
Certificates.

179
yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities or terminal shall, unless
exempted, be in possession of such certificates as may be
prescribed.
141. (1) Except otherwise provided, for the purposes of this
Act, a surveyor may, at any reasonable time, go on board a vessel,
and may inspect or audit the vessel, and any part thereof, the structure,
equipment, fittings, arrangements, materials, systems, scantlings,
cargo, provisions, stores, her certificates, and certificates of the
seafarers on board:
Provided that he does not unreasonably hinder the operation of
the vessel, or unreasonably detain or delay her from proceeding on
any voyage.
(2) The owner, agent, master or every officer of the vessel
shall afford to the surveyor all reasonable facilities for a survey, and
provide all such information in respect of the vessel and her structure,
equipment, fittings, arrangements, materials, scantlings, systems,
cargo, provisions, stores, her certificates, and certificates of the
seafarers, as the surveyor reasonably requires.
142. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of
section 139, every vessel, company, port facility, shipyard, ship
breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities or terminal shall be
surveyed, audited and certified to confirm the compliance of
requirements as specified in the following conventions, namely:—
(a) the Safety Convention;
(b) the MARPOL Convention;
(c) the Anti-Fouling Systems Convention;
(d) the Ballast Water Management Convention;
(e) the Load Lines Conventions;
(f) the Tonnage Measurement Convention, 1969;
(g) the Special Trade Passenger Ships Agreement, 1971
and its Protocol;
(h) the Convention on the International Regulations for
Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972;
(i) the International Convention on Maritime Search and
Rescue, 1979 (SAR 1979);
Power of
surveyor.
Compliance of
provisions of
convention.

180
(j) the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006; or
(k) any other convention relating to survey, audit or
certification:
Provided that if every such vessel, company, port facility,
shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities
or terminal, as the case may be, is not covered under the
provisions of the above conventions, such vessel, company,
port facility, shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit,
offshore facilities or terminal, as the case may be, shall, for
survey, audit and certification, comply with such requirements
and in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided further that different classes of vessel, company,
port facility, shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit,
offshore facilities or terminal shall be surveyed, audited or
certified with such requirements in such manner as may be
prescribed.
143. A valid certificate issued under a convention in respect of
a vessel other than an Indian vessel by the government of the country
to which the vessel belongs shall subject to such rules as the Central
Government may make in this behalf, have the same effect in India
as the corresponding certificates issued in respect of an Indian
vessel.
144. (1) The Central Government may at the request of the
government of a country to which convention applies cause an
appropriate convention certificate to be issued in respect of a vessel
registered or to be registered in that country, if it is satisfied in like
manner as in the case of an Indian vessel that such certificate can
properly be issued and where a certificate is issued at such a request
it shall contain a statement that it has been so issued.
(2) The Central Government may request the Government of
a country to which the convention applies to issue an appropriate
convention certificate in respect of a vessel registered or to be
registered in India and a certificate issued in pursuance of such a
request and containing a statement that it has been so issued shall
have effect for the purpose of this Act as if it had been issued by
the Central Government.
145. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out
the purposes of this Part.
Recognition of
certificates issued
outside India.
Issue of certificate
to foreign vessels
in India and Indian
vessels in foreign
countries.
Power to make
rules for this Part.

181
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the requirements for verification of vessel, company,
port facility, shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit,
offshore facilities or terminal under sub-section (1) of section
139;
(b) the manner of requirements and the manner of survey,
audit and certification of vessel, company, port facility, shipyard,
ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities or terminal
and modification, revocation, suspension, cancellation or
surrender of the certificates and documents under sub-section
(4) of section 139;
(c) the certificates to be possessed by a vessel, company,
port facility, ship-yard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit,
offshore facilities or terminal under section 140;
(d) the manner of compliance for survey, audit and
certification under first proviso to section 142;
(e) the requirement and manner of survey, audit and
certification of different classes of vessel, company, port facility,
shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities
or terminal under second proviso to section 142;
(f) any other matter which is to be required or may be
prescribed.
PART IX
MARITIME LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
CHAPTER I
C
OLLISION, ACCIDENT AT S EA AND L IABILITY
146. This Chapter shall apply to,—
(a) Indian vessel; and
(b) any vessel other than an Indian vessel while it is at a
port or place in India including, the territorial waters of India
or any marine areas adjacent thereto over which India has, or
may hereafter have, jurisdiction under the Territorial Waters,
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other
Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any other law for the time being
in force.
Application of
this Chapter.
80 of 1976.

182
147. (1) If the collision, damage, or loss is caused by the fault
of one of the vessels, the liability to make good the damages attaches
to the one who has committed the fault.
(2) Whenever by the fault of two or more vessels damage or
loss is caused to one or more of them or to the cargo of one or
more of them or to any property on board one or more of them, the
liability to make good the damage or loss shall be in proportion to
the degree in which each vessel was at fault:
Provided that—
(a) if, having regard to all the circumstances of the case,
it is not possible to establish different degrees of fault, the
liability shall be apportioned equally;
(b) nothing in this section shall operate so as to render
any vessel liable for any loss or damage to which her fault has
not contributed;
(c) nothing in this section shall affect the liability of any
person under any contract, or shall be construed as imposing
any liability upon any person from which he is exempted by
any contract or by any provision of law, or as affecting the
right of any person to limit his liability in the manner provided
by law.
(3) For the purposes of this Chapter, references to damage or
loss caused by the fault of a vessel shall be construed as including
references to any salvage or other expenses, consequent upon that
fault, recoverable in any law for the time being in force by way of
damages.
148. (1) Whenever loss of life or personal injuries are suffered
by any person on board a vessel owing to the fault of that vessel
or any other vessel or vessels, the liability of the owners of the
vessels concerned shall be joint and several.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as depriving any
person of any right of defence on which, he might have relied in an
action brought against him by the person injured, or any person
entitled to sue in respect of such loss of life, or shall affect the right
of any person to limit his liability in cases to which this section
relates.
Apportionment
of liability.
Damages for
personal injury.

183
149. (1) Whenever loss of life or personal injuries are suffered
by a person on board a vessel owing to the fault of that vessel and
of any other vessel, and a proportion of the damages is recovered
from the owner of one of the vessels which exceeds the proportion
in which she was in fault, the said owner may recover by way of
contribution the amount of the excess from the owners of the other
vessel or vessels to the extent to which those vessels were
respectively in fault:
Provided that no amount shall be so recovered which shall not,
by reason of any statutory or contractual limitation of, or exemption
from, liability, or which shall not for any other reason, have been
recovered in the first instance as damages by the persons entitled to
sue therefor.
(2) In addition to any other remedy provided by law for the
time being in force, the person entitled to any contribution under
sub-section (1) shall, for the purpose of recovering the contribution,
have subject to the provisions of this Act, the same rights, and
powers as the persons entitled to sue for damages in the first
instance.
150. In every case of collision between two vessels it shall be
the duty of the master or person in-charge of each vessel, in and
so far as he can do so without danger to his own vessel, crew and
passengers, if any,-
(a) to render to the other vessel, her master, crew and
passengers, if any, such assistance as may be practicable and
may be necessary to save them from any danger caused by the
collision and to stay by the other vessel until he has ascertained
that she has no need of further assistance; and
(b) to give to the masters or persons in-charge of the
other vessels the name of his own vessel and of the port to
which she belongs and also the names of the ports from which
she comes and to which she is bound.
151. In every case of collision in which it is practicable so to
do, the master of every vessel shall, immediately after the occurrence,
cause a statement thereof and of the circumstances under which the
same occurred to be entered in the official log book, if any, and the
entry shall be signed by the master and also by the officer on watch
or one of the seafarer.
Right of
contribution.
Duty of master of
vessel to assist in
case of collision.
Collision to be
entered in official
log book.

184
152.  When an Indian vessel has sustained or caused any accident
occasioning loss of life or any serious injury to any person or has
received any material damage affecting her seaworthiness or her
efficiency either in her hull or is so altered in any part of her
machinery as not to correspond with the particulars contained in any
of the certificates issued under this Act in respect of the vessel, the
owner or master or agent shall, within twenty-four hours after the
happening of the accident or damage or as soon thereafter as possible,
transmit to the Central Government or the nearest Principal Officer
a report of the accident or damage and of the probable cause thereof
stating the name of the vessel, her official number, if any, her port
of registry and the place where she is.
153.  If the owner or agent of any Indian vessel has reason,
owing to the non-appearance of the vessel or to any other
circumstance, to apprehend that the vessel has been wholly lost, he
shall, as soon as conveniently may be, send notice, in writing, to the
Central Government relating to the loss and the cause of such loss
stating the name of the vessel, her official number, if any, and her
port of registry.
CHAPTER II
L
IMITATION OF LIABILITY FOR M ARITIME C LAIMS
154. This Chapter shall apply to,—
(a) Indian ship; and
(b) any ship other than an Indian ship while it is at a port
or place in India including, the territorial waters of India or any
marine areas adjacent thereto over which India has, or may
hereafter have, jurisdiction under the Territorial Waters,
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other
Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any other law for the time being
in force.
155. (1) The shipowner or salvor or any person for whose
act, neglect or default, the shipowner or salvor, or any such person,
as the case may be, is responsible, and the insurer of liability for
such claims, may limit his liability as provided,—
(a) claims of loss of life or personal injury or loss of or
damage to property including damage to harbour works, basins
and waterways and aids to navigation, occurring on board or
Report to Central
Government of
accidents to
vessels.
Notice of loss of
Indian vessel to be
given to Central
Government.
Application of this
Chapter.
Limitation of
liability for
damages in
respect of certain
claims.

185
in direct connection with the operation of the vessels or with
salvage operations, and consequential loss resulting
therefrom;
(b) claims of loss resulting from delay in the carriage by
sea of cargo, passengers or their luggage;
(c) claims of other loss resulting from infringement of
rights other than contractual rights, occurring in direct
connection with the operation of the vessel or salvage
operations;
(d) claims of the raising, removal, destruction or the
rendering harmless of a vessel which is sunk, wrecked, stranded
or abandoned, including anything that is or has been on board
such vessel;
(e) claims in respect of the removal, destruction or the
rendering harmless of the cargo of the vessel;
(f) claims of a person other than the person liable in
respect of measures taken in order to avert or minimise loss
for which the person liable may limit his liability in accordance
with the convention, and further loss caused by such
measures.
(2) The claims set out under sub-section (1) shall be subject
to limitation of liability even if brought by way of recourse or for
indemnity under a contract or otherwise:
Provided that claims set out under clauses (d), (e) and (f) of
sub-section (1) shall not be subject to limitation of liability to the
extent that they relate to remuneration under a contract with the
person liable.
(3) Nothing in this section apply to,—
(a) claims for salvage, including, if applicable, any claim
for special compensation under article 14 of the Salvage
Convention, or contribution in general average;
(b) claims for oil pollution damage under Chapter III of
this Part relating to civil liability for oil pollution damage;
(c) claims subject to any international convention or
national legislation governing or prohibiting limitation of liability,
for nuclear damage;

186
(d) claims against the shipowner of a nuclear ship, for
nuclear damage;
(e) claims by servant of the shipowner or salvor whose
duties are connected with the ship or the salvage operations,
including claims of their heirs, dependants or other persons
entitled to make such claims, if under the law governing the
contract of service between the shipowner or salvor and such
servants, the shipowner or salvor is not entitled to limit his
liability in respect of such claims, or if he is by such law only
permitted to limit his liability to an amount greater than that
provided in the provisions of LLMC Convention or the rules
made under this Chapter.
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this section the act of
invoking limitation of liability shall not be an admission of liability.
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(a) the liability of a shipowner shall include the liability in
an action brought against the ship herself;
(b) "shipowner" means the owner, charter, manager or
operator of a sea-going vessel.
156. A person liable under section 155 shall not be entitled to
limit his liability if it is proved that the loss resulted from his personal
act or omission, committed with the intent to cause such loss, or
recklessly and with knowledge that such loss may probably result.
157. Where a person entitled to limitation of liability under this
Chapter has a claim against the claimant arising out of the same
occurrence, their respective claims shall be set off against each
other and the provisions of this Chapter shall only apply to the
balance, if any.
158. (1) The limits of liability for claims other than those
mentioned in section 159 arising on any distinct occasion, shall be
calculated in accordance with the provisions of LLMC Convention:
Provided that in cases where the provisions of the LLMC
Convention are not applicable, the limit of liability shall be such as
may be prescribed.
(2) Where the amount calculated in respect of claims for loss
of life or personal injury is insufficient to pay such claims in full,
the amount calculated in respect of other claims shall be made
Conduct barring
limitation.
Counter claims.
Limits of
liability.

187
available for payment of the unpaid balance of claims in respect of
claims for loss of life or personal injury and such unpaid balance
shall rank rateably with claims in respect of other claims.
(3) Without prejudice to the right of claims for loss of life or
personal injury according to the provision of sub-section (2), the
claims in respect of damage to harbour works, basins, waterways
and aids to navigation shall have priority over other claims.
(4) The limits of liability for any salvor not operating from any
vessel or for any salvor operating solely on the vessel to, or in
respect of which he is rendering salvage services, shall be calculated
according to a gross tonnage of 1,500.
159. In respect of claims arising on any distinct occasion for
loss of life or personal injury to passengers of a ship the limit of
liability of the shipowner thereof shall be such amount, as may be
prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, "claims arising
in any distinct occasion for loss of life or personal injury to passengers
of a ship " means any claim brought by or on behalf of any person
carried in that ship,—
(a) under a contract of passenger carriage; or
(b) who, with the consent of the carrier, is accompanying
a vehicle or live animals which are covered by a contract for
the carriage of goods.
160. (1) The limits of liability determined in accordance with
the provisions of section 158 shall apply to the aggregate of all
claims which arise on any distinct occasion, —
(a) against the person or persons or any person for whose
act, neglect or default he or they are responsible; or
(b) against a shipowner rendering salvage services from
that ship and the salvor or salvors operating from such ship
and any person for whose act, neglect or default he or they are
responsible; or
(c) against the salvor or salvors who are not operating
from a ship or who are operating solely on the ship to, or in
respect of which, the salvage services are rendered and any
Limit for
passenger claims.
Aggregation of
claims.

188
person for whose act, neglect or default he or they are
responsible.
(2) The limits of liability determined in accordance with the
provisions of section 159 shall apply to the aggregate of all claims
subject thereto which may arise on any distinct occasion against the
shipowner in respect of the ship referred to in that section and
any person for whose act, neglect or default he or they are
responsible.
161. (1) Limitation of liability may be invoked notwithstanding
that a limitation fund as mentioned in section 162 has not been
constituted.
(2) Where an action is brought to enforce a claim subject to
limitation, a person liable may only invoke the right to limit liability
if a limitation fund is or has been constituted in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter when the right to limit liability is
invoked.
162. (1) Any person alleged to be liable may constitute a fund
with the High Court in which legal proceedings are instituted in
respect of claims subject to limitation.
(2) The fund shall be constituted in the sum of such of the
amounts in accordance with the provisions of section 158 or section
159 as are applicable to claims for which that person may be liable,
together with interest thereon from the date of occurrence giving
rise to the liability until the date of the constitution of the fund.
(3) The fund constituted under sub-section (1) shall be,—
(a) by depositing the amount calculated under section 158
or section 159 with the High Court; or
(b) by producing a guarantee acceptable under any law
for the time being in force and considered to be adequate by
the court.
(4) The fund so constituted shall be available only for the
payment of claims in respect of which limitation of liability may be
invoked.
(5) The fund constituted by one of the persons referred to in
section 161 or his insurer shall be deemed to be constituted by all
persons mentioned in that section.
Limitation of
liability without
constitution of a
limitation
Constitution of
limitation fund.

189
163. (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 158 and 159, the
fund shall be distributed among the claimants in proportion to their
established claims against the fund.
(2) If before the fund is distributed, the person liable or his
insurer has settled a claim against the fund, such person shall, up
to the amount he has paid, acquire by subrogation the rights
which the person so compensated would have enjoyed under this
Chapter.
(3) The right of subrogation provided for in sub-section (2)
may also be exercised by persons other than those mentioned therein
in respect of any amount of compensation which they may have
paid, but only to the extent that such subrogation is permitted under
any law for the time being in force.
(4) Where the person liable or any other person establishes that
he may be compelled to pay, at a later date, in whole or in part any
such amount of compensation with regard to which such person
would have enjoyed a right of subrogation pursuant to sub-sections
(2) and (3) had the compensation been paid before the fund was
distributed, the High Court where the fund has been constituted may
order that a sufficient sum shall be provisionally set aside to
enable such person at such later date to enforce his claim against the
fund.
164. (1) Where a fund has been constituted under section 162,
any person having made a claim against the fund shall be barred
from exercising any right in respect of such claim against any other
assets of a person by or on behalf of whom the fund has been
constituted.
(2) After a fund has been constituted under section 162, any
ship or other property, belonging to a person on behalf of whom the
fund has been constituted, which has been arrested or attached for
a claim which may be raised against the fund, or any security given,
may be released by an order of the High Court and such release shall
always be ordered if the fund has been constituted with the High
Court administering the fund.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply only
if the claimant may claim against the fund before the High Court
administering that fund and the fund is actually available and freely
transferable in respect of that claim.
Distribution of
the fund.
Bar to other
actions.

190
165. (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply whenever
any person referred to in section 155 seeks to limit his liability
before the High Court or seeks to procure the release of a ship or
other property or the discharge of any security given within the
Indian jurisdiction:
Provided that the person who at the time when the provisions
under this Chapter are invoked before any High Court does not have
his habitual residence in India or does not have his principal place
of business in India or any ship in relation to which the right of
limitation is invoked or whose release is sought and which does not
at the time specified above fly the flag of a country, which is a party
to the LLMC Convention, shall be excluded from invoking the
provisions of this Chapter.
(2) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to air-cushion
vehicles or floating platforms constructed for the purpose of exploring
or exploiting the natural resources of the sea-bed or the subsoil
thereof.
166. (1) The Central Government may, having regard to the
provisions of LLMC Convention, make rules to carry out the purposes
of this Chapter.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the limits of liability in cases where the provisions of
LLMC Convention are not applicable under proviso to sub-
section (1) of section 158;
(b) the amount of limit of liability of the owner for loss
of life or personal injury to passengers of a ship under section
159;
(c) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER III
C
IVIL LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE
167. This Chapter shall apply to,—
(a) pollution damage caused by,—
(i) Indian ship wherever it is; and
Scope of
application.
Power to make
rules.
Application of
this Chapter.

191
(ii) any ship other than an Indian ship while it is at
a port or place in India including, the territorial waters of
India or any marine areas adjacent thereto over which India
has, or may hereafter have, jurisdiction under the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and
other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any other law for the
time being in force;
(b) preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent or
minimise such pollution damage.
168. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "incident" means any occurrence, or series of
occurrences having the same origin, which causes pollution
damage or creates a grave and imminent threat of causing such
damage;
(b) "oil" means any persistent hydrocarbon mineral oil
such as crude oil, fuel oil, heavy diesel oil and lubricating oil
whether carried on board a ship as cargo or in the bunkers of
such a ship;
(c) "owner" means,—
(i) the person registered as the owner of the ship;
or
(ii) in the absence of registration, the person
owning the ship; or
(iii) in the case of a ship owned by a country and
operated by a company of that country, the persons
registered in that country as the operator of such ship;
(d) "person" means any individual or partnership or any
public or private body, whether corporate or not, including a
State or any of its constituent sub-divisions;
(e) "pollution damage" means,—
(i) loss or damage caused outside the ship by
contamination resulting from the escape or discharge of oil
from the ship, wherever such escape or discharge may
occur:
Provided that compensation for impairment of the
environment other than loss of profit from such impairment
shall be limited to costs of reasonable measures of
reinstatement actually undertaken or to be undertaken; and
Definitions.
80 of 1976

192
(ii) the costs of preventive measures and further
loss or damage caused by preventive measures;
(d) "preventive measures" means any reasonable measures
taken by any person after an incident has occurred to prevent
or minimie pollution damage;
(g) "ship" means any sea-going vessel and seaborne craft
of any type whatsoever constructed or adapted for the carriage
of oil in bulk as cargo:
Provided that a ship capable of carrying oil and other
cargoes shall be regarded as a ship only when it is actually
carrying oil in bulk as cargo and during any voyage following
such carriage unless it is proved that it has no residues of such
carriage of oil in bulk aboard;
(h) "State of the ship's registry" means in relation to
registered ships the State of registration of the ship, and in
relation to unregistered ships the State whose flag the ship is
flying.
169. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-sections (2) and
(3) of this section, the owner of a ship at the time of an incident
or where the incident consists of a series of occurrences, at the time
of first of such occurrence, shall be liable for any pollution damage
caused by the ship as a result of the incident.
(2) No liability for pollution damage shall attach to the owner,
if he proves that the pollution damage,—
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war,
insurrection or a natural phenomenon of an exceptional,
inevitable and irresistible character; or
(b) was wholly caused by an act or omission done with
intent to cause damage by a third party.
(3) Where the owner proves that the pollution damage resulted
wholly or partially either from an act or omission done with intent
to cause damage by the person who suffered the damage or from
the negligence of that person, the owner may be exonerated wholly
or partially from his liability to such person.
(4) No claim for compensation for pollution damage may be
made against the owner otherwise than in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
Liability of owner.

193
(5) Subject to sub-section (6), no claim for compensation for
pollution damage under this Chapter or otherwise may be made
against,—
(a) the servants or agents of the owner or the members
of the crew;
(b) the pilot or any other person who, without being a
member of the crew, performs services for the ship;
(c) any charterer (by whatever name called including a
bareboat charterer), manager or operator of the ship;
(d) any person performing salvage operations with the
consent of the owner or on the instructions of a competent
public authority;
(e) any person taking preventive measures;
(f) all servants or agents of persons mentioned in clauses
(c), (d) and (e),
unless the damage resulted from their personal act or omission,
committed with the intent to cause such damage, or recklessly and
with knowledge that such damage may probably result.
(6) Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any right of recourse
of the owner against third parties.
170. When an incident involving two or more ships occurs and
pollution damage results therefrom, the owners of all the ships
concerned, unless exonerated under sub-section (3) of section 169,
shall be jointly and severally liable for all such damage which is not
reasonably separable.
171. (1) The owner may limit his liability under this Chapter in
respect of any incident, to an aggregate amount in accordance with
the provisions of the 1992 Liability Convention.
(2) The owner shall not be entitled to limit his liability under
this Chapter, if it is proved that the pollution damage resulted from
his personal act or omission, committed or made with the intent to
cause such damage, or recklessly and with knowledge that such
damage may probably result.
172. (1)(a) Any owner, desiring to avail of the benefit of
limitation of his liability under section 171, shall constitute a limitation
Joint and several
liability for ships.
Limitation of
liability.
Constitution of
limitation fund.

194
fund (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as fund) for the total sum
representing his limits of liability in the High Court.
(b) Such fund may be constituted either by depositing the
sum with the High Court or by furnishing bank guarantee or
such other security as, in the opinion of the High Court, is
satisfactory.
(2) (a) The insurer or any other person providing financial
security to the owner may apply to the High Court for
constitution of the fund under sub-section (1) and any fund so
constituted shall have the same effect as if it were constituted
by the owner.
(b) Such fund may be constituted even in cases where
sub-section (2) of section 171 applies but in any such event
constitution of the fund shall not prejudice the rights of any
claimant against the owner for full compensation exceeding the
amount deposited or secured in the fund.
(3) The amount in Special Drawing Rights to be deposited or
secured in the fund under sub-section (1) shall be converted in
rupees on the basis of official value in rupees of the Special Drawing
Rights as determined by the Reserve Bank of India on the date of
constitution of the fund.
173. (1) Where, before the fund is distributed, the owner or
any of his servants or agents or any person providing him insurance
or other financial security has as a result of an incident paid
compensation for pollution damage, such person shall upto the amount
he has paid, acquire by subrogation the rights which the person so
compensated may have enjoyed under this Chapter.
(2) Where the owner or any other person establishes that he
may be compelled to pay at a later date in whole or in part any such
amount of compensation, with regard to which such person shall
have enjoyed a right of subrogation under sub-section (1), had the
compensation been paid before the fund was distributed, the High
Court where the fund has been constituted, may order that a sufficient
sum shall be provisionally set aside to enable such person at such
later date to enforce his claim against the fund.
174. (1) The High Court shall consolidate all claims against the
fund including those arising under section 173.
Acquisition of
right for
compensation by
subrogation.
Consolidation
of claim and
distribution of
fund.

195
(2) Any claim in respect of expenses reasonably incurred or
sacrifices reasonably made by the owner voluntarily to prevent or
minimise pollution damage shall rank equally with other claims against
the fund.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 173,
the High Court shall distribute the amount in the fund among all
claimants in proportion to their established claims.
175. (1) The owner of every ship carrying more than 2000
tons of oil in bulk as cargo shall, in respect of such ship, maintain
an insurance or other financial security to cover his liability for
pollution damage under this Chapter for the amount specified under
the provisions of the 1992 Liability Convention.
(2) In respect of every Indian ship which maintains insurance
or other financial security under sub-section (1), there shall be issued
by the Central Government a certificate in such form and giving
such particulars as may be prescribed.
(3) On an application by the owner or agent of any foreign
ship, the Central Government may issue a certificate under sub-
section (2) in respect of such foreign ship on production of
satisfactory evidence relating to maintenance of insurance or other
financial security in accordance with the provisions of the 1992
Liability Convention.
(4) For every certificate issued under sub-sections (2) and (3)
there shall be charged such fee as may be prescribed.
176. Any certificate issued by a competent authority in any
country outside India to a ship registered in that country or any
certificate issued by a competent authority of any country which is
a contracting party to the 1992 Liability Convention to any ship
wherever it is registered, shall be accepted at any port or place in
India as if it were issued under this Act.
177. (1) No Indian ship, which has on board more than 2000
tons of oil in bulk as cargo shall enter or leave or attempt to enter
or leave any port or place in India, unless it carries on board a
certificate issued under sub-section (2) of section 175 or a certificate
accepted under section 176.
(2) No ship other than an Indian ship carrying more than 2000
tons of oil in bulk as cargo, wherever registered, shall enter or leave
Compulsory
insurance or
other financial
guarantee.
Acceptance of
certificate issued
outside India.
Ban on entering or
leaving an Indian
Port without
certificate.

196
or attempt to enter or leave any port or place in India, unless it
carries on board a certificate issued under sub-section (3) of section
175 or a certificate accepted under section 176.
(3) No proper officer shall grant inward entry or outward
clearance to any ship to which sub-section (1) or, as the case may
be, sub-section (2) applies, unless its master produces a certificate
required under the respective sub-section.
178. (1) The insurer or other person providing financial security for
the owner's liability for pollution damage may be directly liable for
any claim for compensation for such damage.
(2) The insurer or other person referred to in sub-section (1)
may, if the owner is not entitled to limit his liability in accordance
with the provisions of section 171, avail himself such limits of
liability as specified in that section.
(3) Any claim for compensation for pollution damage may be
brought directly against the insurer or other person providing financial
security for the owner's liability for pollution damage and in such
cases the insurer or other person providing financial security may,
even if the owner is not entitled to limit his liability in accordance
with the provisions of section 171, avail himself such limits of
liability as specified in that section.
(4) The insurer or other person providing financial security
may further avail himself of the defences (other than the bankruptcy
or winding up of the owner) which the owner himself would have
been entitled to invoke and the defendant may avail himself of the
defence that the pollution damage resulted from the wilful misconduct
of the owner himself, but the defendant shall not avail himself of any
other defence which he might have been entitled to invoke in
proceedings brought by the owner against him.
(5) The insurer or other person providing financial security
shall in any case have the right to require the owner to be joined in
the proceedings.
(6) Any sum provided by insurance or by other financial security
maintained in accordance with sub-section (1) of section 175 shall
be available exclusively for the satisfaction of claims under this
Chapter.
Direct action
against insurer
or other person
providing
financial
security.

197
179. (1) Rights of compensation under this Chapter shall be
extinguished unless an action is brought within a period of three
years from the date when the damage occurred:
Provided that, no action shall be made for compensation after
six years from the date of the incident which caused the damage.
(2) If incident consists of a series of occurrences, the period
of six years shall start from the date of the first occurrence.
180. Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any ship of war or
any ship for the time being used by the Government of any country
for purposes other than commercial purposes.
181. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the form of certificate and particulars to be given
thereto under sub-section (2) of section 175;
(b) the fees to be charged for issue of certificates under
sub-section (4) of section 175;
(c) any other matter which required to be or may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
C
IVIL LIABILITY FOR BUNKER OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE
182. This Chapter applies to, —
(a) pollution damage caused due to escape or discharge
of bunker oil from every Indian ship and from every ship other
than an Indian ship while it is,—
(i) within the territory including territorial sea of
India; or
(ii) at a port or a place in India or within the
territorial waters of India or any marine areas adjacent
thereto over which India has, or may hereafter have,
jurisdiction under the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf,
Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act,
1976 or any other law for the time being in force;
Limitation
period.
Government
ships.
Power to make
rules.
Application of
this Chapter.
80 of 1976.

198
(b) preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent or
minimise the pollution damage:
Provided that this Chapter shall not apply to warships,
naval auxiliary or other vessels owned or operated by the
Government and used, for the time being, only on Government
non-commercial service:
Provided further that this Chapter shall not apply to pollution
damage specified in Chapter III of this Part.
183. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Bunker Convention" means the International
Convention on Civil Liability for Bunker Oil Pollution Damage,
2004;
(b) "bunker oil" means any hydrocarbon mineral oil,
including lubricating oil, used or intended to be used for the
operation or propulsion of the ship, and any residues of such
oil;
(c) "Civil Liability Convention" means the International
Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1992;
(d) "incident" means any occurrence or series of
occurrences having the same origin, which causes pollution
damage or creates a grave and imminent threat of causing such
damage;
(e) "person" means any individual or partnership or any
public or private body, whether corporate or not, including a
State or any of its constituent sub-divisions;
(f) "pollution damage" means,—
(i) loss or damage caused outside the ship by
contamination resulting from the escape or discharge of
bunker oil from the ship, wherever such escape or discharge
may occur:
Provided that compensation for impairment of the
environment other than loss of profit from such impairment
shall be limited to costs of reasonable measures of
reinstatement undertaken or to be undertaken; and
(ii) the costs of preventive measure and further
loss or damage caused by preventive measures;
(g) "preventive measure" means any reasonable measures
taken by any person after an incident has occurred to prevent
or minimise pollution damage;
Definitions.

199
(h) "registered owner" means the person or persons
registered as the owner of the ship or, in the absence of
registration, the person or persons owning the ship, and, in the
case of a ship owned by a State and operated by a company
which in that State is registered as the ship's operator, "registered
owner" shall mean such company;
(i) "ship" means any sea-going vessel and sea borne craft,
of any type whatsoever;
(j) "shipowner", means the owner, including the registered
owner, bareboat charterer, manager or operator of the ship;
(k) "state of the ship's registry" means, in relation to a
registered ship, the State of registration of the ship and, in
relation to an unregistered ship, the State flag the ship is entitled
to fly.
184. (1) Save as otherwise provided in section 186,—
(a) where pollution damage is caused due to discharge or
escape of bunker oil on board or originating from the ship, the
shipowner shall be liable for,—
(i) any pollution damage;
(ii) the cost of any reasonable measures taken for
the purpose of preventing or minimising any pollution damage
so caused or likely to be caused; and
(iii) any damage caused by any such preventive
measure so taken:
Provided that where an incident consists of a series
of occurrences having the same origin, the liability shall
attach to the shipowner at the time of the first of such
occurrences and where more than one person is liable,
their liability shall be joint and several;
(b) where there arises a grave and imminent threat of
damage being caused outside a ship, the shipowner shall be
liable for the cost of any measures reasonably taken to prevent
or minimise any such damage.
(2) Where any incident involving two or more ships occurs
resulting in pollution damage, the shipowners of all ships involved in
such incident shall, unless the damage is reasonably separable, be
jointly and severally liable for such damage.
Liability for
bunker oil
pollution.

200
(3) With respect to ships owned by the Government or the
Government of any country and used for commercial purposes, the
Government or the Government of each of such country shall be
liable for pollution damage under this Chapter.
185. (1) No liability for pollution damage shall be incurred by
the ship owner under this Chapter, if he proves that such damage,—
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war,
insurrection or a natural phenomenon of an exceptional,
inevitable and irresistible character; or
(b) was wholly caused by any act or omission done with
an intent to cause such damage by any person other than an
employee or agent of the owner.
(2) If the shipowner proves that the pollution damage resulted
wholly or partially either from an act or omission done with intent
to cause damage by the person who suffered the damage or from
the negligence of that person, then, he shall be wholly or partially
exonerated from his liability to such person.
186. (1) The shipowner and the person providing insurance or
other financial security shall be entitled to limit his liability under this
Chapter, in respect of any one or more incident, in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter II of this Part.
(2) The shipowner shall not be entitled to limit his liability if it
is proved that the incident causing pollution damage occurred as a
result of his personal act or omission, committed or made with
intent to cause such damage, or recklessly and with knowledge that
such damage may probably result.
187. (1) Where the shipowner is alleged to have incurred a
liability under section 184, or his insurer, may make an application
to the High Court for determination of limitation of his liability.
(2) After receiving the application under sub-section (1), the
High Court may determine the amount of liability of shipowners and
direct the shipowner or his insurer, as the case may be, to deposit
such amount with the High Court.
188. The High Court may consolidate all claims against the
shipowner or his insurer who has deposited the amount under section
187 and may distribute the amount amongst the claimants.
Exemption from
liability.
Right of owner
to limitation of
liability.
Determination
of limitation of
liability.
Consolidation
of claims and
distribution of
amount.

201
189. (1) The right to claim compensation under this Chapter
shall be extinguished if such claim is not made within a period of
three years from the date of occurrence of damage:
Provided that in no case, such claim may be made after six
years from the date of incident which caused such damage.
(2) Where the incident consists of a series of occurrences, the
period of six years shall run from the date of the first of such
occurrence.
190. Every registered owner of a ship having gross tonnage of
more than one thousand shall, for the purpose of his liability for
pollution damage under this Chapter, maintain compulsory insurance
coverage or such other financial security, to the limits specified
under the provisions of the LLMC Convention.
191. (1) The insurer or other person providing financial security
for the owner's liability for pollution damage may be liable for any
claim for compensation for such damage.
(2) The insurer or other person referred to in sub-section (1)
may, if the owner is not entitled to limit his liability in accordance
with the provisions of section 184 may avail himself such limits of
liability as may be prescribed.
(3) Any claim for compensation for pollution damage may be
brought directly against the insurer or other person providing financial
security for the registered owner's liability for pollution damage and
in such a case, the insurer or such person may invoke defences
(other than bankruptcy or winding up of the owner) which the
shipowner would have been entitled to invoke, including limitation of
liability pursuant to section 187:
Provided that where the shipowner is not entitled to limitation
of liability under section 187, the insurer or such person may limit
the liability to an amount equal to the amount of the insurance or
other financial security required to be maintained under
sub-section (1):
Provided further that the insurer or such person may invoke the
defence that the pollution damage resulted from the wilful misconduct
of the shipowner but shall not invoke any other defence which such
insurer or person might have been entitled to invoke in proceedings
brought by the shipowner against such insurer or person:
Extinguishment
of right to claim.
Maintenance of
compulsory
insurance or
other financial
security.
Direct action
against insurer
or other person
providing
financial
security.

202
Provided also that the insurer or such person may make the
shipowner as a party to such proceedings.
192. (1) The Central Government shall issue a certificate in
respect of every ship which maintains insurance or other financial
security under section 190, in such form, containing such particulars
and subject to such conditions and on payment of such fee, as may
be prescribed.
(2) Every certificate issued under sub-section (1) shall be
renewed after its expiry in such manner and on payment of such fee
as may be prescribed.
193. (1) No ship shall enter or leave or attempt to enter or
leave any port or place to which this Chapter applies, unless it
carries on board a certificate issued under section 192.
(2) Any certificate issued by a competent authority in any
country outside India to a ship registered in that country or any
certificate issued by a competent authority of any country which is
a contracting party to the Bunker Convention to any ship wherever
registered, shall be accepted at any port or place in India as if it
were issued under this Act.
(3) No Proper Officer shall permit inward entry or outward
clearance to any ship to which sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
applies unless the master of the ship produces the certificate referred
to in that sub-section.
194. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall prejudice the right
of recourse that the shipowner may have against any other person
in respect of his liability.
195. (1) Any judgment passed by a Court shall be recognised
in India except where, —
(a) the judgment was obtained by fraud; or
(b) the shipowner or the insurer or the person providing
financial security who is a party to the proceedings was not
given reasonable notice and a fair opportunity to present his
case.
(2) Any judgment passed by a court in accordance with the
provision of the Bunker Convention under sub-section (1) shall be
enforceable in India as soon as the procedures required have been
complied with:
Issue of
certificate.
Ban on
entering or
leaving port
without
certificate.
Right of
recourse.
Recognition and
enforcements of
decision of the
court.

203
Provided that such procedure shall not permit the merits of the
case to be re-opened.
196. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the limits of liability of the insurer or other person
providing financial security under sub-section (2) of section
191;
(b) the form of certificate, the particulars containing therein
with the conditions and fee for issue of certificate under sub-
section (1) of section 192;
(c) the manner of renewal of certificate and fees therefor
under sub-section (2) of section 192;
(d) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER V
INTERNATIONAL O IL P OLLUTION C OMPENSATION F UND
197. This Chapter shall apply to pollution damage caused in the
territory, including the territorial waters of India or any marine areas
adjacent thereto over which India has, or may hereafter have, exclusive
jurisdiction in regard to control of marine pollution under the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other
Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any other law for the time being in
force and to preventive measures, wherever taken, to prevent or
minimize such damage.
198.  In this Chapter unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Contributing oil" means crude oil and fuel oil;
Explanation—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) "crude oil'' means any liquid hydrocarbon
mixture occurring naturally in the earth whether or not
treated to render it suitable for transportation and includes
crude oils from which certain distillate fractions have been
removed (sometimes referred to as "topped crudes") or to
which certain distillate fractions have been added (sometimes
referred to as "spiked" or "reconstituted" crudes),
Power to make
rules.
Application.
Definitions.

204
(ii) "fuel oil'' means heavy distillates or residues
from crude oil or blends of such materials intended for use
as a fuel for the production of heat or power of a quality
equivalent to the ''American Society for Testing and
Materials” Specification for Number Four Fuel Oil
(Designation D 396-69)'', or heavier.
(b) "Fund" means the International Oil Pollution
Compensation Fund,1992 established by Article 2 of the Fund
Convention;
(c) "Fund Convention'' means the International Convention
on the establishment of an International Fund for Compensation
for oil Pollution Damage, 1992;
(d) ''Guarantor'' means any person providing insurance or
other financial security to cover an owner's liability in pursuance
of paragraph 1 of Article VII of the 1992 Liability Convention;
(e) "Incident", ''Oil'', ''Organisation'', ''Owner'', ''Person'',
''Pollution Damage'', ''Preventive Measures" or "ship" shall have
same meaning as assigned to it in the 1992 Liability Convention;
(f) "Ship's tonnage'' shall have the same meaning as
assigned to in paragraph 10 of Article V of the 1992 Liability
Convention;
(g) "Terminal installation'' means any site for the storage
of oil in bulk which is capable of receiving oil from waterborne
transportation, including any facility situated off-shore and linked
to such site;
(h) "Ton", in relation to oil, means a metric ton.
199. (1) Contribution to the Fund, in respect of contributing oil
carried by sea to ports or terminal installations in India, shall be
payable in accordance with Articles 10 and 12 of the Fund
Convention.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply whether or
not the contributing oil is imported, and notwithstanding that
contributions are payable to the Fund, in respect of carriage of the
same contributing oil on a previous voyage.
(3) The contributions shall also be payable to the Fund in respect
of contributing oil when first received in any installation in India
after having been carried by sea and discharged in a port or terminal
installation in a country which is not a Fund Convention country.
Contribution to
Fund.

205
(4) The person liable to pay contributions to the Fund shall
be—
(a) in case of contributing oil which is being imported
into India, the importer; or
(b) in any other case, the person by whom the oil is
received in India.
(5) A person shall not be liable to pay contributions to the
Fund, in respect of the contributing oil imported or received by him
in any year if the quantity of contributing oil so imported or received
in the year does not exceed one hundred and fifty thousand tons or
as may be specified from time to time in the Fund Convention.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (3) of this section,
''Fund Convention country'' means a country in which the Fund
Convention is for the time being in force.
200. (1) The contributions payable to the Fund by a person for
any year shall be,—
(a) such amounts as may be determined by the Assembly
of the Fund under Articles 10 and 12 of the Fund
Convention;
(b) in such instalments, becoming due at such dates, as
may be notified and if any amount due from such person
remains unpaid after the date on which it became due, it shall
be from that due date bear interest at a rate determined by the
said Assembly until it is paid.
(2) The Central Government may require persons, who are or
may be liable to pay contributions to the Fund under section 199,
to give financial security for payment of contributions to the Central
Government or the Fund.
201. (1) Where any person suffering pollution damage has been
unable to obtain full and adequate compensation for the damage
under the provisions of 1992 Liability Convention, the Fund shall be
liable to pay compensation for pollution damage to such person if,—
(a) no liability for the damage arises in accordance with
the provisions of the 1992 Liability Convention;
(b) the owner liable for the damage under the provisions
of 1992 Liability Convention is financially incapable of meeting
Contribution
payable by
persons to the
fund.
Liability of
Fund.

206
his obligations in full and any financial security that may be
provided under the Convention does not cover or is insufficient
to satisfy the claims for compensation for the damage;
(c) the damage exceeds the owner's liability under the
provisions of 1992 Liability Convention as limited pursuant
therein.
(2) Expenses incurred or sacrifices made by the owner
voluntarily to prevent or minimize pollution damage shall be treated
as pollution damage for the purposes of this section.
(3) The Fund shall incur no obligation under sub-section
(1) if,—
(a) it proves that the pollution damage resulted from an
act of war, hostilities, civil war or insurrection or was caused
by oil which has escaped or been discharged from a warship
or other ship owned or operated by a State and used, at the
time of the incident, only on Government non-commercial
service; or
(b) the claimant cannot prove that the damage resulted
from an incident involving one or more vessel.
(4) If the Fund proves that the pollution damage resulted wholly
or partly either from an act or omission done with the intent to
cause damage by the person who suffered the damage or from the
negligence of that person, the Fund may be exonerated wholly or
partly from its obligation to pay compensation to such person.
(5) The Fund shall in any event be exonerated to the extent that
the vessel owner may have been exonerated under the provisions of
1992 Liability Convention:
Provided that there shall be no such exoneration of the Fund
with regard to preventive measures.
202. (1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of
transmitting to the Fund, the names and addresses of the persons
who under the provisions of section 197 are liable to make
contributions to the Fund every year and the quantity of contributing
oil in respect of which they are so liable, by notice, require to any
such person to furnish such information as may be specified
therein.
Power to call for
information.

207
(2) A notice under sub-section (1) may specify the manner in
which, and the time within which, such notice shall be complied
with.
(3) In proceedings by the Fund against any person to recover
any amount due under section 197, particulars contained in any list
transmitted by the Central Government to the Fund shall, so far as
those particulars are based on information obtained under this section,
be admissible as evidence of the facts stated in the list, and so far
as particulars which are so admissible are based on information
given by the person against whom the proceedings are brought,
those particulars shall be presumed to be accurate until the contrary
is proved.
(4) No person shall disclose any information which has been
furnished to or obtained by him under this section unless the
disclosure is made,—
(a) with the consent of the person from whom the
information was obtained;
(b) in connection with the compliance of this section;
(c) for the purpose of any legal proceedings arising out of
this section or of any report of such proceedings.
(5) A person who,—
(a) refuses or wilfully neglects to comply with a notice
under this section; or
(b) makes, while furnishing any information in compliance
with a notice under this section, any statement which he knows
to be false in a material particular, or recklessly makes any
statement which is false in a material particular, shall be guilty
of an offence punishable under this Act.
203. (1) Any claim against the Fund for compensation under
this Chapter shall be brought directly before the Fund.
(2) Any action for a claim against the Fund shall be brought
before the High Court.
(3) Where an action for compensation for pollution damage
has been brought against the owner or his guarantor before the High
Court each party to the proceedings may notify the Fund of the
proceedings.
Claims against
fund and
Jurisdiction of
Courts.

208
(4) The Fund shall have the right to intervene as a party to any
legal proceedings instituted in the High Court against the owner or
his Guarantor.
(5) Where such notice of proceedings has been given to the
Fund, any judgment given in the proceedings shall, after it has
become final and enforceable, become binding upon the Fund to the
effect that the facts and evidence in that judgment may not be
disputed by the Fund on the ground that it has not intervened in the
proceedings.
204. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, no action to enforce a claim against the
Fund under this Chapter shall be entertained by a High Court,
unless,—
(a) the action to enforce is commenced; or
(b) notice of action to enforce a claim against the owner
or his guarantor in respect of the same pollution damage is
given to the Fund, within three years from the date when the
damage occurred:
Provided that no action to enforce a claim shall be
brought after six years from the date of the incident that caused
such damage.
205. In respect of any sum paid by a public authority in India
or the Fund, as the case may be, as compensation for pollution
damage, that authority or the Fund shall acquire by subrogation any
rights which the person so compensated would have enjoyed under
the Fund Convention.
206. The Central Government may make rules to carry out the
provisions of the Fund Convention.
Part X
I
NVESTIGATION AND I NQUIRIES
207. (1) For the purposes of investigations and inquiries under
this Part, a marine casualty shall be deemed to be an event, or
sequences of events that has resulted in any of the following and has
occurred directly by, or in connection with the operations of Indian
vessels and vessels other than Indian vessels, when,—
(a) on or near the coast of India, any vessel is lost,
abandoned, stranded or materially damaged;
Extinguishment
of claims.
Subrogation and
right of
recourse.
Power to make
rules.
Marine
casualties and
report thereof.

209
(b) on or near the coast of India, any vessel causes loss
or material damage to any other vessel;
(c) any loss of life or presumed loss of life, ensues by
reason of any casualty happening, or otherwise, to or on board
any vessel, on or near the coast of India;
(d) any loss of life or presumed loss of life, ensues by
reason of any casualty happening, or otherwise, to an Indian
national on board any vessel, anywhere in the world;
(e) in any place, any such loss, abandonment, stranding,
material damage or casualty as mentioned above occurs to or
on board any Indian vessel, and any competent witness thereof
is found in India;
(f) any Indian vessel is lost or is supposed to have been
lost, and any evidence is obtainable in India as to the
circumstances under which she proceeded to sea or was last
heard of;
(g) in any place within the zones under the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other
Maritime Zones Act, 1976, pollution, or the potential threat of
such pollution to the environment, or severe damage to the
environment, or the potential to severe damage to the
environment is caused of a vessel;
(h) a fire or explosion takes place on any Indian vessel
anywhere in the world, or a fire or explosion takes place on a
vessel other than an Indian vessel, while such vessel is on, or
near, the coast of India.
(2) In the cases mentioned in sub-section (1), the owner,
manager, operator, company, pilot, harbour-master, master, or other
person in charge of the vessel, or, where two vessels are concerned,
in charge of each vessel at the time of the marine casualty, as the
case may be, shall, within twenty-four hours of the occurrence,
give notice of the marine casualty to the officer appointed in this
behalf by the Central Government.
(3) Wherever any such officer receives the notice of the marine
casualty under sub-section (2), he shall forthwith report in writing
the information to the Central Government and may proceed to
make preliminary inquiry into the marine causalty and shall furnish
80 of 1976.

210
the report on completion of independent inquiry into the incident.
(4) The Central Government may, for the purposes of the
investigation, appoint a body to conduct a marine safety investigation
in accordance with the Safety Convention.
(5) The body appointed under sub-section (4) shall, make
preliminary assessment of the marine casualty and conduct a marine
safety investigation for ascertaining its causes and circumstances
and submit its report to the Central Government.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Part, the word
"company" has the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (a) of
section 111.
208. On receipt of report under sub-section (5) of section 207
or otherwise, if the Central Government is of the opinion that prima-
facie, there exists, incompetency, misconduct or violation of any
law for the time being in force on part of any person, it may,—
(a) initiate administrative action; and
(b) direct such officer or other authority having jurisdiction
over the area to initiate any proceedings, as may be required in
accordance with the provision of any law for the time being in
force.
209. The Central Government may, by order, cancel or suspend
any certificate granted under this Act to any seafarer for any specified
period,—
(a) if the inquiry report or investigation report reveals that
the seafarer is incompetent or has been guilty of misconduct;
(b) in a case of collision, the seafarer has failed to render
assistance;
(c) if the seafarer has been convicted of any offence
under this Act or any non-bailable offence committed under
any other law for the time being in force in India or outside
India;
(d) the casualty, if any, has been caused by wrongful act
or default of the seafarer; or
(e) if the seafarer to whom the certificate has been granted
contravenes any provisions of this Act:
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed
Power to cancel
suspend etc.
certificate of
seafarers
Power of Central
Government to
initiate
proceedings

211
unless the person concerned has been given an opportunity of
making a representation against such order.
210. Whenever an investigation or inquiry has been made under
this Act, the Central Government may order the case to be re-heard
either generally or as to any part thereof, and shall so order,—
(a) if new and important evidence which could not be
produced at the time of investigation has been discovered; or
(b) if for any other reason there has, in its opinion, been
a miscarriage of justice.
PART XI
WRECK AND SALV AGE
CHAPTER I
WRECK
211. This Chapter shall apply to the wrecks located within the
territory of India including the territorial sea or any marine areas
adjacent thereto over which India has, or may hereafter have, exclusive
jurisdiction under the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive
Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976:
Provided that this Chapter shall not apply to,—
(a) any measure taken under the International Convention
relating to the Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil
Pollution Casualties, 1969;
(b) any warship or other vessel owned or operated by the
Government for non-commercial service.
212. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "authority" means the Central Government or any
person authorised by it;
(b) "affected country'' means the country in whose
Convention area the wreck is located;
(c) "Convention" means the Nairobi Convention on the
Removal of Wrecks, 2007;
(d) "Convention area'' means the exclusive economic zone
of a State Party, established in accordance with international
law or, if a State Party has not established such a zone, an area
Re-hearing.
Application of
this Chapter to
wrecks.
80 of 1976.
Definitions.

212
beyond and adjacent to the territorial sea of that State determined
by that State in accordance with international law and extending
not more than two hundred nautical miles from the baselines
from which the breadth of its territorial sea is measured;
(e) "hazard" means any condition or threat, that,—
(i) poses a danger or impediment to navigation; or
(ii) may reasonably be expected to result in major
harmful consequences to the marine environment, or damage
to the coastline or related interests of India or any other
Country;
(f) "maritime casualty'' means a collision of ships, stranding
or other incident of navigation, or other occurrence on board
a ship or external to it, resulting in material damage or imminent
threat of material damage to a ship or its cargo;
(g) "operator of the ship'' means the owner of the ship or
any other organisation or person such as the manager, or the
bareboat charterer, who has assumed the responsibility for
operation of the ship from the owner of the ship and who, on
assuming such responsibility, has agreed to take over all duties
and responsibilities established under the International Safety
Management Code;
(h) "receiver of wreck'' means a person appointed as such
under sub-section (1) of section 213;
(i) ''registered owner'' means the person registered as the
owner of the ship or, in the absence of registration, the person
owning the ship at the time of the maritime casualty:
Provided that in the case of a ship owned by a State
and operated by a company which in that State is registered as
the operator of the ship, "registered owner" shall mean such
company;
(j) "related interests", in relation to the interest of India
directly affected or threatened by a wreck, means—
(i) maritime coastal, port and estuarine activities,
including fisheries activities, constituting an essential means
of livelihood of the persons concerned;
(ii) tourist attractions and other economic interests
of the areas concerned;

213
(iii) the health of the coastal population and the well
being of the area concerned, including conservation of marine
living resources and of wild life; and
(iv) offshore and underwater infrastructure;
(k) ''removal'' means any form of prevention, mitigation
or elimination of the hazard created by a wreck, and the
expressions "remove", "removed" and "removing" shall be
construed accordingly;
(l) ''ship'' means a sea-going vessel of any type whatsoever
and includes hydrofoil boats, air-cushion vehicles, submersibles,
floating craft and floating platforms, except when such platforms
are on location engaged in the exploration, exploitation or
production of seabed mineral resources;
(m) ''state of the ship's registry'' means,—
(i) in relation to a registered ship, the country of
registration of the ship; and
(ii) in relation to an unregistered ship, the country,
under whose flag the ship is entitled to fly;
(n) ''wreck'', in relation to maritime casualty, means —
(i) a sunken or stranded ship;
(ii) any part of a sunken or stranded ship, including
any object or goods or cargo that is or has been on board
such a ship;
(iii) any object or goods or cargo that is lost at sea
from a ship and that is stranded, sunken or adrift at sea;
(iv) a ship that is in distress or is about, or may
reasonably be expected, to sink or to strand, where effective
measures to assist the ship or any property in danger are
not already being taken; or
(v) a ship abandoned without hope or intention of
recovery.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-clause, any
question as to whether the measures adopted to assist the ship
or any property in danger are effectively being taken or not
shall be decided by the Director-General.

214
213. (1) The Central Government, may by notification, appoint
any person to be the receiver of wreck to receive and take possession
of wreck and to perform such duties connected therewith as are
hereinafter mentioned, within such limits as may be specified in that
notification.
(2) The receiver of wreck shall receive and take possession of
wreck with all powers in respect thereof, including powers for
disposal or sale of the wreck, power to give notices, power to
enforce performance of obligations by owner, operator, insurer of
the vessel, as provided in this Chapter, and take such action as
require to remove the wreck by the most practical and expeditious
means available, consistent with considerations of safety and
protection of maritime environment.
214. (1) When any Indian ship has been involved in a maritime
casualty resulting in a wreck in any area to which this Chapter
applies, the master or owner or the operator of the ship shall, without
any delay, report such incident to the receiver of wreck and the
Central Government.
(2) When any Indian ship has been involved in a maritime
casualty resulting in a wreck in a Convention area of any country,
the master and the operator of that ship shall, without any delay,
report such incident to the affected country in such manner as may
be required by that country and shall also report such incident to the
Central Government.
(3) When any ship other than Indian ship has been involved in
a maritime casualty resulting in a wreck in any area to which this
Chapter applies, the master and the operator of the ship shall, without
any delay, report such incident to the receiver of wreck and the
Central Government.
215. For determining as to whether a wreck poses a hazard or
not, the following criteria shall be taken into account, namely:—
(a) the type, size and construction of the wreck;
(b) depth of the water in the area;
(c) tidal range and currents in the area;
(d) proximity to protected areas including coral reefs and
other areas as notified by the Government;
Receivers of
wreck.
Duty to report
wrecks.
Determination
of hazard.

215
(e) particularly sensitive sea areas identified and, as
appropriate, designated in accordance with guidelines adopted
by the International Maritime Organisation, or a clearly defined
area of the exclusive economic zone where special mandatory
measures have been adopted in accordance with requirements
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982;
(f) proximity of shipping routes or established traffic lanes;
(g) traffic density and frequency;
(h) type of traffic;
(i) nature and quantity of the wreck's cargo, the amount
and types of oil (such as bunker oil and lubricating oil) on
board the wreck and, in particular, the damage likely to result
if the cargo or oil is released into the marine environment;
(j) vulnerability of port and port facilities;
(k) prevailing meteorological and hydrographical conditions;
(l) submarine topography of the area;
(m) height of the wreck above or below the surface of the
water at lowest astronomical tide;
(n) acoustic and magnetic profiles of the wreck;
(o) proximity of offshore installations, pipelines,
telecommunication cables and similar structures;
(p) proximity of tourist spots and heritage locations; and
(q) any other circumstances that might necessitate the
removal of the wreck.
216. (1) The Central Government may, if considers necessary,
give directions to a receiver of wreck or any other person or authority
including the Director-General of Light House or the Port Authority
or a Maritime Board or Indian Coast Guard, as the case may be,
within their respective jurisdiction to locate or mark the wreck, or
both.
(2) When a wreck has been determined to be a hazard, it shall
be the duty of the owner or the operator of such a vessel,—
(a) to immediately mark the wreck at his or its own cost
in such manner as may be prescribed; and
Locating and
marking of
wrecks.

216
(b) to maintain the marking until the wreck is removed.
(3) The cost for locating and marking the vessel shall be borne
by or recovered from the owner or the operator of such a vessel.
217. (1) Whenever a vessel is wrecked, stranded or in distress,
all persons may, for the purpose of rendering assistance to the ship
or of saving the lives of the shipwrecked persons, or of saving the
cargo or equipment of the vessel, unless there is some public road
equally convenient, pass and repass, either with or without vehicles
or animals, over any adjoining lands without being subject to
interruption by the owner or occupier, so that they do as little
damage as possible and may also on the like condition, deposit on
these lands any cargo or other article recovered from the vessel.
(2) Any damage sustained by an owner or occupier in
consequence of the exercise of the rights under this section shall be
a charge on the vessel, cargo or articles in respect of or by which
the damage is sustained and in case of dispute, the amount payable
in respect of such damage shall be determined by a Magistrate on
an application made to him in this behalf.
218. No person shall,—
(a) without the leave of the master, board or attempt to
board any vessel which is wrecked, stranded or in distress,
unless the person is, or acts by command of, the receiver of
wreck; or
(b) impede or hinder or attempt in any way to impede or
hinder the saving of any vessel stranded or in danger of being
stranded or otherwise in distress in any area to which this
Chapter applies or of any part of the cargo or equipment of the
vessel, or of any wreck; or
(c) secrete any wreck or deface or obliterate any marks
thereon; or
(d) wrongfully carry away or remove any part of a vessel
stranded or in danger of being stranded or otherwise in distress,
in any area to which this Chapter applies, or any part of the
cargo or equipment of the vessel or any wreck.
219. Where a receiver of wreck suspects or receives information
that any wreck is secreted or is in the possession of some person
who is not the owner thereof or that any wreck is otherwise
Power to pass
over adjoining
lands.
Prohibition of
certain acts in
respect of wreck.
Search warrants
where wreck is
involved.

217
improperly dealt with, he may apply to the nearest Judicial Magistrate
of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, for
a search warrant, and that Judicial Magistrate of the first class or
Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, shall have power to
grant such warrant and the receiver of wreck by virtue thereof may
enter any house or other place wherever situate and also any vessel
and search for, seize and detain any such wreck found thereof.
220. (1) When it is determined that the wreck constitutes a
hazard, the receiver of wreck shall give the detail information to the
Central Government.
(2) The Central Government, on receipt of information under
sub-section (1), shall—
(a) inform the government of the country of the vessel
registry and the registered owner of the vessel; and
(b) consult the government of the country of the vessel
registry and other countries affected by the wreck regarding
measures to be taken in relation to such wreck.
(3) The registered owner of the vessel or, as the case may be,
the operator of the vessel shall remove such wreck which has been
determined to constitute a hazard:
Provided that where any dispute arises as to whether the wreck
constitutes a hazard or not, the decision of the Central Government
shall be final and binding on all parties.
(4) When a wreck has been determined to constitute a hazard,
the registered owner of the vessel or, as the case may be, any
interested person shall provide to the Central Government or the
receiver of wreck with the evidence of insurance or other financial
security maintained by him in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.
(5) The receiver of wreck shall, having regard to the nature of
the hazard, set such time limit as may be prescribed for the owner
of the vessel or its operator to remove the wreck.
(6) If the owner of the vessel or its operator does not remove
the wreck within the time specified under sub-section (5), the receiver
of wreck may, at the expense of such owner or operator, remove
the wreck by the most practical and expeditious means available,
Measures to
facilitate the
removal of
wrecks.

218
consistent with considerations of safety and protection of the marine
environment and the wreck or any sale proceeds derived from such
wreck shall become the property of the Central Government.
(7) Where immediate action is required and the receiver of
wreck has informed the owner of the vessel or the operator
accordingly, he may, at the expense of such owner or operator,
remove the wreck by the most practical and expeditious means
available, consistent with considerations of safety and protection of
the marine environment.
221.(1) The registered owner shall be liable for the costs of
locating, marking and removing the wreck under this Chapter
unless he proves that the maritime casualty which caused the
wreck,—
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war,
insurrection, or a natural phenomenon of an exceptional,
inevitable and irresistible character; or
(b) was wholly caused by act or omission done with an
intent to cause damage by a third party; or
(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or other wrongful
act of any Government or other authority responsible for the
maintenance of lights or other navigational aids in the exercise
of that function.
(2) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall affect the right of
the registered owner to limit his liability in accordance with the
provisions of section 155.
(3) Nothing contained in this Part shall prejudice any right of
recourse available to the registered owner against third parties.
222. (1) Every registered owner of an Indian ship of gross
tonnage three hundred and above shall, for the purpose of covering
his liability under this Chapter, be required to maintain compulsory
insurance coverage or such other financial security, as may be
prescribed.
(2) Every owner of a vessel or operator of a vessel other than
an Indian vessel of gross tonnage of three hundred and above, while
it is in the area to which this Chapter applies, shall maintain insurance
coverage or other financial security to cover his liability under the
Convention and shall carry on board a certificate attesting that such
Liability of
owner.
Maintenance of
insurance or
other financial
security.

219
insurance or other financial security is in force in accordance with
the provisions of the Convention.
(3) The certificate referred to in sub-section (2) shall, in case
the vessel is,—
(a) an Indian vessel, be issued by the Authority;
(b) registered in a Convention country other than India,
be issued by or under the authority of the Government of that
country; and
(c) registered in a country which is not a Convention
country, be issued or certified by the appropriate authority
authorised by any Convention country.
(4) Any vessel found contravening the provisions of sub-section
(2) shall be liable to be detained by the Authority.
(5) Any claim for costs arising under this Chapter may be
brought directly against the insurer or other person providing financial
security for the registered owner's liability and in such a case, the
insurer or such person may invoke defences (other than bankruptcy
or winding up of the registered owner) which the registered owner
would have been entitled to invoke, including limitation of liability as
provided under the provisions of this Act:
Provided that where the registered owner is not entitled to
limitation of liability under the provisions of this Act, the insurer or
such person may limit liability to an amount equal to the amount of
the insurance or other financial security required to be maintained
under sub-section (1):
Provided further that the insurer or such person may invoke the
defence that the maritime casualty resulted from the wilful misconduct
of the registered owner but shall not invoke any other defence
which such insurer or person might have been entitled to invoke in
proceedings brought by the registered owner against such insurer or
person:
Provided also that the insurer or such person shall have the
right to require the registered owner to be joined in such
proceedings.
223. (1) The registered owner shall not be liable under this
Chapter for meeting the costs referred to in sub-section (5) of
Exception to
liability.

220
section 222 if, and to the extent that, liability for such costs is in
conflict with,—
(a) any other Chapter or provisions of this Act;
(b) the provisions of the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage
Act, 2010; or
(c) any other applicable or binding international legal
instrument which India adopts.
(2) Where measures are taken under this Chapter to the extent
such measures are construed to be salvage under the provisions of
section 229, the provisions of said section 229 shall apply for the
purposes of remuneration or compensation payable to salvers.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that the provisions of this section shall be construed harmoniously
with the provisions of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 and in case of any
ambiguity or conflict thereof, the provisions of the Indian Ports Act,
1908 shall prevail.
224. (1) The owner of any wreck in the possession of the
receiver upon establishing his claim to the same to the satisfaction
of the receiver within one year from the time at which the wreck
came into the possession of the receiver shall, upon paying the
salvage and other charges, be entitled to have the wreck or the
proceeds thereof delivered to him.
(2) Where any articles belonging to or forming part of a vessel
other than an Indian vessel which has been wrecked or belonging to
and forming part of the cargo of such vessel, are found in any area
to which this Chapter applies or are brought into any port in India,
the consular officer of the country in which the vessel is registered
or, in the case of cargo, the country to which the owners of the
cargo may have belonged shall, in the absence of the owner and of
the master or other agent of the owner, be deemed to be the
agent of the owner, with respect to the custody and disposal of the
articles.
(3) Where the owner of the wreck does not appear and claim
the balance of the proceeds of sale within one year from the date
of sale, the said balance shall become the property of the Central
Government.
Claims of
owners to
wreck.
38 of 2010
15 of 1908

221
225.Any claim for recovery of costs for locating and marking
of the vessel under sub-section (3) of section 216 shall be made
within a period of three years from the date of determination of the
hazard:
Provided that no claim shall be made after six years from the
date of the maritime casualty that resulted in the wreck:
Provided further that where the maritime casualty consists of
a series of occurrences, the six years period shall run from the date
of the first occurrence.
CHAPTER II
SALV AGE
226. (1) This Chapter applies to judicial or arbitral proceedings
relating to salvage operations in respect of a vessel or any other
property, which are instituted in India:
Provided that this Chapter shall not apply to the fixed or floating
platforms or to mobile offshore drilling units when such platforms
or units are on location engaged in the exploration, exploitation or
production of sea-bed mineral resources:
Provided further that this Chapter shall not apply to warships
or other non-commercial vessels owned or operated by the
Government which are entitled, at the time of salvage operations,
to sovereign immunity.
(2) This Chapter shall apply, notwithstanding that the vessel
undertaking the salvage operations belong to the same owner of the
vessel.
227.In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "damage to the environment'' means substantial
physical damage to human health or to marine life of resources
in coastal or inland waters or areas adjacent thereto, caused
by pollution, contamination, fire, explosion or similar major
incidents;
(b) "payment" means any reward, remuneration or
compensation due under the Salvage Convention;
(c) "property" means any property not permanently and
intentionally attached to the shoreline and includes freight at
risk;
Extinguishment of
right to claim
recovery of costs.
Application of
this Chapter to
salvage.
Definitions.

222
(d) "Salvage Convention'' means International Convention
on Salvage, 1989;
(e) "salvage operation'' means any act or activity
undertaken to assist a vessel or any other property in danger
in navigable waters or any other waters to which this Chapter
applies and includes,—
(i) the raising, removal, destruction or rendering a
vessel harmless which is sunk, wrecked, stranded or
abandoned including anything that is or has been on board
such vessel;
(ii) the removal, destruction or rendering the cargo
of a vessel harmless;
(iii) the measures taken to avert or minimise loss to
a vessel or its cargo or both; and
(iv) any other salvage services.
(f) "salvor" means any person rendering services in direct
connection with salvage operation;
(g) "vessel" means any ship or craft, or any structure
capable of navigation.
228. Every master who, renders assistance to any person in
danger of being lost at sea, or to property, shall be paid a salvage
award for such assistance.
229. (1) Where services are rendered,—
(a) wholly or in part within the territorial waters of India
in saving life from any vessel, or elsewhere in saving life from
a vessel registered in India;
(b) in assisting a vessel or saving the cargo or equipment
of a vessel which is wrecked, stranded or in distress at any
place to which this Chapter applies as specified in section 226;
or
(c) by any person other than the receiver of wreck in
saving any wreck, there shall be payable to the salvor by the
owner of the vessel, cargo, equipment, a reasonable sum for
salvage having regard to all the circumstances of the case.
Salvage award.
Salvage payable
for saving life,
cargo or wreck.

223
(2) Salvage in respect of the preservation of life when payable
by the owner of the vessel shall be payable in priority to all other
claims for salvage.
230. Where salvage operation are rendered by or on behalf of
the Government or by a vessel of the Indian Navy or of the Coast
Guard or the commander or crew of any such vessel or the port
authorities or any public authority, as the case may be, it shall be
entitled to salvage and payment for such services as provided under
this Chapter and shall have the same rights and remedies in respect
of those services as any other salvor.
231. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in section 232,
this Chapter shall apply to any salvage operation save to the extent
that a contract otherwise provides expressly or by implication.
(2) The master shall have the authority to conclude contracts
for salvage operations on behalf of the owner of the vessel.
(3) The master or the owner of the vessel shall have the authority
to conclude such contracts on behalf of the owner of the property
on board the vessel.
232. (1) The salvor shall have the following duties towards the
owner of the vessel or other property in danger, namely:—
(a) to carry out the salvage operations with due care;
(b) to exercise due care to prevent or minimise damage to
the environment during salvage operations;
(c) to seek assistance from other salvors including port
authorities or public authorities when circumstances so require;
and
(d) to accept the intervention of other salvors when
reasonably requested to do so by the owner or master of the
vessel or other property in danger:
Provided that if it is found that such a request was
unreasonable, it shall not prejudice the amount of reward of
such salvor.
(2) The owner, master of the vessel or the owner of other
property who is in danger shall have the following duties towards
the salvor, namely:—
(a) to co-operate fully with the salvor during the course
of the salvage operations;
Salvage
operations
controlled by
Government or
port and public
authorities.
Salvage
Contracts.
Duties of
salvor, owner
and master.

224
(b) to exercise due care to prevent or minimize damage to
the environment during the salvage operations;
(c) when the vessel or other property has been brought
to a place of safety, to accept redelivery when reasonably
requested by the salvor to do so; and
(d) to provide satisfactory security for the claim, including
interest and costs of the salvor for salvage operations, at the
request of the salvor.
233. (1) The Central Government shall take such measures as
may be prescribed to protect its coastline or related interests from
pollution or threat of pollution arising out of a maritime casualty or
acts relating to such casualty which may result in major harmful
consequences.
(2) The Central Government shall give such directions as it
deems fit to the concerned vessel owner or the master or the salvor
or a port authority or a public authority or any other person in
relation to salvage operations.
(3) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of efficient
and effective salvage operations, saving life or property in danger
and preventing damage to the environment, seek cooperation from
the concerned vessel owner or the master or the salvor or a port
authority or a public authority or any other person, to give assistance
to vessel in need, to admit to ports of vessel in distress or in need
of assistance and to give facilities to salvors.
234. (1) A salvor shall have a right to payment for the services
rendered by him relating to salvage operations:
Provided that no such payment shall be made where there is
express and reasonable prohibition from the owner or master of
vessel or owner of any other property in danger.
(2) The criteria for claiming rewards, the manner of fixing
rewards, the payment of special compensation, the apportionment of
payment amongst salvors, the salvage of persons, the payment under
the contract, the payment for additional services not covered under
the contract and the effect of misconduct of salvors on
reward or payment under this Chapter shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Rights and duties
of Central
Government in
relation to salvage
operations.
Rights of
salvors.

225
(3) The salvor shall have right to enforce his maritime lien
against the owner or master of vessel or owner of any other property
in danger when satisfactory security for his claim, including interest
and costs, has not been provided by such person.
235. (1) A dispute relating to claims under this Part shall be
determined upon application made by either of the disputing parties
to the concerned High Court.
(2) Where there is any dispute as to the persons who are
entitled to the salvage amount under this section, the High Court
shall decide the dispute and if there are more persons than one
entitled to such amount, the High Court shall apportion the amount
thereof, among such persons.
(3) The cost of and incidental to all proceedings before the
High Court under this section shall be in the discretion of the High
Court and the High Court shall have full power to determine by
whom or out of what property and to what extent such costs are
to be paid and to give all necessary directions for the purpose
aforesaid.
(4) The High Court may, by interim order, direct that the salvor
shall be paid such amount as may appear to it to be fair and just,
upon such terms, including terms as to security, as may appear to
it to be necessary, fair and just, according to the circumstances of
each case.
236. Any action relating to payment under this Chapter shall
extinguish if no action for such claim is made within a period of two
years from the date of completion of salvage operations.
237. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect,—
(a) any treaty or arrangement with any foreign country to
which India is a party with reference to the disposal of the
proceeds of wrecks on their respective coasts; or
(b) the provisions of section 29 of the Indian Ports Act,
1908, or any person to salvage in respect of any property
recovered by creeping or sweeping in contravention of that
section.
238. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
Adjudication of
disputes
Extinguishment
of claims.
15 of 1908
Savings.
Power to make
rules respecting
wreck and salvage

226
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of marking wreck under clause (a) of
sub-section (2) of section 216;
(b) the time-limit to remove the wreck under sub-section
(5) of section 220;
(c) the other financial security under sub-section (1) of
section 222;
(d) the measures to be taken to protect the coastline or
related interests from pollution or threat of pollution under sub-
section (1) of section 233;
(e) the criteria for claiming rewards, the manner of fixing
rewards, the payment of special compensation, the apportionment
of payment amongst salvors, the salvage of persons, the
payment under the contract, the payment for additional services
not covered under the contract and the effect of misconduct
of salvors on reward or payment under sub-section (2) of
section 234;
(f) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
PART XII
C
ONTROL OF I NDIAN V ESSELS AND F OREIGN V ESSELS
ENGAGED IN C OASTING T RADE
239. This Part shall apply to all vessels including vessels other
than Indian vessel.
240. (1) No vessel, other than a vessel registered under this
Act shall engage in the coasting trade of India or exploration,
exploitation or research in the coastal waters of India except under
a licence granted by the Director-General under sub-section (4).
(2) No other vessel chartered by a citizen of India or a company
or a co-operative society other than vessel registered under this Act
shall be taken to sea from a port or place within or outside India
except under a licence granted by the Director-General under this
section.
(3) An Indian controlled tonnage vessel may be granted a licence
under this section subject to such conditions as may be specified by
the Director-General.
Application of
this Part.
Licensing of
vessels.

227
(4) A licence granted under this section may be—
(a) a general licence;
(b) a licence for the whole or any part of the coasting
trade of India; or
(c) a licence for a specified period or voyage.
(5) A licence granted under sub-section (4), shall be in such
form and shall be valid for such period as may be prescribed, and
shall be subject to such conditions as may be specified by the
Director-General:
Provided that the Central Government, if it is of the opinion that
it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may,
by a general or special order, exempt any class of vessels from the
provisions of this section.
241. (1) The Director-General may, at any time if the
circumstances of the case so require, revoke or modify a licence
granted under section 240.
(2) No licence shall be revoked or modified under this section
unless the person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity
of making a representation against such revocation or modification,
as the case may be.
(3) When a licence granted under section 240 ceases to be
valid, the person to whom it was granted shall, without unreasonable
delay, return it or causes it to be returned to the Director-General.
242. No proper officer shall grant a port clearance to a vessel
not registered under this Act in respect of which a licence is required
under this Part, until after the production of such a licence by the
owner, master or agent of such vessel.
243. (1) The Director-General may, if he is satisfied that in the
public interest or in the interests of Indian shipping it is necessary
so to do, give, by order in writing, such directions as he thinks
fit,—
(a) in the case of a vessel which has been granted a
licence under section 240, with respect to all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(i) the ports or places, whether in or outside India,
Revocation,
modification or
surrender of
licence.
No port clearance
until licence is
produced.
Power to give
direction.

228
to which, and the routes by which, the vessel shall proceed
for any particular purpose;
(ii) the diversion of any vessel from one route to
another for any particular purpose;
(iii) the classes of passengers or cargo which may
be carried in the vessel;
(iv) the order of priority in which passengers or
cargo may be taken on or put off the vessel at any port or
place, whether in or outside India;
(b) in the case of a vessel which has been granted a
licence under section 240 with respect to the order of priority
in which passengers or cargo may be taken on the vessel at
any port or place in India from which she is about to proceed
for any port or place in India at which she is to call in the
course of her voyage.
(2) The Director-General may, by notice, require,—
(a) the owner, master or agent of any vessel in respect of
which a licence granted under section 240; or
(b) the owner, master or agent of any vessel in respect of
which any directions have been or may be given under clause
(b) of sub-section (1), to furnish within the period specified in
the notice the information as to—
(i) the classes of passengers and cargo which the
vessel is about to carry or is capable of carrying or has
carried during any specified period;
(ii) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the Central Government may, in public
interest, by an order in writing, give such directions as it may deem
appropriate to ban any vessel from entering any port, anchorage or
offshore facility in India.
244. (1) If it appears to the Central Government,—
(a) that measures have been taken by or under the law of
any foreign country for regulating or controlling the terms or
conditions upon which goods or passengers may be carried by
sea, or the terms or conditions of contracts or arrangements
relating to such carriage; and
Powers of Central
Government to
protect interests
of Indian
shipping from
undue foreign
intervention.

229
(b) that such measures, in so far as they apply to things
done or, to be done outside the territorial jurisdiction of that
country by persons carrying on lawful business in India,
constitute an infringement of the jurisdiction which belongs to
India, it may, by an order in writing, direct that this section
shall apply to those measures either in whole or to such extent
as may be specified in the order.
(2) Where an order issued under sub-section (1) is in force
in relation to any measures, it shall be the duty of every person in
India who carries on business consisting or comprising of the
carriage of goods or passengers by sea to give notice to the Central
Government of any requirement or prohibition imposed or threatened
to be imposed on him pursuant to such measures so far as this
section applies to him, including any requirement to submit any
contract or other document for approval thereunder.
(3) Where a notice under sub-section (2) is received from any
person or there are grounds to believe that a notice is likely to be
received, the Central Government may, by an order in writing, give
to such person directions prohibiting compliance with any such
requirement or prohibition as it considers proper for maintaining the
jurisdiction of India.
(4) If it appears to the Central Government that any person in
India has been or may be required to produce or furnish to any
court, or authority of a foreign country any commercial document
which is not within the territorial jurisdiction of that country or any
commercial information to be compiled from documents not within
the territorial jurisdiction of that country and that the requirement
constitutes or may constitute an infringement of the jurisdiction
which belongs to India, the Central Government may, by an order
in writing, give directions to that person, prohibiting him from
complying with the requirement except to such extent or subject to
such conditions as may be specified in that order.
245. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry
out the provisions of this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
Power to make
rules.

230
(a) the form of licence and the valid period of such licence
under sub-section (5) of section 240;
(b) any other matters under sub-clause (ii) of clause (b)
of sub-section (2) of section 243;
(c) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
PART XIII
SAILING, F ISHING AND OTHER V ESSELS
246. (1) Save as otherwise provided, this Part shall apply to
vessels of the following description, namely:—
(a) sailing vessel;
(b) fishing vessel;
(c) vessel without mechanical means of propulsion;
(d) vessel whose net tonnage is less than fifteen and is
engaged solely in coasting trade of India.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the words "net
tonnage" means the measure of the useful capacity of a vessel
determined in accordance with the rules made in this behalf.
(2) The provisions of this Act, other than those contained in
Part I, Part II, Part III, Part X, Part XIV and this Part, shall not
apply to vessels under sub-section (1):
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification direct
that any other provisions of this Act shall also apply to such vessels
subject to such conditions, exceptions and modifications as may be
specified in the notification.
247. If any question arises whether a vessel falls under this Part,
it shall be decided by the Director-General and his decision thereon
shall be final.
248. (1) Every vessel covered under this Part shall be manned
and carry on board such fittings, material, appliances and apparatus,
for safety, security and prevention of pollution as may be
prescribed.
(2) Every owner of the vessel covered under this Part shall
provide a policy of insurance for all persons employed as members
Application of
Part.
Decision on
whether a vessel
falls under this
Part.
Requirements for
safety, security,
prevention of
pollution, and
insurance.

231
of the crew of such vessel against death or personal injury caused
by accident arising in the course of their employment, for an amount
which shall not be less than the amount as may be notified.
(3) No vessel shall ply or proceed to sea unless it complies
with the provisions under sub-sections (1) and (2).
249. (1) No vessel shall ply or proceed to sea unless there is
in force in respect of that vessel prescribed certificates granted
under this Part, the same being applicable to the voyage on which
she is about to ply or proceed.
(2) Every certificate shall be granted in such manner and shall
be in force for such period as may be prescribed:
Provided that where a vessel is not at a port at the time of
expiry of the certificate, the owner, master, tindal or skipper of that
vessel shall inform to the Central Government and the certificate
shall continue to be valid until her first arrival at the next port after
the expiry of such period.
250. (1) Every owner, master or tindal or skipper of a vessel
shall maintain or cause to be maintained a statement of the crew of
the vessel containing with respect to each member thereof in such
form as may be prescribed, namely:—
(a) his name;
(b) the wages payable to him;
(c) the names and addresses of his next-of-kin;
(d) the date of commencement of his employment; and
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(2) Every change in the crew of the vessel shall be entered in
the statement under sub-section (1).
(3) A copy of such statement and of every change entered
therein shall be communicated as soon as possible to the shipping
master.
251. (1) If any owner, master or tindal or skipper of a vessel
in the course of her voyage, has jettisoned or claims to have jettisoned
the whole or any part of the cargo of the vessel on account of
abnormal weather conditions or for any other reason, he shall
Vessel not to
proceed without
valid certificates.
Statement
relating to crew
of vessels to be
maintained.
Inquiry to
jettisoning of
cargo.

232
immediately after arrival of the vessel at any port or place in India
give notice of such jettisoning to the proper officer, and such notice
shall contain full particulars of the cargo jettisoned and the
circumstances under which such jettisoning took place.
(2) Where the proper officer receives the notice under
sub-section (1) , he shall forth-with report in writing to the
Central Government and may proceed to make an inquiry into the
matter.
252. (1) Any vessel attempting to ply or proceed to sea without
free board markings or any vessel which has been so loaded as to
submerge such markings or carrying persons in excess of the certified
capacity, may be detained by a proper officer until the vessel complies
with the rules made in this behalf.
(2) Except otherwise provided, for the purposes of this Part,
a proper officer may, at any reasonable time, go on board a vessel,
and may inspect or audit the vessel, and any part thereof, the structure,
equipment, fittings, arrangements, materials, systems, scantlings,
cargo, provisions, stores, her certificates, and certificates of the
crew on board:
Provided that the proper officer shall not unreasonably hinder
the operation of the vessel, or unreasonably detain or delay her from
proceeding on any voyage.
(3) The owner, agent, master or every officer of the vessel
shall afford to the proper officer all reasonable facilities for a survey
or audit, and provide all such information in respect of the vessel
and her structure, equipment, fittings, arrangements, materials,
scantlings, systems, cargo, provisions, stores, her certificates,
and certificates of the crew, as the proper officer reasonably
requires.
253. (1) If any vessel under this Part, arrives in or proceeds
from a port or place in India in an unseaworthy condition or which
is likely to pose a threat to the security on Indian coasts or offshore
installations, the vessel may be detained until the owner, master or
tindal or skipper takes all reasonable measures to ensure the
seaworthiness of the vessel.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect the liability
of the person in charge of the vessel in respect of such
Detention of
vessel by
proper officer.
Detention of
unseaworthy
vessels.

233
unseaworthiness or threat to the security on Indian coasts
or offshore installations under any other provisions of this
Act.
254. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the
Central Government may, by order in writing and upon such
conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose, exempt any vessel
or tindal, skipper or member of crew of such vessel or any class
thereof, from any specified requirement contained in or prescribed
in pursuance of this Act or dispense with the observance of any
such requirement in the case of any vessel or tindal, skipper or
member of crew of such vessel or any class thereof if it is satisfied
that the requirement has been substantially complied with or that
compliance with the requirement is or ought to be dispensed with
in the circumstances of the case.
(2) Where an exemption is granted under sub-section (1) subject
to any conditions, a breach of any of those conditions shall, without
prejudice to any other remedy, be deemed to be an offence under
this sub-section.
255. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Part.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:-
(a) the scale of manning and fittings, material, appliances
and apparatus to be carried on board by Indian vessel under
sub-section (1) of section 248;
(b) the certificates required to ply or proceed to sea by a
vessel under sub-section (1) of section 249;
(c) the manner of granting of certificate and the period
said certificate under sub-section (2) of section 249;
(d) the form for maintaining a statement of the crew of
the vessel under sub-section (1) of section 250;
(e) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
Power to exempt.
Power to make
rules.

234
PART XIV
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
256. (1) Any person who contravenes any provision of this
Act or fails to comply with any provision thereof, which it was his
duty to comply with, shall be guilty of an offence committed under
this Act.
(2) The offences mentioned in column (2) of the Table below
shall be punishable to the extent mentioned in column (4) of the said
Table with reference to such offence respectively.
(3) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or
fails to comply with any provision thereof, which it was his duty to
comply with, shall be guilty of an offence, and if in respect of any
such offence, no penalty is specially provided in sub-section (2), he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
(4) The Principal Officer may, after giving the parties an
opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, impose penalties as
specified in column (4) of the said Table.
(5) Any person aggrieved by the order under sub-section (4),
may, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such
order, prefer an appeal before the Director-General in such form and
manner as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.
(6) The Director-General may, after giving the parties an
opportunity of being heard, within a period of thirty days from the
date of receipt of the order under sub-section (5), pass appropriate
order which shall be final and binding on all parties.
Penalties.

235
Table
Serial Offences Section of Pe nalties By whom the
No. this Act to offence triable
which offence and penalties
has referred imposed
12 3 4 5
1. If any person causes a 14 (1) Imprisonment which may Court
vessel to proceed to sea extend to six months or
in contravention of sub- fine which may extend to
section (1) of section 14. two lakh rupees, or both.
2. If the owner of an Indian 17 (1) Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
vessel fails to comply with, thousand rupees. Officer
or contravenes, sub-section
(1) of section 17.
3. If any person contravenes 20 (2) Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
sub-section (2) of section 20. thousand rupees. Officer
4. If the owner fails to deliver 22 Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
the certificate of registry to thousand rupees. Officer
the Registrar as required
under section 22.
5. If any person contravenes 24 (1) Fine which may extend to one Principal
sub-section (1) of section 24 lakh rupees. Officer
6. If an owner fails to make 35 Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
an application for registering thousand rupees; and in addition, Officer
a new vessel or for a fine which may extend to two
registering an alteration of a thousand rupees for everyday
vessel under section 35. during which the offence continues
after conviction.
7. If any distinctive national 40 (1) Fine which may extend to two Principal
colours except those lakh rupees. Officer
declared under sub-section
(1) of section 40 are
hoisted on board by Indian
vessel.
8. If any person acts in 40 (2) Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
contravention of sub-section thousand rupees. Officer
(2) of section 40.

236
12 3 4 5
9. If any person contravenes 40 (4) Imprisonment which may extend Court
sub-section (4) of section to two years, or fine which may
40. extend to two lakh rupees, or both.
10. If an owner or a master of 41 Imprisonment which may extend Court
an Indian vessel contravenes to two years, or fine which may
section 41. extend to two lakh rupees, or
both.
11. If any person in the case of General Imprisonment which may extend Court
any declaration made in the to six months, or fine which may
presence of, or produced to, extend to two lakh rupees, or both.
Registrar under Part IV or
in any document or other
evidence produced to such
Registrar—
(i) wilfully makes or assists
in making or procures to be
made, any false statement
concerning the title to or
owner vessel of or the
interest existing in any vessel
or any share in a vessel; or
(ii) utters, produces or makes
use of any declaration or
document containing any
such false statement knowing
the same to be false.
12. If the Indian charterer fails 49 (7) Fine which may extend to two Principal
to inform the Registrar under lakh rupees. Officer
sub-section (7) of section
49.
13. If any person having been 51 (2) Imprisonment which may extend Court
engaged as one of the to six months or fine which may
officers referred to in sub- extend to two lakh rupees, or both.
section (2) of section 51
goes to sea as such officer
without holding a certificate
referred to in sub-section
(2) of that section.

237
12 3 4 5
14. If any person conducts 53 (2) Imprisonment which may extend Court
training course in to two years, or fine which may
contravention of sub-section extend to twenty lakhs rupees, or
(2) of section 53 both.
15. If any person obstructs 53 (3) Fine which may extend to two Principal
authorised person under lakh rupees. Officer
sub-section (3) of section
53.
16. If any person causes a General Imprisonment which may extend Court
vessel or fishing vessel to to six months or fine which may
proceed to sea without the extend to two lakh rupees, or both.
required certificate personnel.
17. If a master fails to comply 55 (1) Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
with the requirement under thousand rupees and in addition, Officer
sub-section (1) of section 55. a fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees for everyday
during which the offence continues
after conviction.
18. If any person contravenes 63 (4) Fine which may extend to two Principal
sub-section (4) of section 63 lakh rupees. Officer
19. If any person contravenes 66 (2) Imprisonment which may extend Court
sub-section (2) of section 66 to one year or fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees, or both.
20. If any person contravenes 66 (3) Fine which may extend to two lakh Principal
sub-section (3) of section 66 rupees, for every seafarer engaged Officer
in contravention to section 66 (3).
21. If any person,— 66 (5) Fine which may extend to two lakh Principal
(i) is carried sea to work in rupees for every seafarer engaged Officer
contravention of sub-section in contravention to section 66 (5).
(5) of section 66, or
(ii) is engaged to work in Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
any capacity in a vessel in thousand rupees for every seafarer Officer
contravention of sub-section engaged in contravention to section
(5) of section 66 on a false 66 (5).
representation by his parent
or guardian that the young

238
1           2  3            4    5
person is of an age at which
such engagement is not in
contravention of that section.
22. If any person contravenes 66 (6) Fine which may extend to two lakh Principal
sub-section (6) of section 66 rupees for every seafarer engaged Officer
in contravention to section 66 (6).
23. If any person contravenes 66 (7)
sub-section (7) of section 66 Fine which may extend to two lakh Principal
rupees for every seafarer engaged Officer
in contravention to section 66 (7).
24. If any person contravenes 66 (8) Fine which may extend to two lakh Principal
sub-section (8) of section 66. rupees for every seafarer in respect Officer
of who the offence is committed.
25. If any person contravenes of 66 (9) Fine which may extend to two Principal
sub-section (9) of section 66. lakh rupees for every offence. Officer
26. If a master, owner or his 67 (1) Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
agent carries any seafarer to thousand rupees for every seafarer Officer
sea in contravention in respect of whom the offence is
sub-section (1) of section 67 committed.
27. If any person,—
(a) forges or fraudulently General Imprisonment which may extend Court
alters any certificate of to six months or fine which may
discharge or a certificate as extend to two lakh, rupees, or
to the work of a seafarer or both.
a continuous discharge
certificate or a copy of any
such certificate; or
(b) fraudulently uses any
certificate of discharge or a
certificate as to the work of
a seafarer or a continuous
discharge certificate or a
copy of any such certificate
which is forged or altered or
does not belong to him.

239
1           2  3            4    5
28. If a master or owner acts 73 (2) Fine which may extend to one Principal
in contravention sub-section lakh rupees. Officer
(2) of section 73.
29. If any master acts 73 (5) Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
in contravention sub-section thousand rupees. Officer
(5) of section 73.
30. If a master fails to comply 74 Fine which may extend Principalto
with the provisions of this three times the value Officer of the
Act with respect to taking property not accounted for or if
charge of the property or such value is not ascertained, to
to making in the official twenty thousand rupees.
logbook the proper entries
relating thereto or to the
payment or delivery of
such property as required
under section 74.
31. If any person fails, without 78 Fine which may extend to twenty Principal
reasonable cause, to comply five thousand rupees. Officer
with any requisition under
section 78.
32. If any person commits a 83 (9) Imprisonment which may extend Court
breach of any term of any to one month, or fine which may
award which is binding on extend to two lakh rupees, or both.
him undersub-section (9)
of section 83.
33. If a seafarer contravenes 83 (14)(a) Imprisonment which may extend Court
clause (a), or an owner 83 (14)(b); to one month, or fine which may
contravenes clause (b), of extend to fifty thousand rupees, or
sub-section (14) of both.
section 83.
34. (a) If any requirement under 88 Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
section 88 is not complied thousand rupees unless he can Officer
within the case of any prove that the non-compliance
vessel; or was not caused by his in attention,
neglect or wilful default;

240
1           2  3            4    5
(b) if any person obstruct the 88 Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
shipping master, survey or thousand rupees unless he can Officer
or seafarer welfare officer, prove that the obstruction was
Indian consular officer or caused without his knowledge or
any other officer at any connivance.
port in the discharge of his
duty under section 88.
35. If a master fails, without 90 Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
reasonable cause, to comply thousand rupees. Officer
with section 90.
36. If any person goes on board 92 Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
a vessel contrary to section thousand rupees. Officer
92.
37. If a master or seafarer 93 Imprisonment which may extend Court
contravenes section 93. to two years or fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
38. If a seafarer,— (a) deserts 94 (1) (a) He shall be liable to forfeit all or Principal
his vessel under clause (a) any part of the property leaves on Officer
of sub-section (1) of section board and of the wages has then
94; earned and also if the desertion
takes place at any place not in
India, to forfeit all or any part of
the wages which earn in any other
vessel in which employed until next
return to India, and to satisfy any
excess of wages paid by the master
or owner of the vessel from which
deserts to any substitute engaged in
his place at a higher rate of wages
than the rate stipulated to be paid
to him.
(b) contravenes clause (b) of 94 (1) (b) He shall, if the contravention does Principal
sub-section (1) of section not amount to desertion, be liable Officer
94 . to forfeit out of his wages a sum
not exceeding two days pay and in
addition for every twenty-four
hours of absence either a sum not

241
1           2  3            4    5
exceeding six days' pay or any
expenses properly incurred in hiring
a substitute.
39. If a seafarer is guilty of the
offence specified in,—
(i) clause (a) of section 95; 95 (a) Forfeiture out of his wages of a Principal
sum not exceeding one month's Officer
pay;
(ii) clause (b) of section 95; 95 (b) Forfeiture out of his wages of a Principal
sum not exceeding two days' pay; Officer
(iii) clause (c) of section 95; 95 (c) Imprisonment which may extend Court
to one month and also for every
twenty-four hours of continuance
of such disobedience or neglect,
forfeiture out of his wages of a
sum not exceeding six days' pay
or any expenses which may have
been properly incurred in hiring a
substitute;
(iv) clauses (d) and (e) of 95 (d) and Imprisonment which may extend Court
section 95; 95 (e) to three months, or fine of fifty
thousand rupees which may
extend to one month's pay or both;
(v) clause (f) of section 95; 95 (f) Forfeiture out of his wages of a Court
sum equal to the loss sustained
and also imprisonment which may
extend to three months;
(vi) clause (g) of section 95. 95 (g) Fine which may extend to one lakh Principal
rupees but nothing herein shall take Officer
away or limit any other remedy
which any person would otherwise
have for breach of contract or
refund of money advanced or
otherwise.
40. If any master fails to 98 Fine which may extend to one Principal
comply with section 98. lakh rupees, or both. Officer

242
1           2  3            4    5
41. If a seafarer on or before General Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
being engaged wilfully and thousand rupees. Officer
fraudulently makes a false
statement of the name of his
last vessel or alleged last
vessel or wilfully and
fraudulently makes a false
statement of his own name.
42. If any person contravenes,— 104 (1) Fine which may extend to two Principal
(a) sub-section (1) of section lakh rupees. Officer
104;
(b) sub-section (2) of 104 (2) Fine which may extend to two Principal
section 104. lakh rupees. Officer
43. If any person goes to sea in 105 (1) Imprisonment which may extend Court
a vessel contrary to sub- to one month, or fine which may
section (1) of section 105. extend to one lakh rupees, or both.
44. If a master fails to deliver 106 Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
the documents referred to thousand rupees. Officer
in sub-section (1) of section
106.
45. If any person harbours or General Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
secretes any deserter knowing thousand rupees. Officer
or having reason to believe
that he has deserted.
46. If any person wilfully General Imprisonment which may extend Court
destroys or mutilates or to one year.
renders illegible any entry in
any official logbook or
wilfully makes or procures
to be made or assists in
making a false or fraudulent
entry in or omission from
an official logbook.
47. If the vessel contravenes 112 The owner or master of the vessel Principal
section 112. shall be liable to fine which may Officer
extend to fifteen lakh rupees and
the vessel may also be detained.

243
1           2  3            4    5
48. If the master fails, without
reasonable cause,—
(a) to comply with sub- 113 (1) Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
section (1) of section 113; thousand rupees. Officer
(b) to comply with sub- 113 (2) Fine which may extend to two Principal
section (2) of section 113. lakh rupees. Officer
49. If any person contravenes 116 Fine which may extend to fifteen Principal
section 116. lakh rupees and the vessel may Officer
also be detained.
50. If any vessel proceeds or 117 The master of the vessel shall be Principal
attempts to proceed to sea liable to fine which may extend to Officer
without carrying on board one lakh rupees.
the information required
by section 117.
51. If an vessel other than a 118 (1) The master or owner of the vessel Principal
vessel exempted under Part shall be liable to fine which may Officer
VI is loaded in contravention extend to four lakh rupees and to
of sub-section (1) of such additional fine not exceeding
section 118. twenty-five thousand rupees for
every inch or fraction of an inch
by which the appropriate load lines
on each side of the vessel are
submerged or would have been
submerged if the vessel had been
in salt waters and had no list, as
the principal officer thinks fit to
impose, having regard to the extent
to which the earning capacity of
the vessel is or would have been
increased by reason of the
submersion:
Provided that it shall be a good
defence for the master or owner
to prove that a contravention was
due solely to deviation or delay
caused solely by stress of whether
or other circumstance which neither
the master nor the owner nor the
charterer, if any, could have
prevented or forestalled.

244
1           2  3            4    5
52. If a vessel carries passengers 119 The owner or master shall be liable Principal
in contravention of section to fine which may extend to two Officer
119. lakh rupees.
53. If the master owner or agent General Imprisonment for a term which Court
of a special general trade may extend to six months, or fine
passenger vessel, after having which may extend to fifty thousand
obtained any of the certificates rupees, or both.
referred to in Part VI,
fraudulently does or suffers
to be done anything whereby
the certificate becomes
inapplicable to the altered state
of the vessel, or special
trade passengers other
matters to which the
certificate relates.
54. If any person contravenes 120 Fine which may extend to fifteen Principal
section 120. lakh rupees and the vessel may Officer
also be detained.
55. If any person is guilty of an 121 (1) Fine which may extend fifty Court
offence under sub-section (1) thousand rupees.
of section 121.
56. If any person is guilty of an 122 (1) or Imprisonment which may extend to Court
offence under sub-section (1) 122 (2) six months, or fine which may
or sub-section (2) of section extend to two lakhs rupees, or
122. both.
57. If a person sends or attempts 123 Imprisonment which may extend to Court
to send a vessel in one year, or fine which may extend
contravention of section 123. to two lakhs rupees, or both.
58. If any owner causes a vessel 124 Imprisonment which may extend to Court
to proceed to sea in one year, or fine which may extend
unseaworthy condition in to two lakhs rupees, or both.
contravention of section 124.
59. If oil or oily mixture or any 131
other polluting substance is
discharged in contravention
of section 131,—

245
1           2  3            4    5
(a) where such discharge is 131 Imprisonment which may extend Court
made from an Indian tanker to six months and the owner or
anywhere into the sea; master of the tanker shall be liable
to fine which may extend to twenty
five lakh rupees.
(b) where such discharge is 131 Fine which may extend to twenty Principal
made from foreign tanker five lakh rupees. Officer
anywhere within the coastal
waters of India.
60. If any person contravenes 133 Fine which may extend to fifteen Principal
section 133. lakh rupees and the vessel may Officer
also be detained.
61. If the master of a vessel fails 134 Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
to maintain records as thousand rupees. Officer
required by section 134 or
contravenes any rule made
under that section.
62. If the master of an Indian 136 Fine which may extend to one Principal
vessel or any person fails lakh and fifty thousand rupees. Officer
to comply with the rules
made or measure taken
under section 136.
63. If owner of any Indian 137 The offender shall be liable to Court
vessel, fails to comply penalty of imprisonment which
with any order issued may extend to six months or fine
under section 137. which may extend to five lakh
rupees, or both and if the offence
is a continuing one, the offender
shall be liable to a further fine
which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees per day for every day
during which the offence continues
after conviction.
64. If any person fails to posses 140 Fine which may extend to fifteen Principal
the certificates as required lakh rupees and the vessel may also Officer
under section 140. be detained.

246
1           2  3            4    5
65. If the master of a ship 193 Fine which may extend to fifteen Principal
contravenes sub-section lakh rupees and the vessel may Officer
(1) of section 193. also be detained.
66. If any person fails to give 207 (2) Fine which may extend to fifty Court
notice under sub-section (2) thousand rupees and in default of
of section 207. payments, simple imprisonment
which may extend to three months.
67. If any person fails to report 214 (1); Fine which may extend to fifty Courts.
under sub-section (1) or 214 (2); thousand rupees and in default of
sub-section (2) or sub-section 214 (3). payments, simple imprisonment
(3) of section 214. which may extend to three month.
68. If any person contravenes 216 (2) Fine which may extend to two Court
sub-section (2) of section216. lakh rupees and in default of
payment, simple imprisonment
which may extend to six months.
69. If any person contravenes 240 (1) or Imprisonment which may extend Court.
sub section (1) or sub- 240 (2) to six months, or fine which may
section (2) of section 240. extend to ten lakh rupees, or both
and th vessel may also be detained.
70. If any person to whom a 240 (5) Fine which may extend to five Principal
licence under sub-section lakh rupees and the vessel may Officer
(1) or sub-section (2) of also be detained.
section 240 has been granted
fails to comply with the
conditions under sub-section
(5) of section240.
71. (a) If any directions given 243 (1) Imprisonment which may extend Court
under sub-section (1) of to six months, or fine which may
section 243 are not complied extend to fifty thousand rupees,
with; or or both.
(b) if the owner, master or 243 (2) Imprisonment which may extend Court
agent on whom a notice has to six months, or fine which may
been served under sub-section extend to fifty thousand rupees,
(2) of section 243 fails to or both.
furnish the information
required within the time
specified or furnishing the
information makes any
statement which he knows
to be false on any material
particular.

247
1           2  3            4    5
72. If any person contravenes 244 (3) Imprisonment which may extend Court
sub-section (3) of section to six months, or fine which may
244. extend to fifty thousand rupees, or
both.
73. If an owner contravenes 248 (2) Fine which may extend to one lakh Principal
sub-section (2) of section rupees and the vessel may also be Officer
248. detained.
74. If any person contravenes 249 (1) Fine which may extend to one lakh Principal
sub-section (1) of section rupees and the vessel may also be Officer
249. detained.
75. If the owner, master, tindal 250 (1) Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
or skipper fails to comply thousand rupees. Officer
with sub-section (1) of
section 250.
76 If the owner, master, tindal 251 (1) Imprisonment which may extend Court
or skipper fails to comply to three months, or fine which
with sub-section (1) of may extend to fifty thousand
section 251. rupees, or both.
77. (a) If any person is guilty of 263 (2) Imprisonment which may extend Court
an offence under sub-section to six months, or fine which may
(2) of section 263. extend to two lakh rupees, or both.
(b) If the owner, master or 263 (3) Fine which may extend to two Court
his agent of vessel is guilty lakh rupees.
of an offence under sub-
section (3) of section 263.
78. If any person acts in 270 (2) Fine which may extend to fifty Principal
contravention of sub- thousand rupees. Officer
section (2)of section 270.
79. If any person contravenes 272 (2) Fine which may extend to five lakh Principal
security measures under rupees and the vessel may also be Officer
sub-section (2) of section detained.
272.
80. If any person is guilty of an 274 (2) Fine which may extend to one Principal
offence under sub-section (2) lakh rupees. Officer
of section 274.
81. If any vessel is detained General Fine which may extend to fifteen Principal
under the provisions of lakh rupees. Officer
this Act for which no fine
is provided.

248
257. Any person committing any offence under this Act or any
rules made thereunder, may be tried for such offence before any
place in which he may be found, or in any Court which the Central
Government may, by notification, direct in this behalf, or in any
Court in which he might be tried in any other law for time being in
force.
258. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, it shall be lawful for a Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class to pass any
sentence authorised by or under this Act on any person convicted
of an offence under this Act or any rules made thereunder.
259. The penalties to which the masters or owners of special
trade passenger vessels are made liable by section 256 shall be
enforced only on a report made by the proper officer in this behalf.
260. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is
a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed,
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the
conduct of its business, as well as the company, shall be deemed to
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any
director, manager, secretary, or any other officer of the company,
such director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall also be
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" includes a co-operative society, a firm or
other association of individuals; and
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the
firm.
Place of trial
and jurisdiction
of court.
Special
provision
regarding
punishment.
Cognizance of
offence.
Offences by
companies.
2 of 1974

249
261. (1) Whenever, in the course of any legal proceeding under
this Act instituted at any place in India before any court or Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or before any
person authorised by law or by consent of parties to receive evidence,
the testimony of any witness is required in relation to the subject-
matter, and the defendant or the person accused, as the case may
be, after being allowed a reasonable opportunity for so doing, does
not produce the witness before any court or Metropolitan Magistrate
or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or person so authorised,
any deposition previously made by the witness in relation to the
same subject-matter before any court or Metropolitan Magistrate or
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class in any other place in India or,
if elsewhere, before any I ndian consular officer, shall be admissible
in evidence,—
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of
the presiding officer of any court or Metropolitan Magistrate or
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or consular officer,
before whom it is made;
(b) if the defendant or the person accused had an
opportunity by himself or has agent of cross-examining the
witness;
(c) if the proceeding is criminal, on proof that the
deposition was made in the presence of the person accused.
(2) It shall not be necessary in any case to prove the signature
or official character of the person appearing to have signed such
deposition, and a certificate by such person that the defendant or
person accused had an opportunity of cross-examining the witness,
and that the deposition, if made in a criminal proceeding, was made
in the presence of the person accused, shall, unless the contrary is
approved, be sufficient evidence that he had that opportunity and
that it was so made.
262. (1) Whenever any damage has in any part of the world
been caused to property belonging to the Government or to any
citizen of India or a company by a vessel other than an Indian vessel
and at any time thereafter that vessel is found within Indian jurisdiction,
the High Court may, upon the application of any person who alleges
that the damage was caused by the misconduct or want of skill of
the master or any member of the crew of the vessel, issue an order
Depositions to be
received in
evidence when
witness cannot be
produced.
Power to detain
foreign vessel
that has
occasioned
damage.

250
directed to any proper officer or other officer named in the order
requiring him to detain the vessel until such time as the owner,
master or coassignee thereof has satisfied any claim in respect of
the damage or has given security to the satisfaction of the High
Court to pay all costs and damages that may be awarded in any legal
proceeding that may be instituted in rest of the damage, and any
officer to whom the order is directed shall detain the vessel
accordingly.
(2) Whenever it appears that before an application can be made
under this section, the vessel in respect of which the applications to
be made will have departed from India or the territorial waters of
India, any proper officer may detain the vessel for such time as to
allow the application to be made and the result thereof to be
communicated to the officer detaining the vessel, and that officer
shall not be liable for any cost or damages in respect of the detention
unless the same is proved to have been made without reasonable
grounds.
(3) In any legal proceedings in relation to any such damage
aforesaid, the person giving security shall be made a defendant and
shall for the purposes of such proceeding be deemed to be the
owner of the vessel that has occasioned the damage.
263. (1) Where under this Act a vessel is authorised or ordered
to be detained, any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy or
Indian Coast Guard or any port officer, pilot, harbour master,
conservator of port or customs collector may detain the vessel
under instruction of the proper officer.
(2) If any vessel after detention or after service on the master
for any notice of, or order for, such detention proceeds to sea
before she is released by any competent authority, the master of the
vessel shall be guilty of an offence under this sub-section.
(3) When a vessel so proceeding to sea takes to sea, when on
board thereof in the execution of his duty any person authorised
under this Act to detain or survey the vessel, the owner, master or
agent of such vessel shall each be liable to pay all expenses of, and
incidental to, such person being so taken to sea and shall also be
guilty of an offence under this sub-section.
(4) When any owner, or master or agent is convicted of an
offence under sub-section (3), the convicting court or Metropolitan
Power to enforce
detention of
vessel.

251
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, as the case may
be, may inquire it and determine the amount payable on account of
expenses by such owner, master or agent under that sub-section and
may direct that the same shall be recovered from him in the manner
provided for the recovery of fines.
264. (1) When an order under this Act for the payment of any
wages or other sums of money is made by any court or Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or other officer
or authority, and the money is not paid at the time or in the manner
directed, the sum mentioned in the order with such further sum as
may be thereby awarded for costs, may be levied by distress and
sale of the movable property of the person directed to pay the same
under a warrant to be issued for that purpose by such a court
or Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first
class.
(2) Where any court or Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class or other officer or authority has power
under this Act to make an order directing payment to be made of
any seafarer's wages, fines or other sums of money, then if the
person so directed to pay the same is the master, owner or agent
of a vessel and the same is not paid at the time or in the manner
directed by the order of the court or Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class, or other officer or authority
may, in addition to any other power it may have for the purpose of
compelling payment by warrant, direct the amount remaining unpaid
to be levied by distress and sale of the vessel and her
equipment.
265. If any vessel other than an Indian vessel is detained under
this Act, or if any proceeding is taken under this Act against the
master, owner or agent of any such vessel, notice shall forthwith be
served on the consular officer of the country in which the vessel is
registered, at or nearest to the port where the vessel is for the time
being, and such notice shall specify the grounds on which the vessel
has been detained or the proceedings have been taken.
266. Where, for the purpose of this Act, any document is to be
served on any person, that document may be served,—
(a) in any case by delivering a copy thereof personally to
the person to be served, or by leaving the same at his last place
of abode, or by post;
Levy of wages,
etc., by distress of
movable property
or vessel.
Notice to be
given to consular
representative
of proceedings
taken in respect
of foreign vessel.
Service of
documents.

252
(b) if the document is to be served on the master of a
vessel, where there is one, or a person belonging to a vessel,
by leaving the same for him on board that vessel, with the
person being or appearing to be in command or charge of the
vessel; and
(c) if the document is to be served on the master of a
vessel where there is no master and the vessel is in India, on
the owner of the vessel, or, if such owner is not in India, in
some agent of the owner residing in India, or, where no such
agent is known or can be found, by serving a copy thereof to
the master of the vessel or by affixing at a suitable place on
the bridge.
PART XV
MISCELLANEOUS
267. The master of any vessel performing a voyage shall, on
arrival, at the next port or place of call, intimate the proper officer,
the date of any birth or death of any person occurring during the
voyage and the cause of death or any other relevant details, as the
Central Government may, by order, specify in this behalf.
268. (1) If any person dies on board or is missing from an
Indian vessel, the master shall forthwith inform to the Director-
General, and the proper officer of the port or the next port of call.
(2) On receipt of information under sub-section (1), the proper
officer shall enquire into the cause of death and make in the official
log book an endorsement to that effect, either that the statement of
the cause of death in the book is in his opinion true, or the contrary
according to the result of inquiry.
(3) If, in the course of any such inquiry, it appears to the
proper officer that a death has been caused on board the vessel by
violence or other improper means, he shall either report the matter
to the Director-General or, if the emergency of the case so requires,
shall take immediate steps for bringing the offender to trial.
269. The following persons shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, namely:—
(a) every surveyor;
(b) every person appointed under this Act to report
information as to shipping casualties under Part X;
Birth and death
of persons on
board vessel
during a voyage.
Inquiry into cause
of death on board
or person missing
from Indian
vessel.
Certain persons
deemed to be
public servants.
45 of 1860.

253
(c) every person authorised under this Act to make any
investigation or inquiry and all persons whom he calls to his
aid;
(d) every person directed to make an investigation into an
explosion or fire on a vessel; and
(e) every other officer or person appointed under this Act
to perform any functions thereunder.
270. (1) Every person who is empowered by this Act to make
an investigation or inquiry or to board, survey, inspect or detain a
vessel,—
(a) may go on board any vessel and inspect the same or
any part thereof, or any of the machinery, equipment or articles
on board thereof, or any certificate of the master or other
officer to which the provisions of this Act or any of the rules
made thereunder apply, not unnecessarily detaining or delaying
the vessel from proceeding on any voyage, and if in consequence
of any incident to the vessel or for any other reason it is
considered necessary so to do, may require the vessel to be
taken into dock for the purpose of inspection or survey;
(b) may enter and inspect any premises, the entry and
inspection of which appears to be requisite for the purpose
aforesaid;
(c) may, by summons under his hand, require the
attendance of all such persons as he thinks fit to call before
him and examine them for the purpose aforesaid, and may
require answers or returns to any enquiries he thinks fit to
make;
(d) may require and enforce the production of all relevant
books, papers, or documents;
(e) may administer oaths or may in lieu of requiring or
administering an oath, require every person examined by him
to make and subscribe a declaration of the truth of the statements
made by him in his examination; and
(f) may muster the crew of any such vessel.
(2) No person shall hinder or obstruct any officer or person
referred to in sub-section (1) from going on board any vessel or
otherwise impede him in the execution of his duties or the exercise
of his powers under this Act.
Power of persons
authorised to
investigate,
inquire, etc.

254
271. Where this Act requires that provisions or arrangements
for a vessel shall meet the obligations under the Convention the
Central Government may, after satisfying itself based on the
Convention or its protocol or its amendments or by trials or otherwise,
as effective as that so required, by an order, permit such other
provisions or arrangements to be used or provided.
272. (1) No vessel provided with a nuclear power plant shall
proceed to any port or place in India including territorial waters
thereof without permission of the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order,
issue such direction, as it deems fit, to the registered owners of the
vessels, for taking such security measure as may be necessary.
273. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that
the provisions of this Act or any of them shall not apply to vessels
belonging to the Government or to any class of such vessels.
274. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
Central Government may, by order in writing and upon such
conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose, exempt any vessel
or tindal or seafarer or any class thereof, from any specified
requirement contained in or prescribed in pursuance of this Act or
dispense with the observance of any such requirement in the case
of any vessel or tindal or seafarer, or any class thereof if it is
satisfied that the requirement has been substantially complied with or
that compliance with the requirement is or ought to be dispensed
with in the circumstances of the case:
Provided that no exemption which is prohibited by the safety
Convention or Pollution Prevention Convention shall be granted under
this sub-section.
(2) Where an exemption is granted under sub-section (1) subject
to any conditions, a breach of any of those conditions shall, without
prejudice to any other remedy, be deemed to be an offence under
this sub-section.
275. Without prejudice to any other power to make rules
contained elsewhere in this Act, the Central Government may make
rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Power to permit
alternative
provisions and
arrangement.
Control of
Nuclear vessels
and security
measures.
Exemption of
public vessels,
foreign and
Indian.
Power to
exempt.
General power
to make rules.

255
276. (1) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the
Official Gazette and shall be subject to the condition of previous
publication.
(2) In making a rule under this Act, the Central Government
may direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees, and if the breach is a continuing
one, with further fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for
every day after the first day during which the breach continues.
(3) Every rule made or notification issued under this Act shall
be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses
agree that the or notification rule should not be made, the rule or
notification shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or notification.
277. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done
under this Act.
278. The Central Government may enter into agreement with
other countries or organisations for effective implementation of the
provisions of this Act.
279. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the
official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of a period of three years from the commencement
of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Provisions with
respect to rules.
Protection of
persons acting
under the Act.
Agreement with
other countries.
Removal of
difficulties.

256
PART XVI
REPEALS AND SA VINGS
280. (1) The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and the Coasting
Vessels Act, 1838 are hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of any enactment by sub-
section (1),-
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, bye-law, order or
exemption issued, made or granted under any enactment hereby
repealed shall, until revoked, have effect as if it had been
issued, made or granted under the provisions of this Act;
(b) any office established or created, officer appointed
and anybody elected or constituted under any enactment hereby
repealed shall continue and shall be deemed to have been
established, created, appointed, elected, or constituted, as the
case may be, under this Act;
(c) any document referring to any enactment hereby
repealed shall be construed as referring to this Act or to the
provision of this Act;
(d) any fine levied under any enactment hereby repealed
may be recovered as if it had been levied under this Act;
(e) any offence committed under any enactment hereby
repealed may be prosecuted and punished as if it had been
committed under this Act;
(f) any vessel registered under the Merchant Shipping
Act, 1958 hereby repealed shall be deemed to have been
registered under this Act;
(g) any mortgage of vessels recorded in any register book
maintained at any port in India under the Merchant shipping
Act, 1958 any enactment hereby repealed shall be deemed to
have been recorded in the register book under the corresponding
provision of this Act;
(h) any licence, certificate of competency or service,
certificate of survey, A or B certificate, safety certificate,
qualified safety certificate, safety equipment certificate,
exemption certificate, international or Indian load line certificate
Repeal and
savings.
44 of 1958
19 of 1938
44 of 1958

257
or any other certificate or document issued, made or granted
under any enactment hereby repealed and in force at the
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been issued,
made or granted under this Act and shall, unless cancelled
under this Act, continue in force until the date shown in the
certificate or document, as the case may be;
(i) any proceeding pending before any court under any
enactment here by repealed may be tried or disposed of under
the corresponding provisions of this Act;
(j) the officers existing under the commencement of this
Act shall continue as if they have been established under this
Act;
(k) any person appointed under or by virtue of any repealed
enactment shall be deemed to have been appointed to that
office under or by virtue of this Act;
(1) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be
done under the provisions of any repealed enactment shall
continue to be proceeded with as if such inspection, investigation
or inquiry ordered to be done under the corresponding provisions
of this Act.
(3) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not
be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of
the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of
repeals.

258
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 has been enacted to foster the development and ensure the
efficient maintenance of an Indian mercantile marine in a manner best suited to serve the national interests
and for that purpose to establish a National Shipping Board and a Shipping Development Fund, to provide
for the registration of Indian ships and generally to amend and consolidate the law relating to merchant
shipping. The said Act has been amended several times and now contains more than 560 sections.
2. Internationally, merchant shipping industry has undergone various changes in recent years. In order
to meet the new challenges and promote 'Ease of Doing Business', reforms are required to increase
tonnage under Indian flag and share of Indian seafarers, safeguard the rights and privileges of seafarers,
enhance the safety and security of vessels and life at sea, prevent marine pollution, provide for maritime
liabilities and compensations, and to develop Indian costal shipping and trade, etc.
3. The Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 is a legislation of British era which provides for registration of non-
mechanically propelled vessels for a limited jurisdiction of Saurashtra and Kutch. As it has been decided
to bring the registration of all seagoing vessels under the law of Merchant Shipping, the Coasting Vessels
Act, 1838 will become redundant.
4. In order to ensure that old and redundant provisions of the laws are replaced with contemporaneous
provisions, it has been decided to consolidate and amend the laws relating to merchant shipping to ensure
compliance with the country's obligation under the International Conventions and maritime treaties to
which India is a party and also to ensure the efficient maintenance of Indian mercantile marine in a
manner best suited to serve the national interest.
5. In view of the above, it has become imperative to repeal the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and the
Coasting Vessels Act, 1838 and to provide for contemporaneous, futuristic and dynamic legislation,
namely, the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016 to meet the requirements of India as an emerging economy.
6. The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016, inter alia, seeks to provide for the following, namely:—
(a) to register all seagoing vessels, whether propelled or not, including certain residuary category
of vessels not covered under any statute;
(b) to allow substantially-owned vessels and vessels chartered on Bareboat Charter-cum-Demise
(BBCD) contract by Indian entities to be registered as Indian flag vessels, to recognise Indian
controlled tonnage as a separate category, and dispense with the requirement for issuing
licences to Indian flag vessels for coastal operation, so as to facilitate augmentation of Indian
tonnage and promotion of coastal shipping;
(c) to simplify and consolidate the regime for survey, inspection and certification of vessels which
are scattered in various Parts of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 by placing them together,
for convenience of the Indian shipping industry;
258

259
(d) to monitor the maritime education leading to grant of certificate of competency or certificate
of proficiency in accordance with either the provisions of International Convention or otherwise
to impart quality education to prospective seafarers, and to facilitate Indian seafarers to work
onboard vessels with respective certificate and qualification;
(e) to entitle the seafarers held in captivity of pirates to receive wages till they are released from
captivity and reach home safely so as to ensure welfare of seafarers;
(f) to make insurance compulsory for the crew engaged on vessels including fishing, sailing, non-
propelled vessels and vessels whose net tonnage is less than fifteen and solely engaged in
coasting trade of India, by the owner of the vessel;
(g) to dispense with the requirement of signing of articles of agreement by the crew before the
Shipping Master so as to facilitate early employment of seafarers;
(h) to make provisions for security-related aspects with respect to vessels, which will enable
identification and ensure coastal security;
(i) to make provisions so as to give effect to seven Conventions of International Maritime
Organisation, namely, (i) the Intervention Convention, 1969, (ii) the Search and Rescue
Convention, 1979, (iii) the Annex VI to the International Convention on Prevention of Pollution
from Ships, (iv) the Convention for Control and Management of Ships Ballast Water and
Sediments, 2004, (v) the Nairobi Wreck Removal Convention, 2007, (vi) the Salvage
Convention,1989 and (vii) the International Convention for Bunker Oil Pollution Damage, 2001;
(j) to repeal the Coasting Vessels Act,1838 and the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
   N EW D ELHI; NITIN GADKARI
5 December, 2016.

260
Notes on clauses
Clause 1.— This Clause seeks to provide for short title and commencement of the Bill.
Clause 2. —This Clause seeks to provide for application of the Bill. It specifies the application of
the Bill to the vessels registered, vessels required to be registered and vessels other than preceding two
categories. It also specifies the extent of application of the Bill to Indian controlled tonnage vessels.
Clause 3. — This Clause contains definitions of various expressions used in the Bill. It defines the
expressions, inter alia, "costs", "coasting trade of India", "convention", "distressed seafarer", "family",
"Indian controlled tonnage vessel", "port of registry", "sailing vessel", "ship", "special trade", "vessel".
Clause 4 .—This Clause seeks to provide for establishment of the National Shipping Board. It
provides for the composition of the Board, consisting of six members of Parliament; sixteen members
to be appointed by the Central Government and equal number to be included in the Board representing
the ship owners and seafarers; and the term of its members, its power to advise the Central Government.
Clause 5.—This Clause seeks to provide for the constitution of the Seafarer Welfare Board to advise
the Central Government on the measures for promoting the welfare of the seafarers.
Clause 6.— This clause empowers the Central Government to appoint a person to be the Director-
General of Shipping for the purposes of exercising or discharging the powers, authority or duties
conferred on or imposed by under the provisions of the Bill. This clause also empower the Central
Government to delegate its power to Director-General and he may with the approval of the Central
Government delegate his powers to other officer or authority and the officers appointed under the Bill
shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence and control of the Director-General.
Clause 7.— This clause empowers the Central Government to appoint Surveyors at such port or
place as it may consider necessary. It further empowers the Central Government to authorise any person
or body of persons, as surveyor in case of cargo vessel.
Clause 8.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to appoint Radio Inspectors
relating to radio communication.
Clause 9.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to establish and maintain office
of the Mercantile Marine Department at the ports of Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Kochi, Kandla and such
other ports or places in India for the administration of the provisions of the Bill and the rules made
thereunder. It further provides that the office of the Mercantile Marine Departments at the ports of
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Kochi, Kandla and any other port or place as notified by the Central Government
shall be in the charge of the Principal Officer, and the office at any other port or place shall be in the
charge of such officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf.
Clause 10.—This clause empowers the Central Government to establish Shipping office and appoint
shipping master and other officers as it may consider necessary. It provides that if at any place such
260

261
shipping office is not established then either the Mercantile Marine Department, or port officer or any
other office may conduct the business of shipping office. It further provides that any act done by Deputy
Shipping Master, Assistnat Shipping Master or any other officer in shipping office shall have the same
effect as if done by the Shipping Master.
Clause 11.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to establish at every port a
seafarer's employment office and shall appoint thereto a director and as many Deputy Directors and
Assistant Directors as it may consider necessary. It provides that all acts done by Deputy Director or
Assistnat Director shall have the same effect as if done by the Director himself. It also provides that
if at some port, seafarers employment office is not available then at such place the Central Government
has power to appoint a person or body of persons to carry out the functions of the Seafarer's Employment
Office and such person or body of persons shall be deemed to be Seafarers Employment Office.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to appoint Seafarers Welfare
Officer in any port or place outside India. It specifies the duties which the Seafarers Welfare Officer
needs to perform. It further provides that if any seafarer's welfare officer appointed at any port outside
India performs any functions assigned to an Indian consular officer, such functions shall have the same
effect as if they had been performed by an Indian consular officer.
Clause 13.— This clause seeks to provide for application of Part III of the Bill. It provides for the
application of the provisions of Part III to all sea-going vessels for the purposes of registration of vessels.
Clause 14.— This clause seeks to impose obligation for registration of every vessel. It provides that
every Indian vessel shall be registered under Part III at such port or place of registry as may be notified
by the Central Government. It further provides that the vessels registered under the Coasting vessels Act,
1838, which has been proposed for repeal by this Bill, shall be re-registered under the provisions of this
Bill within one year of coming into force of the Bill and the vessels registered under the existing Act shall
be deemed to be registered under this Bill. It also provides that all vessels belonging to the Government,
other than vessels of the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, Customs Authorities, Central Paramilitary
Forces, Coastal Police and other Police Agencies, shall be registered under this Bill.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause enables the registration of an Indian vessel out of India with such
conditions as may be made by rules. Sub-clause (3) provides that no vessel shall be an Indian vessel
or an Indian controlled tonnage vessel unless such vessel is substantially owned by any of the person
specified therein. Sub-clause (4) mandates that Indian vessel proceeding to sea without a valid certificate
of registration shall be detained unless it produces such certificate.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to appoint the Registrar of Indian vessels. It provides that at any
port, the Principal Officer of the Mercantile Marine Department, shall be the Registrar of Indian vessels
at that port, and at any other place in India such authority as the Central Government may, appoint, shall
be the Registrar of Indian vessels at that place. It further provides that every Registrar shall keep a
register book and shall make entries in that book be made, and maintain the records of vessels registered
under this Bill, in such manner as may be provided by rules.

262
Clause 16.— This clause seeks to provide of application of registry. It provides that an application
for the registry of an Indian vessel shall be made to the Registrar in such form and manner as may be
provided by rules.
Clause 17.— This clause seeks to provide for marking, survey and measurement of vessels before
registry. It provides that the owner of every Indian vessel in respect of which an application for registry
is made shall cause such vessel to be marked, surveyed and measured by a surveyor and the tonnage
of the vessel ascertained before the registry in such manner as may be made by rules and the surveyor
shall grant a certificate specifying the tonnage and build and such other particulars descriptive of the
identity of the vessel as may be provided by rules and the certificate of the surveyor shall be delivered
to the Registrar before registry.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to empower the Registrar to inquire into title of an Indian vessel to
be registered. It provides that where it appears to the Registrar that there is any doubt as to the title of
any Indian vessel to be registered as an Indian vessel, he may require evidence to be given to his
satisfaction that the vessel is entitled to be registered as an Indian vessel and if no evidence is given to
the satisfaction of the Registrar, such vessel shall be liable for forfeiture.
Clause 19.— This clause seeks to provide for grant of certificate of registry. It provides that on
completion of registry, the certificate of registry shall be granted to Indian vessel. It also provides for
issuance of tonnage certificate and granting of new certificate of registry in case it is defaced or
mutilated or lost or destroyed.
Clause 20.— This clause seeks to provide for custody and use of certificate. It provides that the
certificate of registry shall be used only for the lawful navigation of the vessel, and shall at all times
remain in the custody of the person in charge of the vessel; and shall not be subject to detention by
reason of any title, lien, charge or interest whatever had or claimed by any owner, mortgagee or other
person to, on or in the vessel and such certificate may be delivered to person entitile to demand the
certificate. It further provides the possession of illegal certificate of registry as an offence.
Clause 21.— This clause seeks to provide for endorsement on certificate of change of ownership.
It provides that whenever a change occurs in the registered ownership of an Indian vessel, the owner
of the Indian vessel shall, for the purposes of endorsement of change of ownership, deliver the certificate
of registry to the Registrar who shall make an endorsement for that purpose in such manner as may be
provided by rules.
Clause 22.— This clause seeks to provide for delivery of certificate of vessel lost or ceasing to
be an Indian vessel. It provides that in case the vessel is actually or constructively lost, taken by the
enemy, burnt or broken up or ceasing for any reason to be an Indian vessel, or is to be registered under
any other law, every owner of such vessel shall immediately on obtaining knowledge of the event, if no
notice thereof has already been given to the Registrar, give notice thereof to the Registrar so that
Registrar can make entries in his records accordingly.
Clause 23.— This clause seeks to provide for provisional registration of Indian vessel. It provides
that the Registrar, Indian consular officer or any person authorised by the Central Government may issue

263
the certificate of provisional registration for a period of six months, which may further be extended by
three more months to complete the formalities of permanent registration and such provisional certificate
is required to be delivered to the Registrar for cancellation where a vessel has been permanently
registered.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to provide for the conditions when share of an Indian vessel may
not be transferred like during emergency without the previous approval of the Central Government. It
further provides conditions of transfer or acquision of an Indian vessel like satisfaction of mortgages,
statutory fee, wages, etc. It also provides that the instrument of transfer shall be in writing with requisite
particulars.
Clause 25.— This clause seeks to provide for registry of transfer. It provides that every instrument
for the transfer of an Indian vessel or of a share therein when duly executed shall be produced to the
Registrar of her port of registry, and the Registrar shall thereupon enter in the register book the name
of the transferee as owner of the vessel or share, as the case may be, and shall endorse on the instrument
the fact of that entry having been made with the day and hour thereof and every such instrument shall
be entered in the register book in the order of its production to the Registrar.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide for the transmission of property in Indian vessel on death,
insolvency, etc. It provides for certain action to be completed by the person to whom the property in
a vessel has been transferred on the death or insolvency of any registered owner, or by any lawful means
other than by a transfer under this Bill. Registrar shall make an entry in the register book and if by such
transmission the vessel ceases to be an Indian vessel, the Registrar need not make any entry in the
register book.
Clause 27.— This clause seeks to provide inter alia, to make an application to the High Court for
a direction for the sale of a vessel to any citizen of India or any company or body or co-operative society
if where the vessel has ceased to be an Indian vessel and the Registrar of the port of registry to submit
report to the Central Government setting out the circumstances in which the vessel has ceased to be an
Indian vessel.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to provide for transfer of vessel on sale by order of court. It
provides that any court may order the sale of vessel or share therein with a declaration vesting in person
named by the court the right to transfer that vessel or share, and that person shall thereupon be entitled
to transfer the vessel or share in the same manner and to the same extent as if he were the registered
owner thereof.
Clause 29.— This clause seeks to provide for mortgage of vessel or share therein which may be
made for security for a loan or other valuable consideration.
Clause 30.— This clause seeks to provide the rights of mortgagee. It provides that where there is
only one registered mortgagee of a vessel or share, he shall be entitled to recover the amount due under
the mortgage by selling the mortgaged vessel or share without approaching the High Court. It further
provides that where there are two or more registered mortgagees of a vessel or share they shall be
entitled to recover the amount due under the mortgage in the High Court.

264
Clause 31.— This clause seeks to provide that a registered mortgage of a vessel or share shall not
be affected by any act of insolvency committed by the mortgagor after the date of the record of such
mortgage.
Clause 32.— This clause seeks to provide for transfer of mortgage or shares to any person by the
instrument and after production of such instrument, the Registrar shall record the details in a register
book.
Clause 33.— This clause seeks to provide for transmission of interests in mortgage in certain
circumstances. It provides that the interest of a mortgagee in a vessel or share if transmitted on death,
or insolvency, or by any lawful means other than by a transfer under this Bill, the transmission shall be
authenticated by a declaration of the person to whom the interest is transmitted and it shall be containing
a statement of the manner in which and the person to whom the property has been transmitted and shall
be accompanied by like evidence.
Clause 34.— This clause seeks to provide that the Indian vessel shall be described by name, call
sign and an official number for the purpose of proper identification of the vessel.
Clause 35.— This clause seeks to provide that when the vessel is so altered as not to correspond
with the particulars relating to her tonnage or description contained in the register book, then the
Registrar at the first port at which the vessel arrives after the alteration, shall, on an application being
made to him by the owner stating the particulars of the alteration, either cause the alteration to be
registered or direct that the vessel be registered anew.
Clause 36.— This clause seeks to provide for provisional certificate and endorsement where vessel
is to be registered anew. It provides that where any Registrar, not being the Registrar of the vessel's port
of registry, on an application as to an alteration in a vessel directs the vessel to be registered anew, he
shall either grant a provisional certificate describing the vessel as altered, or provisionally endorse the
particulars of the alteration on the existing certificate.
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to provide that where the ownership of any Indian vessel is changed,
the Registrar of the port at which the vessel is registered may on the application of the owner of the
vessel, register the vessel anew.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to provide for transfer of registry. It provides that the registry of
any vessel may be transferred from one port of registry to another on an application to the Registrar
of the existing port of registry of the vessel made by declaration made in writing of all persons appearing
in the register to be interested therein as owners or mortgagees, but that transfer shall not in any way
affect the rights of those persons or any of them and those rights shall in all respects continue in the
same manner as if no such transfer had been effected.
Clause 39.— This clause seeks to put restrictions on re-registry of abandoned vessel. It provides
that where a vessel has ceased to be registered as an Indian vessel by reason of having been wrecked
or abandoned, or for any reason other than capture by the enemy, the vessel shall not be re-registered
until she has, at the expense of the applicant for the registry, been surveyed by a surveyor and certified
by him to be seaworthy.

265
Clause 40.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to declare the proper national
colours for all Indian vessles and for vessles owned by the Government with power to declare different
colours for different class of vessels. It also empowers the commissioned officer of the Indian Navy,
any officers of the Indian Coast Guard, a surveyor to board and seize and take away the colours which
are hoisted contrary to the provisions of Bill. It also imposes ban on Indian national colours on vessels
for the purpose of making it appear to be a vessel which is not an Indian vessel.
Clause 41.—This clause seeks to provide that no owner or master of an Indian vessel shall
knowingly do anything or permit anything to be done, or carry or permit to be carried any papers or
documents, with intent to conceal the Indian character of the vessel from any person entitled by any
law for the time being in force to inquire into the same with intent to assume a foreign character for
the vessel, or with intent to deceive any person so entitled.
Clause 42.— This clause seeks to provide that an Indian vessel shall not be entitled to any privileges,
benefits, advantages or protection usually enjoyed by Indian vessel or to use the Indian national colours
for Indian vessel or to assume the Indian national character of such vessel has not been recognised as
Indian vessel and for the purpose of payment of dues, the liability of fine and forfeiture and the
punishment for the offences committed on board such vessles may be dealt with in the same manner
as if the vessel is a recognised Indian vessel.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to provide that any vessel that is either wholly or any share therein
become subject to forfeiture under Part III, then, any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy, Indian
Coast Guard, any Indian consular officer or any other officer authorised by the Central Government, may
seize and detain the vessel, and bring her for adjudication before the High Court.
Clause 44.— This clause seeks to provide for liability of owners. It provides that where any person
is beneficially interested otherwise than by way of mortgage in any vessel or share in a vessel registered
in the name of some other person as owner, the person so interested shall, as well as the registered
owner, be subject to all the pecuniary penalties imposed by this Bill or any other Act on the owners of
vessel or shares therein, without prejudice that proceedings for the enforcement of any such penalties
may be taken against both or either of the said parties jointly or severally.
Clause 45.— This clause seeks to provide that any person may inspect any register book, and may
obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register book, by making an application to the Registrar and
the evidentiary value of a certified copy of an entry in the registered book.
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to enable the owner of an Indian vessel to may make an application
to the Registrar to close its registry subject to that there is no unsatisfied mortgage and outstanding
claims of the master or seafarer of the vessel in respect of wages have been intimated.
Clause 47.—This clause seeks to provide the application of Chapter II of Part III of the Bill. It
provides that this Chapter shall be applicable to any vessel registered under the law of any country other
than India and chartered by an Indian charterer on bareboat charter-cum-demise contract.
Clause 48.—This clause contains definitions of various expressions specified in Chapter II of Part
III of this Bill.

266
Clause 49.—This clause seeks to provide for registration of vessel chartered on bareboat charter-
cum-demise contract and the procedure to be followed and the provisions of the validity of registration
period, its closure with power to hoist Indian flag, etc.
Clause 50.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes covered under Part III of the Bill.
Clause 51.—This clause seeks to mandate that every Indian vessel to be provided with the seafarers
as per manning scale provided by rules and requirement that the seafarer shall hold such certificate as
per grade and the number of persons with such qualifications for manning different types of vessels.
It also provides that Indian national with foreign certificate and foreign national with foreign certificate
or Indian certificate of competence may be allowed to work on board Indian vessel subject to the
conditions to be specified in the rules.
Clause 52.—This clause empowers the Central Government to grant certificate of competency or
certificate of proficiency subject to fulfilment of requirements in respect of service, age limit, medical
fitness, training, qualifications and examination in accordance with the STCW Convention subject to
payment of such fee.
Clause 53.— This clause seeks to empower the Director-General to administer, supervise and
monitor all activities related to training and assessment for grant of certificate of competency or certificate
of proficiency and to approve training institute, courses and the method of conducting training for
granting such certificates and also with power to authorise any person to conduct inspection and submit
report to him.
Clause 54.— This clause seeks to provide for examination for grant of certificates. It empowers
the Central Government to appoint a person to examine the qualification for persons desirous of such
certificates. It further provides the manner of conducting examination and fee to be charged and payment
to the examiner. It also provides to grant certificates to applicants who have passed examination. It also
empowers the Central Government to withdraw, suspend and cancel such certificate in case it is obtained
through false and erroneous information or if the person is guilty of misconduct. It also provides for
re-issue of certificate in case of loss, etc. on payment of such fee as per rules.
Clause 55.— This clause cast a duty on the master of the vessel to produce the list of seafarers
along with the certificate of competency of the seafarer along with the list of crew, etc., to the proper
officer. It also empowers the surveyor to go on board a vessel for the purpose of ensuring that the
seafarers on board possess the certificates as per the STCW convention.
Clause 56.— This clause seeks to provide that India may recognise foreign certificate of competency
and certificate of proficiency as equivalent if they meet essential conditions like standards not being less
than that of Indian certificate holders and recognitions of Indian certificates under Part IV in their
countries and the certificate recognised as equivalent may be issued with a certificate of endorsement
and a person holding the certificate of endorsement shall be considered duly certificated.
Clause 57.—This clause seeks to provide that foreign vessel shall not proceed to sea from any port
or place of India without the requisite number of seafarers of appropriate grades and empowers the

267
surveyor to board the vessel for the purpose of ensuring that the seafarers holding certificates are
actually appointed and are actually present and are adequate in number for the watch keeping duty in
ports and at sea. It also empowers the Central Government to detain a foreign vessel in case of
deficiency on the report of the surveyor.
Clause 58.— This clause seeks to provide for obligations of certain certificate holders to serve the
Government or in Indian vessels during a proclamation of emergency or when security of India is
threatened according to the provisions of the constitution.
Clause 59.— This clause seeks to provide for the rule making power of the Central Government
for the provisions of Part IV .
Clause 60.—This clause seeks to provide for the applicability of Part V . It applies to every seafarer,
recruitment and placement service and ship owners.
Clause 61.—This clause seeks to define certain expressions which are specified Part V .
Clause 62.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for the classification
of seafarers into different categories, minimum scale and the different scale for different classes of ships
and application of the provisions to the seafarer employed or engaged as a member of the crew of a
ship.
Clause 63.— This clause seeks to provide for application of maritime labour standards to seafarers
and ships registered under this Bill, except ships which navigate exclusively in inland waters or waters
within, or closely adjacent to, sheltered waters or areas where any law for the time being in force relating
to ports apply; ships engaged in fishing activities; traditionally built ships such as dhows and junks and
ships of war or naval auxiliaries. It further provides that the Central Government shall have power on
recommendation of the Director-General to extend the provision of this clause to any category of ships
and the ships to possess certificate in accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention
and also prohibits the ships to proceed to sea without possessing the certificate.
Clause 64.— This clause seeks to enumerate the duties of the shipping master.
Clause 65.— This clause seeks to enumerate the business of the seafarer's employment office, such
as issuance to licence of recruitment and placement services and to perform any other functions provided
by rules made by the Central Government.
Clause 66.—This clause seeks to provide for the engagement of seafarer by licensed recruitment
and placement service and the owners of Indian vessels. It prohibits a person other than the owner of
the vessel to carry on the business of recruitment and placement of service without license; to engage
the seafarers without possession of continuous discharge certificate and identity documents; and the
person under sixteen years for engagement or carried to sea to work in any capacity without such
qualifications specified by the Central Government. It also prohibits the engagement of seafarer in a ship
without possessing a medical fitness certificate and any person who claims to represent the interests of
seafarers shall not demand or receive, either directly or indirectly, from any seafarer or person seeking
employment as seafarer or any person on his behalf, any remuneration or donation or fees or compulsory

268
subscription of any kind attributable from such seafarer or person's employment as seafarer, other than
the fees authorised by the provisions of this Bill.
Clause 66 also provides that the Central Government may, by notification, fix the fees which shall
be payable upon all engagements and discharges of the seafarer and the services of the seafarer engaged
in contravention thereof shall not be recognised for the purposes of certification under Part IV.
Clause 67.—This clause seeks to provide that every master or owner or his agent shall for the
purpose of engagement of seafarer enter into an articles of agreement with the seafarer and submit a
copy of such agreement to the shipping master. It specifies certain provisions therein for engagement
of a seafarer who is not a citizen of India. It further specifies the time when the wages and provisions
shall be taken to begin, and provides that no agreement shall forfeit the lien on the ship or deprive of
any remedy for recovery of wages of the seafarer and every stipulation inconsistent with the provisions
of this Bill will be void.
Clause 68.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for the matters
relating to seafarer's employment and condition of services including skill development and opportunity
or any other requirements under the Maritime Labour Convention.
Clause 69.—This clause seeks to entitle the seafarer to receive wages or compensation for loss of
effects in case or wreck, loss or abandonment of the ship or by reason of his being left on shore at
any place outside India under a certificate granted under this Bill for his unfitness or inability to proceed
on the voyage however he shall not be entitled to receive wages if through negligence he failed to apply
to proper authority for relief as a distressed or destitute seafarer. It further provides the amount of
compensation shall be deposited with the shipping master at the port of engagement in India for payment
to a seafarer or in the case of a deceased seafarer with the person nominated by him or in case he has
not made any nomination or nomination has become void, to his legal heirs. The seafeaver is entitled to
receive wages during captivity including incidence of piracy in the course of his employment.
Clause 70.—This clause seeks to provide that seafarer shall not be entitled to wages like absence
without leave, etc.
Clause 71.—This clause seeks to provide for compensation to the seafarer by the master, owner
or his agent for the damage caused due to premature discharge apart from the wages due and also
prescribe the limit of such compensation.
Clause 72.—This clause seeks to provide certain restrictions in respect of wages due to a seafarer
such as from attachment by order of any court and any assignment prior to the accruing thereof shall
not bind the person making the same subject to that it shall not apply if such assignment is under the
scheme approved by the Government.
Clause 73.—This clause seeks to provide the manner of discharge of seafarer. It provides that if
any Indian ship is transferred or disposed of, then the seafarer belonging to that ship shall be discharged
at that port unless he consents in writing to complete the voyage in the ship if continued. It further
provides certain conditions for discharge of seafarer, entitlement of wages, etc.

269
Clause 74.—This clause seeks to mandate the master to enter into the log book a statement of the
amount due to the seafarer in respect of wages and his property, at the time when such seafarer was
left behind or lost overboard or is deceased.
Clause 75.— This clause seeks to provide that if the service of the seafarer is terminated without
consent at a foreign part and before the expiration of the contract, the master or owner of the ship or
his agent shall make adequate provisions for the maintenance of the seafarer according to his rank and
rating and for the return of that seafarer to the proper port. It further provides that if the master, owner
or agent fails without reasonable cause to provide expenses of maintenance and for the journey of proper
return port, if defrayed by the seafarer, shall be recoverable as wages due to him and if defrayed by
the Indian consular officer be regarded as expenses failing within the provisions of clause 86.
Clause 76.— This clause seeks to provide that in case the amount deposited with or recovered by
the shipping master is unclaimed as wages for making payment then shipping master after a period not
less than six years can utilize that money for the welfare of the seafarer as the Central Government may
direct.
Clause 77.—This clause seeks to provide that any dispute between the master, owner, or his agent
and the seafarer under the agreement shall be submitted to the shipping master and he shall decide upon
the dispute submitted and make an award which shall be conclusive. It further provides that any person
aggrieved by the award shall approach the principle officer for the appeal and if a person is aggrieved
by the award of the principle officer shall go for second appeal to the Director-General. It also provides
that an award made under this clause shall be enforced by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a
Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of the Arbitration and conciliation Act, 1996 shall not apply
to any matter submitted for decision to the shipping master.
Clause 78.—This clause seeks to provide that the shipping master may require the owner, master
or any mate or other member of the crew to produce the logbook, papers or other documents in his
possession and also requires their attendance for the purpose of examination.
Clause 79.—This clause seeks to provide that the proceedings for wages of seafearer shall be
conducted by summary procedure by the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any Metropolitan
Magistrate.
Clause 80.— This clause bars for institution of suits for wages in any civil court except where the
owner of the ship is declared insolvent, ship is under arrest or sold by the authority of the court and
a judicial magistrate of the first class or the metropolitan magistrate refers claims to the court.
Clause 81.— This clause seeks to provide that if the seafarer's voyage terminates in India, he shall
not be entitled to sue in any court outside India for wages unless he is discharged with such sanction
as required under the provisions of the Bill and with the written consent of the master or proves ill-usage
on the part or by the authority of the master as to warrant a reasonable apprehension of danger to his
life if he remains on board.
Clause 82.— This clause seeks to provide for the rights, liens and remedies of a master of a ship
for the recovery of wages same as a seafarer and the same rights of a acting master due to disease or

270
incapacity from illness of the master. It empowers the court dealing with the claim of a master in respect
of such wages, disbursements to settle all accounts then arsing for outstanding.
Clause 83.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to refer the dispute between
seafarer and their employer to the Tribunal for adjudication.
Clause 84.—This clause empowers the Central Government or such officer as appointed by it to
recover the wages and compensation due to a seafarer who is lost with the ship to which he belongs,
from the master or owner of a ship or his agent.
Clause 85.— This clause seeks to provide that the seafarer can make a nomination of his family
member on his behalf subject to that if a seafarer acquires a family after he has made any such
nomination, the nomination shall become void and the form for nomination and matters connected with
nomination shall be provided by rules by the Central Government.
Clause 86.—This clause seeks to provide that in case a seafarer is in distressed condition, the Indian
consular officer at or near the place where a seafarer is in distress shall, on application being made to
him by the distressed seafarer, provide in accordance with the rules made under this Bill for the return
of that seafarer to a proper return port, and also for the said seafarer's necessary clothing and maintenance
until his arrival at such port and expenses incurred in such repatriation shall be a debt due to the Central
Government by the owner or agent of the ship.
Clause 87.— This clause seeks to provide that a certificate of the Central Government or of such
officer as the Central Government may specify in this behalf, to be provided to any seafarer in distress
and that shall be a conclusive evidence that such seafarer is distressed within the meaning of this Bill.
Clause 88.— This clause seeks to provide that any shipping master, surveyor, seaman welfare
officer, Indian consular officer under the circumstances mentioned therein enter on board the ship and
inspect such ship. It further provides that Indian ships in international voyage shall possess a Maritime
Labour Certificate and a Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance and for the purpose of preventing
seafarer from being taken on board any ship at any port in India contrary to the provisions of this Bill,
the shipping master and other officers may enter at any time on board any such ship he has reason to
believe that the seafarer is being shipped.
Clause 89.—This clause seeks to provide certain special protection to seafarers in case of litigation.
It, inter-alia, provides that a seafarer shall, for the purposes of this Part, be deemed to be a serving
seafarer during any period commencing on the date of the agreement with the crew and ending thirty
days after the date on which the seafarer is finally discharged from such agreement and provided that
the Collector may certify that a person is serving seafarer for the purpose of conducting legal proceedings.
Clause 90.—This clause seeks to enable seafarer to make a complaint against the master or any
member of the crew if the ship is at a place where there is a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or
a Metropolitan Magistrate or when the ship reaches a place where such Magistrate is available.
Clause 91.— This clause seeks to provide that assignment of salvage payable to a seafarer made
prior to the accruing thereof shall not bind the person making the same, and a power of attorney or
authority for the receipt of any such salvage shall not be irrevocable.

271
Clause 92.—This clause seeks to provide that any person at any port or place other than a person
in the service of the Government or duly authorised by law if goes to board a ship without permission,
the master of the ship may take such person into custody and deliver him up forthwith to a police officer
to be taken before a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate.
Clause 93.— This clause seeks to provide that no Indian seafarer shall knowingly do anything
tending to the immediate loss or destruction of, or serious damage to, the ship, or tending immediately
to endanger the life of, or to cause injury to any person belonging to or on board the ship and refuse
or omit to do any lawful act proper and requisite to be done by him for preserving the ship from
immediate loss, destruction or serious damage, or for preserving any person belonging to or on board
the ship from danger to life or from injury.
Clause 94.— This clause seeks to provide that no seafarer shall dessert his ship or neglect or be
absent from ship without leave or without reasonable ground and that refusal, absent etc. of a seafarer
engaged on the ground of a ship as unseaworthy shall be a reasonable cause. Provided, if the seafarer
before failing or refusing to join a ship informed the master or a shipping master, surveyor, seafarer's
welfare officer, port health officer, Indian consular officer or any other officer at any port duly authorised
in this behalf by the Central Government, that the ship is unseaworthy. It further provides that if the
seafarer without sufficient reasons absents himself from his ship or desserts his ship and on being
satisfied the shipping master may report it to the Director-General who may thereupon direct that the
seamen identity document and continuous discharge certificate may be held for such period as may be
specified and if any seafarer desserts or absents himself from the ship then the master, mate, owner or
agent without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against the seafarer under this Bill may
use such force as may be reasonable in the circumstances of the case. It also provides that if a seafarer
commits offence of desertion or is absent without leave or any other offence against discipline outside
India then, master, mate, owner or agent shall be permitted to arrest him without warrant and the seafarer
should not be arrested on improper or insufficient grounds and also provides that if any costs and
expenses properly incurred by or on behalf of the master or owner by reason of the conveyance to be
paid by the offender then it can be deducted from his wages.
Clause 95.— This clause seeks to enlist all the actions of discipline in violation of which the seafarer
shall be guilty of an offence.
Clause 96.— This clause seeks to provide that if the seafarer is convicted of an offence of
smuggling any goods whereby loss or damage is occasioned to the master or the owner, then, a sum
sufficient to reimburse the loss or damage could be recovered in lieu of whole or part of his wages and
the Director-General can cancel or suspend the seafarer identity document or continuous discharge
certificate of such seafarer convicted of offence of smuggling.
Clause 97.—This clause seeks to provide that if any offence of desertion, absence without leave,
against discipline or any other misconduct is committed by seafarer for which offender's agreement
imposes a fine, then entry of such offence or act shall be made in the official book, and if the offender
is still on ship and it is yet to arrive, he shall be furnished with a copy of the entry and the same be
read out to him and then he has to make a reply as he thinks fit and after which, a statement of a copy

272
of the entry having been so furnished and the entry having been so read over and the reply, if any, made
by the offender shall likewise be entered and signed.
Clause 98.—This clause seeks to provide that if any seafarer engaged outside India on an Indian
ship desserts himself in India without leave, the master of a ship within forty eight hours of discovering
such desertion or absence report to the shipping master or to such officer as the Central Government
may specify.
Clause 99.—This clause seeks to provide that in case of desertion from Indian ship, the master shall
produce the official log book to the Indian consular officer and the officer shall thereupon make and
certify a copy of the entry and shall transmit such a copy of entry certified to the shipping master to
be produced before a legal proceedings and such a certified copy can be admissible in evidence in a legal
proceedings for desertion.
Clause 100.—This clause seeks to provide that for proving desertion from ship it has to be shown
that the seafarer was duly engaged in or belonged to the ship and he left the ship without completion
of the voyage or engagement and entry of desertion of the seafarer's shall be duly made in the official
log book. It further provides that the desertion leading to forfeiture of wages shall be deemed to be
proved unless the seafarer produces proper certificate of discharge or show to the court that he had
sufficient reason for leaving the ship.
Clause 101.—This clause seeks to provide that wages or other property fortified for desertion from
the ship shall be applied for reimbursing the expenses caused by the desertion to the master or the owner
or agent subject to that the reimbursement shall be paid to the Central Government. It further provides
that the wages earned subsequent to desertion may be recovered.
Clause 102.—This clause seeks to provide that any question concerning the forfeiture or deductions
from the wages of a seafarer may be determined in any proceeding lawfully instituted with respect to
those wages.
Clause 103.—This clause seeks to provide the procedure of deduction of a fine imposed on seafarer
for any act of misconduct under the agreement and such proceeds of all fines received by the shipping
master shall be used for the welfare of seafarers in a manner as the Central Government may direct.
Clause 104.— This clause prohibits any person to persuade or attempt to persuade a seafarer to
neglect or refuse to join or proceed to sea or desert from ship or absent himself from his duty or harbour
or secrete a seafarer from doing the same.
Clause 105.— This clause seeks to provide that no person shall secrete himself and go to sea in
a ship without the consent of the owner, agent or master, or of a mate, or of the person in charge of
the ship or of any other person entitled to give that consent. It further provides that if the master is
compelled to take on board any seafaring person as long as he remains on ship shall be subject to laws
of discipline as if the member has signed the agreement with the crew and the master shall report in
writing about any person gone to sea on a ship without consent to the proper officer as soon as the
arrival of the ship.

273
Clause 106.—This clause seeks to provide that if during the voyage, the master of Indian ship is
removed or superseded or quits the ship and is succeeded by the command by some other person, then,
he shall deliver to his successor the various documents relating to the navigation of the ship and the crew
thereof which are in his custody and a handing over note enlisting such documents and on receipt of
such documents and the handing over note, the successor shall make an entry in the official log book
to that effect which shall also be endorsed by the predecessor.
Clause 107.— This clause seeks to provide that if due facilities shall be given by the Government
of any Country outside India for recovering or apprehending seafarers who dessert from Indian ship in
that country, the Central Government may by notification declare that this clause shall apply to seafarers
belonging to ships of such country, subject to such limitations or conditions as may be specified in the
notification and if the seafarer belonging to ship of any country desserts then, on the application of a
consular officer of that country shall aid in apprehending the desserter and for that purpose may on
information given on oath, issue a warrant for his apprehension and on proof of the dessertion order
him to be conveyed on board his ship or delivered to the master or mate of his ship or to the owner
of the ship or his agent to be so conveyed and any such warrant or order may be executed accordingly.
Clause 108.— This clause seeks to provide for keeping of official log book for a ship exceeding
two hundred tons gross and cast a duty on the master, owner or his agent of every ship for which an
official log book is required to be kept, to deliver the official log book to the shipping master as and
when required by him. It further provides that no entry in the official log book shall be made in repsect
of any occurrence prior to arrival of the ship at her final port.
Clause 109.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of Part V of the Bill.
Clause 110.— This clause seeks to provide for application of Part VI to Indian vessels, and foreign
vessels on matters related to safety and security and the port facilities on security aspects and company
on matters relating to safety and security.
Clause 111.—This clause seeks to define various expressions specific to Chapter VI.
Clause 112.—This clause seeks to provide for compliance of various obligations under the international
treaties to which India is a Party. Each of these treaties specified therein contains certain obligations for
the State, to enact suitable national legislation to implement and enforce the treaties fully and effectively.
Clause 113.— This clause seeks to impose obligation on the master of a vessel to report any
incident relating to safety of vessel, safety of persons on board, loss of dangerous cargo to the sea,
matters affecting safe navigation, abandonment of vessels, etc., to an authority designated for this
purpose by the Central Government.
Clause 114.—This clause seeks to impose obligation on the master of an Indian vessel to provide
assistance to any distress situation at sea, when he receives such a message seeking assistance. It further
provides that the master is duty bound to provide assistance until he is relieved of this duty and also
provides for the mandatory maintenance of records and the circumstances in which the master is unable
to provide assistance.

274
Clause 115.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government for making arrangements for
search and rescue at sea and establishment of rescue coordination centres and sub-centres by India as
required under International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue, 1979 and agreement related
thereto.
Clause 116.—This clause seeks to provide for requirements of radio communication, distress and
safety equipment and the certified operators required on ships.
Clause 117.—This clause seeks to mandate that every vessel should possess the information relating
to its stability and the effects of any damages to the vessel and the precautions for maintaining water
tight integrity of the vessel.
Clause 118.—This clause seeks to provide loading of vessel as per loadline rules and contain
provisions to detain a vessel from proceeding to sea if it is loaded in contravention of such rules.
Clause 119.—This clause seeks to obligate every vessel to have appropriate certificates while
carrying passengers between ports or places in India, or to or from any port or place in India from or
to any port or place out side India. It further provides for the Central Government to specify the
conditions for passenger accommodation, passenger and crew amenities, and other facilities while carrying
passengers and the master of every passenger vessel to oblige to make a statement about the passengers
on board as provided by the rules by the Government.
Clause 120.—This clause seeks to provide that every vessel should be in possession of valid safety
and security certificates whenever she proceeds to sea as required under the convention or agreement
referred to in clause 112.
Clause 121.—This clause seeks to provide various acts which constitute offences.
Clause 122.—This clause seeks to provide that no vessel shall carry or attempt to carry cargo in
contravention of clause 120 or shall have on board or in any part thereof a cargo which is not in
accordance with the certificate held by the vessel. It further provides that for violations, the master shall
be held liable and his certificate of competency shall be cancelled or suspended for such period as the
Central Government may specify in an order made in this behalf.
Clause 123.—This clause seeks to provide that every person (owner or company or master)
who sends an unseaworthy vessel to sea is guilty of an offence and it mandates the prior consent of
the Central Government for prosecution of such person.
Clause 124.—This clause seeks to cast obligation on the ship owner, master or his agent to ensure
the seaworthiness of the vessel for the voyage and to keep her in a seaworthy state during the voyage.
Clause 125.—This clause seeks to provide for implementation of safety and security management
of the vessels and the port facilities where the vessels have an interface. It further provides for
maintaining different levels of security by vessels and ports depending on the security situation in the
country.
Clause 126.—This clause seeks to provide for the inspection and boarding of vessels, to verify

275
compliance with requirements specified in Part VI and to enforce the provisions under the Bill and foreign
flag vessels can be inspected under port state control being an obligation under the treaties. It further
provides for intervention such as detention as a part of the enforcement measure and also for entering
into agreements with other countries or organisations for effective implementation of the provisions of
this Bill.
Clause 127.—This clause seeks to make the Central Government liable to pay to the owner or
master the costs for an unreasonable detention or undue delay. It further provides that the owner of a
vessel shall be liable to pay to the Central Government its costs of and incidental to the detention and
survey of the vessel if the vessel is detained by reason of its condition or due to act of default of owner
or master and the vessel shall not be released until such costs are paid and faults are rectified.
Clause 128.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make the rules under Part
VI relating to safety and security aspects.
Clause 129.—This clause seeks to specify the application of Part VII. It applies, inter alia, to Indian
vessels, ports and foreign vessels on matters related to prevention of pollution.
Clause 130.—This clause seeks to define certain expressions which are specific to Part VII.
Clause 131.—This clause seeks to prevent the ship-generated pollution such as the discharges or
emissions of harmful substances or mixtures containing such substances. It empowers the Central
Government to make necessary rules for the construction, survey or equipment to be fitted on board
ships for this purpose, and to specify the conditions for issuance of the certificates. It further provides
for the survey of the hull, equipment or machinery of vessel by surveyors and the manner in which
certificates are issued to verify and demonstrate the compliance with the applicable pollution prevention
requirements, under this Part. It also provides for controlling the deliberate dumping of wastes and other
matter into the sea by ships.
Clause 132.—This clause seeks to provide for meeting various obligations towards prevention of
marine pollution under the international maritime treaties specified therein. It further provides that the
vessel, to which the provisions of the conventions mentioned therein are applicable, to comply with such
pollution prevention requirements as may be provided by the rules. It also empowers the Government
to prescribe different rules for pollution prevention for different classes of vessels.
Clause 133.—This clause seeks to provide that every vessel (cargo vessel as well as passenger
vessel) shall be in possession of valid pollution prevention certificates as per conventions specified under
clause 132, whenever she proceeds to sea.
Clause 134.—This clause seeks to ensure that records of ship-generated wastes and disposal are
mandatorily maintained, as per the rules made by the Central Government and also empowers the Central
Government to make rules for the details of records, its custody, the manner in which these are to be
maintained and such other related matters.
Clause 135.—This clause seeks to provide that in order to prevent and control the discharges into
the sea from ships, every port is required to have necessary facilities to receive the various kinds of

276
wastes generated on ships. It further provides that every port or place where the ship has an interface
is obliged to provide necessary reception facilities under the applicable international conventions. It also
provides that the wastes generated during operation, repair and recycling of vessel are collected, handled,
treated and disposed of in a safe and environmentally sound manner, to protect human health and the
environment and empowers the port authority to impose suitable charges for providing such facilities for
receiving wastes from ships. It also empowers the Central Government to give directions in case there
are no reception facilities at any port or place in India or that the facilities available at such port or place
are not adequate for enabling vessel calling at such port or place to comply with the requirements of
pollution prevention.
Clause 136.—This clause seeks to obligate the master of a vessel to make a report to the authority
designated by the Central Government, whenever an incident in which the cargo or harmful substances
as covered under Part VII or the pollution prevention convention is escaping or likely to escape and may
cause or threaten to cause pollution of air, any part of coasts or coastal waters of India and the
responsibility of the master for failure in making such reports. It empowers the Central Government to
direct the owner, agent, master, charterer, operator, lessee or licensee of the vessel through a notice, to
take immediate necessary action to prevent or control pollution, in case an incident of pollution occurs
or likely to occur and also empowers the Central Government to take any suitable and appropriate
measures, as deemed necessary, to prevent, mitigate or eliminate the threat or danger from pollution,
whenever a pollution is caused or likely to be caused by release of harmful substances, or whenever a
grave and imminent danger to the coastline or related interest is likely from an incident of pollution or
threat of pollution.
Clause 137.—This clause empowers the Central Government to give directions to Indian ships to
provide assistance in combating pollution, subject to payment of reasonable fees for the services provided.
Clause 138.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules under Part VII
of the Bill relating to pollution prevention aspects covered thereunder.
Clause 139.—This clause seeks to put an obligation that every vessel, port facility, shipyard, ship
breaking and ship repairing units, offshore facilities or terminal shall be surveyed or audited towards
verification of the requirements under the Bill. It further provides for the issuance of certificates after
satisfactory completion of the survey or audit and once an audit or survey is done, no material change
shall be effected without the permission of the Central Government and in case such modifications are
made without informing the Central Government, such certificates are liable to be cancelled and prevents
a vessel from proceeding to sea without the necessary certificates or documents, except when an
exemption is granted by the Central Government.
Clause 140.—This clause seeks to provide that every vessel shall possess the prescribed certificates,
as may be specified under the rules.
Clause 141.—This clause seeks to empowers the surveyor for the inspection of the vessel as
necessary and to board the vessel for implementation and enforcement purposes.
Clause 142.—This clause seeks to ensure that every vessel, Company, port facility, shipyard etc.

277
shall be surveyed, audited and certified to confirm the compliance of requirements of various international
conventions as specified therein. It also provides for survey and certification of non-convention vessels.
Clause 143.—This clause seeks to provide for the recognition of the certificates issued to ships
outside India by the flag authority of the vessel.
Clause 144.—This clause seeks to enable Indian vessels to be issued with certificates in other
countries, as well as issuance of certificates to foreign vessels in India.
Clause 145.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make the rules for the
matters covered under Part VIII.
Clause 146.—This clause seeks to specify the application of Chapter I of Part IX of the Bill. It
applies to Indian vessel; and any foreign vessel while it is in a port or place in India including the maritime
zones under its jurisdiction as per the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic and other
Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 147.—This clause seeks to provide the methodology for the division of liability when
collision, damage, or loss occurs on a vessel or vessels and full liability falls upon the vessel whose fault
it lies upon and the total liability is shared depending upon proportion to the degree in which each vessel
was to blame and the liability is applicable subject to either of the three criteria's specified therein do not
get affected. It also provides that references to damage or loss caused by the fault of a vessel shall also
include cost due to any salvage or other expenses, after a damage or loss, which is recoverable by way
of damages through any law in force.
Clause 148.—This clause seeks to apply when compensation is to be paid in case of loss of life
or personal injury; the joint liability of owners of vessels or liability of the owner of the vessel whose
fault has been determined; whenever a loss of life or personal injuries are suffered by any person on
board a vessel and it prevents depriving any person of any right of defense in court in an action brought
against him by the person injured, or any person entitled to sue in respect of such loss of life or affect
the right of any person to limit his liability in that particular case.
Clause 149.—This clause seeks to provide for sharing of the contribution, in case excess payment
of contribution is made by one of the vessel which exceeds the proportion in which vessel was in fault,
then, the owner can recover by way of contribution the amount of the excess from the owners of the
other vessel or vessels to the extent to which those vessels were respectively in fault and the recovery
is to be carried out provided that no amount is recovered again, that is, if it has been recovered in the
first instance as damages by the person entitled to sue due to a statutory or contractual limitation or
exemption. It also provides that for the purpose of recovering the contribution referred to therein, the
same rights, and powers of the persons entitled to sue for damages in the first instance is available to
the person entitled to any contribution and this recovery is in addition to any other remedy provided by
law for the time being in force.
Clause 150.—This clause seeks to impose a duty on the master of a vessel to assist the other vessel
in case of collision between two vessels without endangering his vessel, crew and passengers. It requires

278
the master to save the other vessel from any danger caused by the collision and to standby near the other
vessel until the other vessel needs no further assistance and also requires the master to exchange
information such as name of its ship, port of registry, last port and next port of call.
Clause 151.—This clause seeks to provide for the requirement of recording of statement and
circumstances leading to the collision in the log book by the master of every vessel and such entry is
required to be signed by the master and also by the officer on watch or one of the seafarer.
Clause 152.—This clause seeks to mandate that, report has to be made to the Central Government
or nearest principal officer in case an Indian vessel has sustained or caused any accident which results
in loss of life or any serious injury to any person or vessel has a material damage affecting her
seaworthiness or her efficiency either in her hull or is so altered in any part of her machinery as not
to correspond with the particulars contained in any of the certificates issued under this Bill in respect
of the vessel and such report is to be made by either the owner or master or agent, within twenty-four
hours after the happening of the accident or damage or as soon as possible.
Clause 153.—This clause seeks to provide that if the owner or agent of an Indian vessel feels the
vessel has been wholly lost due to non-appearance of the vessel or any other circumstances, they shall
send notice to Central Government relating to the loss and cause of the loss along with the vessel
particulars such as the name, official number and port of registry, etc.
Clause 154.—This clause seeks to specify the application of Chapter II of Part IX relating to
Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims. It applies to Indian ships, and any ship other than an Indian
ship while it is in a port or place in India including the maritime zones under its jurisdiction as per the
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any
other law for the time being in force.
Clause 155.—This clause seeks to provide for the limitation of liability to shipowner or salvor or
person for damages in respect of claims, which are enlisted therein, due to their act, neglect or
defaulting. It further provides that the limitation of liability shall be applicable even if brought by way
of recourse or for indemnity under a contract or otherwise. It also specifies various other claims where
the limitation of liability shall not apply.
Clause 156.—This clause seeks to provide that provisions of clause 155 cannot be applied to limit
the liability if, the loss is resulted from a personal act or omission committed with the intent to cause
the loss, or recklessly and with the knowledge that such loss would probably result.
Clause 157.—This clause seeks to provide that when limitation of liability is set to apply for multiple
claims of the same occurrence, then the claims shall be set off against each other and the provisions
of Chapter II of Part IX shall apply to the balance, if any.
Clause 158.—This clause seeks to stipulate the limits of liability which will be calculated under the
provisions of LLMC Convention and as per the rules where provisions of LLMC Convention are not
applicable. It further details the hierarchy in which the claims are to be paid, that is, this order shall be
determined first by claims in respect of loss of life or personal injury followed by claims in respect of

279
damage to harbour works, basins, waterways and aids to navigation. It also provides that the limit of
liability in case of salvor not operating from any vessel or for any salvor operating solely on the vessel
to, or in respect of which he is rendering salvage services, shall be calculated according to gross tonnage
of 1500.
Clause 159.—This clause seeks to provide that in respect of claims arising on any distinct occasion
for loss of life or personal injury to passengers of a ship the amount limit of liability of the shipowner
thereof shall be such as may be provided by rules.
Clause 160.—This clause seeks to provide that the limits of liability as determined in clause 158
shall apply collectively in total to the claims which arise on any distinct occasion as specified therein.
It further provides that the limits of liability as determined in relation to limit for passenger claims shall
apply in total to the claims which arise against the shipowner and any person for whose act, neglect
or default he or they are responsible.
Clause 161.—This clause seeks to provide that limitation of liability can be invoked even if the
limitation fund as mentioned in clause 162 has not been constituted. It further provides that the person
can only invoke the right to limit liability if the limitation fund has been constituted as per the provisions
of this Chapter.
Clause 162.—This clause seeks to provide for the constitution of limitation fund with the High
Court by any person alleged to be liable and against whom legal proceedings are being initiated for claims
which are subjected to limitation and the fund shall be constituted in the sum of such of the amounts
in accordance with the provisions of clause 158 or 159 as are applicable to claims for which that person
may be liable together with interest thereon from the date of occurrence giving rise to the liablity until
the date of the constitution of the fund. It also provides that the fund amount so constituted shall either
to be deposited or guarantee to be produced at the High Court and the fund so constituted shall be
available only for the payment of claims in respect of which limitation of liability may be invoked and
also provide that the fund so constituted by one of the persons or his insurer shall be deemed to be
constituted by all persons mentioned in clause 161.
Clause 163.—This clause seeks to provide that fund to be distributed among the claimants in
proportion to their established claims against the fund based on the limitation of liability as stated in
section 158 or 159 as applicable and if the person who is liable or his insurer settles a claim before the
fund is distributed, then the right of the claimant maximum to the amount paid, is transferred to that
person or insurer. It further provides for allowing application with respect of transfer of rights by
persons other than those mentioned in the said clause to the level provided by the law. It also provides
that the High Court may order a sufficient sum to be provisionally set aside to enable a person liable or
any other person to enforce his claim against the fund at a later date when this person liable or any other
person proves that he needs to pay at a later date wholly or partly part any such amount of compensation
with regard to which such person would have enjoyed a right of subrogation as provided therein.
Clause 164.—This clause seeks to provide that once claim has been made against the fund by any
person that person cannot exercise any right in respect of such claim against any other assets of a person

280
by or on behalf of whom the fund has been constituted and if any ship or property which has been
attached or arrested for a claim, belonging to a person on behalf of whom fund has been constituted,
then, such ship or property may be released by an order of the High Court. It further provides that the
provisions of this clause shall apply if the claimant claims the fund before High Court administering that
fund and if the fund is available and transferable with respect to that claim.
Clause 165.—This clause seeks to mandate the scope of application of the provisions of limitation
of liability. It provides that provisions of this clause does not apply to air-cushion vehicles or floating
platforms and when the person does not have his habitual residence in India or does not have his principal
place of business in India or any ship in relation to which the right of limitation is invoked or whose
release is sought and which does not at the time specified above fly the flag of a country, which is a
party to the LLMC Convention.
Clause 166.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for the matters
specified under Chapter II of Part IX.
Clause 167.—This clause seeks to specify the application of Chapter III of Part IX. This Chapter
applies to oil pollution damage caused by Indian ship and any ship other than an Indian ship while it is
in a port or place in India including the maritime zones under its jurisdiction as per the Territorial Waters,
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any other law for
the time being in force. This section also applies to the preventive measure taken to minimise the oil
pollution damage.
Clause 168.—This clause seeks to define certain expressions which are specific to this Chapter.
Clause 169.—This clause seeks to provide for the liability of owner for any pollution damage caused
by the ship. It further provides for exemption of the owner from liability if he proves that the pollution
damage is the result of an act of war, hostility, civil war, etc., and was wholly caused by an act or
omission done with intent to cause damage by a third party and also the damage caused intentionally by
a person who suffered the damage or from negligence of that person and specifies the persons against
whom the claim for compensation for pollution damage under this Chapter or otherwise cannot be made.
Clause 170.—This clause seeks to provide that the owners of all the ships shall be jointly and
severally liable for pollution damages in case an incident involves two or more ships.
Clause 171.—This clause seeks to provide that owner may limit his liability under this Chapter in
respect of any incident, to an aggregate amount by the provisions of the 1992 Liability Convention unless
it is proved that the pollution damage resulted from his personal act or omission, committed or made
with the intent to cause such damage, or recklessly and with knowledge that such damage may probably
result.
Clause 172.—This clause seeks to provide for the constitution of a limitation fund by the owner,
the insurer or any other person providing financial security to the owner either by depositing the sum
with the High Court or by furnishing bank guarantee or such other security as, in the opinion of the High
Court, is satisfactory. It further provides that the constitution of the fund shall not prejudice to the rights
of any claimant against the owner for full compensation exceeding the amount deposited or secured in
the fund.

281
Clause 173.—This clause seeks to provide that before the fund is distributed, the owner or any of
his servants or agents or any person providing him insurance or other financial security has as a result
of an incident paid compensation for pollution damage, such person shall upto the amount he has paid,
acquire by subrogation the rights which the person so compensated may have enjoyed under this Chapter
and such owner or insurer can also enforce his claim at a later date after the fund is constituted, in case
the compensation has been paid before distribution of the fund.
Clause 174.—This clause seeks to provide for the power of High Court to consolidate all the claims
against the fund and to distribute the amount in the fund among all claimants in proportion to their
established claims. It further provides any claim in respect of expenses reasonably incurred or sacrifices
reasonably made by the owner voluntarily to prevent or minimise pollution damage shall, rank equally
with other claims against the fund.
Clause 175.—This clause seeks to provide that ship carrying more than 2000 tons of oil in bulk
as cargo to maintain an insurance or other financial security to cover his liability for pollution damage
under Chapter III of Part IX for the amount specified under the provisions of the 1992 Liability
Convention and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Central Government to every Indian ship
and owner or agent of any foreign ship on payment of a fee as may be specified by rules.
Clause 176.—This clause seeks to provide that the certificate issued by a competent authority in
any country outside India which is a contracting party to the 1992 Liability Convention to any ship
wherever it is registered shall be accepted at any port or place in India as if it were issued under the
provisions of this Bill.
Clause 177.—This clause seeks to mandate that ships which has on board 2000 tonnes of oil in
bulk as cargo shall not enter or leave any port or place in India unless it carries the certificate as per
the requirements of clause 175 or clause 176. It further provides that the proper officer shall grant
inward entry or outward clearance to any ship only when its master produces a certificate as
aforementioned.
Clause 178.—This clause seeks to provide for the direct liability of the insurer or other person
providing financial security for payment of compensation. It further provides that the insurer or other
person may limit his liability in accordance with the provisions of clause 171 provided that the owner
has not exercised this option or avail himself of the defenses which the owner himself would have been
entitled to invoke and the defendant may avail himself of the defence that the pollution damage resulted
from the wilful misconduct of the owner himself, but the defendant shall not avail himself of any other
defence which he might have been entitled to invoke in proceedings brought by the owner against him.
Clause 179.—This clause seeks to provide for the limitation period of three years for claiming
compensation from the date of oil pollution damage or six years, if the incident consists of a series of
occurrences.
Clause 180.—This clause seeks to exempt the war ships or any ship used by the Government from
the application of Chapter III of Part IX.

282
Clause 181.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for the matters
covered under Chapter III of Part IX.
Clause 182.— This clause seeks to provide for the application of Chapter IV of Part IX relating
to civil liability for bunker oil pollution damage.
Clause 183.— This clause seeks to define certain expressions specific to this Chapter.
Clause 184.— This clause seeks to provide the types of liabilities with respect to pollution caused
due to bunker oil discharge or escape which the ship owner shall be liable for.
Clause 185.— This clause seeks to exempt from liability for the ship owner, in certain situations
such as, if the pollution damage is caused due to act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a natural
phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or was wholly caused by any act or
omission done with an intent to cause such damage by any person other than an employee or agent of
the owner. It further provides to exonerate the liability of the ship owner when it is proved that the
person suffered the damage has intentionally done the damage or due to negligence an oil pollution
damage was caused.
Clause 186.— This clause seeks to provide for the ship owner or insurer to limit his liability for
one or more incidents specified therein in accordance with Chapter II of Part IX.
Clause 187.— This clause seeks to provide for determination of limitation of liability by the High
Court and the amount once determined has to be deposited with the High Court.
Clause 188.— This clause empowers the High Court to consolidate all claims and distribute the
amount amongst the claimants.
Clause 189.— This clause seeks to stipulate the limitation period of three years for claiming
compensation from the date of bunker oil pollution damage or six years if the incident consists of a series
of occurrences.
Clause 190.— This clause seeks to provide that the owner of ship of more than gross tonnage of
thousand has to maintain compulsory insurance coverage or financial security to the limits specified
under the provisions of the LLMC Convention.
Clause 191.—This clause seeks to provide for authority for direct action against the insurer or other
person providing financial security. It provides that the insurer or other person may limit his liability in
accordance with the provisions of clause 183 provided that the owner has not exercised this option or
avail himself of the defenses which the owner himself would have been entitled to invoke. It further
provides that the defendant may avail himself of the defence that the pollution damage resulted from the
wilful misconduct of the owner himself, but the defendant shall not avail himself of any other defence
which he might have been entitled to invoke in proceedings brought by the owner against him.
Clause 192.—This clause seeks to provide that the Central Government shall issue a certificate
which complies with the provisions of clause 190 on payment of fee as may be specified by rules and
makes provisions for renewal on its expiry.

283
Clause 193.—This clause seeks to provide that no ship can enter or leave any port or place in India
unless it has the certificate as per the requirements of clause 192 of this Chapter and the proper officer
shall grant inward entry or outward clearance to any ship only when its master produces a certificate
as mentioned.
Clause 194.—This clause seeks to provide that the right of the ship owner to demand compensation
against any other person for his liability.
Clause 195.—This clause seeks to confer authority of the enforcement of the judgement of the
court.
Clause 196.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for the matters
covered under Chapter IV of Part IX.
Clause 197.—This clause seeks to provide for application of Chapter V of Part IX to oil pollution
damage caused within the territorial waters and specifically the maritime zones under its jurisdiction in
accordance with the provisions of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zones
and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 or any other law for the time being in force and also to the
preventive measures taken to prevent or minimise the oil pollution damage.
Clause 198.—This clause seeks to define certain expressions specific to Chapter V of Part IX.
Clause 199.—This clause seeks to provide for the contribution to the fund by the importer or the
receiver in respect of contributing oil carried by sea to ports or terminal installations in India as per
Articles 10 and 12 of the Fund Convention and also stipulates minimum quantity of 1,50,000 tons per
year of oil import as specified in Fund Convention, above which the fund has to be paid.
Clause 200.—This clause seeks to provide for the requirements of the minimum contribution
payable by persons to the fund which is determined by the Assembly of the Fund under Articles 10 and
12 of the Fund Convention and the power of the Central Government to require the persons to give
financial security for payment of contributions to the Central Government or the Fund.
Clause 201.—This clause seeks to provide for situations where the fund can be invoked and liable
to pay compensation as specified therein. It further provides the situations where fund does not have
an obligation to pay the compensation.
Clause 202.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government, to call for information, in
particular, the name and addresses of the persons to whom the provisions of clause 197 shall apply and
the person making disclosure needs to follow certain conditions specified therein and the liability of
person for punishment in case of refusal to comply with the conditions of notice.
Clause 203.—This clause seeks to provide for the claims against the Fund and state that any claim
against the Fund for compensation under this Chapter shall be brought directly before the Fund and
provides that the jurisdiction of High Court shall be applicable for any action for the claim against the
fund. It further provides that the Fund's right to intervene as a party to any legal proceedings instituted
in the High Court against the owner or his guarantor and makes judgment of the High Court as final even
if the fund has not intervened in its proceedings.

284
Clause 204.—This clause seeks to stipulate the limitation period for claim against the Fund within
a time-frame of minimum three years and that no action to enforce a claim shall be brought after six
years from the date of the incident that caused such damage.
Clause 205.—This clause seeks to provide for the subrogation of right of which the person so
compensated would have enjoyed under the Fund Convention when any sum is paid by the fund or any
public authority.
Clause 206.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules to carry out
the provisions of the Fund Convention.
Clause 207.—This clause seeks to define the marine casualty and mandate on the owner, manager,
operator, company, pilot, harbour-master, master, or other person in charge of the vessel, to give notice
of the occurrence of casualty within twenty-four hours of such occurrence to the office appointed by
the Central Government for the purpose and such officer shall forthwith report in writing the information
to the Central Government and may proceed to make preliminary inquiry into the marine casualty and
shall furnish the report on completion of independent inquiry into the incident. It further empowers the
Central Government to appoint a body to make preliminary assessment of the marine casualty and
conduct a marine safety investigation for ascertaining its causes and circumstances and submit its report
to the Central Government.
Clause 208.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to initiate administrative action
or to pass direction for proceeding in accordance with the law, if on receipt of report under sub-clause
(5) of clause 207 or otherwise, it is of the opinion that primafacie, there exists, incompetency, misconduct
or violation of any law for the time being in force on the part of any person.
Clause 209.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to cancel or suspend any
certificate granted under this Bill to any seafarer for any specified period, by way of an order, based
on inquiry report or for any other default of seafarer listed under that clause.
Clause 210.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to order re-hearing either
generally or for a part thereof of an investigation or inquiry under Part X and in case of new and
important evidence which could not be produced at the time of investigation has been discovered, or if
for any other reason there has, in its opinion, been a miscarriage of justice, the Central Government is
duty bound to order such re-hearing.
Clause 211.—This clause seeks to specify the application of Part XI to wrecks located within
territory of India including the territorial sea or any marine area adjacent thereto over which India has
exclusive jurisdiction under the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic and other
Maritime Zones Act, 1976. It further specifies units or ships of Government for non-commercial use and
casualties involving oil pollution in accordance with Intervention on the High Seas in cases of Oil
Pollution Casualties,1969 for which this Part is not applicable.
Clause 212.—This clause seeks to define certain expressions specific to Part IX.
Clause 213.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to appoint person to receive

285
wreck and aurhorise him to take possession of wreck and take action for disposal or removal by available
means for safety and protection of marine environment, as prescribed under the Bill.
Clause 214.—This clause seeks to mandate the reporting of incident resulting in wreck. It provides
that every master or owner or operator of Indian and foreign vessel involved in a maritime casualty
resulting in a wreck in Indian waters or waters of other country which is a party to the convention to
report such incident to the receiver of country appointed by the Central Government and to the authorities
of affected country without any delay.
Clause 215.—This clause seeks to provide for the criteria for determination of possible hazards and
enlists therein various parameters that determine such hazards.
Clause 216.— This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to give direction to receiver
of wreck and others specified therein to locate and mark the wreck as applicable and also obligates the
owner or operator of vessel to mark the wreck at its own cost until the wreck is removed and ensures
that the cost towards locating and marking of wrecks is borne by owner or operator of wreck.
Clause 217.—This clause seeks to give power to pass over adjoining lands to all persons for
rendering assistance to ship for saving shipwrecked persons, its cargo and equipment and obligates
concerned persons to minimise damage to cargo or any article recovered from shipwrecked which may
be deposited on land and the disputes relating to damage expected by owner or occupier shall be decided
by a Magistrate when application made to him.
Clause 218.—This clause seeks to specify the prohibition of acts such as attempt to board or leave
wreck ship without permission of master or receiver of wreck or an attempt to bring obstruction in
action of saving ship, cargo and equipment, removing marks or any part of vessel as stipulated under
the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 219.—This clause seeks to give power to receiver to make application to Judicial Magistrate
of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate for search warrant, if receiver suspects that wreck is
secreted and possessed by person who is not owner and empowers the Judicial Magistrate to grant
warrant authorsing receiver to search for wreck possessed by person who is not the owner of wreck.
Clause 220.—This clause seeks to provides for measures that facilitates the removal of wrecks and
mandates the receiver to forward detailed informations to Central Government on determination of
possible hazards as stipulated in clause 215. It empowers the Central Government to inform concerned
government, affected country and registered owner of the vessel regarding the hazards, measures to be
taken to wreck and removal of wreck and the decision of Central Government thereof shall be final. It
also mandates the owner of wreck vessel to provide financial security or evidence of insurance to Central
Government or receiver of wreck appointed by the Central Government and gives power to the receiver
to set period for removal of wreck and empower him to remove wreck by realistic means with due
regard to safety and protection of marine environment at the expense of owner or operator.
Clause 221.—This clause seeks to provide the liability of owner in respect of cost to be borne by
registered owner for locating, marking and removing the wreck. It further provides that the owner may

286
provide evidence of occurrence of marine casualty resulting in wreck such as war, hostilities or any act
of non-maintainance of lights or navigational aids by concerned authorities and such liability covers the
limit as specified under the provisions of clause 155 of the Bill.
Clause 222.—This clause seeks to mandate that every registered owner of Indian ship of gross
tonnage of three hundred tons and above should be in possession of valid insurance coverage or financial
security and the owner of vessel whether Indian or from other country, which do not carry certificate,
is liable for detention by authorities and the cost or claims arising under the Part should be directly against
the insurer or person that provides financial security as per circumstances listed which may invoke
defence by insurer.
Clause 223.— This clause seeks to specify the circumstances where registered owner may not be
liable to bear the cost as prescribed in Part XI and specifies the extent of cost borne by the registered
owner and its exception in accordance with other applicable treaties, instruments, as the case may be.
Clause 224.—This clause seeks to specify the claims of the owner to wreck and time limit of his
entitlement to possess wreck back which is in possession of receiver of wreck and empowers the
consular officer to act as agent of owner for custody and disposal of the articles from wreck vessel
on behalf of the country where the vessel is registered or, cargo owners belongs to that country within
a period of one year for said claim.
Clause 225.—This clause seeks to set limit for recovery of cost and stipulates the time period of
three years from the date of determination of marine casualty for locating and marking of the vessels
and provides that no claim shall be made after the period of six years from the date of such casualty.
Clause 226.—This clause seeks to provide for the application of Chapter II of Part XI which
includes judicial or arbitral proceedings relating to salvage operations instituted in India and specifies
therein the units, ships and other non-commercial vessels for which this clause shall not be applicable.
Clause 227.—This clause seeks to define certain expressions specific to Chapter II of Part XI.
Clause 228.—This clause seeks to provide for the salvage award for the assistance rendered by the
master of a vessel.
Clause 229.—This clause seeks to specify the conditions, circumstances and location when salvage
is payable to the salvor for saving life, cargo or wreck.
Clause 230.—This clause seeks to provide for the entitlements of salvage payments when services
are provided by the Government vessels such as Indian Navy or of the Coast Guard and port authorities.
Clause 231.—This clause seeks to provide that the master have the authority to conclude contracts
for salvage operations on behalf of the owner of the property on board the vessel.
Clause 232.—This clause seeks to provide for the duties of salvor towards owner of the vessel or
other property in danger and specifies the duties of the owner, master of the vessel or the owner of other
property who is in danger towards salvor.

287
Clause 233.—This clause seeks to provide for the measures to be taken by the Central Government
to protect its coastline from threat of pollution consequential to occurrence of maritime casualty and
empowers the Central Government to issue directions to the owner or the master or salvor and other
public authorities associated with salvage operations and seek their cooperation to initiate salvage services
for vessel in distress.
Clause 234.—This clause seeks to provide for the rights of salvors to payment for the services
rendered by him to salvage operations in the event of refusal of payments by the owner or master of
vessel or owner of any other property in danger and enlists the criteria, circumstances and conditions
for claiming rewards and maritime lien by the salvor.
Clause 235.—This clause seeks to provide for settlement of disputes relating to claims under the
provisions of Part XI and empowers the High Court to determine the costs to be paid and to issue
necessary directions for such payments if deemed fit and fair, after receipt of application from either
of disputing party.
Clause 236.—This clause seeks to specify the time limit of two years from the date of completion
of salvage operations for raising claims and action thereof by all concerned.
Clause 237.—This clause seeks to provide that nothing in Chapter II of Part XI shall affect any
treaty or arrangement with any foreign country to which Indian is a party with reference to the disposal
of wrecks on their respective coasts or the provisions of section 29 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 or
any person to salvage in respect of any property recovered by creeping or sweeping in contravention
of that section.
Clause 238.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules to carryout the
provisions contained in Part XI.
Clause 239.—This clause seeks to provide for the application of Part XII to all vessels including
vessels other than Indian vessels.
Clause 240.—This clause seeks to direct that any vessel engaged in coastal trade or exploration or
exploitation or research in coastal waters of India shall require a licence and stipulates that no vessel
chartered by an Indian citizen, company or cooperative society to be taken to a port or place within India
or outside India without licence granted by the Director-General and the Indian controlled tonnage may
also be granted licence subject to certain conditions. It further provides that the Central Government shall
have the power to exempt any class of vessel by general or special order from the provision of this
clause.
Clause 241.—This clause seeks to empower the Director-General to revoke and modify the licence
after giving reasonable hearing to the person and provides that in case the licence ceases to be valid,
the person to whom it was granted shall return it back to the Director-General without any delay.
Clause 242.—This clause seeks to direct that no port clearance shall be given by the proper officer
to the owner, master or agent of a foreign vessel unless such a licence is produced which is issued under
this Part.

288
Clause 243.—This clause seeks to empower the Director-General, in public interest or in the interest
of Indian shipping if it is necessary, to give order in writing or notice for matters stipulated therein and
also empowers the Central Government in public interest to ban any vessel from entering into India,
anchorage or offshore facility in India.
Clause 244.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to protect the interest of
Indian shipping from undue foreign intervention and stipulates certain measures by a foreign country
which infringes the jurisdiction of India and which can be brought to notice of the Central Government
by the Indian citizen carrying business in that country and the Central Government may in turn give order
in writing prohibiting Indian citizens from complying with such measure. It further provides that the
Central Government may by order in writing refuse to give commercial information to any court or
authority of a foreign country and prohibits any person from complying with such an order by foreign
authority or court subject to the conditions as specified in the said order.
Clause 245.—This clause seeks to empower to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions contained in Part XII.
Clause 246.—This clause seeks to provide for application of Part XIII. It applies to sailing vessel,
fishing vessel, vessel without mechanical of propulsion and vessel whose net tonnage is less than fifteen
and engaged solely in coasting trade of India and the extent to which other provisions in the Bill to apply
to such vessel.
Clause 247.—This clause seeks to empower the Director-General to take a decision on whether the
vessel falls under Part XIII or not and makes his decision thereon as final.
Clause 248.—This clause seeks to provide by rules the safety, security and pollution prevention
requirements and ensure that these requirements are met and to prohibit the vessels from proceeding to
sea, unless they comply with the provisions.
Clause 249.—This clause seeks to put an obligation on the vessels to have all certificates specified
in Part XII, before proceeding to sea and the manner in which safety certificates are to be issued and
the power of Government to provide of by rules for this purpose and the period validity of certificates.
Clause 250.—This clause seeks to impose an obligation on the maintenance of the statement or
cause to be maintained a statement about the crew of the vessel and to keep the record of the changes
in crew and its communication to the shipping master.
Clause 251.—This clause seeks to mandate that whenever cargo is jettisoned from vessel, notice
shall be given to proper officer appointed for this purpose, and empower the proper officer to conduct
an enquiry.
Clause 252.—This clause seeks to provide for detaining a vessel while attempting to proceed to sea
in overloaded condition or carrying passengers in excess of the certified capacity and empowers the
proper officer to board the vessel whenever necessary and obligates the master, owner and every other
person to provide all reasonable facilities for the survey or audit.

289
Clause 253.—This clause seeks to provide with the power to detain the vessel which is unseaworthy
or likely to pose a threat to the security or the environment. It provides for the liablility of the person
in charge of the vessel in respect of such unseaworthiness or threat to the security on Indian coasts
or offshore installations under any other provisions of this Bill.
Clause 254.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to exempt vessels from the
applicable requirements, if it is satisfied that the requirements have been substantially complied with or
that compliance with the requirement is or ought to be dispensed with in the circumstances of the case.
Clause 255.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions contained in Part XIII.
Clause 256.—This clause seeks to provide the penalties for the contravention of the provisions as
specified therein. It empowers the Principal Officer to impose the monitory penalty, against which an
appeal shall lie to the Director-General. It further provides that the competency to sentence the imprisonment
has been vested with the Court only and the table, inter alia, indicates the contravention made and the
penalty to be imposed and specifying the competent authority for imposing such penalty.
Clause 257.—This clause seeks to provide for that any person committing any offence under the
Bill may be tried at a place in which he may be found, or in any Court which the Central Government
may, by notification, direct in this behalf, or in any Court in which he might be tried in any other law
for time being in force.
Clause 258.—This clause seeks to empower the Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate
of the first class to pass any sentence authorised by or under this Bill on any person convicted of an
offence under this enactment or any rules or regulations made thereunder.
Clause 259.—This clause seeks to provide that the report of the Proper Officer is required for
enforcement of penalties, under section 256, against the masters or owners of special trade passenger
vessels.
Clause 260.—This clause seeks to provide that in case the person committing an offence under this
Bill is a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business, as well as the company, shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly and if
such person proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence, such person need not to be subject to punishment
and at the same time if it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of,
or is attributable to any neglect, such person shall be punished accordingly as per provisions.
Clause 261.—This clause seeks to provide for depositions to be received in evidence when witness
cannot be produced. It provides that for the purpose of evidence during the legal proceedings, if the
testimony of any witness is required in relation to the subject-matter, and the defendant or the person
accused, as the case may be, after being allowed a reasonable opportunity for so doing, does not produce
the witness before any court or Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or

290
person authorised, any deposition previously made by the witness in relation to the same subject-matter
before any court or Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class in any other place
in India or, if elsewhere, before any Indian consular officer, shall be admissible in evidence. It also
provides that such deposition need to be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer of any
court or Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or consular officer, before
whom it is made and also be subject to certain other conditions as enumerated therein.
Clause 262.—This clause seeks to empower the High Court to detain a foreign vessel that has
caused the damage caused to property belonging to the Government or to any citizen of India or a
company, when such vessel is found within Indian jurisdiction and empowers the proper officer to detain
such vessel if it is expected that the vessel may depart and allow the application to be made by any
person to High Court for detention of the vessel.
Clause 263.—This clause seeks to provide that when an order for the detention of the vessel has
been made, any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy or Indian Coast Guard or any port officer,
pilot, harbour master, conservator of port or customs collector may detain the vessel under instructions
of proper officer and any contravention of detention order or notice is an offence.
Clause 264.—This clause seeks to provide that if an order for the payment of any wages or other
sums of money has been made but has not been paid, then such payment may be levied by distress and
sale of the movable property of the person directed to pay the same under a warrant to be issued for
that purpose by such a court or Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
Clause 265.—This clause seeks to provide that in case any foreign vessel is detained under this Bill,
or if any proceeding is taken under this Bill against the master, owner or agent of any such vessel, notice
shall forthwith be served on the consular officer of the country in which the vessel is registered, at or
nearest to the port where the vessel is for the time being, specifying the grounds of such detention or
the proceedings.
Clause 266.—This clause seeks to provide the manner of service of documents on any person, such
as, personal delivery, leaving the same at his last place of abode, or by post and if such delivery is to
be made to the master of a vessel then such document may be left on board with person in command
of the vessel and if no master or owner or agent is there, it may be affixing to the master of the vessel
or at a suitable place on the bridge.
Clause 267.—This clause seeks to put responsibility on the master of a vessel to inform about birth,
death, and cause of death or any other relevant details that the Central Government may specify at the
next port or place of call.
Clause 268.—This clause seeks to put responsibility on the master of Indian vessel to inform of
any person missing or died on board to the Director-General and the proper officer of the port or the
next port of call. It provides that on receiving the information, the proper officer would inquire into the
causes of death and make in the official log book an endorsement to that effect whether the statement
of cause of death is true or not or contrary to the result of inquiry. It further provides that if it appears
to the proper officer that the death occurred due to violence or other improper means, shall, report to
the Director-General and in case of emergency, shall take immediate steps for bringing the offender into
trial.

291
Clause 269.—This clause seeks to provide for certain persons mentioned therein to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 270.—This clause seeks to empower an officer conducting investigation and inquiry to
board a vessel to inspect or detain a vessel, etc., and prohibits any person to hinder or obstruct any
officer or person referred above from going on board any vessel or otherwise impede him in exercution
of his duties or exercise his powers.
Clause 271.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to permit such alternate
provisions and arrangements in order to meet the requirements of the convention through a notice.
Clause 272.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to give permission for a
nuclear ship to proceed to sea and the Central Government by general or special order give such direction
to the registered owner of the vessel for taking security measure as is necessary.
Clause 273.—This clause seeks to exempt the application of this Bill to veseels belonging to
Government or to any class of such vessels.
Clause 274.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government by order, to impose or exempt
any vessel or tindal or seafarer or any class thereof, from any specified requirement contained in or
prescribed in pursuance of this Bill or dispense with the observance of any such requirements in the case
of any vessel or tindal or seafarer, or any class thereof if it is satisfied that the requirements have been
substantially complied with or that compliance with the requirement is or ought to be dispensed with in
the circumstances of the case subject to restriction which is prohibited by the Safety Convention or
Pollution Prevention Convention and makes it an offence for breach of any such condition.
Clause 275.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules generally to
carry out the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 276.—This clause seeks to provide for the publication of rules in the Official Gazette subject
to previous publication and also makes the breach of it as punishable. It further provides that every rule
made and every notification issued by the Central Government shall be required to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
Clause 277.—This clause seeks to protect any person acting in good faith from any suit or other
legal proceedings.
Clause 278.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to enter into agreement with
other countries or organisations for effective implementation of the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 279.— This clause empowers the Central Government to make, by order published in the
Official Gazette, provisions for removal of difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill and
restrict the power to make such order within a period of three years and mandates every such order
issued under this clause to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 280.—This clause seeks to repeal the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and the Coasting Vessel
Act, 1838. It provides for saving of various actions undertaken under the said enactments as specified
therein.

292
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of the National Shipping Board by the Central
Government to advise it on matters relating to Indian shipping including the development thereof.
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of Seafarers Welfare Board by the Central Government
for advising it on the measures for promoting the welfare of the seafarers.
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint the Director General of Shipping
for discharging the powers, authorities or duties under the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint Surveyors at such port or place
as it may consider necessary.
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint Radio Inspectors relating to radio
communication.
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to establish and maintain office of Mercantile
Marine Department in the ports of Mumbai, Kolkatta, Chennai, Kochi, Kandla and such other ports or
places for the administration of the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to establish Shipping Office and appoint
shipping master and other officers as it may consider necessary.
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to establish at every port a seafarer's
employment office and shall appoint thereto a Director and as many Deputy Directors and Assistant
Directors as it may consider necessary.
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint Seafarers Welfare Officer in any
port or place outside India.
Clause 54 of the Bill provides for fee to be paid to the examiner appointed to examine the
qualification of persons desirous of certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency.
Clause 115 of the Bill provides for making arrangements for search and rescue at sea and establishment
of rescue coordination centres and sub-centres.
Clause 135 of the Bill empowers the port authority to impose suitable charge for setting up facilities
to receive wastes, facilities for handling, treatment and disposal of wastes generated on ships in an
environmentally sound manner by public sector ports.
The expenditure on establishing the National Shipping Board, constituting the Seafarer Welfare
Board, appointing the Director General of Shipping, the Surveyors, the Radio Inspectors, establishing and
maintaining office of the Mercantile Marine Departments, establishing Shipping Office and appointing
shipping master and other officers, establishing at every port a seafarer's employment office and appointing
Director, Deputy Directors and Assistant Directors, appointing the Seafarers Welfare Officer, fee to be
paid to the examiners will be met out of the existing budgetary allocations of the Ministry of Shipping.
292

293
The arrangements for search and rescue at sea and the establishment of rescue coordination centres and
sub-centres are already in place and do not involve any additional expenditure. The expenditure of setting
up facilities to receive wastes, reception facilities and the facilities for handling, treatment and disposal
of such wastes in an environmentally sound manner by public sector ports, or places which have an
interface with ships, will be met from their own budget and charges imposed on ships for providing such
facilities.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will not involve any additional expenditure of recurring or non-
recurring nature.

294
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (7) of clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for the
matters relating to the term of office of members of the Shipping Board; the manner of filling vacancies
in the Shipping Board; the travelling allowances and other allowances payable to the members of the
Shipping Board; and the manner of appointment of officers and other employees of the Shipping Board
and the terms and conditions of their service.
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
the matters relating to the composition of the Welfare Board and the term of office of members thereof;
the procedure to be followed in the conduct of business by the Welfare Board; the travelling and other
allowances payable to the members of the Welfare Board; the rate of levy of fee payable by owners of
vessels for the purposes of providing amenities to seafarer and for taking other measures for the welfare
of the seafarer; the procedure by which any such fee may be collected or recovered and the manner
in which the proceeds of such fees, after deduction of the cost of collection, shall be utilised for the
purpose specified in sub-clause (d).
3. Clause  50  of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the provisions of the Part III of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of
which such rules may be made. These matters, include the conditions for registration of an Indian vessel;
the manner of keeping the register book and making entries therein and maintenance of the records of
vessels registered under this Bill; the form and manner of making application for registry of an Indian
vessel; the other particulars descriptive of the identity of vessel; the manner of making endorsement; the
procedure for issuing a provisional certificate of registry; the form of mortgage; the form of instrument
effecting the transfer; the manner of description of the name, call sign and official number of Indian
vessel; the fee for inspection of register book and a certified copy of any entry of the register book;
the procedure for registration of vessel chartered on bareboat charter-cum-demise and any other matter
which is required to be or may be made.
4. Clause 59 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of the provisions of Part IV of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) specifies inter alia, the manning scale
of seafarers; the different manning scales in relation to different categories of vessels, areas and type
of operations; the requirement and grant of certificates, its form fees and its valid period and the manner
of keeping the copies of certificates; the manner of conducting examination for certificate of competency
or proficiency, the fee for grant of such certificate and any other matter which is required to be or may
be made.
5. Sub-clause (1) of clause 62 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
classification of seafarers into different categories, the minimum manning scale of seafarers of such
categories and the different scales of different classes to ships.
6. Clause 68 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules, having regard to the
provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention, for the matters relating to the seafarer's employment
294

295
officer. These matters, include the payment of wages; hours of work and hours of rest; leave entitlement;
accommodation, recreational facilities, food and catering; health protection, medical facilities, welfare and
social security protection.
7. Sub-clause (8) of Clause 86 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules with
respect to relief, maintenance and return to the proper port of a seafarer found in distress; the circumstances
in which and the conditions subject to which the seafarer may be relieved; and to carry out the provisions
of Part V of the Bill relating to distressed seafarer.
8. Clause 109 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of Part V of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules
may be made. These matters, include the continuous discharge certificate and seafarers identity documents;
other function and duties of the seafarers employment offices; the form, manner of issue of continuous
discharge certificates; seafarers identity documents and fees for such certificates and documents; the
qualifications of seafarers; the manner of discharge from service of seafarers; the restrictions and
conditions for utilisation of any amount deposited with or recovered from shipping master; the form and
manner of keeping log book and any other matter which is required to be or may be made.
9. Clause 128 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for safety and security
requirements applicable to vessel, company or port facility under Part VI of the Bill. Sub-clause (2)
thereof enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, include the
safety and security requirements for different classes of vessels; the manner of reporting the particulars
of incidents and the authority to whom such particulars to be reported; the communication equipment,
distress and safety equipment to be equipped and maintained, and the certified operators to be provided;
the requirements for safety or security management; the provisions with regard to insurance, classification
and condition of vessel; any other matter which is required to be or may be made.
10. Sub-clause (1) of clause 131 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
requiring Indian vessel to be fitted with such equipment and to comply with such requirements relating
to construction, survey of equipment and structure of such vessel and specifying conditions, prior to
issuing a certificate under Part VII of the Bill.
11. Clause 138 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, having regard to the Pollution
prevention convention, to make rules to carry out the purposes of Part VII of the Bill. Sub-clause (2)
enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, include the
conditions to comply the provisions of the conventions; the pollution prevention requirements; the form
and manner and other matter relating to maintenance of record book; the reception facility, surveillance,
supervision and guidance; the manner reporting the incidents to the authority to whome the incident to
be reported and any other matter which is required to be or may be made.
12. Clause 143 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for recognition of a
certificate issued under a Convention in respect of vessel other than Indian vessel by the Government
of the country to which the vessel belongs.
13. Clause 145 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of Part VIII of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules

296
may be made. These matters, include the requirements for verification of vessel, company, port facility,
shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities or terminal; the manner of requirements
and the manner of survey, audit and certification of vessel, company, port facility, shipyard, ship breaking
yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities or terminal and modification, revocation, suspension, cancellation
or surrender of the certificates and documents; the certificates to be possessed by a vessel, company,
port facility, shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship repair unit, offshore facilities or terminal; the manner of
compliance for survey, audit and certification; the requirement and the manner of survey, audit and
certification of different classes of vessel, company, port facility, shipyard, ship breaking yard, ship
repair unit, offshore facilities; and any other matter which is required to be or may be made.
14. Clause 166 of the Bill empowers the Central Government having regard to the LLMC Convention
to make rules to carry out the purposes of Chapter II of Part IX of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) provides
that the rules may be made in matters relating to the limits and liability in cases where the LLMC
Convention not applicable; the amount of limit of liability of the owner for loss of life or personal injury
to passengers of a ship and any other matter which is required to be made or may be made.
15. Clause 181 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of Chapter III of Part IX of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) provides that the rules may be made in
matters relating to the form of certificate and particulars to be given thereto; the fees to be charged for
issue of certificates and any other matter which is required to be or may be made.
16. Clause 196 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of Chapter IV of Part IX of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) provides that the rules may be made in
matters relating to the limits of liability of the insurer or other person providing financial security; the
form of certificate, the particulars containing therein with the conditions and fee for issue of certificate;
the renewal of certificate and fees therefor and any other matter which is required to be or may be made.
17. Clause 206 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the Fund Convention.
18. Clause 238 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of Part XI of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules
may be made. These are the matters relating to manner of marking wreck; the time limit to remove the
wreck; the other financial security; the measures to be taken to protect the coastline or related interest
from pollution or threat of pollution; the criteria for calming rewards, the manner of fixing rewards, the
payment of special compensation, the apportionment of payment amongst salvors, the salvage of persons,
the payment under the contract, the payment for additional services not covered under the contract and
the effect of misconduct of salvors on reward or payment and any other matter which is required to
be or may be made.
19. Clause 245 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of Part XII of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) thereof enumerates the matters in respect of which
such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, include the form of licence and the valid period of
such licence and any other matters which is required to be or may be made.

297
20. Clause 255 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of Part XIII of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) provides the rules may be made in matters relating
to the scale of manning and fittings material, appliance and apparatus to be carried on board by Indian
vessels; the certificates required to ply or proceed to sea by a vessel; the manner of issuance of grant
of certificate and the period for which the said certificate shall be in force; the form for maintaining a
statement of the crew of the vessel and any other matter which is required to be or may be made.
21. Clause 275 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
provisions of the Bill in respect of matters contained elsewhere in the Bill.
22. Clause 276 of the Bill provides for the rules to be published in the Official Gazette subject to
previous publication and every rules made or notification issued under this Bill shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
23. Clause 279 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make an order published in the
Official Gazette, for removal of difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill, and every such
order issued shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
24. The matters in respect of which rules may be made or notifications to be issued under the
proposed legislation are matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.

298
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to merchant shipping to ensure compliance
with the country's obligation under the maritime treaties and International
Instruments to which India is a party and also to ensure the efficient
maintenance of Indian mercantile marine in a manner best suited to
serve the national interest.
(Shri Nitin Gadkari, Minister of Road Transport, Highways and Shipping)
GMGIPMRND—3809LS(S3)—08-12-2016.
298

299
ANNEXURE-II
List of Witnesses who appeared before the Department- Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
12th May, 2017
3.00 P.M.
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING
1. Shri Rajive Kumar Secretary
2. Shri Parvir Krishan JS (S&Parl.)
3. Shri M.M. Hasija Adviser
4. Dr. Malini Shankar DG (Shipping)
5. Shri Amitabh Kumar Addl. Director Genl. (S)
6. Dr. Amol B. Kirtane Dy. DG, DGS
7. Shri Ash Mohammad ADG, DGS
8. Capt. Jaya Kumar Dy. Nautical Adviser, DGS
9. Shri B.R. Sekhar Chief Surveyor, DGS
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
10. Shri K. Biswal Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
11. Shri R.K. Pattanayak Deputy Legislative Counsel
299

300
ANNEXURE-III
List of stakeholders who have furnished written memorandum on the
Merchant Shipping Bill, 2016
(i) Container Shipping Lines Association;
(ii) Shipyards Association of India;
(iii) National Union of Seafarers of India;
(iv) Indian Register of Shipping;
(v) The Maritime Union of India;
(vi) The Company of Master mariners of India;
(vii) International Association of Drilling Contractors;
(viii) ICC Shipping Association;
(ix) Indian National Shipowners' Association; and
(x) Capt. Sudhir Subhedar.
300