Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY FIRST REPORT
ON
MODERNIZATION OF AIRPORTS
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 20.08. 2008)
 
  (PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 20.08. 2008)
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST,  2008/ SRAVANA  1930 (SAKA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
PAGES
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                   (i) - (ii)            2.  INTRODUCTION           
                                                                                    
3.  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                  4. 

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
5.  MINUTES                                                                                                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2007-2008)
1.         Shri Sitaram Yechury              - Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA
^2.        Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary                     
  3.       Shri Vedprakash Goyal
  4.       Shri Naresh Gujral
$5.        Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya     
^6.        Shri Janardhana Poojary                       
#7.       Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
  8.       Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
  9.       Shri Shahid Siddiqui                              
^10.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
%11.    Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
@12.    Shri Shanta Kumar                              
@13.    Shrimati Hema Malini
@14.    Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
@15.    Shri Biswajit Daimary
            LOK SABHA
 16.       Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
 17.       Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
 18.       Shri Joachim Baxla

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 19.       Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
 20.       Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
 21.       Shri Adhir Chowdhury
 22.       Dr. K. Dhanaraju
 23.       Smt. Priya Dutt
 24.       Shri Dip Gogoi
 25.       Shri P. Karunakaran
*26.      Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
 27.       Dr. P.P. Koya
 28.       Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
 29.       Shri Samik Lahiri 
 30.       Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
 31.       Shri Hemlal Murmu
 32.       Shri Madan Lal Sharma
 33.       Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
 34.       Shri Dushyant Singh
 35.       Shri Suraj Singh
 36.       Shri Prahlad Joshi
**37.    Shri Rakesh Singh
  
*     Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 13.11.2007. 
**   Nominated on 1.12.2207.
^     Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 9.4.2008.
$     Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 9.4.2008 and re-nominated on 14.5.2008.
#    Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 14.5.2008.
%   Nominated on 14.5.2008.
@   Nominated on 21.5.2008.
 (2008-2009)
 
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury                - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
3. Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Shanta Kumar
6. Smt. Hema Malini
7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
10. Shri Biswajit Daimary
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Smt. Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Prahlad Joshi

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
21. Shri P. Karunakaran
22. Dr. P.P. Koya
23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri 
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Rakesh Singh
31. Shri Suraj Singh
SECRETARIAT
        Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
        Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
        Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
        Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
           
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
 having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this One Hundred Forty First on
 Modernization of airports.
 
2          The Committee considered the subject and held extensive discussions with the representatives of Ministry of
 Civil Aviation and the Planning Commission.  The Committee took oral evidence of the Additional Secretary, Ministry
 of Civil Aviation and Secretary, Planning Commission on the 22
nd May, 2008.
 
3.      The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Planning
 Commission for placing before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with the subject and
 for clarifying the points raised by the Members.
 
4.      The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 11th August 2008.
 
  
 
NEW DELHI ;
August 11, 
2008
 Sarvana 20, 1930 (Saka) 
SITARAM YECHURY 
 Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture.
 
 
 
 
                                                                 
                                                                                               
             
 
 
 
 

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT
I
There is a strong correlation between airports and economic development; while economic growth leads to air
 traffic, increased air traffic necessitates new airports as well as expansion/modernization of existing ones.  The airports
 facilitate the quick and safe movement of men and material giving impetus to trade and tourism.  Airports thus have
 spin-off effect on the surrounding regions in terms of its development and growth.  India has witnessed in recent years
 unprecedented economic growth, but the airport development could not kept pace with this growth. We have seen
 gradual increase not only in the number of aircrafts but also in passenger and cargo traffic.   In the years 2002-03, 2003-
04, and 2004-05 the aircraft movement at the 126 airports managed by the Airports Authority of India increased by
 10%, 13.5% and 12.6% respectively, passenger movement by 9.96% , 10.69% and 21.6% respectively and cargo
 movement by 15%, 18.75% and 19.9% respectively. As a result, several major airports still remain congested offering
 slow and inefficient services.
Modernization of Airports
2.         Being aware of such a demand being generated in this sector, the Government of India decided to modernize and
 expand its airports in the country. It constituted a high-powered ‘Committee on Infrastructure’ under the Prime Minister
 on the 31
st August 2004, to initiate policy measures to ensure creation of world-class infrastructure in a time-bound
 manner. This work being highly capital intensive as it is, suitable policy and regulatory framework for Public Private
 Partnership (PPP) was also thought for maximizing capital inflows and efficiency.  The Committee on Infrastructure
 (CoI) in its meeting held on the 10 th December 2004, decided that a framework for airport development up to 2010
 would be planned, assuming an annual traffic growth at 16 per cent.   In the third meeting of the Empowered Sub-
committee of the CoI held on 3 rd October, 2005, it was decided to set up a Task Force headed by a Member, Planning
 Commission and comprising representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Department of Economic Affairs,
 Department of Expenditure, and Airports Authority of India to deliberate and submit a financing plan for the
 development of airports, and for upgrading and augmenting the airport infrastructure in India.  The Task Force held
 meetings on the 7
th November, 2005, 6 th January, 2006, 27 th March, 2006 and 5 th May, 2006 to formulate its
 recommendations.  The report of the Task Force was discussed by the Empowered Sub-committee of CoI in its meeting
 held on 9th June, 2006 and approved with some modifications, which were being incorporated in the financing plan.
3.         The Task Force recommended that Metro airports and Greenfield airports have to be developed through the
 Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) mode.  However, the modalities in respect of Kolkata and Chennai airports were left
 to be decided after further consultations.
4.         Accordingly, airports in Delhi and Mumbai are being developed through the PPP.  Bengaluru and Hyderabad
 Greenfield Airports developed in this mode are already functional.   
5.         The Ministry of Civil Aviation proposed development of 35 non-metro airports keeping in view the potential for
 traffic, tourism, business etc.  The development of these airports was proposed under three heads namely; (a) terminal
 building, cargo parking and cargo; (b) airside; and (c) cityside (cargo complexes, hotels and flight kitchens).   Airports
 Authority of India had proposed that the capital investment for commercial exploitation and development of land
 (cityside development) of non-metro airports would be made by private participation.   It was also proposed that out of
 their commercial revenues, private partners would pay land lease and revenue share to Airports Authority of India.  The
 proposed commercial exploitation would be restricted to cargo complexes, hotels, flight kitchens and parking could
 also be included, if necessary. 
6.         In the light of the considerations spelt out above, the Task Force on financing plan for airports recommended on

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 the 9th June, 2006 the following:
(a)                                        In principle, the airside and terminal building development of non-metro airports would be
 handed over to AAI and it would be allowed to go ahead with construction work in respect of all
 the 35 non-metro airports. 
(b)                                       Progress in execution of the development work should be reviewed in 18-24 months.
(c)                                        The possibility of going in for PPP in respect of a few selected airports should be kept open
 taking into account rapid development in the aviation sector in the country ; and 
(d)                                       For selected airports, particularly the larger ones, wholly owned subsidiaries of AAI may be
 created for development and operation of the respective airports.
7.         AAI had proposed to fund the entire airside and terminal development through its internal resources, surplus
 revenues from Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata and market operations.   The funding of capital expenses on 35
 non-metro airports except, commercial development of land, was to the tune of Rs.4,662 crore.
II
Modernisation of Mumbai and Delhi airports
8.         The Cabinet in its meeting held on the 11th September, 2003 accorded its approval for the restructuring of Delhi
 and Mumbai airports by adopting the joint venture route.  The AAI (Amendment) Bill, was passed in June 2003 which
 authorized AAI to transfer the operations and management of its airports by way of long-term lease to private players. 
 The Cabinet constituted an Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) to take decisions on various issues connected with
 restructuring of Mumbai and Delhi airports.  In this connection, the Cabinet also decided to constitute an Inter
 Ministerial Group (IMG) to assist EGoM.  In this Joint Venture, the Airports Authority of India and other Government
 PSUs held 26% equity, with the balance 74% held by the strategic partners.  The Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in
 this transaction has been kept at 49%.  On the basis of the evaluation of technical and financial bids, it was decided by
 the Government on the 1
st February, 2006 that GMR consortium and GVK Consortium would be the private partner for
 modernization and development of Delhi and Mumbai airports respectively.
Modernization of Mumbai airport
9.         Mumbai International Airport Pvt. Ltd. (MIAL) a Joint Venture Company (JVC) of Airports Authority of India
 (AAI) (26%) and GVK Led Consortium (74%) took over management and development of Chhatrapati Shivaji
 International Airport (CSIA) w.e.f. 3 rd May, 2006.  There was transition phase of three months and w.e.f. 3 rd August,
 2006, MIAL is independently handling management and operation of CSIA.
10.       As per the Master plan prepared by MIAL, total project cost for development of CSIA is estimated to be Rs.9800
 crores.  Till 31st March 2008, MIAL has spent Rs.937 crores.  Estimated capital expenditure till 31st March 2009 would
 be Rs.3081 crores.  Financial closure for the project was achieved on 24th April, 2007.
11.       Operation, Management and Development Agreement (OMDA) which was signed on 4 th April 2006 prescribe
 that mandatory capital projects to be completed as per schedule 7.  It also lists out various compliances and procedures
 to be followed.  It also spells out subjective and objective service quality requirements to be achieved by MIAL.
 OMDA prescribes objective service quality standard (schedule 3) and subjective quality standard (schedule 4).  These
 standards are being achieved.   In the survey conducted by Airport Council International (ACI) for the quarter ending
 the 31st December, 2007, Mumbai airport has been rated at 3.58 on a scale of 0-5, which is highest among all Indian
 airports.  CSI Airport has also been granted ISO 10002:2004 certification. As per schedule 7 of OMDA, there are 32
 mandatory capital projects to be completed by MIAL as per prescribed time schedule.  All mandatory capital projects
 (i.e. 27 projects), which were to be completed within first two years from the date of signing of OMDA i.e. by 3rd April
 2008, have been completed.   Balance 5 projects are required to be completed by 31 st March, 2010.  Out of these, 2
 projects have been completed before time.
Modernisation of Delhi Airport
12.       Delhi International Airport Pvt. Ltd (DIAL) is a Joint Venture Company, between GMR led consortium (GMR,

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 Fraport, Malaysia Airport) and Airports Authority of India which entered into the Concession Agreement (30 year and
 extendable to another 30 years) for Operation, Management and Development of IGI Airport on 4 th April, 2006 under
 the Operation, Management and Development Agreement (OMDA).   Subsequent to signing of OMDA, DIAL took
 over IGI Airport on 3rd May, 2006.
13.       DIAL prepared a 20 year Master Plan for IGI Airport projecting all the facilities which will be commissioned in
 a phased manner and would finally cater to 100 million passengers upto 2036. Under the Phase 1 of the Master Plan,
 major facilities will be commissioned by DIAL for the Commonwealth games.  Phase 1 is further sub divided into
 Phase 1A for works to be completed by 2008 and Phase 1B for works to be completed by 2010. As per the mandate
 agreed under Mandatory Capital Projects (MCP) of OMDA, the following major facilities are proposed to be
 commissioned under the Phase 1A and Phase 1B:-
Phase 1A (2008) Phase 1B (2010)
Commissioning of 3rd Runway (4,430m)
Commissioning of New Taxiways, Fire Stations,
 associated infrastructure
Refurbishment of International Terminal
Expansion of Domestic Arrival Terminal
Development of New Domestic Departure
 Terminal (T1D) – Not part of Mandatory Capital
 Project but being constructed to enhance passenger
 convenience
 
New Integrated Terminal Building – 5 million sq.
 ft.
55 Contact Stands (84 Aerobridges) & 30 remote
 parking bays
90 Walklators, 47 Escalators, 70 lifts
Multi-level Car parking, Taxi Staging & Bus
 Parking -15,000 lots
General Aviation facilities
High speed dedicated rail link – Constructed by
 DMRC (Equity support by DIAL)
Expansion/Upgrade of Utilities (Sewerage, Power,
 Water)
 
14.       OMDA prescribes objective service quality standard (schedule 3 ) and subjective quality standard (schedule 4). 
 The Committee was informed that these standards were being achieved.   In the survey conducted by Airport Council
 International (ACI) for the year 2007-08, IGIA has been rated at 3.02 on the scale of 0-5. As per schedule 7 of OMDA
 there are 33 mandatory capital projects to be completed by DIAL as per prescribed time schedule.   Out of these
 mandatory capital projects, the Committee was informed that 10 projects had been completed, 5 projects will be
 completed by August, 2008 and 7 projects will be completed by March, 2010.  However, 11 projects have been partly
 delayed by 3 months and were likely to be completed by June, 2008.  This delay was mainly due to delay in obtaining
 approvals from concerned authorities, delay in shifting of 42 Airlines Back Offices, Customs Back Offices, Warehouse
 and Court seized goods warehouse, Immigration Back Offices etc.
15.       The total cost of Airport restructuring and modernization under Phase-I is estimated as Rs.8890 Crore.  Till the
 2007-08, DIAL has incurred an expenditure of about Rs.2900 Crore on various projects.   Further an amount Rs.3900
 Crore is projected to be spent in the current financial year (2008-09) and remaining Rs.2090 Crore during the financial
 year 2009-10.
III
GREENFIELD AIRPORTS
(a) Bengaluru International Airport
16. Greenfield airport at Devanahalli near Bengaluru is being implemented on a Build Own Operate and Transfer
 (BOOT) basis with Public Private Participation. Government of Karnataka through Karnataka State Industrial
 Investment Development Corporation (KSIIDC) and AAI together hold 26% equity and the strategic joint venture
 partners hold the balance 74%.  AAI’s investment in the equity is capped at Rs.50 crore.             A Memorandum of
rd

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 Understanding to this effect signed on 3  May 1999 between AAI and KSIIDC to facilitate further action leading to
 implementation of the project.
17.       Based on a Global Tendering  Process initiated in August 1999, a Consortium led by Siemens, Germany with
 Unique Zurich, Switzerland and Larsen & Toubro India Limited as other members was chosen as the strategic Joint
 Venture Partner in July 2001.   
18.       In order to address the issue of excluding Greenfield  airports from the ambit of AAI Act 1994, the amendments
 proposed to the AAI Act was passed by Lok Sabha on 9 th May 2003 and subsequently by Rajya Sabha on 28 th July
 2003.  The amended Act was, however, notified only on 1st July 2004.      The Working Group constituted by the Prime
 Minister’s Office (PMO) comprising of representatives from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Finance,
 Ministry of Law and Government of Karnataka finalized the draft Concession Agreement (CA), which was approved
 by the Cabinet in January 2004/15 th June 2004.  The approved version of the CA was signed on 5 th July 2004.    The
 Government of Karnataka extended on amount of Rs.350 crore as State support for which a State Support Agreement
 has been executed by GoK with BIAL.  Further, GoK provided  4300 acres of land (approximately having the value of
 Rs.175 crore) on concessional rent and  executed a Land Lease Agreement with BIAL. 
19.       The Committee was further informed that the private investors, selected on a Global Tendering Process, led by
 Siemens, Germany with Unique Zurich, Switzerland and Larsen & Toubro India Limited as other members, hold the
 balance 74% with Siemens holding 40% and Unique Zurich and L&T holding 17% each. The total project cost is
 estimated to be Rs.1411 crore (2005 figure) being financed as per the following funding sources:
 
       Debt  Rs.735 crore (from lenders)
       Equity  Rs.326 crore (includes 85 crore of AAI and Government of
 Karnataka) Rest 240 crore belong to the Private Investors.
 
       State Support Rs.350 crore
 
20.       The construction of the new airport commenced on the 2
nd July, 2005 and the new airport started its operations
 from the 24th May, 2008. 
(b)  Hyderabad International Airport
21.       As regards the Greenfield airport at Shamshabad near Hyderabad i.e. Hyderabad International Airport Limited
 (HIAL) is being implemented on a Build Own Operate and Transfer (BOOT) basis with Public Private Participation. 
    The Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) have selected a consortium led by M/s. GMR infrastructure Ltd. with
 Malaysian Airport Holding Berhard (MAHB) as the developer for Greenfield  airport at Shamshabad near
 Hyderabad.     The Government of Andhra Pradesh and AAI together hold 26% equity with AAI's investment in the
 equity capped at Rs.50 crore and the strategic joint venture partners, GMR infrastructure Ltd. With Malaysian Airport
 Holding Berhard (MAHB), hold the balance 74% in the Company namely, Hyderabad International Airport Ltd.
 (HIAL) set up to implement the project.     A Shareholders' Agreement was executed by the parties viz. M/s. GMR,
 M/s. MAHB (Sponsors), AAI and GoAP (State Promoters) on 30
th September 2003.     The Government of Andhra
 Pradesh extended Rs.315 crore as State Support and Rs.107 crore as grant.  Further, Government of Andhra Pradesh
 provided 5000 acres of land on concessional rent.    The concession Agreement between the GoI and HIAL was
 executed on 20
th December 2004. 
22.       The Committee was further informed that the total project cost, as per the DPR submitted by HIAL, was
 estimated to be Rs.1400 crore (2005 figure). This was being financed by State Support to the extent of Rs.422 crore and
 rest by way of Debt and Equity to the tune of 40% and 60%, respectively.   This project cost was for estimated
 passenger traffic of 5 million.   However, the final cost of the project is Rs.2920 crore for estimated passenger traffic of
rd

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 12 million.  The new airport started its operations from the 23  March, 2008.
 
 
 
IV
(a) Modernisation of Chennai Airport
23.       The Committee on Infrastructure (CoI) in its 14 th meeting held on     18 th April 2007, decided to set up an Inter
 Ministerial Group (IMG) under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Civil Aviation to finalize the action plan for
 development of Chennai Airport in Tamil Nadu.
24.       The CoI in its next meeting held on 15 th June, 2007 decided that the Chennai Airport will be modernized by the
 AAI through its own resources.  This decision of CoI was based on the commitment of the Government of Tamil Nadu
 to hand over 1006.99 acres of contiaguous land to AAI free of cost and free of encumbrances for expansion and
 modernizing work.  In pursuance of the decision of the CoI, AAI prepared an action plan and DPR for expansion and
 modernization of Chennai Airport.  The DPR was approved by AAI Board by September, 2007.
25.       The Committee was informed that the Planning Commission had offered the following comments on the
 proposal during the IMG meetings:
 
i)
                    Chennai airport should be modernized to world class standards.  However, it must be ensured that the
 investments made are realistic and do not lead to an undue increase in user charges/tariffs to be borne by the
 passengers when the regulator determines these charges.
ii)                   The proposal of Airports Authority of India to invest Rs.1808.25 crore for modernization of Chennai
 airport, which include an expenditure of Rs.1273.25 crore on terminal building alone, seems to be on the
 higher side as the airport handled traffic of about 9 million passengers in 2006-07.
iii)                 The proposal envisaged construction of separate domestic and international terminals with inter connected
 walkways.  It is suggested that an integrated terminal may be designed so as to reduce the area requirement. 
 It is common knowledge that international passenger traffic is during night time.   An integrated terminal
 would, therefore, need lesser space.  This practice is being followed for metro airports.
iv)                 The proposal envisaged construction of multilevel car parks at the domestic as well as international
 terminals.  The cost of these structures would add to the cost of the terminal buildings.  It is suggested that
 the cost of constructing multilevel car parks may be separated from the proposal and the car parks could be
 constructed alongwith other cityside development under the PPP Mode.
v)                  In the original proposal submitted by AAI,  the cost of construction of new domestic terminal of 10 million
 capacity is Rs.638 crore, while the cost of upgradation of the international terminal (capacity 3 million) and
 extension of this to 7 million capacity is Rs.532 crore.  These estimates have been slightly revised by
 Airports Authority of India.
                     Works                                                 Reduction
 
a)         Facelift works                                                   Rs.60 crore
b)   International Terminal                                             Rs.33 crore
c)   Domestic Terminal                                      Rs.37 crore
 
However even after this reduction, the cost of construction of international terminal per passenger, is far in
 excess of the construction cost of domestic terminal.  Airports Authority of India is requested to examine
 this cost.

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 
vi)        The proposal envisaged construction of international terminal to cater to 7 million passengers.  It would be
 seen that the airport handled 2.89 million international passengers during 2006-07 and according to Airports
 Authority of India estimates, the airport would handle 7 million international passengers only in 2015-16.  It
 is suggested that the construction of international terminal may be divided into two phases on the same lines
 as domestic terminal.
26.       The Planning Commission did not agree with the original proposals due to reasons mentioned above.
27.       An IMG headed by Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation with the representatives of Planning Commission,
 Department of Economic Affairs and Department of Expenditure was constituted to finalise the DPR.  During the IMG
 deliberations held on 30
th July, 2007, 31 st October, 2007 and 7 th November, 2007 it was suggested that the terminal
 capacities be scaled down and that the savings in the cost of terminal building should be used for construction of
 additional parallel runway.  With this the IMG approved the action plan presented by the Airports Authority of India for
 expansion and modernization of Chennai airport at an estimated expenditure of Rs.1808.25 crore, comprising
 Rs.1273.25 crore for terminal building and other buildings and other building works and Rs.535 crore towards
 extension of runway and other pavement works for completion, by June, 2010.
28.       In the meantime, the Ministry of Civil Aviation requested for ‘in principle’ approval of the Planning
 Commission on the 20th December, 2007, which was obtained on 11th March, 2008.
29.       The project is premised upon acquisition and handing over of additional land by the State Government.  The
 State Government initiated the process of acquiring land in November, 2007, which was challenged by various affected
 persons before the Hon’ble Madras High Court.  The High Court granted interim stay in the matter.   The same was
 vacated and the petitions finally dismissed in end March, 2008.
30.       Pre-Public Investment Board (PIB) meeting was convened on 12.05.2008.  However, the same could not be held
 due to the request of appraisal agencies for some more time to consider the project. Process for obtaining environmental
 clearance for the project is also underway.
31.       Ministry of Civil Aviation has permitted AAI to go ahead with the pre-qualification of project management
 consultants and contractors as well as to sell tender documents to pre-qualified bidders pending administrative
 approval/financial sanction so as to reduce the time taken in award to contract after necessary approvals are in place.
32.       Regarding the delay aspect, the Planning Commission representatives submitted before the Committee that as far
 as Chennai airport was concerned, in-principle approval was given in March, 2008 and inter-Ministerial PIB proposal
 was received in May 2008. The inter-Ministerial meeting however, could not be held by the Secretary, Civil Aviation.
 Only, thereafter, Planning Commission would proceed further. As far as the substantive part is concerned, the Planning
 Commission had supported that investment should be done in the State sector.
(b) Modernisation of Kolkata Airport
33.       Committee on Infrastructure (CoI) in its 14
th meeting held on  the       18 th April, 2007 decided that the Kolkata
 airport would be modernized by the Airports Authority of India (AAI) through its own resources.  In pursuance thereof,
 AAI prepared an Action Plan and Detailed Project Report for upgradation and modernization of Kolkata airport.   The
 Action Plan includes construction of an integrated terminal building (covering a built up area of 1,80,000 sqm for
 catering to 20 million passengers per annum) and several airside facilities at a total estimated cost of Rs.1942.51
 crores.  Project was to be completed in 30 months time, i.e. in June 2010 pursuant to award to works in January, 2008. 
 The new terminal building planned for saturation in 2015-16 with a projected passenger traffic growth rate of 19% per
 annum from 2007-08 till 2011-12 and 14.5% per annum thereafter.  The growth estimates were based on historical data
 with 2006-07, as base year.
34.       An Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) headed by the Secretary, Civil Aviation with the representatives of Planning
 Commission, Department of Economic Affairs and Department of Expenditure was also set up to finalize the Action
 Plan prepared by AAI. This IMG held its meetings on the 9
th July, 2007; 30 th July, 2007;  7th September, 2007 and
   10th October, 2007.  The IMG approved the action plan presented by AAI for expansion and modernization of Kolkata
 Airport at a total cost of Rs.1942.51 crore. The project would be completed within 30 month period i.e. by end June

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 2010.  The proposal involved construction of a new integrated terminal building to handle 20 million passengers per
 annum at a cost of Rs.1651.51 crore and other airside work. 
35.       It was submitted to the Committee that Planning Commission was of the view that Kolkata Airport should be
 modernized to world-class standards.  However, the efficiency of the investments has to be borne in mind to ensure that
 the user charges/tariffs borne by passengers did not undergo a significant increase when the proposed regulator
 determines these charges.  Planning Commission suggested the following two options;
(i)                  Adoption of phased approach for construction of terminal buildings by dividing the construction into two
 phases of about 90,000 sq. mts each and construction of second phase only after traffic reaches, say 15
 million per annum.
(ii)                Construction of terminal buildings in single phase as proposed by AAI may be submitted for consideration
 of PIB/CCEA with the observations of the Planning Commission.
36.       The representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted to the Committee that during the IMG
 deliberations various issues including growth estimates; the built up area per unit passenger; and the level of service
 standards to be adopted were discussed.  A suggestion was also made that the construction of terminal building could
 be split into two successive modules of 90,000 sq.m. each for catering to 10 million capacity.   It was explained that the
 growth rate were based on historical data and were well justified; the area per peak hour passenger is as per IATA
 norms for Level of Service Standards ‘A’.  It was further explained that in case the terminal building was divided into
 two modules of 10 million capacity each, the first module of terminal building would saturate by 2011-12, i.e., almost
 within a year of its completion.  For major infrastructure projects, such a small time horizon is not advisable both from
 the ‘scale of economics’ and ‘perspective planning’ point of view.  IMG, accordingly, approved the Action Plan.
37.       In the meantime, Ministry of Civil Aviation sought ‘in principle’ approval of the Planning Commission for the
 project on 9
th October, 2007, which could be obtained on 14 th December, 2007.  While granting in-principle approval,
 Planning Commission desired the Ministry to examine the pros & cons of a modular approach while coming up for the
 appraisal stage.  The pre PIB meeting was held on 3 rd March, 2008 after circulation of draft PIB Memo.  Pre PIB
 concluded to recommend the project to the PIB.
38.       In pursuance of the pre PIB meeting, the PIB Memo has been circulated for holding the PIB meeting.   Further,
 the Ministry of Civil Aviation has permitted AAI to go ahead with the pre qualification of project management
 consultants and contractors as well as to sell tender documents to pre qualified bidders pending administrative
 approval/financial sanction so as to reduce the time taken in award of contract after necessary approvals are in place.
39.       Regarding the delay the representatives of the Planning Commission submitted before the Committee that the
 proposal for Kolkata airport was received in October 2007 and in December, 2007 in-principle approval was given to it,
 to be done in the State sector with public investment. In the normal procedure, an inter-Ministerial pre-PIB meeting was
 scheduled for January 2008. But, actually this pre-PIB meeting took place only in March 2008. Thereafter, it was
 appraised through a memo and the proposal for appraisal was received in April, 2008 and they sent their comments on
 14
th May, 2008. Once the PIB meeting is held on the scale of investment, it will go to the Cabinet Committee on
 Economic Affairs. 
40.       The representatives of Planning Commission opined that taking in account the projection of passenger traffic for
 Kolkata airport, the project be taken up in a modular fashion.  They had supported the entire project. But, exact details
 of the phasing of the modular construction have to be worked out by the Airports Authority of India. PIB will probably
 give some further directions.    A development fee would be levied on the passengers. Levying of development fee
 would be commensurate with the phasing of the work done so that while the entire investment has not been done, the
 higher level of fee should not be levied. That was a matter of detail which the Airports Authority of India had to look
 into. This was the substantive point.
41.       When the Committee further inquired the representatives of Planning Commission submitted that the proposal
 for Kolkota airport was received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 9
th October 2007 and within two months
 they had given in-principle approval for the proposal. They claimed that there was no delay on the part of the Planning
 Commission.
 (c) Modernization of 35 Non-Metro Airports

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
42.       The Committee on Infrastructure in June, 2006 decided that Airports Authority of India (AAI) may take up the
 modernization and development of 35 non-metro airports in a sequential manner.  In compliance of the directions, AAI
 has undertaken various modernization and development works including CNS/ATM works at the said 35 non-metro
 airports at an expenditure of Rs.5462 crores.  As per the decision taken by the Committee on Infrastructure, airside
 work, including construction of terminal building, has been taken up by AAI.  The cityside development of 24 selected
 non-metro airports is proposed to be undertaken through Public Private Partnership (PPP) at an estimated cost of
 Rs.1500 crores.
43.       New terminal building expandable on modular basis are being constructed at various airports.  Airside works
 including expansion and strengthening of runway for wide bodied aircraft operations, extension/new construction of
 Apron for more parking of aircrafts, link taxiways and parallel taxi tracks are being taken up at these airports as per
 requirement.
44.       It was expected that terminal buildings and associated air side works in respect of 24 airports will be completed
 by March 2009 whereas remaining 11 airports would be completed by March, 2010.
 
45.       The report of the Task Force on Financing Airports had estimated total investment to the tune of Rs. 6162 crores
 for the modernization of the selected 35 non-metro airports.  The Committee on Infrastructure had approved the
 modernization of 35 non-metro airports under the authority and responsibility of AAI.  The  CoI in its meeting held on
 18
th April, 2007 decided that an IMG under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation would finalise a
 Model Concession Agreement for cityside development of airports through Public Private Partnerships.  The IMG has
 also been authorized to formulate the project details and the Concession Agreement. 
46.       It was submitted to the Committee in its meeting held on 22nd May, 2008 that the Concession Agreement was
 under preparation in the Planning Commission and it would be finalized in consultation with IMG and the competent
 authority.  The empowered Sub-committee of the Committee on Infrastructure last reviewed this subject on 2 nd April,
 2008.  It was noted that out of 35 non-metro airports and 13 other airports, 37 airports would be completed by March,
 09 and balance 11 airports would be completed by March, 2010. 
47.       The representatives of the Planning Commission submitted before the Committee that there was no privatization
 through backdoor. The terminal- side and airside of the non-metro airports should be done by the Airports Authority of
 India. They read out the minutes of 14
th meeting of CoI which considered the matter as “the IMG under the
 chairmanship of Secretary, civil Aviation would formulate proposals for operation and maintenance of the newly
 created terminals and for setting up subsidiaries of Airports Authority of India in select non-metro airports.  It was
 further noted that the Ministry of Civil Aviation would invite bids for development of airports through PPP by
 December, 2007.  It was decided that the IMG under the Secretary, Civil Aviation, would finalise the concession
 agreement by July 2007.” What the IMG doing was addressing mainly the issue of operation and maintenance.   So,
 there is no deviation from the decision taken by CoI in 2006.
48.       The representatives of the Planning Commission submitted that the maintenance of the terminals in fact
 presently outsourced by Airports Authority of India; it is not done in-house. They engage a number of small contractors
 for the works like cleaning, air-conditioning, gardening and others for various other jobs. Airports Authority of India
 did not have the staff and it did not do these works itself. For maintenance of newly constructed buildings, these
 functions would in any case be entrusted to multiple contractors. The IMG therefore, took a view that it would be better
 to outsource these works to a single entity, with very stiff performance standards and penalty clauses so that the user
 gets the best service for low prices. There was no merit in splitting the maintenance works in ten or twenty groups.
 According to the representatives of Planning Commission doing so would be in the best interest of coordination,
 accountability and monitoring.
49.       When the committee enquired about future of the staff of the Airports Authority of India, the representatives of
 Planning Commission submitted that
“ not a single Airports Authority of India staff gets affected.                     Let us take the case of Udaipur or
 Amritsar. They have some engineering staff. What do they do? They issue the contract for maintenance of air-
conditioners etc. and monitor it. They will continue to supervise the contractors’ functions even after this
 measure. Not a single Airports Authority of India staff is affected in our proposal. No Airports Authority of

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 India staff is to be relocated. It is completely neutral to the staff and actually it will free them of the day-to-day
 headaches caused by small contractors.  Any profit which would go to the private sector would be shared by the
 airport Authority of India.  It does not involve privatization.  Actually, we will get better bids if somebody does
 a unified and complete job compared to 20 small contractors.   There were a number of objections that were
 raised by the Airports Authority of India and most of them have been taken on board.  Now the Ministry of
 Civil Aviation will sent the proposal for further clearance”.
50.       The representatives of AAI who were present in the meeting of the Committee, however, opposed the view of
 the Planning Commission and stated that they were not outsourcing everything.  A few AMC were signed that too for
 non strategic areas.  AAI did not want to club the 30 years concessionaire to do the maintenance of the terminal
 building because there would be conflict of interest.   The AAI should have the control over the terminal building, not
 the concessionaire who was doing the cityside, who would come and operate the commercial activities and the
 maintenance and other things.
51.       AAI further submitted that after privatization of Delhi and Mumbai, the Delhi employees have not opted for
 Delhi airport.  Out of 2,000, around 240 have given option.  The remaining employees who are skilled labourers have
 yet to be accommodated in various non-metro airports.  These employees could be utilised and all of these were
 willing.  Suppose, some volunteers are there, they can be used in the northern region like Udaipur, Amritsar, Lucknow,
 etc.  After 2009, there will be a surplus of 9,900 employees in Delhi.  They had explained in the IMG that this is also an
 Airports Authority's employees-related issue.  The Chairman, Airports Authority of India submitted before the
 Committee -
“yes, you stop it with the car park because we have no problem and cityside can be included.   Terminal building
 maintenance, operation and management should be with the Airports Authority which is being done today. 
 Now, that was the issue which was discussed in the IMG.  The IMG had a number of views.  We have
 expressed our views.  We have also given the other country's model.   Nowhere in the world such clubbing has
 been done.  I would also like to place before the Committee that one Netherlands delegation came which is
 managing the Schiphol Airport.  They said that they did not want to participate for Udaipur as there was a
 conflict of interest, because if the management were with the airport operator, he should have the control over
 this.  Suppose there is the tea stall,   I may make it or I may break it and use it for operational purposes for the
 passengers.  If I give it to a concessionaire for 10 years or 30 years, I tie my hands.  I cannot do it.  It will be a
 problem.   I do not have the flexibility.   So, the operation is more important for Airports Authority than the
 commercial viewpoint.  Yes, we want to make money out of it, but not at the cost of passenger amenities.   That
 is what we explained to the IMG.  When you give it to a private party, his first priority is making money not the
 passenger comfort and operation.   So, if the management is restricted to the Airports Authority, then, it should
 be with the Airports Authority.  Just like in Metro, we have given the terminal to them.   We need not have it
 with the Airports Authority.  The entire thing can be given to the private operator.  We cannot have dual
 responsibility giving one concessionaire entire responsibility of operation and maintenance and you are only
 sitting on management with taking whatever may be the penalties.  It never works in our system.  So, we said
 that the terminal should be left with the Airports Authority and the cityside can be done on PPP.  It can be
 subsidiary; it can be joint venture; it can be a concessionaire or whatever.  That was the view expressed by all
 the Members of the Airports Authority in the meeting.”
52. The representative of the Ministry of Civil Aviation during the deliberations of the Committee further submitted 
“I would still like to reiterate in front of the Committee that this thing has not been concluded.   The discussions
 took place and we have still to finalise the concession. And, if I recollect, the minutes had said that we would
 come back in the end of May and finalise this.  This is what the Secretary had mentioned.  The issue about the 5
 years or 30 years was deliberated and there was not a final view taken as far as that is concerned.   It was open
 for some more discussion.  So, I would like to bring to the knowledge of the Committee that we have not closed
 on that”. 
 
 
 
 

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Observations and Recommendations of the Committee
53.       The Committee on Infrastructure headed by the Prime Minister at its 12 th meeting on the 8 th June 2006
 decided that for 35 non-metro airports, the Airports Authority of India will undertake the airport side
 development, including terminal building, while the cityside development will be undertaken through  private
 public partnership.  However, the Committee has been given to understand that the Inter Ministerial Group
 headed by Secretary Civil Aviation has decided on 6 May 2008, to deviate from  the decision taken by the
 Committee on Infrastructure headed by the Prime Minster.  Now the IMG has suggested that the commercial
 operations in the terminal building will be done through PPP.   The IMG decided that the scope of work of the
 project would include commercial operation and maintenance of Terminal  Building, development and
 operatrion of Cargo and real estate development on the land identified for the purpose.  Maintenance of the
 Terminal Building would include maintenance of the building, equipment and utilities. On the basis of this
 decision, the Planning Commission has prepared a Model Concession Agreement for PPP for 30 years for
 terminal buildings. 
54.       The Committee feels that this is a deviation from the decision of the Committee on Infrastructure and fails
 to understand how the IMG headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, can go against or deviate from
 the decisions/directions of the COI headed by the Prime Minister himself.  The Committee, therefore, expects 
 PMO to issue a clarification in this regard, if the IMG had its approval for deviating from the CoI and if not, it
 must intervene in this matter to ensure that the commercial operation of terminal buildings was done by the
 Airports Authority of India itself. 
55.       Commercial operation of terminal buildings is a profit making activity which would have generate
 revenue for the Airports Authority of India to spend on developing airside operations.
56.       The Committee, therefore, recommends that the airport side development including the commercial use of
 terminal building should be entrusted to the Airport Authority of India.  The AAI is also of the view that there
 will be conflict of interests, if private parties and AAI were involved into this simultaneously. 
57.       The Airports Authority of India that has been continuously earning profit every year and has proven
 ability of setting up, maintaining and modernizing airports in India and also abroad.   Even the private Cochin
 International Airport had been developed by it.  The Committee is, therefore, against the handing-over of the
 profit making airports to the private sector in the name of modernization and reconstruction, specially when the
 Airports Authority of India possesses the proven capability for this task.
58.       The Committee also learnt that the Government was planning to hand over 15 more profit making
 airports to private parties in the name of constructing green field airports.
59.       The Committee notes that the greenfield airports that are proposed to be handed over to private parties
 are largely being financed by Airports Authority of India, concerned State Governments and also by Indian
 Financial Institutions.   The Committee wonders, if the private players can manage the necessary resources
 within India, why can’t the Airports Authority of India be allowed to pursue the same business strategy.  In
 2006, when the Delhi and Mumbai Airports were being allowed to be modernized/expanded through PPP mode,
 the Airports Authority of India had submitted a plan with lesser time frame for the modernization of these
 airports.  However, these were turned down for unknown reasons.  The Committee feels that had the
 Government agreed to this proposal of the Airports Authority of India, the Mumbai and Delhi Airports would

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 have been completed by this time.  The Committee does not agree to the Government’s logic that the
 modernization of airports can be done only through privatization. It is a wrong and misplaced assumption.  
 Airports, assuming important role in our economy as they are, the Committee feels, must be under strong public
 regulation, if not under direct public control to ensure that unfair monopolistic practices do not become
 rampant.  Internationally, most successful examples of airport management are known to have retained over all
 public control even while outsourcing some particular activities to private people.  For example, many airports
 have successfully brought in private parties to invest in cargo handling facilities, parking bays, servicing and
 overhauling facilities, maintaining terminals and so on.  However, in India we are handing over the entire
 airport to the private parties which are in total negation to the best practices available in the world. 
60.       The representatives of the Planning Commission who appeared before the Committee submitted that the
 Committee on Infrastructure decided that for Kolkota Airport planning for terminals should be undertaken on
 a modular basis whereas the Airport Authority of India had planned a big ‘L’  shape terminal.   AAI was
 planning to build a capacity which is for four times the present traffic.  The Planning Commission opined that if
 the Airports Authority of India were to make a very huge investment today, it will inevitably lead to much
 higher user charges.  They were not ready to accept a situation where air fares are coming down but airport
 charges are going up.   When the Committee enquired if the same logic applied to the Hyderabad and Bengaluru
 Airports, the representatives of the Planning Commission were evasive by stating that the Planning Commission
 did not discuss that matter.   The Committee also notes the assurance given to the Committee by the Chairman
 AAI that in Kolkata airport it did not propose to charge any user development fees from the passengers.
61.       The committee has learnt that the newly opened Bengaluru and Hyderabad Greenfield airports are
 reported to have faced decline in short-haul passenger traffic due to the fact that the passengers have to travel a
 long distance to reach the airports.  The short-haul passengers are opting for other modes of transport like train
 and road journey.  The Committee, therefore, would like to draw the attention of the Government to the
 recommendation contained in its 131
st Report wherein the Committee inter-alia has recommended that the old
 airports at Bengaluru and Hyderabad airports should be made operational.  The Action Taken Report from the
 Government, however, is awaited.
62.       Meanwhile, the Committee came to know that the Ministry of Civil Aviation asked the BIAL to make
 arrangements to increase its capacity in the next eighth months as the construction of the second terminal would
 take three years.  It would, therefore be a better option to augment the capacity by restarting the functioning of
 existing HAL airport.  In order to ensure that the wide winged aircraft be accommodated properly at the
 Greenfield airports, the Government can take a policy decision to allow the small aircraft and ATRs to operate
 from the existing airports.  The Committee, therefore, once again calls upon the Ministry of civil Aviation to
 take necessary steps to ensure that the existing airports at Hyderabad and Bengaluru are kept functional. 
63.       The Committee notes that this approach of the Planning Commission and the Government was
 privatizing terminal buildings and other airport operations that were being managed, hitherto, by the Airports
 Authority of India, was knowingly or unknowingly, benefiting the private agencies.  The Committee is
 constrained to say that the Government and the Planning Commission appear to be least concerned about
 passenger comfort and the operational efficiency of the airports.  The Committee strongly recommends that
 while modernising the airports, care should be taken not to involve multiple agencies for maintenance and
 operations of the terminal building.  The Committee is of the view that the leading airport infrastructure
 provider, the Airports Authority of India, should have a better say in the modernization of airports in the
 country.  Any further move to offer the airport terminals to the private persons through PPP mode will
 definitely affect the profits as well as the morale of a premier organization like the Airports Authority of India. 
 Another problem would be the fate of the people working in the organization.  More than 80% of the employees
 of Airports Authority of India in Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru and Hyderabad are waiting for their transfer to
 some other places due to privatization of these airports, and only a few of them have decided to join the Joint
 Venture Companies.  Though the lease of terminals in the non-metro airports on PPP mode may fill the coffers
 of Government, it will definitely make a negative impact on the employees of AAI.   
64.       The Committee notes the statement made by the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that a
 decision on handing over the terminal buildings in non-metro airports to private parties had not been finalized
 so far.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that in view of economy of scale, operational convenience and as

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 also in national and public interest, the views of the AAI be seriously considered before taking any decision in
 this regard.
65.       Aircraft have to hover around due to congestions at the airports; passengers have to face lot of
 inconveniences due to traffic jam at the airports, lack of basic amenities for the passengers at the terminals;
 number of accidents reported  due to congestion at the runways etc. are some of the problems which came to the
 notice of the Committee as regards the Mumbai and Delhi airports.  The Committee observes that the lack of
 vision and proper planning are the main causes of these problems.  The Committee feels that the lack of
 coordination between the governmental agencies and the private developers is also largely responsible for
 aggravating the problems at both the airports.  The Committee hopes that the lessons learned from the
 experiences of Mumbai and Delhi airports in these regards, would be helpful in ensuring that in future such
 problems do not recur elsewhere. 
MODERNISATION OF KOLKATA AND CHENNAI AIRPORTS
66.       The Committee notes that the decision to modernize/expand the major airports in the country upto 2010
 was taken by the Government of India on 10
th December, 2004. The Committee finds that the modernisation of
 airports at Kolkata and Chennai, and other 35 non-metro airports has been delayed unduly.  Certain basic
 policy decisions are yet to be taken in 2008, not to speak of the final go ahead.  In the light of Delhi, Mumbai,
 Bengaluru and Hyderabad, the Committee notes that approval for Joint Venture Companies or Private
 Companies, were quick and prompt as compared to these relating to the Public Sector Undertakings.  Inordinate
 delays have happened in the cases relating to the airports to be undertaken by the Airport Authority of India.
67.       The committee observes that clearances were to be taken from various agencies at different stages to
 finalise an infrastructure project. First, there is a Committee on Infrastructure chaired by the Prime Minister to
 approve various infrastructure projects. This committee is a high powered committee consisting of some cabinet
 ministers and representatives of Planning Commission. Thereafter, there is the Inter Ministerial Group headed
 by Secretary Ministry of Civil Aviation to finalise the details of the Projects. The IMG consists of representatives
 of various ministries and Planning Commission. Thirdly, there is the Task Force on finalizing Financing Plan for
 Airports that was chaired by a Member Planning Commission. Then, there is the Public Investment Board,
 headed by the Secretary Department of expenditure and it consists of representatives of various Ministries.  
 Then there is a pre-PIB meeting to finalise the proposals.  The PIB considers investment proposals of the
 Central Government Ministries in regard to their Public Sector Undertakings. It acts as final "appraisal
 agency" and processes the notes for the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) that is the final
 approval authority.
68.       Till now these agencies could not arrive at a decision on modernisation of Chennai, Kolkotta and non-
metro airports. Every passing day, the cost overrun of the projects will run into crores and problems of
 infrastructure squeeze will further aggravate.
69.       In this connection, the Committee noted the following chronology of events as regards modernization of
 Airports:-
Ø
      31st August, 2004- Committee on Infrastructure constituted under the chairmanship of the Prime
 Minister was constituted with the objectives of initiating policies that would ensure time bound
 creation of world class infrastructure. 
Ø      10th December, 2004 - The Committee on Infrastructure decided that a framework for Airport
 development  upto 2010 would be planned assuming an annual traffic growth of 16 percent.
Ø      October, 2005 - The Empowered Sub-Committee on Committee on Infrastructure, decided to set
 up a Task Force headed by a Member Planning to deliberate and submit a financial plan for
 modernization and development  of Airports.
Ø
      7th November, 2005, 6th January, 2006, 27th March, 2006 and 5th May, 2006 - the Task Force held
 meetings to formulate its recommendations.
Mumbai and Delhi Airports
th

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
Ø      11  September, 2003 - the Cabinet in its meeting decided for the restructuring of the Delhi and
 Mumbai airports by adopting the joint venture route. 
Ø      1st February, 2006 - the Government decided that GMR consortium and GVK Consortium would
 be the private partners for modernization and development  of Delhi and Mumbai airports
 respectively.
Ø      4th April, 2006 - OMDA was signed for Mumbai airport.
Ø      3rd May, 2006 - w.e.f. 3 rd August, 2006, Mumbai airport was handed over to Mumbai
 International Airport Private Ltd. MIAL is independently handling management and operation of
 CSIA.
Ø      The MIAL modernization is progressing as per schedule.
Ø      4th April, 2006 - OMDA for Delhi Airport was signed.
Ø      3rd May, 2006 - DIAL took over management of IGI Airport
Ø      The phase IA (2008) projects are progressing as per schedule.
Ø      Some of the phase IB (2010) projects are being delayed due to the delay in shifting some of the
 back offices.
Ø      9th June, 2006 - the Empowered Sub-Committee of Committee on Infrastructure in its meeting
 held approved the financing plan.
 
Chennai Airport
Ø      18th April, 2007 - the Committee on Infrastructure in its 14 th meeting held constituted an IMG
 under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Civil Aviation to finalise the action for development  of
 Chennai Airport.
Ø      15th June, 2007 - The Committee on Infrastructure in its 15 th meeting held decided that the
 Chennai Airport will be modernized by the Airport Authority of India through its own
 resources.
Ø      The detailed Project Report (DPR) was approved by AAI Board September, 2007.
Ø      30th July, 2007, 31 st October, 2007 and 7 th November, 2007 - The IMG held its meeting  to
 finalise DPR.
Ø      20th December, 2007 - Ministry of Civil Aviation request for in principle approval of the
 Planning Commission.
Ø      11th March, 2008 - Planning Commission given the ‘in principle’ approval.
Ø      12th May, 2008 - Pre-PIB meeting was scheduled to be held but was postponed.
Kolkata Airport
Ø      14th meeting held on 18th April, 2007 - the Committee on Infrastructure (COI) decided that the
 Kolkata airport will be modernized by the Airport Authority of India through its own
 resources.
Ø
      on 9th July, 2007, 30th July, 2007, 7th September, 2007 and 10 th October, 2007 - the IMG held
 its meeting and approved the action plan prepared by AAI.
Ø      9th October, 2007 - the Ministry of Civil Aviation sought ‘in principle’ approval of the Planning
 Commission for the project.

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
Ø      14th December, 2007 - the Planning Commission given the in principle approval.
70.       The Committee notes that modernization projects have to go through several stages. While the Committee
 does not question the involvement of so many agencies in processing the proposals, it feels that the time taken by
 each one can certainly be cut to a large extent.  The persons handling different bodies/agencies were generally
 officers who are very hard pressed for time and, therefore, more often than not, they were unable to spare time
 frequently.  In this time-taking process, projects get delayed leading to massive cost-time overruns.
71.       The Committee recommends that final sanction for the modernisation of Chennai, Kolkota and the Non-
metro airports should be given without any delay.
72.       In this connection, the Committee would like to refer to  58
th Report presented to the Parliament on the
 24 th April, 2002 in which the Committee had inter-alia recommended that the ongoing and developmental
 activities at the four metro airports should not be kept in abeyance and should be allowed to proceed as per the
 earlier time schedule.  The Committee, thereafter, repeatedly recommended in its 69 th, 78th, 88 th and 90 th
 reports that the process of modernization of Kolkata and Chennai airports should be undertaken expeditiously.
 But sadly, the process of development of airports could be started in the year 2006 and that too by constituting
 committees after committees to look into the matter.  The Government appears to have adopted a very routine
 and lackadaisical approach without any sense of urgency in developing airports in the country.  In the
 meantime, it opened the Indian skies to private operators which resulted in chaos and confusion at the existing
 airports that were not able to meet the spurt in passenger influx.
73.       The Committee feels that modernization of Chennai, Kolkata and non-metro airports should be
 completed as per the schedule as any further delay will hamper the development of civil aviation sector.  The
 Committee hopes that the Government will coordinate the activities of various organizations involved in this
 process to avoid any further blame game on this issue.  The Committee also emphasizes the greater deal of
 coordination with the respective State Governments as without their role it will not be an easy task to complete
 the modernization programme in time. 
*****
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES
 
 
 
 
 

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
            The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Thursday, the 22
nd May, 2008 in Room No. '63', First Floor, Parliament
 House, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Smt. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
5. Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
7. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
8. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Shri P. Karunakaran
11. Dr. P.P. Koya
12. Shri Samil Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Rakesh Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
           
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary          
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer                   
                       
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION:
 
1. Smt. Vilasani Ramachandran, AS&FA
2. Shri Arun Mishra, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Sandeep Prakash, Director
4. Ms. Anna Roy, Director

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
5. Shri Vijay Singh, Under  Secretary
6. Shri Omanand, Under Secretary
7. Dr. K. Ramalingam, Chairman, AAI
8. Shri V.P. Agarwal, Member (P&G) , AAI
9. Shri S.C. Chhatwal, Member (Finance) , AAI
10. Shri H.S. Bains, Member (P&A), AAI
11. Shri M.C. Kishore, ED(CA)&CS, AAI
12. Shri G.S. Bawa, Jt. GM, AAI
13. Shri Anil Rai, DGM, AAI
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
1.      Dr. Subas Pani, Secretary
2.      Shri Gajendra Haldea, Principal Adviser
3.      Dr. Nagesh Singh, Adviser
4.      Shri Ravi Mital, Adviser (Infrastructure)
5.      Shri I.S. Negi, Director
6.      Smt. Namita Mehrotra, Director (Infrastructure)
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Smt. Alka Balram Kshatriya a re-nominated and Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan
 a newly nominated Member to this Committee.   Thereafter, the Committee heard views of the representatives of the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airport Authority of India and Planning Commission on the status of modernization of
 Airports in the country.   The officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airport Authority of India and the Planning
 Commission replied to the points raised by the Members on the subject.   To several other queries raised by the
 Members, the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airports Authority of India, Planning Commission were
 requested to furnish written replies subsequently.
3.         *                      *                                  *                                  *
4.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 2:00 P.M.
           
New Delhi                                                                                          Jagdish Kumar
22
nd May 2008                                                                                   Joint Director
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________
****Relates to matters not included in the Report.
 
I
FIRST MEETING
            The Committee met at 11:30 A.M. on Monday, the 11
th August, 2008 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Shri Naresh Gujral

Airport Modernisation
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/141threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:34:41]
3.      Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4.      Shrimati Hema Malini
5.      Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
6.      Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
7.      Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
8.      Dr. K. Dhanaraju
9.      Shri P. Karunakaran
10.  Shri Samik Lahiri
11.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
12.  Shri Hemlal Murmu
13.  Shri Madanlal Sharma
14.  Shri Suraj Singh
15.  Shri Prahlad Joshi
SECRETARIAT
            Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary          
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
            Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
            Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer                   
2.         *                      *                      *                      *
3.         Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft 140 th and 141st reports on ‘Promotion of Tourism in Jammu &
 Kashmir’ and ‘Modernisation of Airports’ respectively.  After some discussion, the Committee adopted both the reports
 with certain modifications.   Thereafter, the Committee authorized its Chairman to present the reports to the Hon’ble
 Chairman, Rajya Sabha and seek his convenience for presentation of the reports.
 
4.         *                      *                      *                      *
5.         *                      *                      *                      *
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 p.m.
New Delhi
                                                                                                  Swarabji B. 
11th August, 2008                                                                                     Deputy Director
_____________________________________________________________
****Relates to matters not included in the Report.
 