Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FOURTEENTH REPORT
 
REPORT NO. 
214
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th December, 2014)
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
First Report on Functioning of National Akademis and other
Cultural Institutions – Issues and Challenges
Recommendations/

57
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED FOURTEENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred
First Report on Functioning of National Akademis and other
Cultural Institutions – Issues and Challenges
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th December, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. T ABLE OF A BBREVIATIONS .................................................................................................. (iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................................. 1—27
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ...................... 28—31
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 3 3—36
7. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 37—56

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2014-15)
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K.N. Balagopal
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Kalpataru Das
^5. Shri Rajeev Shukla
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
7. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
8. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
9. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
10. Kumari Selja
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Vinod Lakhamashi Chavda
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama
14. Mohammed Faizal
15. Ms. Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
18. Shri P. Kumar
19. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey
21. Shri Srinivasa Reddy Ponguleti
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
23. Shri Prathap Simha
24. Shri Rakesh Singh
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari
30. Shri K.C. Venugopal
*31. Vacant
(i)
^ Nominated in place of Shri Oscar Fernandes w.e.f. 9 th December, 2014.
* Vacancy caused due to inclusion of Shri Babul Supriyo in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 9 th November, 2014.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred Fourteenth Report on “Action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred First Report on
Functioning of National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions – Issues and Challenges”.
2. The Two Hundred First Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 17
th October, 2013 to the Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two
Hundred First Report were received from the Ministry of Culture on the 22 nd September, 2014.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 10 th December, 2014.
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 10, 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 19, 1936 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS
CBSE – Central Board of Secondary Education
CCRT – Centre for Cultural Resources and Training
CCS – Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal Rules)
CGHS – Central Government Health Scheme
CIET – Central Institute of Educational T echnology
ESI – Employee State Insurance
HPC – High Powered Committee
HRD – Human Resource Development
IFTI – Indian Film and Television Institute
IGNCA – Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts
IGNOU – Indira Gandhi National Open University
KVS – Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
LKA – Lalit Kala Akademi
MOA – Memorandum of Association
NCERT – National Council for Educational Research and Training
NGMA – National Gallery of Modern Art
NSD – National School of Drama
SA – Sahitya Akademi
SFC – Standing Finance Committee
SNA – Sangeet Natak Akademi
ZCC – Zonal Cultural Centre
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture on
the observations/recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred and First Report on
“Functioning of National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions– Issues and Challenges”, which
was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 17
th October, 2013.
2. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Ministry of Culture vide their O.M.
dated the 22 nd September, 2014 in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the
Report.
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of all the further
recommendations/observations, which have been made in this Report should be furnished to
the Committee at the earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Two Hundred and First Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and
recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the
succeeding paragraphs.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
5. The fact that three high-powered Committees had to be constituted for reviewing the
functioning of these institutions at regular interval is a clear indication that these institutions were
not working on the expected lines almost from the beginning and that need was being felt for
making them more effective, relevant and visible. Secondly, the fact of missing files relating to
these high-powered Committees reflected the lack of required concern in the Ministry of Culture
about working/performance of these bodies or it was helpless in doing anything in this regard due
to reasons beyond its control, perhaps because of autonomy enjoyed by them. The Committee,
therefore, decided to look into these issues and while examining the matter, it found that its
apprehensions were not unfounded and the problems were deeper than expected.
(Recommendation at Para 5 of 201st Report)
6. The Committee notes that though the Haksar Committee had also recommended for review
of the constitutions in 1990s, nothing could be done by the Government till now. The Committee
was informed that the Committees have been constituted for Lalit Kala Akademi and NSD to review
their constitutions and this Committee is not aware of their outcome. The Committee would like
to be apprised about this. (Para 22 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
7. There is no record available of the implementation of various recommendations of these
Committees in the Ministry. However, these recommendations are also being taken into consideration
by the High Power Committee constituted recently as per recommendations contained in this report.
8. Updated Status : Copies of report of Bhabha Committee, Khosla Committee and Haksar
Committee were made available to the HPC.
9. The HPC submitted its Report in May, 2014 and the same is under examination in
consultation with concerned organizations.

2
10. The HPC has advised that a Committee be set up to implement the recommendations. The
Committee should include officials from the Akademies and at least two external experts. It has
suggested that for each Institution concerned in HPC’s Report a small group be set up to study
changes required in detail and to bring them into effect. HPC felt that the changes proposed in its
report can be brought about in approximately two years.
11. HPC’s Report was circulated to all concerned and also uploaded on this Ministry’s website.
At present the views/comments of various Akademies on HPC’s report are being obtained and
examined.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
12. The Committee notes the fact of missing records regarding implementation of
recommendations of Bhabha Committee, Khosla Committee and Haksar Committee. Aside
from much resources, public money, time and efforts gone waste, it reflects the attitude of
those who were responsible to examine/implement them. The Committee hopes that the
findings of the present High Powered Committee set up by the Ministry would not meet the
same fate.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
13. The Committee agrees that having autonomous cultural institutions with a link to
government remains a valuable notion in principle. The fundamental problem, however, is that these
were set up at a different time altogether, and they are alleged to have not been able to connect
with the actual arts constituencies of the day in the desired manner. The Committee feels that this
problem expresses itself in the linked areas of mandate; structure; accountability; inclusiveness;
networks; and imaginative outreach of programmes. Culture in general and the arts in particular can
never work with an unchanging or unresponsive or bureaucratic template. If the basic driver of
the akademis is to be autonomous and imaginative support for dynamic, ever-changing and
heterogeneous arts practices and practitioners, the institutions need to be reenergized from time to
time. We have unfortunately failed on that account. Emphasizing the urgent need for doing so, the
Committee recommends that the Government should come out with a road map in this regard in
the light of our experience so far. The Committee would like to be informed about steps to be
taken for this purpose. (Para 26 of ibid)
14. The Committee feels that the entire field of art and culture did not get the required attention
for decades, despite the foresight and commitment of the Founding- Fathers who knew the
significance of ‘culture and arts’ in our efforts for the nation-building. They set up these
institutions because they knew that this power is superior to other forms of power. But
unfortunately, these institutions, over the time, are alleged to have developed the vested interests -
monopolized by a few persons or group who have earned titles of ‘Culture Vultures’ or ‘Culture
Czars/Czarinas’, etc. Their products are described as being uninspiring, not showcasing the
composite culture of India. India is not known even to Indians precisely because these agencies
have not been able to live upto the expectations. These have still remained merely as subordinate
offices instead of becoming institutions of national glory. Be that as it may, the Committee feels
a deeper review of their organisation, composition, functioning and vision is called for urgently.
Professionalism of the highest order alone can salvage these institutions from the patronage of
unscrupulous people. The persons entering the portals of our premier cultural bodies, apart from
being from the field of art and culture also should be an evolved human being. In view of this,
the Committee recommends a comprehensive review of the Constitution as well as working of
these autonomous bodies – Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi, National
School of Drama, Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts and National Gallery of Modern Arts to

3
attune them to the present day realities and requirements. The aim should be to get rid of the
vested interests that may have led to ‘cronyism’ and ‘self-perpetuating administration’. Only artists
should get opportunity to manage these bodies to make them truly professional, more responsive
and accessible. Their autonomy should be preserved at all costs, but we should ensure that it does
not lead to autocracy of a few. Autonomy and accountability are two sides of the same coin, one
cannot exist without the other. (Para 27 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
15. As desired by the Parliamentary Committee, a High Power Committee has recently been
constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Abhijit Sengupta, Secretary, Culture (Retd.),
Government of India to address the various concerns expressed by the Parliamentary Committee
in regard to various Akademis under the Ministry of Culture.
16. Updated Status : The High Powered Committee has submitted its report. HPC has
recommended that a working group should be set up, chaired by a senior officer of the MOC, with
the three Secretaries of the Akademis, experts in the arts and at least one legal expert to draw up
the new Constitutions of the Akademis. Thereafter the Government will have to use its overarching
powers to direct the Akademis to adopt these changes. Recommendations of the HPC are under
consideration in the Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that Ministry this time will try to live upto
expectations and come out with the most practicable and effective mechanism that may take
care of the problems faced today in these bodies as expeditiously as possible. This
Committee shall try to monitor any major step required to be taken in this regard. It also
calls upon the Akademis and other institutions to utilize this opportunity in making them
more responsive, effective and accountable. The Committee reiterates its observation made
earlier that “culture in general and arts in particular, can never work with an unchanging
or unresponsive or bureaucratic template”.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
18. The Committee feels that art and culture are inextricably linked with our traditions which
should be viewed as an evolving and organic thing. At the same time, these are not merely a thing
of the past, they have close correlation with the present as well as the future. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that efforts have to be made to create a composite, holistic understanding
of culture that can happen only if our premier cultural organizations such as the various Akademis
have a proper synergy amongst themselves. (Para 28 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
19. The various Akademis under the Ministry of Culture have synergy among themselves or
with other educational and cultural institutions. For example, the Indira Gandhi National Centre for
Arts (IGNCA) has over the years established a network with like-minded organizations in various
fields both Government and non-Government as also educational institutions. To name some: Prasar
Bharti, Sangeet Natak Akademi, National School of Drama, Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav
Sanghrahalay, Zonal Cultural Centres, several organizations in the North-East, including the North
East Hill University, Delhi, University, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Indraprastha University, Calicut
University, Benaras Hindu University, Centre for Cultural Resources and Training, NCERT, and
British Library.

4
20. IGNCA believes in the synergy of institutions and interdisciplinary studies. For instance on
8th March (International Women’s Day), 2013, the IGNCA in collaboration with the ZCCs and a
NGO working in the area of women’s health started a year-long campaign on ‘Cultural barriers in
women’s health.’ Through its Bal Jagat programme, the IGNCA has contacted over a hundred
schools, with emphasis on government schools and those run for underprivileged children, and
conducted workshops, film screenings and storytelling sessions, relating to Indian arts, culture and
heritage.
21. Sahitya Akademi encourages proper synergy among similar institutions like State Akademies,
educational and cultural institutions like Sangeet Natak Akademi and National Book Trust etc.
through which programmes are organized in collaboration.
22. The CCRT in its endeavour to enlarge its scope of working with other sister organizations
and to share its expertise with them, has developed certain collaborative inter-art as well as
educative programmes which are being organized in collaboration with ZCCs on various themes for
the benefit of student community.
23. Keeping in view the expertise available at CCRT, the CBSE had taken the help of CCRT to
prepare modules in the form of printed material as well as audio visual programmes on Indian
Culture for the courses. The NCERT in collaboration with CCRT has designed the syllabus on Art
Education for secondary level students and also produced educational material using the resources
of CCRT.
24. Further, synergy amongst various cultural organizations is also established through Central
Advisory Board on Culture and the Sub-Commission on Culture. However, the High Power
Committee is also examining these aspects.
25. Updated Status : The High Powered Committee has submitted its report. HPC has observed
that at the programmatic level, synergy must be in academic collaboration. The three Akademis
could jointly support inter-disciplinary studies. They should hold joint workshops and discussions
in areas of common theoretical importance. Recommendations of the HPC are under consideration
in the Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
26. The Committee notes the reply regarding synergy amongst the Akademis, cultural
and educational institutions but feels that it leaves much to be desired. Its level needs to
be enhanced and expanded.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
27. The Committee feels that there is hardly any contradiction between what the Committee
found and the argument given by the Ministry of Culture about overlapping of their mandates/
activities. The Committee also agrees that strict compartmentalization in this regard may neither be
possible nor desirable. But the Committee is convinced and Haksar Committee also talked about
this, that there is a scope for avoiding duplication of activities which causes wastage of resources
and efforts. This may be streamlined to reduce such duplications to a great extent. Thus, the
activities of the institutions need to be synergised for promotion and protection of our art and
culture in more efficient and effective way. (Para 30 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
28. The various Akademis under the Ministry function as per their respective mandate. In this,
although they collaborate with similar institutions, they try to avoid duplication of activities because

5
each organization has its own mandate. As mentioned above, the High Power Committee is
examining these aspects also.
29. Updated Status : The High Powered Committee has submitted its report and its
recommendations are under consideration in the Ministry in consultation with all concerned
organisations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
30. The Committee hopes that the duplication if any, as mentioned above would be
cautiously eliminated to a great extent after new report is implemented.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
31. Our cultural akademis do not seem to interact nor do they have any sustained or
meaningful dialogue with schools, colleges and universities – even in the metros, leave alone the
vast remainder of the country. As a result, the akademis, for the most part, work like museums
in the wilderness. In the existing scenario, the Committee feels that our schools need to integrate
cultural education as part of their curriculum. This has to become mandatory for it to be
effective. (Para 32 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
32. Integrating cultural education in school curriculum is within the jurisdiction of the Ministry
of HRD. As far as the Akademis under the Ministry of Culture are concerned, some of them
already impart training on cultural matters to youth of the country directly or indirectly.
33. The CCRT was set up precisely for distinct functions relating to “Propagation of Culture
among Students”, which was not being addressed by any institution in the educational set up. It
was solely for this reason that a conscious decision to set up CCRT in 1979 was taken in order
to discharge its responsibilities towards its people for propagation of cultural values through
teachers and students.
34. CCRT has trained more than 1.2 lakh teachers in the field of cultural education and has
created a niche for itself in providing cultural education in schools. The CCRT has trained these
teachers covering 450 plus districts of the country. It is heartening to mention that most of the
schools are from rural backgrounds. The CCRT has worked with every State Education
Department in the length and breadth of the country. The teachers are trained in the methodologies
of linking education with culture.
35. Sahitya Akademi is involving more and more young writers for their programmes in 24
different languages recognized by the Akademi and also gives Yuva Puraskar to writers of the age
of 35 and below in these languages. Akademi has also involved school children in the programmes
organized under Children’s Literature. These programmes are not only held in the main cities but
also in remote places of the country.
36. Recently instructions have been issued that all those organisations/NGOs that are given
grants by this Ministry, would also give performance in at least two schools of their choice in the
place of their operation.
37. Committee’s observation that schools need to integrate cultural education as part of their
curriculum, the same has been conveyed to Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department
of School Education and Literacy who are concerned in the matter.

6
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
38. The Committee appreciates the work initiated by CCRT in training teachers by
liaising with State Education Departments in the country. The Committee advises the
Ministry to guard against mine or thine attitude. It has passed the onus of integrating
cultural education with curriculum as suggested by it, on to the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (HRD). It would have been appropriate had the Ministry of Culture
tried to put its head with Ministry of Human Resource Development to work together in
this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
39. Education and culture are inseparable and will remain incomplete without one another. The
Committee, therefore, feels that the mandate of the akademis needs to be re-articulated to
emphasise links among the akademis as well as with a range of educational institutions. They
should interact with the Indian universities and educational institutions with a view to propagate,
preserve, and enrich our heterogeneous culture. Such a link would also promote arts education,
essential if we are to build a new generation of culture and arts “managers” with a vision.
(Para 33 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
40. A High Power Committee has been constituted to look into these issues. It is however,
mentioned that some of the Akademis are already involving educational Institutions in their
activities. For example, Sahitya Akademi regularly organizes literary activities with various
educational institutes/universities and colleges. The Akademi also collaborates with these educational
and literary institutions to organize its programme which are quite in number. Sahitya Akademi also
gives financial assistance under its Grants-in-Aid scheme to the educational institutes, literary
associations, universities and colleges from time to time and from the past experience, the Akademi
is having very healthy relationship with the educational institutions.
41. CCRT is working in the field of Cultural Education by way of providing education to the
in-service teachers, teacher educators and administrators, producing supplementary reading
materials on cultural education in the form of printed and audio-video teaching aids; sensitizing
students to the rich cultural heritage of India. It conducts programmes under the schemes
“Propagation of Culture among college and school students”, interlinking of education with culture
and Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme. During the training programme the participating
teachers are required to interact with local school students thus facilitating the participating
teachers to translate the open handed learning in their respective institutions.
42. Further, the CCRT, working closely with NCERT and CBSE, was successful in introducing
heritage crafts and other forms of arts in the curriculum. The CCRT worked with NCERT in
preparation of position papers of the National Focus Group of National Curriculum Framework
2005 and made various recommendations. The CCRT is also in the final stages of starting Distance
Learning Training Programme with the help of Central Institute of Educational Technology (CIET)
of NCERT. These programmes will enhance the reach of CCRT to new heights quantitatively
without compromising on its quality and bring new resources into contact.
43. The NSD as a premier theatre teaching and training institute does not confine itself to the
academics happening within its classrooms and studios. It also interacts with students and teachers
across the country having drama departments in various universities through various ways of
teaching, conducting workshops, participating in seminars, evaluating research documents and also
participating in selection committees for various appointments.

7
44. Under its Outreach Programme or in other words, NSD’s Extension Programme, the
institution’s effort is to reach out to all young theatre enthusiasts and practitioners across the
country to train and provide them various theatrical inputs through theatre workshops of short/
long term durations. The participants of these workshops are not merely uneducated and
unemployed youths but come from educational institutions and in-service NGOs or Government
offices. Over the years beyond two decades, a large number of school/college going youths have
been immensely benefitted by these workshops.
45. The Theatre-in-Education Wing of the NSD engaged in imparting education through the
medium of theatre has been of immense use for children in the age group of 8–16 years. Through
this wing’s training programme, a great sense of confidence and personality building in the children
has been developed. Currently, the activities of TIE Company are largely located in and around
Delhi. It is so because of constraints of manpower and finance resource.
46. The Theatre-in-Education Company has also taken up the task of educating in-service
teachers of the country through the medium of theatre which subsequently helps the teachers in
educating their students. This programme has been successfully running in Agartala at Tripura for
the last two years and has won high appreciation.
47. As far as IGNCA is concerned, it is working with many academic institutions, universities
like Delhi University, JNU, BHU, and Pondicherry University etc. and with academicians from all
over the country. It also collaborates with organizations such as NCERT, CCRT, to promote art
education in schools and colleges through academic and outreach programmes. It also concentrates
on research and publication of fundamental texts and volumes of fundamental terms in the arts,
humanities and cultural heritage of India and the project for multi volume encyclopaedia of Indian
arts. Apart from dissemination through Bal Jagat programme and collaborative research, IGNCA
plays a major role in academic content generation.
48. The Sangeet Natak Akademi serves as a member of the General Council of Central Board
of Secondary Education, New Delhi and from time to time imparts desired information on the basic
concepts in the syllabus at academic level; also provide expertise in framing the syllabus on the
element of performing arts for the NCERT.
49. Ministry of Culture has been considering ways and means by which the urgent need for
arts management in India is addressed. To ensure that the process of arriving at an institutional
structure has wider participation and transparency, a Conclave attended by people of eminence was
held in March, 2014 at IIM, Bangalore.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
50. The Committee notes the reply but feels that all these activities were confined
mainly to Metro cities and colleges/universities located there. It needs to be expanded to
rural areas with the help of State Governments and renowned NGOs working in the area.
It would also help in locating and nourishing talents scattered all over the country.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
51. The Committee is of the opinion that a cultural Akademi would be meaningless if it does
not have programmes to reach out to the people at large, especially the youth. In addition to
interventions in educational spaces, this also calls for more planned involvement with the
community in general and the youth in particular by organizing workshops, short term appreciation
courses, residencies in colleges and schools. Besides, equally important is to have a closer interface
with the Media - print, electronic and social media through Internet. All the artists and art forms
may be provided with adequate platforms. Akashvani and Doordarshan may be roped in to provide

8
more opportunities to the artists and art forms. They should be used as a platform to disseminate
art and culture and various art forms. In other words, their mandate needs to be re-articulated to
balance the existing emphasis on showcasing with a more inclusive approach that takes the
akademis to people. (Para 35 of ibid)
52. The Committee notes that the efforts in India are largely targeted at getting children to learn
art forms – namely dance and music. Many drop out very soon and few see this as a real career
option. Incentives are far and few to get them engaged and interested. The Committee feels that
to avoid this disinterest, another level of intervention is required, to make them aware of what these
traditions are; at least to a point where they can identify some very basic ideas of the performing
and visual arts. While the Ministry of Culture set up the CCRT with somewhat a similar idea of
reaching out and creating opportunities for young children, especially from smaller cities, and all
regions including the North-East, the program needs to be seriously reviewed and updated. Further
it should be linked with other ongoing efforts of the Ministry. (Para 36 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
53. The present status of the various Akademis in these matters is as follows:
CCRT organizes training programmes which aim at creating awareness of the fundamental
principles underlying the development of culture. CCRT has been involving youth in her
programmes by providing national scholarships to young talented children. More than
10,500 scholarships were given to young students who have now created a niche for
themselves. As far as the dissemination of art, culture, various art forms and various
schemes are concerned; CCRT has been propagating the senior scholarship programmes
through trained teachers and also through young scholarship holders.
The CCRT has recently been transferred the Cultural Heritage Youth Leadership Programme
(CHYLP). This scheme will benefit school students of backward classes and rural areas.
It is estimated that hundreds of students will get benefited by exposure to arts and this
number will multiply in the subsequent years. The CCRT has been training the teacher
educators of the District Institute of Education and Training (DIETs) which was set up in
each District for training Primary or Upper-primary school teachers. The CCRT has trained
the teacher educators of more than 400 DIETs out of 542 DIETs functioning in the various
States. CCRT intends to cover all the DIETs in the next 3 to 4 years by not only providing
training but also enriching the educational resources in these DIETs. These educational
resources are provided free of cost to the teacher educators. At the philosophical core of
the CCRT lies a commitment to holistic education, encompassing the cognitive, emotional
and spiritual development of children. The CCRT emphasizes education grounded in cultural
knowledge and understanding as conducive to clarity, creativity and independence of
thought, tolerance, and compassion. In sensitizing students, teachers and others to the arts
and cultures of India, the CCRT aims to encourage local communities to take the lead in
the preservation of their cultural and natural heritage, and to promote respect for diversity.
Considering the impact of the electronic media on the viewers and realizing the
responsibility rests with the cultural institutions working under Ministry of Culture, CCRT
has produced quality productions towards fulfilling the objectives of linking education with
culture. This educational material is the outcome of the continued interaction with the
scholars, experts and educators, and is based on careful study and research. This material
is given to schools which have sent teachers to the CCRT to train, and teacher trainees are
initiated into using these in a variety of teaching and learning situations in the schools, for
curriculum teaching and extension work. In addition, the material is available for sale at the
CCRT headquarters and at its regional centres for general access also. The CCRT is signing

9
a MOU with Doordarshan (Bharati) to telecast these productions for wider circulation and
reach.
In order to build up a pervasive consciousness of the rich natural and cultural heritage of
North-East region, including Sikkim through the utilization of students in the conservation
of our heritage, the CCRT organized workshops in different North-Eastern States. The
primary, middle, secondary and senior secondary school teachers from all parts of the
country were introduced to innovative methods in classroom teaching using specific art
forms and traditional crafts of this region.
Sahitya Akademi, does a lot of programmes for youth which involve poetry readings, short
story readings, inviting them for national and regional seminars and also translation
workshops as and when organized apart from the Annual Yuva Puraskar given to young
writers.
NSD, through its outreach programme, has been educating and training young people having
interest in theatre arts across the country. Later on, these young people have either pursued
the theatre arts for their higher education and thereafter, joining some professional career
or practicing the same for its promotion in their region. This has helped in preserving the
dying performing art forms in different parts of the country.
To support the performing artists of the younger generation, the Sangeet Natak Akademi has
introduced Ustad Bismillah Khan Yuva Puraskar in 2006, to give recognition to the young
artistes. These artistes are featured in the festival of music dance and drama held after the
Award Ceremony. The Akademi provides financial support and training to young artists by
providing training under its various schemes, to sustain the rare and dying art forms such
as Kuttiyattam, Chhau, instrument making and mask making etc. set up in different regions
of the country. In addition, seven ZCCs are also actively concerned with preservation of
art and culture including folk and tribal art and culture in the country.
54. The High Power Committee set up by the Government recently will also look into these
recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee.
55. Updated Status : The High Powered Committee has submitted its report and its
recommendations are under consideration in the Ministry in consultation with all concerned
organisations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee notes the reply and further recommends that the Akademis and
CCRT must collaborate with Universities like IGNOU for spreading cultural programmes in
India. IGNOU is a National University dedicated for distance learning and is presently
running an education channel “Gyandarshan”, which is highly popular and accessible to
everyone. In Gyandarshan direct interaction of teacher and students gets telecast. These
Akademis and CCRT can telecast its programmes on Gyandarshan for wider dissemination
of art and culture.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
57. The Committee found that the Secretariat of these cultural institutions were manned by the
people who have little idea/knowledge about how to manage Arts and Culture. Many of them lack
professionalism required for the field. The Committee feels that a cultural cadre distinct from the
regular administrative cadre needs to be created to man the functioning of the Akademis, Museums
and other cultural institutions. This should consist of individuals who may be ‘generalists in the

10
arts’. Courses would have to be introduced for educating them in the arts to make them conversant
with different forms of theatre, dance, music, poetry and literature, painting, sculpture and
architecture. Courses in ‘art administration’ could be part of the regular educational stream or even
special courses created under the Ministries of HRD and Culture to produce right kind of persons
to administer our cultural institutions in a better way. The Committee further recommends that
the Ministry should seriously consider the creation of cultural cadre on the above lines.
(Para 37 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
58. It is not possible to have a culture cadre common to all Akademies as their requirements
are quite different. The Akademies already have specialists in different fields with which the
respective Akademies are concerned and in view of the uniqueness of their respective expertise, it
may not be possible to utilize the same in any other Akademi.
59. CCRT has assured that being a training institution; they can organize 2 or 3 programmes
for the personnel of the Ministry of Culture and Ministry of HRD. These programmes can be of
one week duration. The CCRT would like to organize two such programmes in CCRT Hqrs, Delhi
and one programme in Regional Centre, Hyderabad the modalities of logistics of which can be
worked out.
60. CCRT organized a training programme for the Directors of ZCCs. This course was followed
by another training programme for the 2nd tier officials of the ZCCs. The Centre organized very
recently another programme for the Librarians and Library professionals in CCRT in the month of
March, 2014 which was attended by 42 librarians from different States/UTs.
61. Training policy for all organisations is being formulated. With a view to create awareness
about Arts Management in the country, an Arts Management Conclave was recently organised at
IIM, Bangalore wherein top experts in such fields participated. The conclusions drawn therein are
being processed. National Museum Institute, a deemed University, organises regular courses in
History of Art, Conservation and Museology. ASI also has a training Institute namely Institute of
Archaeology where training in archaeology is imparted to students and the officers of ASI.
62. Updated Status : HPC has also made certain recommendations in this regard. It has
suggested that a cultural administration pool be created appointment to which would be on contract
basis. Some of these positions can be in the Ministry while others can be placed in various
Institutions under the Ministry. The recommendations of HPC are under examination in consultation
with organizations concerned.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63. The Committee agrees with the Ministry of Culture that these Akademis are not
alike and their requirements are quite different. But apart from this Committee, the HPC
also has proposed to create a common/separate cultural administration pool. The Committee
feels that the Ministry has to either strengthen any of its present cadre/service or create
a new service/cadre from the persons belonging to the field of Art and Culture.
64. Akademis and other apex cultural organizations were expected to be the custodians
of our rich cultural heritage. But unfortunately, most of them had been understaffed most
of the time, mainly due to large number of vacancies for very long time. Moreover, higher
positions are being manned by the persons on deputation from sundry background. These
institutions, no doubt, have done some good work but a long term vision to promote art and
culture is yet to develop in the country. In this regard, the Committee would like to
emphasize that the proposal for the creation of a cultural cadre should be carefully
considered on the lines suggested by it.

11
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
65. Regarding Lalit Kala Akademi, there were serious allegations of malpractices and counter
allegations by its Chairman and Secretary. The Garhi studios were occupied by vested interested
and the guidelines for allotment of studios could not be implemented properly. There were
complaints regarding missing/damages of missing large number of famous/rare art works and
paintings due to mishandling during upkeep or transportation. Immediate enquiry and action is
recommended to place responsibility and to evolve mechanism to stop the recurrence. Proper
record should be maintained of all the art works in LKA possession.
66. The Committee recommends that an enquiry may be ordered to find out the truth and fix
responsibility for missing/damaging of art works. Appropriate mechanism should be evolved to
prevent the recurrence of such incidents. The Committee also recommends that appropriate
punishment may be imposed on those found guilty. A proper record should be maintained of all the
art works in possession of Lalit Kala Akademi. (Para 44 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
67. The appointment of the former Secretary, Lalit Kala Akademi (LKA), has been cancelled
being void ab initio and his services have been terminated w.e.f. 05.05.2014. He has filed a case
in Hon’ble Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) against this and the Hon’ble Tribunal has directed
the Government to dispose of the Appeal of former Secretary within eight weeks. With regard to
the irregularities committed by him, a Charge Sheet containing 16 articles of serious charges was
issued to him. However, with the cancellation of the appointment, the enquiry initiated against him
has abated. LKA has stated that the allegations of malpractices levelled against the ex-Chairman
have been found to be motivated and guided by the ex-Secretary because of enquiry ordered by
the ex-Chairman into his action of omissions and commissions in defiance of General Council
directions. LKA has added that the ex-Secretary was the Chief Executive Officer and has taken
decisions without the approval of the then Chairman and the General Council. The Chairman
proceeded against the Secretary for disciplinary action and his action in this regard was approved
by the General Council. After completing his tenure, the ex-Chairman has left the institution.
68. It has been stated by LKA that the Garhi studios were occupied by vested interests. Several
artists were permitted only for one year, but they continued to stay there for several decades. Audit
has also objected about the said overstay in Garhi studios. When the present Chairman asked them
to vacate the studios, they went to the High Courts and Supreme Court of India. They have lost
their cases seeking stay on this action for their vacation, and consequently, they have vacated the
studios. Presently, renovation work is going on and the guidelines for the allotment of studios are
being implemented through an open advertisement and all the applications would be considered by
a Committee of experts from outside the Akademi in accordance with the existing rules/regulations/
norms.
69. With regard to the missing and loss of damaged art works and paintings, a complaint was
lodged in the Tilak Marg Police Station and the case was also referred to the CBI and CBI has
asked the LKA to pursue with the Police. Efforts are on to get all the art works physically verified
and authenticated by a Committee of Experts in the field. Most of the art works have been
digitalized, and the screening work to separate the permanent collection from the camp collection
and other works has been taken up in right earnest.
70. Updated Status : The constitution of LKA is proposed to be amended deleting the clauses
relating to appointment of Vice-Chairman and elected members. In-principle approval of HCM has
been obtained for this.

12
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
71. The Committee notes the updated status and desires that after complete action has
been taken thereon, the Ministry may furnish a final reply.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
72. The Committee reiterates all its observations made about the functioning of our premier
cultural institutions in its 171st Report on the “Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi,
Sangeet Natak Akademi and National School of Drama” and 167
th Report on the “Functioning of
National Museum” submitted earlier to Parliament. In fact, the report in hand is a result of the
callousness and apathy noticed on the part of Akademis as well as the Government to any attempt
to reform these institutions. Fate of a number of important reports such as Bhabha Committee
(1964), Khosla Committee (1972), Haksar Committee (1989) including Parliament’s Reports is a
testimony to this as no actions have been taken on recommendations of these Committees. These
Akademis are always mired in one controversy or the other. Our Founding-Fathers gave them
autonomy to keep the politics away from culture but today politics seems to have crept into them
from the back door. The Founding-Fathers of these institutions had strong faith in the integrity of
the community of writers and artists but could not foresee the problems plaguing these institutions
today. (Para 49 of ibid)
73. The result is a lack of transparency in process and accountability in terms of outcomes.
In fact, their autonomy without transparency and accountability has become a double-edged
weapon to be used as per one’s convenience. In administrative parlance, accountability is not about
control but about responsibility for which autonomy has to be exercised. In other words,
accountability is not an administrative tool but a moral obligation on those who have the
responsibility to give an account of their work and performance. Besides, legitimacy and credibility
of these institutions can only be established if they observe adequate transparency in their
functioning. Unfortunately, these elements are currently conspicuous by their absence. As a result,
these institutions have failed to live upto the expectations and are being misused by those in power
selectively by marginalizing/ignoring deserving others. This crisis situation has been further
compounded by the role of the Ministry of Culture characterized by apathy, lack of concern and
sometimes helplessness. There is hardly any mechanism to ensure accountability and transparency
in their working by the Ministry. Once or twice, the Ministry did try to become pro-active in this
regard, it was met with stiff resistance and the matter went up to highest level in the executive
ladder. As such, normally the Ministry has little option but to keep off. It interferes only when it
feels that it should. (Para 50 of ibid)
74. When asked about the differences between the Chairman and the Secretary, the Ministry of
Culture submitted that when the then Secretary of the Lalit Kala Akademi was dismissed under Rule
19 of the CCS (CCA) Rule by the then Chairman in December, 2011, the Ministry of Culture being
the Appellate Authority issued an order dated 16.01.2012 revoking the dismissal order and directed
to inquire into the various lapses and failures in the dismissal order by following prescribed
procedure. The Committee, however, received views of the other side alleging highhandedness and
unwarranted interference in the affairs of LKA. The Committee also received a copy of the joint
representations given by Secretaries of all the Akademis emphasizing the need for their
restructuring. (Para 51 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
75. Ministry of Culture respects the autonomy of the Akademis as these are premier Institutions
of the country. However, the Akademis are expected to enjoy autonomy while maintaining
accountability. Efforts to make the Constitution of LKA simple, transparent and effective have been

13
made as per directions of the Hon’ble Delhi High Court. In the meanwhile, as per directions of
the Department-related Standing Parliamentary Standing Committee, a High Powered Committee has
been set up to go into all these aspects afresh.
76. Updated Status : Copies of report of Bhabha Committee, Khosla Committee and Haksar
Committee were made available to the HPC.
77. The High Powered Committee has submitted its report and its recommendations are under
consideration in the Ministry in consultation with all concerned organisations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
78. The Committee agrees that autonomy of these Akademis should be maintained but
Committee feels that accountability and transparency are equally important. Akademis after
all are also public institutions being run on the public exchequer. At least in the respect of
enforcing their financial accountability, autonomy should not come in the way. The Ministry
is expected to provide a complete and objective report to Parliament in this regard every
year. Accountability and transparency must be ensured for proper utilization of funds and
their accounts, expenditure etc. should be adequately audited by the Ministry of Culture and
also by C&AG.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
79. As per their constitution/MOA, Secretaries are the executive head of the Akademis. In fact,
their constitutions are vague about the limits of Presidential authority and therefore, sometimes the
Chairmen try to exercise powers which they do not have and intervene directly in day-to-day
administration. Many of the decisions taken by them are not put to ratification by General Council
or Executive Council. Responsibility for any lapse/violation done by the Secretaries while
implementing the direction of the Chairman, ratified or not, would obviously lie with the Secretaries
and not the Chairmen. It has resulted, more often than not, in a running feud between the two.
In such a situation, main work of the Akademis gets a back seat as most of the time, energy and
scarce funds are wasted on unproductive/unwarranted things as cases go to the Court quite too
often. It has been found that during this running feud between the Chairmen and the Secretary,
Ministry either remains a mute spectator or it intervenes only when it feels to do so. The
Committee emphasizes the need for delineation of power between the Chairmen and Secretaries on
the one hand and Government of India on the other to avoid any possibility of violation of rules
and regulations in the course of exercise of administrative powers by the Chairmen/Secretaries of
these Akademis. (Para 55 of ibid)
80. Such a situation, the Committee strongly feels, cannot be allowed to linger on and feels it
is high time something has to be done for setting these Akademis in order. The Committee feels
that these bodies get funds from the Consolidated Fund of India and their Demands for Grants are
approved every fiscal by the Parliament on the recommendations of this Parliamentary Committee.
As such, this Committee with all sense of responsibility says that the funds allocated to these
institutions need closer and regular monitoring by conducting their performance audit every year.
There should be a regular review of the functioning of our cultural institutions. These reviews
should be conducted by external persons/committees which should be included in their Annual
Reports that are placed before Parliament. (Para 56 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
81. The observation of the Committee regarding need for delineation of power between
Chairman and Secretaries of the Akademis appears to have been made primarily in the context of

14
LKA. In this case the demarcation of authority and responsibility between Chairman and Secretary,
LKA are distinct in the Constitution. The responsibility and authority of the General Council,
Executive Board vis-à-vis  Chairman and Secretary are also delineated. However, despite that
problems had crept up. The HPC appointed to look into the working of the Akademis will go into
these aspects also. It is also proposed to have MoUs with all the Akademis to ensure that the
objective for which they were set up is achieved. Comptroller and Auditor General of India has
also been requested to do performance audit of all the Akademies in order.
82. Updated Status : The High Powered Committee has submitted its report and its
recommendations are under consideration in the Ministry in consultation with all concerned
organizations. Ministry of Culture has now entered into MoUs with various organizations under it
to monitor their performance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
83. The Committee hopes that HPC/working group will try to address the problem in
Akademis’ working.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
84. The Ministry should constitute a High Powered Committee (HPC) comprising eminent
persons mainly from the field of art and culture to examine the issues raised in this report as well
as those contained in Bhabha Committee, Khosla Committee and Haksar Committee constituted by
the Government in the years 1964, 1972 and 1989. The proposed HPC can review the mandate,
composition, etc. of these bodies and suggest measures to monitor their performance and a
coordination mechanism for these institutions. (Para 57 of ibid)
85. Major recommendations made by the earlier Committees remain as relevant as these would
have been when made decades ago. The Committee reiterates its anguish on those major
recommendations not acted upon till date. That the proposed HPC does not meet the fate of earlier
Committees, this Committee recommends that it may be kept informed about the decision/action
taken in this regard at every step including the final outcome. The Committee feels that it should
be done at the earliest with a sense of urgency that it deserves. (Para 58 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
86. An HPC has been constituted by the Ministry of Culture, as desired by the Parliamentary
Committee. A copy of the order constituting the HPC is enclosed as Annexure.
87. Updated Status : The High Powered Committee has submitted its report and its
recommendations are under consideration in the Ministry in consultation with all concerned
organisations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
88. The Committee would like to know the actions taken by the Ministry on the Report
of the High Powered Committee.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
89. Accessibility to resources in these Akademis - their libraries, their heritage material and their
publications was another major concern expressed before the Committee. As of now, all these exist
in isolated inaccessible spaces not easily available to people. The Committee is of the view that a

15
real push needs to be made to take stock of what material exists; to digitalise archival material;
and to do all this in collaboration with educational/cultural institutions and organisations all over
India, as well as in collaboration with research scholars and arts practitioners who are not
necessarily in the usual over-used circles of the akademis. All the libraries of the akademis need
to be re-organised and made more freely available to people. To begin with, people should be made
aware that they exist; and have specific material of use to students, scholars and practitioners.
(Para 59 of ibid)
90. The Committee is of the view that accessibility would also be promoted by the practice of
external fellows coming in and looking at how the archives can be made to work. This would not
only mean bringing in their own material, but also helping with the great need to catalogue and
make archival material usable, and accessible to more people. (Para 60 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
91. As far as the Sahitya Akademi is concerned, the library and their publications are easily
accessible and available to the people. As regards CCRT, it provides very well researched and
documented educational material on different manifestations of art and culture free of cost to the
government and government aided schools after training teachers/teacher educators/educational
administrators. Further, the CCRT is in the process of uploading its entire resources in the National
Repository established by Ministry of Human Resources Development, Government of India. The
CCRT is also in the final stages of signing a MoU with DD Bharti for telecasting CCRT productions
on national level for achieving a very wide audience and reach. The CCRT is also in the process
of signing a MoU with IGNCA in giving exposure to students in a wide range of programmes being
organized by the IGNCA. Moreover, the Ministry of Culture also administers a Scheme “Tagore
National Fellows and Scholars Scheme” wherein eminent persons are given fellowships to work in
an institution to do original research into certain identified aspects of that organisation for a period
of two years. Digitized data with various organisations is also proposed to be uploaded on the
website for bringing it in public domain. Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) is
going to set up the National Cultural Audiovisual Archives (NCAA) at IGNCA. The proposed
duration of the project is initially for 4 years. The IGNCA has taken up this project because a large
body of India’s cultural wealth, created in the last six decades is stored in audiovisual form with
various governmental and non-governmental institutions and private collections. The content of
these holdings enshrines the creativity of some of India’s greatest artistic talents. This is an
invaluable national heritage that needs to be preserved for all time and also made accessible to the
citizens of the country. The expected date of completion of the Project is 31
st March, 2017. The
project will be implemented by the IGNCA through partner institutions and agreements will be
signed with them for the work assigned to them. The project will be monitored by the National
Monitoring Committee headed by Secretary (Culture) and assisted by Member Secretary, IGNCA.
For day-to-day project monitoring and implementation respectively, a Steering Committee of experts
from various disciplines has been constituted.
92. Updated Status : Ministry of Culture administers a scheme named Tagore National
Fellowship which enables the identified cultural institutions engage scholars to work on research
projects. The scholars affiliate themselves with these Institutions to work on projects of mutual
interest.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
93. The Committee feels that the reply furnished by the Ministry, particularly, the
updated status shown as above, is not adequate and, therefore, wishes to be apprised of
more details.

16
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
94. The akademis need to constantly provide information about themselves and their ongoing
programmes to their constituencies. Better use of online communication and existing media is
critical. The Akademis should not feature in the press only when there is complaint or controversy
about any action/decision taken by them. More use of ICT and media, the Committee feels, would
also help strengthening the transparency process of officials in the akademis, and the artists usually
involved. The Committee notes that the websites of the Akademis and cultural institutions are not
updated, many of the information provided are either incomplete or out of date. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the websites of all the Akademis and cultural institutions should be
updated on real time basis. All the programmes and activities should be prominently published in
their websites. There should be a system of proactive dissemination and publication of all the
relevant information. (Para 61 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
95. The websites of the Akademis are regularly updated. As far as Sahitya Akademi is
concerned not only its website is regularly updated, all the activities of the Akademi like declaration
of awards, vacancy notices, programmes etc. are also uploaded on the website of the Akademi as
well as on the other social networks like Facebook.
96. As regards CCRT, it maintains its website which contains detailed information about the
main and ancillary activities of the organization. Recognizing that the website of any institute/
establishment constitutes a powerful and democratic source of information, the CCRT has
redesigned its website and add features and functionalities to give it contemporary look and feel
as well as more utility with the help of IGNCA which has a graphically rich layout and structure.
The website is regularly updated on all the counts.
97. The IGNCA website is updated on real time basis. The IGNCA also interacts on the social
media in a substantial way. The Centre has a regular e-newsletter, listing the activities of the
forthcoming fortnight. This is sent to thousands of email addresses collected by the IGNCA in the
last one year. The IGNCA website of fers information on current events as also the programmes
and activities since inception. It has multimedia presentations, slides, photographs and documents
for reference. It also submits a monthly report to the Ministry of Culture.
98. The Sangeet Natak Akademi is constantly updating the information of its activities, archival
holdings, books and periodicals on its website. Besides this, KIOSKs have been provided in the
Library and Museum for the members and persons of performing arts to access the desired
information at either free of cost or at minimal charges depending upon the information/material
required.
99. Similarly, the NGMA has a dynamic website and is updated on real time basis. As regards
the National School of Drama, all information relating to teaching and training and its various
theatre activities are always available on the its official website and this site is updated on a regular
basis.
100. The Ministry is also developing a Mobile App through NIC to provide information on
cultural events in the country. It will be divided into three parts viz. Web App Development, Mobile
App Development and Data uploading. Data from different cultural centres in each city/town will
be collected and entered into a web based application by content uploaders into a web based form.
Users will be able to search on locations based (GPS), get route map to event location and also
receive push notification from Event Web portal.

17
101. Updated Status : Apart from Mobile App, the Ministry is also going to make its presence
felt through Twitter and Youtube. The Ministry’s new website and the above applications were
inaugurated by HCM on 19.09.2014.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
102. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
103. The Committee observes that the specific forms of support by the akademis are crucial to
nurture existing and new forms of arts practice. Grants, residencies in educational institutions,
travel etc. should be made completely transparent in terms of selection process and all information
and lists should be freely available on the akademis’ website. Whether it is awards, grants,
fellowships, residencies, or travel aboard, it makes more sense, on the whole, for a body of work
to be recognised/supported/rewarded rather than a single work. (Para 64 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
104. The CCRT implements the Ministry’s Cultural Talent Search Scholarship Scheme to award
scholarship which is advertised widely in the print media through DA VP. The selection of young
scholars is very transparent and has never attracted any controversy since its inception in 1982.
Similarly the selection of in-service teachers who are invited for participation in training
programmes is also done only on the recommendations of the State Education Department(s) and
hence has not been under any controversy. The working of the Sahitya Akademi is very transparent
and the information is freely available on the Akademi’s website whether it is award, Fellowship
or any other scheme which the Akademi proposes to give to the writers. Sangeet Natak Akademi’s
official website provides all type of information with regard to financial support, training, events,
workshops etc and also its archival holding of documentation, library and audio-visual material.
105. Updated Status : Ministry of Culture proposes to put five schemes namely, Jr. and Sr.
Fellowship; Scholarship to young Artists; Building Grants Scheme; Cultural Functions Grants
Scheme and Pension Grant Scheme online shortly. With this, candidates will be able to apply online
and also track the status of their applications. Further they will be also updated by the system
automatically about the status through SMS/email.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
106. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
107. It is ironic that India, a cultural leader, a storehouse of rich traditions, values and beliefs,
is itself struggling to keep together these exceptional treasures, particularly those that do not reach
urban centres – the local and folk cultures. (Para 65 of ibid)
108. It is fact that these traditions and art forms have survived centuries through several political and
social ups and downs. Where is the innovative programming, the creative content, the quality and the
aesthetics of the production/product? Although administrative and structural reforms are important, the
greater need is to have trained, efficient and informed personnel. This is ownership in addition to
accountability. If one were only to look at the various organizations, the objectives for their existence,
it would seem that the objectives of preserving, promoting spreading culture and so on should be
wonderfully achieved in this country! Ownership is, therefore, crucially missing. (Para 66 of ibid)

18
Reply of the Government
109. Sahitya Akademi has a special centre for folk literature under which Sahitya Akademi is
doing programmes to promote the folk literature of our country and also publishing books. The
CCRT organized academic programmes for the Directors of all the seven Zonal Culture Centres and
also for the second tier officials of these ZCCs. These programmes were able to generate and
create awareness of the various facets of Indian culture and also the interrelatedness amongst
artistic traditions of India. The CCRT in its all the training programmes emphasizes the role of local
education. It is education which is not formal, not conventional, nor designed merely for the
purpose of cultivating skills but something which relates people to their community. It is an
educational venture that is localized, as its roots are in the local community.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
110. The Committee notes the reply. However, the efforts towards bringing the folk
literature into mainstream may be continued in future and evaluated from time to time.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
111. The Committee emphasizes the need for a separate Akademi for Tribal and Folk Arts. The
Committee feels that this specialized Centre could, if set up, be a vehicle for the propagation of
folk and tribal art forms concertedly. This would also mean nurturing these forms and preserving
them in their original form as well as encouraging innovation in presentation without destroying the
authenticity of these art forms. This could perhaps also be a way to raise the status as well as
the remuneration of these artists to levels comparable to those of the classical artists. In addition,
it can facilitate a cultural dialogue between all art forms from classical to traditional.
(Para 67 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
112. It may be mentioned that the academies and other establishments look after the tribal and
folk art forms of their respective art categories. Craft is the largest sector of employment after
agriculture and one of the largest contribution to the economy in export revenues as well as
domestic sales. Hence, craft can be used as a means of interpreting many social issues and ways
of living. Craft in India is so unusually prevalent that it has been used over the centuries as a
metaphor for numerous philosophical, metaphysical, and social craft concept. Many words, forms
of measurement, colour and material have a craft origin. Taana and Baana a life is something with
which we all are familiar. Caste, gender, religion and social practice all play significant/varying
roles. In SNA, a separate section for the Tribal and Folk art form is working in the Akademi. This
department has recently organized ‘Desaj’ – Festival of Folk and Tribal arts in collaboration with
National Book Trust, New Delhi during National Book Fair.
113. Updated Status  : The mandate of the seven ZCCs is to preserve and propagate the
traditional folk art and crafts of the country. The ZCCs have been implementing the following
schemes to preserve and promote traditional folk art and artists:–
(i) National Cultural Exchange Programme.
(ii) Guru Shishya Parampara Scheme.
(iii) Y oung Talented Artistes Scheme.
(iv) Documentation of Vanishing Art Forms.

19
(v) Theatre Rejuvenation Scheme.
(vi) Shilpagram Activities.
(vii) Loktarang – National Folk Dance Festival and Octave.
114. Further, IGRMS, another autonomous organisations under the Ministry which is a museum
dedicated to the depiction of story of mankind, also holds exhibitions and does outreach activities
on our country’s tribal and folk culture/people. LKA also works to promote and protect tribal and
folk art forms. HPC has in its report felt that creation of another Akademi will not resolve the
problem of insufficient emphasis of tribal and folk forms by the existing Akademis.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
115. The Committee notes the reply and appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry
of Culture, but still would like to reiterate that a creation of a separate Akademi for “Tribal
and Folk Arts”, needs to be seriously considered.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
116. We need to look for low cost insurance models that can treat a preset list of illnesses such
as heart problems, Asthma, kidney malfunctions and so on. The Committee feels the medical
insurance scheme named ‘Yashaswini Health Care’ for artists in Karnataka can be taken as a model
for such a Scheme. (Para 71 of ibid)
117. The Committee notes that the artist fund caters to very few artists and the amount provided
is meagre. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should come out with an
insurance scheme to cover all the deserving artists to ensure sufficient medical care to meet their
medical needs. Any such social security measures should also be extended to related communities
such as instrument makers, etc. (Para 72 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
118. Some Akademies are already providing this facility to the artiste community. Sahitya
Akademi under its Grants-in-Aid scheme provides medical help to writers whenever such a request
is sent to the Akademi. The Sangeet Natak Akademi is providing medical aid through artist aid fund
to its fellows, awardees and artists in the field of performing arts from within its allocated budget.
Ministry of Culture also supports artists in indigent circumstances by way of providing regular
grants.
119. Updated Status : Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India has launched
the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana. This provides health insurance benefit coverage for Below
Poverty Line (BPL) families.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
120. The crux of the recommendation of the Committee was somewhat different. The
Committee recommended in its 201
st Report that these artists/fellows should be covered
under some medical insurance scheme like CGHS/ESI or other private medical insurance.
These schemes may be contributory and the artists will always have an option open before
them to avail this medical insurance facility.

20
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
121. The Committee, therefore, feels that festivals need for focussed attention and recommends
that various forms of festivals may be revived and replicated to provide art and artist a platform
to display. (Para 73 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
122. As far as Sahitya Akademi is concerned, literature festivals are held which gives writers a
platform at regional, national and international level. NSD is organizing annual theatre festivals of
adult and children artists separately since 1999 in Delhi and a parallel festival in a major
cosmopolitan city of the country.
123. The Aiyar Committee which was set up by the Government to review the functioning of
the ZCCs has inter-alia  recommended that the National Cultural Exchange Programme may be
expanded to promote octave like programme for all zones with the pivotal role being drawn to
ZCCs. This recommendation has been accepted by the Government and the ZCCs have been
advised to take follow up action in the matter.
124. The ZCCs have been participating in many festivals organised by different States. Besides,
all ZCCs organise Octave festival in order to promote North-East culture. Besides, in the current
financial year, the ZCCs have proposed to organise octave like J&K festival in order to promote
folk and tribal art and culture of J&K.
125. CCRT has started organizing two cultural festivals, one being Virasat - Kamaladevi (in
memory of Smt. Kamladevi Chattopadhyay) which mainly crafts melas are organized. The crafts
persons so invited for participation with the recommendations of Trifed, Dastakar, etc. The second
festival which CCRT has initiated is entitled “Unity in Diversity” for young CCRT scholarship
holders( in the field of culture). The main objective of these festivals is to create an understanding
of the aesthetic and cultural values in order to appreciate and understand the creative expressions
of mankind through the ages and promote experience of beauty through sensory perception. In the
festivals, special efforts are made to involve the youth in cultural development, to inculcate in them
a spirit of harmony and togetherness and to channelize youthful energy in creative and productive
pursuit. The students interact with eminent Gurus and scholars and practice under them to give
a synchronized presentation during the festival. They are also taken on educational tours to places
of cultural and natural importance during these programmes to show how nature has inspired the
creative genius of the visual artist, poet, musician or dancers and to motivate them for making
efforts to conserve our heritage at regional levels.
126. Updated Status : Apart from Union Ministry of Culture, State Governments and State
Akademies also organize various forms of festivals. The Ministry of Culture also administers a
scheme namely Cultural Functions Grants Scheme under which financial assistance is provided for
organising festivals etc. on different aspects of Indian culture.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
127. Again the Committee insists that an annual venue of festivals pertaining to all these
institutions should be decided beforehand and festivals be organized regularly. Moreover, the
artists who are invited to participate should also be selected on the basis of a clear cut
guideline which has to be kept in public domain and be given due publicity.

21
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
128. The National Akademis must work in close coordination with State Akademis, recognized
art communities/organisations, universities and other cultural and educational institutions for
promoting art and culture, for an integrated growth and functioning of art associations and
moreover to fulfil and implement their own charters. But working of these Akademis/organizations
in States also leave much to be desired; strengthening/equipping State Akademis is equally important
otherwise it will be difficult to take activities down to the local level. The Committee would like
to reiterate the Haksar Committee recommendations in this regard for streamlining and
strengthening State Akademi’s and other regional organisations by involving/associating them in the
activities undertaken by the National Akademis. Support should also be extended to research and
documentation aspects in all forms of arts and revival and support of regional and local traditional
art forms. (Para 74 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
129. The various Akademies already function in close coordination with other Akademies and
literary Institutions. Sahitya Akademi makes all efforts to collaborate with the State Akademies and
also the literary associations to organize programmes and also makes it possible to help these
organizations whenever there is a demand from them. The Akademi has the practice to invite
recommendations from the State Akademies for the reconstitution of its General Council.
130. The NSD is always committed to provide all kinds of advisory support relating to academic,
artistic and technical aspects to the State Akademis as and when required. However, as NSD’s
financial resources are limited and not adequate to carry out its own targeted activities, it is not
able to provide any financial support to the State Akademis in furtherance of their cost.
131. The IGNCA works in close coordination with state Akademies and other recognized
organizations and academic institutions as part of its regular research and documentation projects.
For example, in the North-East region, the IGNCA collaborates with all the universities and state
Akademis. It also attempts to work with ZCCs and universities all over the country as part of
outreach also. As regards CCRT, in view of the specialization acquired by it over the years, it is
also playing an important role not only in providing its expertise to other organizations at national
and international level but also get help and co-operation from other Cultural institutions to fulfill
the aims and objectives of its mandate.
131.1 CCRT and Asia/Pacific Culture Centre for UNESCO (ACCU), Tokyo
The CCRT has been providing expertise and resources for Regional Co-operation in Cultural
Activities in the Asian Region to the Asian Culture Centre for UNESCO, Tokyo. The CCRT is the
national co-agency for the ACCU, Tokyo for implementing its programmes. Many other
organizations in the country are also availing the expertise of CCRT and has been associating with
CCRT in their field of work.
131.2 CCRT and Central Board of Secondary Education(CBSE) and NCERT
The CBSE has felt the need of sensitizing the children of non-resident Indians and has
decided to launch accredition courses on Indian Culture for them. Keeping in view the expertise
available at CCRT, the CBSE had taken the help of CCRT to prepare modules in the form of printed
material as well as audio visual programmes on Indian Culture for the courses. The NCERT in
collaboration with CCRT has designed the syllabus on Art Education for secondary level students
and also produced educational material using the resources of CCRT.

22
131.3. CCRT and Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS)
The Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS), which is running vast number of schools in the
country is providing quality education to the students, has been collaborating with CCRT to
organize a number of Workshops on Lifeskills Education for Adolescence (one of the
recommendations in the National Curriculum Framework for School Education 2000).
131.4 CCRT and Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs)
The CCRT in its endeavour to enlarge its scope of working with sister organizations and
to share its expertise with them, has developed certain collaborative inter-art as well as educational
programmes which are being organized in collaboration with ZCCs on various themes for the
benefit of student community.
131.5 CCRT and Multi-Cultural Education
The CCRT has been training teachers and teacher educators from UK and USA who visit
India to get trained in multi-cultural education. The CCRT has been organizing academic
programmes for them. These exchanges of the teaching community have largely been responsible
for removing the stereotype images that one has of different cultures and provide true information
and understanding through first-hand experiences. A number of organizations like British Council,
USIEF, Japan Foundation, etc. have been availing CCRT’s expertise in this regard.
131.6. CCRT and Cultural Resources
One of the recommendations of the National Policy of Education 1986 that the CCRT will
be required to develop effective cultural software and also develop modules for cultural technology
like audio-visual projects, set of posters, display album, etc. The CCRT has been producing a
variety of publications and audio-visual materials aimed at providing an appreciation and
understanding of various aspects of Indian art and culture. The educational material developed by
CCRT on Indian art and culture has a great acceptance in most of the Universities, Indian
Embassies in foreign countries, Governmental and non-Governmental organizations in India and
abroad.
131.7 CCRT and Department of Education, Ministry of HRD
132. The CCRT is perhaps one of the unique institutions in the country which is working in the
area of providing aesthetic and cultural values in the educational system. There is a Scheme which
is being implemented by the Department of Education namely ‘Scheme for Assistance in
Strengthening Culture and Values in Education’. Keeping in view the expertise available in the
CCRT, the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of
India has appointed CCRT as one of its Nodal organizations to implement the scheme.
133. The recently transferred modified scheme of Cultural Heritage Leadership Programme also
has the provision of documentation of local tradition art forms. This scheme will be operationalized
soon by CCRT.
134. Updated Status : The Ministry of Culture also administers a scheme namely, safeguarding
the Intangible Cultural Heritage and Diverse Cultural Traditions of India the object of which is to
preserve and propagate our rich intangible cultural heritage.

23
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
135. The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the scheme may be
implemented and evaluated in earnest spirit and should not meet the fate of many other
schemes which were dropped untimely and shortly after launching.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
136. The Committee reiterates that there should be an overarching body consisting of eminent
people to look after the affairs of all the Akademis, NSD, IGNCA, NGMA, National Museum and
the Libraries etc. This body should be entrusted to ensure that the functioning and performance
of all the Akademis and organisations are conducted as per their mandate, constitution and rules
prescribed for them. The body should see that the cultural Akademis and other institutions are not
working at cross purposes. They should ensure and oversee interaction and cooperation among all
those institutions to achieve the objectives of each of the institutions. Duplications of activities of
these bodies should be minimised and synergy is obtained. The Committee feels that it would be
a facilitator not as regulator or controlling body. (Para 75 of ibid)
137. It could be a Council like the ‘Press Council of India’ in the field of culture and arts. Any
deviant functioning could be reported to it. The people constituting it should be chosen in the same
manner as the members of the Press Council of India are chosen. The presence of this body will
have a healthy influence. A writer or an artist should have, at least, one place where he can go
and complain about the way these academies function. The Committee would like to have response
of the Government in this regard. (Para 76 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
138. All the Akademies function as per the mandate given to them under their respective
Constitutions etc and in accordance with the procedures, rules specified therein. Ministry of
Culture is the administrative Ministry concerned and it feels that there is no need to have any other
overreaching body as this role is being performed by this Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
139. The Committee feels that a Council for Akademis may help co-ordinate the activities
of these Akademis. The Committee also feels that this Council may also look into
administrative overlap, if any, and remove or minimize the duplication in the functioning
of these Akademis. Further, the Council may also try to solve any dispute among these
organizations.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
140. All the Cultural Institutions and Akademis are working on some sort of ad-hocism. There
should be a vision document for all these institutions. The documents should explain what it is
going to do in the next 4-5 years and how they are going to function. Keeping the autonomy intact,
there should be definite accountability to the people of this country who are paying them and
whose money they are spending. There should be a clear system of answerability. (Para 77 of
ibid)
Reply of the Government
141. The observations of the PSC have been noted. The ‘Vision Document’ in respect of CCRT
would be prepared and submitted to Ministry of Culture in due course. The ZCCs and BTI

24
institutions and all other organisations under the Ministry would be advised to prepare their vision
document with the approval of their Governing Bodies. The Ministry also intends to enter into
MoUs with various organisations under it. The organisations already prepare their annual action
plans.
142. Updated Status : Most of the organizations under the Ministry have framed their respective
Result Framework Document (RFD) which contains vision, mission, objectives and functions of
the organization.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
143. The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
144. It could only be realistically worked out when both the agencies communicate, cooperate
and coordinate for the dissemination of arts. Concerted efforts, no doubt, in that direction would
certainly provide livelihood and artistic ventilation to all the regional and national artists. The
Committee recommends that the Zonal Cultural Centres should be part of the Akademis and the
artists who are engaged by the Cultural Centres should be given adequate financial support and
livelihood as the art cannot flourish on an empty stomach. The National Akademis should take it
as their bounden duty to protect the artists and the art forms throughout India who are part of
the Zonal Cultural Centres. The Ministry of Culture should formulate proper guidelines and schemes
in coordination with the Akademis to achieve the goal of protection of artists and promotion of art
forms. (Para 80 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
145. The ZCCs are intended to perform the centrifugal role of disseminating culture outwards all
over the Zone. Drama, Music and Art may all integrate to make a total concept of every aspect
of our culture through Zonal Cultural Centres. ZCCs are endeavoring to develop in such a direction,
to give a new thrust to cultural development in all States and in all Regions, to show the culture
of one region to another, to assimilate the best in all and to produce a better new direction and
to reach the average person. While each Academy caters to specific area of Art and Art form,
ZCCS have no bounds and propagation of every aspect of ‘Culture’ i.e. way of life is mandated
to ZCCs. Unlike the Akademies, ZCCs have to go to the villages, rural mass and make them see
and experience the indigenous culture of our country. In view of the above, ZCCs have to team
up with Akademies and for that their representatives are members in ZCCs policy making
Committees.
146. A Committee was set up under the Chairmanship of Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, Hon’ble MP
to review the performance of the seven ZCCs. The Committee made a total of 95 recommendations
relating to structure, finances, functioning and focus of activities of the ZCCs. Out of these 94
recommendations have been accepted and action initiated for their implementation. Further, a
Coordination Committee of ZCCs under the Chairmanship of Shri Aiyar has been constituted. The
only recommendation which has not been accepted is relating to constitution of ‘Indian Culture and
Heritage Service’ as the work of different organisations under the Ministry of Culture is very
heterogeneous.
147. Updated Status : HPC has recommended that SNA should find a way towards greater
coordination with the seven ZCCs. The recommendations of HPC are under examination.

25
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
148. The Committee observes that at earlier instances also it had recommended for
greater co-ordination amongst the seven ZCCs. It is happy to know that the HPC has also
recommended the same. The Committee desires that further details may also be intimated
to the Committee vide Action Taken Notes.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
149. The Committee feels that the views expressed by the Ministry are quite rudimentary and do
not represent the need of the time. The Committee recommends that the mandates of ZCCs and
SNA should be reviewed afresh and the synergy of both should be amalgamated to produce a better
cultural scenario which is beneficial to the Art and Artists. (Para 83 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
150. The SNA has made serious efforts to collaborate with the Zonal Centre and avoid over
lapping of events etc. Festivals like Octave, Lok Utsav, Prakriti etc. has resulted out of these
efforts.
151 The ZCCs are intended to perform the centrifugal role of disseminating culture outwards all
over the Zone. ZCCs are endeavouring to develop in such a direction, to give a new thrust to
cultural development in all States and in all Regions, to show the culture of one region to another,
to assimilate the best in all and to produce a better new direction and to reach the average person.
While each Academy cater to specific area of Art and Art form, ZCCS have no bounds and
propagation of every aspect of ‘Culture’ i.e. way of life is mandated to ZCCs. Unlike the
Academies, ZCCs have to go to the villages, rural mass and make them see and experience the
indigenous culture of our country. In view of the above, ZCCs have to team up with Academies
and for that their representatives are members in ZCCs policy making Committees.
152. A Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar was set up to review the
performance of the seven ZCCs. The Committee’s recommendations like Documentation and
Archiving of folk and tribal art, enhancement of remuneration to folk and tribal artistes, organizing
Silver Jubilee Celebrations of ZCCs and Cultural audit of the ZCCs have been accepted and are at
different stages of implementation. The Committee have also made certain other recommendations
that have to be implemented by the ZCCs themselves.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
153. The Committee notes the reply and reiterates its recommendation made vide para 80
of the 201
st Report.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
154. The Committee finds that our National Akademis and other cultural institutions face severe
constraints of resources. There is a large mismatch between the Government financing and the
monetary needs of these cultural institutions. In fact, the funds allocated to Ministry as a whole
is too meagre that needs to be adequately enhanced. However, it is also worthwhile to note here
that the Ministry, its subordinate offices including the Akademis and Cultural Institutions on their
part must also follow sound financial principles. Complaints in this regard were received by this
Committee on the mis-utilization of funds and non-routing of projects through ‘Projects Monitoring

26
Cell’ in IGNCA. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Culture should keep a close watch
on the financial transactions of these Institutions to prevent any sort of financial irregularities.
(Para 84 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
155. The budgetary needs are projected by each Akademi and allocations are made by the
Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Culture which is, in turn, distributed amongst Akademis and
other organisations on the basis of requirement for the same. In order to ensure that funds
allocated are used for the purpose for which they were given, each Akademi has to furnish a
Utilization Certificate before further allocation s are made. Further , the accounts of all the Akademies
are audited by the C&AG regularly and if any financial irregularity is noticed, the same is required
to be rectified/settled as per procedure prescribed for the purpose. Hence, checks and balances are
already in place.
156. As regarding Committee’s observation regarding alleged misutilization of funds and non-
routing of projects through ‘Projects Monitoring Cell’ in IGNCA, it has been clarified by them that
the Annual Plan proposals are put up to duly constituted Programme Advisory Committees by each
Division in IGNCA. The ‘Programme Monitoring Cell’ only coordinates and collates inputs with
regard to the Plan Projects. The recommendations of Programme Advisory Committees are put up
to the Executive Committee of IGNCA for approval.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
157. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Culture only submits the procedure for
allocating funds to these institutions. But, the Ministry did not clearly mention the
mechanism to tackle any financial irregularities. The Committee finds that the above reply
is insufficient and fails to clarify whether any misutilization of funds actually took place and
recommends that this may further be probed into.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
158. A National Centre for Arts and Culture is essential for the promotion of excellence and
the preservation of India’s rich cultural heritage and vibrant traditions. In India we have no
national centre for the arts. A complex, befitting the cultural richness of the country to function
as a vibrant centre for the promotion of art and culture is the pride of any capital city.
Unfortunately, Delhi does not have a National Arts Complex. The Committee recommends that the
huge vacant land at IGNCA can be developed into a National Arts Complex consisting of
Auditoriums, theatres, multiplex, studios etc. It should be a multi-venue, multipurpose cultural
centre. (Para 85 of ibid)
159. The underground at the Rabindra Bhavan Gallery at New Delhi can also be developed into
a multiplex for performing arts. (Para 86 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
160. Earlier Government of India has decided to construct a building complex in an area of
approximately 10.10 hectares of land adjoining the Central Vista in New Delhi for permanently
housing the IGNCA offices and activities. Accordingly a master plan consisting of 8 buildings were
prepared and out of which only one building i.e. Kalanidhi/Kalakosha shared Resource (A) building

27
has come up. A proposal for setting up such national Centre for arts and culture within the
premises of IGNCA by required modification of existing master plan is under active consideration.
161. Updated Status : Government of India is considering to set up a National Centre for
Performing Arts in Delhi. A SFC note for the same is under formulation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
162. The Committee considers the instant reply as an interim one, pending the approval
of the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) Note put up by the Ministry of Culture. The
Committee notes that as per Master Plan, 8 buildings were proposed for promoting
performing arts whereas, out of eight only one building has come up. The Committee
desires a detailed status note with regard to the whole project and about the implementation
of its own recommendation made vide para 86 of the 201 st Report regarding “developing a
multiplex for performing arts”.
Conclusion
163. The Committee directs the Ministry to keep it apprised of the recommendations
accepted/rejected by the Working Group created to go into the recommendation of the High
Powered Committee that was constituted on its advice. The Committee appreciates the
Ministry for constituting HPC quickly and also the HPC for submitting a very good report
within shortest possible time. The time, efforts and resources gone into this exercise will
not be allowed to go waste this time as well. This Committee, therefore, wishes to take its
recommendations to logical conclusion with the aim of bringing about the required changes
for making the working of the Akademis and other premier cultural institutions more
transparent, accountable, professional and effective.

28
28
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee desires that final replies in respect of all the further
recommendations/observations, which have been made in this Report should be furnished to
the Committee at the earliest. (Para 3)
The Committee notes the fact of missing records regarding implementation of
recommendations of Bhabha Committee, Khosla Committee and Haksar Committee. Aside
from much resources, public money, time and efforts gone waste, it reflects the attitude of
those who were responsible to examine/implement them. The Committee hopes that the
findings of the present High Powered Committee set up by the Ministry would not meet the
same fate. (Para 12)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that Ministry this time, will try to live
upto expectations and come out with the most practicable and effective mechanism that may
take care of the problems faced today in these bodies as expeditiously as possible. This
Committee shall try to monitor any major step required to be taken in this regard. It also
calls upon the Akademis and other institutions to utilize. this opportunity in making them
more responsive, effective and accountable. The Committee reiterates its observation made
earlier that “culture in general and arts in particular, can never work with an unchanging
or unresponsive or bureaucratic template”. (Para 17)
The Committee notes the reply regarding synergy amongst the Akademis, cultural
and educational institutions but feels that it leaves much to be desired. Its level needs to
be enhanced and expanded. (Para 26)
The Committee hopes that the duplication if any, as mentioned above would be
cautiously eliminated to a great extent after new report is implemented. (Para 30)
The Committee appreciates the work initiated by CCRT in training teachers by
liaising with State Education Departments in the country. The Committee advises the
Ministry to guard against mine or thine attitude. It has passed the onus of integrating
cultural education with curriculum as suggested by it, on to the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (HRD). It would have been appropriate had the Ministry of Culture
tried to put its head with Ministry of Human Resource Development to work together in
this regard. (Para 38)
The Committee notes the reply but feels that all these activities were confined
mainly to Metro cities and colleges/universities located there. It needs to be expanded to
rural areas with the help of State Governments and renowned NGOs working in the area.
It would also help in locating and nourishing talents scattered all over the country.
(Para 50)
The Committee notes the reply and further recommends that the Akademis and
CCRT must collaborate with Universities like IGNOU, for spreading cultural programmes in
India. IGNOU is a National University dedicated for distance learning and is presently
running an ieducation channel “Gyandarshan”, which is highly popular and accessible to

29
everyone. In Gyandarshanj direct interaction of teacher and students gets telecast. These
Akademis and CCRT can telecast its programmes on Gyandarshan for wider dissemination
of art and culture. (Para 56)
The Committee agrees with the Ministry of Culture that these Akademis are not
alike and their requirements are quite different. But apart from this Committee, the HPC
also has proposed to create a common/separate cultural administration pool. The
Committee feels that the Ministry has to either strengthen any of its present cadre/
service or create a new service/cadre from the persons belonging to the yield of Art and
Culture. (Para 63)
Akademis and other apex cultural organizations were expected to be the custodians
of our rich cultural heritage. But unfortunately, most of them had been understaffed most
of the time, mainly due to large number of vacancies for very long time. Moreover, higher
positions are being manned by the persons on deputation from sundry background. These
institutions, no doubt, have done some good work but a long term vision to promote art and
culture is yet to develop in the country. In this regard, the Committee would like to
emphasize that the proposal for the creation of a cultural cadre should be carefully
considered on the lines suggested by it. (Para 64)
The Committee notes the updated status and desires that after complete action has
been taken thereon, the Ministry may furnish a final reply. (Para 71)
The Committee agrees that autonomy of these Akademis should be maintained, but
Committee feels that accountability and transparency are equally important. Akademis after
all, are also public institutions being run on the public exchequer. At least in the respect
of enforcing their financial accountability, autonomy should not come in the way. The
Ministry is expected to provide a complete and objective report to Parliament in this regard
every year. Accountability and transparency must be ensured for proper utilization of funds
and their accounts, expenditure etc. should be adequately audited by the Ministry of Culture
and also by C&AG. (Para 78)
The Committee hopes that HPC/working group will try to address the problem in
Akademis’ working. (Para 83)
The Committee would like to know the actions taken by the Ministry on the Report
of the High Powered Committee. (Para 88)
The Committee feels that the reply furnished by the Ministry, particularly, the
updated status shown as above, is not adequate and, therefore, wishes to be apprised of
more details . (Para 93)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 102)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 106)
The Committee notes the reply. However, the efforts towards bringing the folk
literature into mainstream may be continued in future and evaluated from time to time.
(Para 110)

30
The Committee notes the reply and appreciates the initiatives taken by the Ministry
of Culture, but still would like to reiterate that a creation of a separate Akademi for “Tribal
and Folk Arts”, needs to be seriously considered. (Para 115)
The crux of the recommendation of the Committee was somewhat different. The
Committee recommended in its 201 st Report that these artists/fellows should be covered
under some medical insurance scheme like CGHS/ESI or other private medical insurance.
These schemes may be contributory and the artists will always have an option open before
them to avail this medical insurance facility. (Para 120)
Again the Committee insists that an annual venue of festivals pertaining to all these
institutions should be decided beforehand and festivals be organized regularly. Moreover, the
artists who are invited to participate should also be selected on the basis of a clear cut
guideline which has to be kept in public domain and be given due publicity. (Para 127)
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the scheme may be
implemented and evaluated in earnest spirit and should not meet the fate of many other
schemes which were dropped untimely and shortly after launching. (Para 135)
The Committee feels that a Council for Akademis may help co-ordinate the activities
of these Akademis. The Committee also feels that this Council may also look into
administrative overlap, if any, and remove or minimize the duplication in the functioning
of these Akademis. Further, the Council may also try to solve any dispute among these
organizations. (Para 139)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 143)
The Committee observes that at earlier instances also it had recommended for
greater co-ordination amongst the seven ZCCs. It is happy to know that the HPC has also
recommended the same. The Committee desires that further details may also be intimated
to the Committee vide Action Taken Notes. (Para 148)
The Committee notes the reply and reiterates its recommendation made vide para 80
of the 201
st Report. (Para 153)
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Culture only submits the procedure for
allocating funds to these institutions. But, the Ministry did not clearly mention the
mechanism to tackle any financial irregularities. The Committee finds that the above reply
is insufficient and fails to clarify whether any misutilization of funds actually took place and
recommends that this may further be probed into. (Para 157)
The Committee considers the instant reply as an interim one, pending the approval
of the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) Note put up by the Ministry of Culture. The
Committee notes that as per Master Plan, 8 buildings were proposed for promoting
performing arts whereas, out of eight only one building has come up. The Committee
desires a detailed status note with regard to the whole project and about the implementation
of its own recommendation made vide para 86 of the 201
st Report regarding “developing a
multiplex for performing arts”.  (Para 162)

31
Conclusion
The Committee directs the Ministry to keep it apprised of the recommendations
accepted/rejected by the Working Group created to go into the recommendation of the High
Powered Committee that was constituted on its advice. The Committee appreciates the
Ministry for constituting HPC quickly and also the HPC for submitting a very good report
within shortest possible time. The time, efforts and resources gone into this exercise will
not be allowed to go waste this time as well. This Committee, therefore, wishes to take its
recommendations to logical conclusion with the aim of bringing about the required changes
for making the working of the Akademis and other premier cultural institutions more
transparent, accountable, professional and effective. (Para 163)

MINUTES

34

35
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 10 th December, 2014 in Room No. 62,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K.N. Balagopal
3. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Vinod Lakhamashi Chavda
5. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama
6. Mohammed Faizal
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan
8. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
9. Shri Rajesh Pandey
10. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
11. Shri Dushyant Singh
12. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
13. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Direrctor
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered
the following draft Reports:
(i) The Two Hundred Fourteenth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred First
Report on Functioning of National Akademis and other Cultural Institutions – Issues and
Challenges;
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
35
*** Relate to other matters.

36
3. The Committee adopted after some discussion, the said reports without any modification
and decided to present the Reports to the Parliament on 12 th December, 2014. The Committee,
accordingly, authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Shri K.N. Balagopal M.P. and in his
absence, Shri Rajeev Shukla M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajesh Pandey, M.P.
and in his absence, Mohammed Faizal, M.P. were authorized to lay the Reports on the Table in Lok
Sabha on 12
th December, 2014.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

37
37
LIST OF REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 ( with
evidence )
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence )
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

38
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 ( with evidence )
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence )
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98)
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)

39
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 ( with evidence )
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence )
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-01) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-01) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (1 Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

40
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption from Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.08.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001-2002 (13 Reports)

41
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 ( with evidence )
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 ( with evidence )
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 ( with evidence )
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.
2002-2003 (11 Reports)
2003-2004 (12 Reports)

42
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Seventieth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
of Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004

43
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 ( with evidence )
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
06.12.2004 (RS)
03.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.09.2005
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
2004-2005 (8 Reports)
2005-2006 (17 Reports)

44
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage by Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

45
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
2006-07 (15 Reports)

46
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
16.08.2007
16.08.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
09.05.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (17 Reports)

47
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133rd
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

48
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
(Presented to Parliament)
23.10.2008
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
(Presented to Parliament)
23.10.2008
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (l0 Reports)

49
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty-ninth Report on Development of
Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities for
the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.02.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
(Presented to Parliament)
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

50
1
158th
159th
160th
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty-first Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty-fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One hundred
Fifty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty-sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
(Rajya Sabha)
27.07.2010
(Lok Sabha)
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
(Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament)
on 01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

51
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
(Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament)
on 11.08.2011
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
(Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament)
on 11.08.2011
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
02.04.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
27.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

52
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11.2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

53
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways—
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the
Parliament)
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the
Parliament)
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the
Parliament)
on 27.02.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11. 2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

54
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
204th
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty-ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 07.08.2013
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 07.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 17.12.2013
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
(Presented to the Parliament)
on 06.02.2014
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
13.01.2014
2013-14 (13 Reports)

55
1
205th
206th
207th
208th
209th
210th
211th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety -second Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety-third Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninety-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety-fifth Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety-first Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty-eighth Report on Functioning
of Commission of Railways Safety
Upkeep of various Monuments in Delhi,
National Museum and other important
issues pertaining to the Ministry of
Culture
4
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
3
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
18.02.2014
18.02.2014

56
1
212th
213th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Ninetieth Report on Development of
Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its Two
Hundredth Report on Development of
Tourism, National Highays and Water
Transport in Kerala and Cochin Shipyard
Limited
4
19.02.2014
19.02.2014
3
18.02.2014
18.02.2014
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees ➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.