PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA. SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
TWENTY SIXm REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS, 1997-98 
(DEMAND NO. 8) 
DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15.5.97) 
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 15.5.97) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW O£LlU 
May, 1997/Vaisakha , 1919 (Saka) 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
CONTENTS 
CoMPOSITION oF THE CoMMJTil!E ......................... ................... .. 
OOROOUCfiON •..•.....• . •••••.....••.•.• .•.•• •.•.••••.•.•••.••..•.••..•.•.••..•••.• 
REPORT OF THE CoMMITrEE ..•..• •.• •••• .••. •.•.• ' •..•.•.....•...•••.•.•.••.••.• 
MIN UTES .... . ..... . . .. ... ....... ...... , ....... ,., ...... , ....... .. .... . . .............. . 
~ RS F- 1-8 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-10 
11-15 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
(1996-97) 
1. Shn Sunder Singh Bhandari--<:hainnan 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri G Pr.1lhapa Reddy 
3. Shri AJit P.K. Jogi 
4. Shri S.S. SUf)ewala 
5. Sbri Virendra Katana 
6. Shri Janardbana Poojary 
7. Shri V. llanumantha Rao 
8. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
9. Shri Raghavji 
10. Maulana ObaiduUah Khan Azmi 
11 Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
12. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
13. Shri V.P. Duraisamy 
14. Shri Ycrra Narayanaswamy 
15. Dr. D. Venkatcshwar Rao 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Pramod Mahnjan 
17 Dr. A.K. Patel 
18. Shri Ram Tabal Chaudhary 
19. Shri Devi Bux SinA.11 
20. Shri Ganga Cha.ran Rajput 
21 Shri P.S. Gadbvai 
22. Shri Chamanlal Gupto 
23. Shri Uttam Singh Pawar 
24. Shri Chandra Shushan Singh Rathour 
25. Shri K. Vijay Bbaska.ra Reddy 
26. Shri P.M. Sayeed 
27 Shri Manoranjan Bhakta 
28. Slui P.C. Chacko 
29. Dr. Y S RaJsekhar Reddy 
30. Shri Sat Mahajan 
31. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
32. Sbri Pradeep Kumar Dev 
33. Shri Pan.a Ram Meghwal 
34. Sbri A. Sidda.raju 
35. Shri Basangouda R. Patil 
36. Sbri Ratna Babadur Rai 
37. Shri Balay Rai 
38. Shri A.M. Vclu 
39. Shri S.S. PaJanimanickam 
946/RS/ r-2·1\ 
(i) 

• 
40. Shri Lgandula Ramana 
41. Shri Anant Mahadevgude 
42. Shri Bisharnbar Prasad Nishad 
43. Shri Mahendra Baitba 
44. Shri Arnrik Singh Aliwal 
45. Shri O.M. Banatwalla 
SECRETARIA T 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shri Ashok Tomar, Director 
Shri A.K. Singh, Unde r Secretary 
(ii) 
Shrirnati Sunita Sekaran, Committee Officer 
• 

~ODUCTION • 
1, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present on their behalf, present this 26th Report on the 
Demands for Grants 1997-98 of the Department of Tourism. 
2. The Committee at its meeting held on 26th March, 1997 considered the Demands for 
Grants 1997-98 of the Department of Tourism (Demand No. 8) and heard the Secretary, 
Department of Tourism on the subject. 
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for placing 
before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with the 
examination of the Demands for Grants of the Department and for giving evidence before 
the Committee. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report at its meeting held on the 8th 
May, 1997. 
New DELHJ; 
81h May, 1997 
Vaisakha 18, 1919 (Saka) 
(iii) 
SUNDER SlNGH BHANDARI, 
Chainnan , 
CommiJJee on Transport and Tourism. 

REPORT 
The Department of Tourism is the nodal agency for the formulation of national policies 
and programmes on tourism and for the coordination of activities of various Central 
Government agencies, State Governments and Private sector for the development of tourism 
in the country. The main activities of the Department are: 
(i) Policy forn1ulation and planning. 
(ii) Co-ordination . 
(iii) Regulation. 
(iv) Infrastructural and Product development. 
(v) Human Resource Development. 
(vi) Publicity, Marketing and Facilitation. 
(vii) Research, Analysis, Monitoring & Evaluation. 
(viii) International Cooperation & External Assistance. 
(ix) Legislation and Parliament Work. 
(x) Management of Public Sector Undertakings & autonomous bodies. 
2. The Department of Tourism is assisted by the Director General of Tourism, an ex­
officio Additional Secretary to Government of India. The Department has under its 
administrative control the following public sector undertakings/autonomous bodies: 
(i) India Tourism Development Corporation Ltd.; 
(ii) National Council for Hotel Management ; 
(iii) Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel Management; 
(iv) Institutes of Hotel Management, Catering Technology and Applied Nutrition al 
different locations in the country; 
(v) Food Craft InstiTUtes at different locations; 
(vi) Indian InstiTUte of Skiing & Mountaineering; and 
(vii) National Institute of Water Sports. 
3. The office of the Director General has a field formation of 18 offices abroad and 21 
offices within the country. Overseas offices are primarily responsible for tourism promotion 
and marketing in their respective nreos, while the field offices in India are responsible for 
providing information services to tourists and to monitor the process ?f field projects. 
4. Demand No. 8 pertains to the Department of Tourism. Provisions in this demand 
mainly include allocations for the Secretariat of the Department, the expenditw:e on the 
headquarters establishment of the Directorate General of Tourism and the regional and field 
offices under it; expenditure on production' and publicity material for the promotional 
programmes, both domestic and overseas; provisions for creation of infrastructural facilities 
like tourist bungalows, 'Yatri Niwas' way-side amenities etc. and grants-in-aid to the various 
tourism training institutes of the Department. 
5. ITDC meets its expendiTUre out of its own internal · and extra budgetary resources. 
1 
946/ RSl F-J.,\ 

I· 
I 
I 
2 
6. The details of the allocations of the last IWO years are as below: 
Major Head 1996-97 (BE) 1996-97 (RE) 1997-98 (BE) 
Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total Plan Non- Total 
Plan Plan Plan 
Revenue 76.90 19.12 96.02 69.95 17.18 87.13 90.50 17.26 107.76 
Capital 13.10 13.10 20.05 20.05 19.85 19.85 
Total 90.00 19.12 109.12 90.00 17.18 107.18 110.35 17.26 127.61 
7. An allocation of Rs. 127.61 crores bas been made for the Department of Tourism for 
1997-98, out of which Rs. 110.35 crores are on the plan side. the Revised Estimates and 
Budget Estimates for 1996-97 were Rs. 107.18 crores and Rs. 109.12 crores respectively. For 
the last three years the Plan BudgeL outlay for the Department of tourism has stayed at 
0.15% oi: the totai Central Plan Budget. In its earlier reports , the Committee has been 
repeatedly emphasising the need for a higher allocations to the tourism industry in view of 
its vast potential. The Department of Tourism, in their Action Taken Replies to the 23rd 
Report on Demands for Grants for 1996-97 have stated that the Department of Tourism had 
indeed sought an increase in the allocation to Rs. 115 crores at tbe RE stage for 1996-97 
from the original Plan allocation of Rs. 90 crores. However, Ministry of Finance retained the 
R.E. figures at the level of B.E. of 1996-97. The Plan allocation at the BE stage for 1997-98 
is also not significantly higher viz. Rs. 110.35 crores. 
8. Tbe total number of tourist arrivals in India in 1996-97 was over 2.28 million, with 
estimated foreign exchange earrtings of over Rs. 10,000 crores. The share of India in world 
tourist arrivals and receipts during 1996 stood at 0.39% and 0.72% respectively. Tourism 
retained its place as India's third largest export industry after gems and jewellery and 
readymade garments. The direct employment in the sector by 1995-96 was over 8.4 million 
persons, accounting for about 2.4% of the total labour force. The number of domestic 
tourisl~ visiting different parts of the country was estimated at over 100 million. The above 
figures cleariy illustrate the important role of tourism sector from the point of view of 
economic growth, foreign exchange earnings, and national integration. The Committee 
observes that despite enormous potential in the tourism sector and the spin-off benefits, the 
sector continues to suffer from neglect at the bands of our planners. lnspite of the increase in 
the number of domestic tourists, the significant growth in the number of foreign tourist~ , and 
the important position of the sector as a foreign exchange earner, the sector does not seem to 
be getting the higb priority it deserves. The low budgetary allocation does not leave much 
scope for any sigolficant initiatives or new schemes. The Committee recalls its earlier 
observations that much sma.Der countries in the region have, by investing in the tourism 
industry, achieved spectacular results. The Committ« reiterates its earlier recommendations 
that the ('n~vemment should take a more serious look at this sector so that its potential can be 
fully realised. The Department of Tourism deserves a substantially higher allocation, specially 
as its Plan Budget Outlay bas stayed at 0.15%. of the total Central Plan. 

3 
TBE 9TU PLAN STRATEG Y 
9. The annual outlays approved by the Planning Commission and expenditure thereon 
during the 8th Plan period were as follows: 
(Rs. in crores) 
Approved Actual 
Year outlays expenditure 
1m-93 80.00 78.57 
1993-94 93.93 91.48 
1994-95 92.81 89.11 
1995-96 92.00 94.35 
1996-97 90.00 R.E. (90 crores) 
10. The Ninth Plan strategy chalked out by the Department of Tourism seeks to 
establish effective co-ordination with all the relevant agencies so as to achieve synergy in the 
development of tourism, since it is clear from the diversity of th(• constituents of tourism 
products that the development of tourism has to be the joint effort of all the infrastructural 
departments, Public Sector Undertakings, State Governments and the Private Sector. It is 
proposed to establish a formal institutional mechanism in the forn1 of a "Board of Tourism 
Industry and Trade" under the chairmanship of the Union Minister of Tourism. The Board 
will have representatives of all the concerned Departments, Orgarusations and Industry 
Associatioas a$ its members. 
11. Establishment of few mega tourism resorts, integrated development of infrastructure 
including basic amenities in the identified tourism centres and circuits, and entrepreneurship 
development and promotion of self employment opportunities in the tourism sector to 
develop lac•lilles m the country are some of the specific components of the new strategy 
dunng the Ninth Plan. 
12. The deveiopment process Itself is proposed to be driven by Private Sector 
investment, with Governmen t acting a:. a facilitator and co-ordinator. A package of 
incentives and single window clearance mcchanis.m would also be provided to attract private 
mvestment . 
13. The approach during Ninth Plan would be to concentrate on a few selected centre<; 
and circuits, to achieve balanced development of infrastructure in an integrated manner, and 
therefore thl" Central Government assistance to State!UT Governments for infrastructure 
development would be confined to such identified cenu .:s and circuits each year till they are 
saturated. Further , the projects which are commercially viable wiU be funded under the 
equity scheme, except 10 the North Eastern States, Sikkim and bill districts of Uttar Pradesh 
and West Bengal, where the existing pattern of assistance would be continued. The normal 
funding scheme would be generally applicable only to purely promotional and product 
development projects and in the above area~ where the equity funding rauem is not insisted 
upon. In general emphasis wouid be on integrated development projects and mega tourism 
resorts rather than spreading the resources 100 thinly over a number of small projects in a 
multitude of locations 
14. This new strategy would be applicable only in the case of centrally assisted schemes 
and proJeCtS. The StatO'UT Gvoemments will decid e their own strategies and priorities in 
946/RS/ f-HI 

4 
respect of funds provided under their own budgets. However, it would be insisted that 
centrally assisted projects are given due attention and the necessary linkages with Central 
Schemes are established. 
15. The Plarmlng Commission had made an allocaUon of Rs. 448.74 crores for the Plan 
scllemes during the 8th Five Year Plan. The actu.al expenditure was Rs. 445.51 crores. For 
the 9th Plan, the Ministry has sought a Plan allocatloo of Rs. 6397 crores for the tourism 
sector which is nearly fourtew times th~ amount allocated for the 8th Plan. The Committee 
recommends that the funds sought by the Department or Tourism for the 9th Pion should be 
made available to lt. 
16. The Com.mittee recommends that the formal Institutional mechanism In the form of 
the 'Board of Tourism Industry and Trade' for effective coordination among all the 
lnfrastructural departments, public sector undertakings, State Governments, ond private 
sector should be set up at the earliest and aJJ proc:eduraJ formaUUes in this regard be 
completed within a specified time frame. This is essential as this Board is expec:ted to play a 
pivotal role in the strategy drawn up for the 9th Plan. 
MARKETING AND PUBLI CITY 
17. An amount of Rs. 63 crores has been approved for marketing and promotion for 
1997·98. The overseas promotion component of this is Rs. 57 crores, while the remaining 
Rs. 6 crores are for demestic campaigns. 
l8. The Committee was informed of the technological changes that are transforming 
international tourism. The international tourist now has access to information on the 
Internet, World Wide Web, the electronic media, and through CD-ROMs. With the growth 
of computerised reservation systems in the airlines and hotel sectors, tele·murketing etc., 
there is much more information and wider variety of choices available than ever before. 
There is thus an increased pressure on our overseas of.fices to adjust to these new 
developments and therefore also of the need far greater investment in these technologies. 
19. The Committee is of the view that there is an urgent need for the Indian tourism 
industry, specially our overseas touru1 offices, to keep up with these technological advances. 
As Is evident, the international tourist industry Is a highly competitive one, and 11 tourist has a 
large nUJJlber of destinations competing for his attention. In such a situation, informtion, 
which is accessible and properly packaged, as weD as modem reservation and marketing 
facilities are of crucial importance. Countries or tourist destinations which an not easily 
available on the electronic networks, may find themselves ignored and forgotten. However 1 
development or these facilities would involve significant investments in hardware, lralned 
personnel, and supporting communication facilities. But, given the potentially high returns to 
the domestic tourism Industry and the economy, such investments are unavoidable. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the department should include such programmes and 
mechanisms in the 9th Five Year Plan. Otherwise, the Indian tourism sector may cuoliuue to 
fmd itself on the fringes of the world tourism market. 
20. The Committee was told about the Department's proposal to implement the 
'management inf~rmation system' to increase the monitoring of activities of the overseas 
offices, and ~teps being taken to make the marketing plans for regions more focussed and 
specific to the needs of the market with a view to secure maximum advantage at minimum 
cost and expenditure. lt was also informed that in order to more effectively utilise the 
oudget for overseas promotion, the Depllflmeot of the Tourism undertook an exercise to 
identify some of the important market segments among the main tourism generating 
\ 

5 
cou ntries to India. The prel iminary indications in this direction are reportedly encouragi ng, 
and this is borne out by the fact that in countries where the strategy has been effect ively 
implemented (such n~ in Germany and Japan) tourist arrivals have grown at higher rates in 
1996 ;ts compared to 1995. The final effectivene~s of the strategy will, however , be known 
only after a few years. 
21. The approved Plan outlay for 1997-98 for product ion of publicity materia l for 
vadous tour ist places is Rs. 2.00 crores. The B.E. for 1996-97 for this head was Rs. 2.25 
cro res while the RE was Rs. 1.25 crores . 
22. The Committee has noted this shortfa ll in spendi nr: even this meagre amount. 
Although the Committee was informed that the State Governments also spen d money £rom 
their respective budgets on this item, the fact is that tourists do not get suitable literature 
while vlsiting tourists places in India. The Committee is of the view that sufficient publicity 
literature which can make tourism more informative and interesting, should be made 
available at important tourist destinations, and there ~hould not be any shortfall in utilisation 
of budgecary allocations meant for this purpose. The Depurtment of Tourism should also 
monitor the attention being paid by the vario us State Governments in this regard. 
23. The Commiuce. in its 23rd Report on the Demands for Grams. 1996-97 of the 
Departmen t of Tourism had recommended that more funds should be made available for 
developing domestic tOurism since the number of domestic lourists is continuously on the 
rise, and the development of domestic tour ism is important for the all round growth of the 
tourism industry in the country. as well as from the poim of view of nuuonal and soc ial 
integration. The Department of Tounsm in their Action Taken Replies have sta ted that 
given the limited budget fo•· markettng and promotion, the competition ~t the i ntermttion~l 
level. and the need to allntct foreign tOurists. there is no alternattvc but to spend the mtljor 
proportio n under th is head on overseas promotion. Further, according lo th~ Department, 
the Stare Governments also ~pend a large proport ion of their publicity budge ts on dome$ti c 
rour ists. TI1e private ~ector is also involved in creating facilities and marketing var ious 
destinmions within lndia, wht~h are mainly bei.ng used by domestic tourist.. 
24 . The allocation on domestic campaign also includes Rs. LSD crores towmds 
organ isation of fairs/festivals and rural craft melas. The Departmen t of Tour is111 has a list of 
ov~:r 70 such fairs and festiva ls all over the country which it has identified for Central 
financtctl assistance. 
25. The Commiltee observes thai these fairs and festh·als and rural craft melas have 
bt!come a popular component of our tourism product, and have begun to attract domestic and 
foreign tourists . Some or the festivals and melas like the Konark dance festh·al in Orissa , the 
Suraj Kund Crafts Mela in Haryana, the Desert Festival in .laisalrner and Great Elephant 
March in Kerala have become well known, even interna tionally. The Commillee recommends 
that efforts should be made to develop more such events throughout the count ry, and the 
Department should also focus on developing pcnnanent tourist infrastructure at these places. 
REGIONAL CIRCUITS 
26. The Committee in its 23rd report had recommended that more and more regio nal 
circuits should be developed and popularised abroad and at home , Special efforts sho uld also 
be made to improve transport and telecommu nicat ion facilities with in these circuits. In its 
Action Take n Report, Department of Tour ism bas stated that they have rc<:cntly identi fied 
26 c i rcuits/destination~ for developme nt both thrQugh Central Assistance and Investment by 
State Governments/Private Sector. Instead of spreading resources thinly , the Depanmen t 

6 
has chalked out a strategy for intensive development of areas falhng withm thc.- identified 
circuits/destinations. Scheme> of infrastrucwraVproduct development, f<Jr example. 
construction of wayside amenities. refurbishment of monument~. sound an<J light show~ . 
crea tion of accommodat ion facilities etc., arc taken up in an integrated manner for intensiv~ 
development of these circuits/destinations. The Department of Tourism ~!so provide' 
interest subsidy for creation of budget hotels along ue circuits. Other fiscal and tax benefih 
are also available for projects taken up along the identified ctrcuits. 
27. The Com mittee recommends that Andam11n & Nicobur Islands and Lak~hdwe~p 
should also be Included in these circuits. It need hardly be emphasised that the Islands offer 
tourist attractions in a big way and the potential of development is tmmense. It i~, however, 
important to ensure that the infrastructure viz., hotels, construction of roads, development of 
means of communication, both by air and sea. :are developed quiekly. The Sound and Light 
Show at the Cellular Jail is out of order and it is understood that the system become oTd and 
obsolete. The Committee recommends that the system should be upgradlod and made 
functional. 
HUMAN RESOURCE OEVELOPMEN f 
28. The Budget Estimates of the Department of Tourism for L997·98 pnwtclc for a 
higher Plan Outlay of Rs. 15 crMes for Human R~~ource Development a~ compared wilh 
the previous year's RE which was around Rs. 8 crores. Tim tnclude~ an allocatton ol 
R~. 12.10 crore~ for the ln~titutes of Hotel Management and Cllcnng Technolog) and 
Rs. 2.30 crores for the Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel M1mgemcnt .ond "'utitor."l 
Institute of Water Sports. 
29. The Committee w;~s told that th~ hight:r dtlocauon for 'Traming' til" \Car i~ me:uH 
to bndge the g;~p between demand and ~upply or tr;uncd manpower in ta~ ho~pttality an<J 
catering sectors. and for which the Dep<trtment of Tourism Wll> wkmg ~'- '~"'' >l<'ps to 
upgrade and expand the intuke capacitic'> of a l<~rgc numh~r of the Gov~rnm••rtt run 
institutes, and ~tDrl new ones. 
30. In a written reply. the Department of Tourism informed the Committee that 
presently there is a greater need for trained manpower :11 the low~r level\ of management 
than the middle and upp er management levels. Therefore . it would be mor.: appropriate to 
set up greater number of Food Crafts lnstiiutes in the country for meeung th~ requirement' 
of tramed manpower in hotel and catct ing sector The Committee recomm~nth oba. th•. 
Department should draw up plans in this regard expeditiously in consultation with SCat•• 
Governments and the private sector. 
3t. The Com mittee in its 23rd Report on the Demands (or Grant.. I\I%-IJ7 of the 
Department of Tourism had recommended that the project for the N;~ti<ln· Cutmary 
Institute , for whtch land has been acquired ,hould be t:tken up ~ptedily Ill l>nlcr I<J ""'"'~ 
that the institute Starts functioning . The Ocpartmclll or Tourism have now >Wte<l that the 
Project of National Culinary Institute could not be 'tuned earlier ~s the l~ntl ''''t:ch "'·'' 
previously alloued to the Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Man~gemcn• 11lTf:,1j, ""· 
cancelled by the allotment authority i.e. NOIDA. NOIDA has onl) reccntl} agreed to the 
restoration or the land to IITIM on which the Departmen t of Touri'm ha' n''"' dcnded to 
set up the Nauonal Culinary Institute. After makin g the ncccss:1rv pa)mcnh to NO!DA the 
proc·~ss for setting of the National Culinury Inslit ut~ will be swrt.:d b'· the DcpJrttnent tn 
coordination Wtth the National Council for Borel M<~nagemen t and c .. :.:nng rc:cil: Ji<IJ,i' 
The work i~ likely to commence from the fourth quarter of the flllilll.:tal ye~1 l9'Ji ·%. n.c 
entire project ts likely to be completed during the 9th Five Year P!J:t . 

r 
7 
:}2. The total amount expected u> be spen t for setting up of the National Culinary 
Institute will be approximately Rs. 15.5 crores. an amount of Rs. 12 crores has been 
earmarked for setting up this Institute dunng the 9th Five Year Plan. Initially Rs. I crorc has 
been allocated m B.E. 1997-98 for thb purpO><!. 
33. The Comm ittee recommends that this important project, which has been hanging fire 
for long. should now he taken up "ilhout any further delay. 
34. The Commilt« r ecommends that the existing Indian Institute of Tourism and Trnvel 
Mana~tern~nt and the propo<!ed National Culinary Institute should also reserve seals for those 
candidates from Andaman Nicob ar Islands nnd Lakshdwecp Islands, who are sponso red by the 
adrninistr<~tion of thc~t Islands. 
''1DlA TOURISM DEVEI OPMENT CORPORATION (ITDC) 
J5 The Chatrman ot India Tounsm Development Corpora110n (IT DC) briefed the 
Commillcc .thout the fiscal ;~nd financial performance of the organ1sation duri ng tht: last two 
yeM'- Ac<,ording to htm, the organis<IIIOI1 was improving its performance , und during 
19'15-<Jh 1ts turnover had lncrca~cd by around 26% from R~. 298.05 crores to 
R>. 333.~0 crores in 11>96-97 It' net prolit had also gone up from R>. 71.65 crores toR~. 83.30 
.-ron:' over these two 'Ca"- The oraam~JIIOn i> also 'elf·>uffiCICnl. The Chatrman also bnefed 
1!:~ Comnuuee 3bout· allcll•t>ts to ~mprove its services ;md empha>ise> on human resources 
developmen t oi lis offkc-r- :tnd ~taff. He brieflv listed out the pmjccts proposed hv ITDC 
dunng the 9th Plan Thc'c include rcnov~tion and refurbish men t IJf their hotch. ;pccially 
hotels like Lodhi, Japo;~th and RanJII 
'"·The Comrnill« IS or the 'ien hat th< performance of 1TDC is not as ros~ as ho~ been 
made onl. ·\ diH~ion·"ise breakup of the profits and turno• ·er for 1996-117 sho"s that the 
or)!3tusation made s profit of only Rs. -l-l.35 ~rores from al'commodalion and catering, and 
Rs. 27.25 crort'.~ from duty freP trade on "'hi~h ITDC h~s a monopoly. The Commillee is 
disappointed to ob~ene thnt despite a number of prime hotel propert! ··s spread throughout the 
countr~, the accommod:llion and caltrtlll: division of I he ITDC could onl} achieve a turnover of 
Rs. 192.05 crores and a net profit of R~ . .W.35 crore~. The main reu~un for this is ob,·iou~ly the 
poor quality of the nroduct. The Commillee had reque~ted for a bre;tkup of information on the 
loss-making hotels, Utose enrn ing 11rofits, and 1 he numher of personnel employed. This 
informal!on ha~ not yet been mad(' ;tvailnb le to the Committee. However, as slated above, even 
the profit makin~a hutel• are obviously not earning cnou~h when compare<! with similarlv placed 
pri• · I• sector hotel•. rn~ Commille'! hall niS<l •ought inf<>rmalion on the depreciated 'ltlue or 
•am It OC ho. I, T • ~onunittee loa> been ~:hen Jn a"urance that this "ill be pro•idt•ll. fhe 
Corum:ttc< recommend ' hnl the •·orking or the TDC should to be lcJ<l;..ed into, 
TOliRISl\1 INFRASTIH]CTURE ANIJ PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 
n '' Pl:•n <'utluy of R,. ~:: t<.< ·-wlc~ b3s b~c:n made for Tourist :nfra~tucturc and 
Product Dc:vclopm.:n\ for 1997-98. The breakup of thi' outlay includes mirastructur:.l ~nd 
other related de\elo;,m:nl of culture il!h-emure. pilgrim ~nd spiritualtounsm. aga1n~1 wh1ch 
at: allocari,ln of onl" Rs ~ 50 •:rore~ IIi" been made Cuhure tourism include:; rdurh1<hmcnt 
of monumc11ts anti lamlscaping of the ~rc~'' around them, nood lighting nf rnonumem ~. und 
'ound aotoll1gh1 shows etc An amounr of Rs. 3 crore' hus been :lpprovcd for the purp'''C The 
•H:tlay' a;lprov.:J for Adventure Tl>Urtsm. and Pilgnm and Spiritual Tourhm urc 
Rs 1 crores 3nd 0 50 crores re,pc:cuvely. Most ,,f the remaintng outlay on Toun\t 
lnfra\trucrure "on Central .<\>!>istance for rhc dev!"lopmcnt oi factlilles for tlomestic wurists, 
where a pla n outlay of R:.. 21 crores has bt:en approved . 

8 
38. The Ninth Plan proposals submitted by the Department of Tourism include a 
number of ambitious schemes under tourism infrastructure and product development. These 
include, among others: 
integrated In£rastructure Development 
Mega Tourim Projects 
Entrepreneurship, Development & Promotion of 
Self-employment opponunities in the tourism 
sector 
Interest Subsidies & incentives 
Conference & Convention Facilities 
Central Assistance for Produc• Developmem 
Proposed Outlay 
for 
(Rs. in crores) 
Approved 
Outlay for 
9th Plan 1997·98 1997-98 
1000 
1000 
500 
1500 
200 
115 
200 
200 
100 
300 
40 
23 
Nil 
Nil 
!';il 
4 
Nil 
4.5 
39. The Sectretary, Department of Tourism. in his deposition before the Committee. 
said that in the absence of any outlay approved for 1997-98 for these schemes, Department 
of Tourism will not take these up during this year. In a written reply submil1ed to the 
Commiuee, the Depanmcnt of Tourism has stated that the !'Ianning Commission has 
advised them not to propose any new schemes, as the 9th Five Year Plan has not been 
finalised yet. These new schemes will be discussed with Planning Commission again at the 
time of finalising the 9th Five Year Plan 
40. During his deposition, the Secretary also briefed the Committee about the extent of 
foreign investment in the tourism sector. He said that there have been a large number of 
approvals given by the Foreign Investment Promotion Board for project in the toumm 
sector. While the value of approvals is Rs. 2345 crores, the actual investment that has come 
in from this tOtal is only around Rs. 89 crores. The level of investment generated from the 
domestic private sector is about Rs. 1500 crorcs only. 
41. The situation as Indicated above In the sector of tourism Infrastru cture oud product 
development is not satisfactory. It is recognised that lack of infrastructural facilities continues 
to be the biggest problem facing the tourism industry. However, the outlay proposed for 
tourist infrastructure in BE for 1997-98 of Rs. 2$.85 crores ~ gro<.<ly innct~qu~te fnr tbi.s 
purpose. This is low level of priority accorded by the Government to tllls important se<:lor is 
further reinforced by the manner in which the various 9tb Plan schemei listed above have 
been treated. It is surprising that \\hile specific outlays were proposed by the Department for 
the first year of the 9th Plan, the Planning Colllrlti.ssion has not granted any uppro>ab )~t. It 
is not l.nown when and if these schemes will be started. The Commillee has separately been 
told that the Government itself does not intend to invest in the tourism infrastructure areas, 
but "ishe~ to act only as a facilitator and catalyst. The Committee ha~ noted that the actual 
for"il::o tuu.l domestic privute iuv..stment in the tourist infr astructure sector are low, and 
cannot be expected to improve the existing toursit infrastructur e is any significant way. 
The equity schemes of funding, whereby the c~nlral and State Government.~ would provide 

• 
I 
I 
9 
40% contribution, and the fmaneial institutions 60%, bav~ also not yielded the desired results 
during the bst 1·2 yean, and according to th~ Department, there are no proposals in hand 
from WIY of the Stat~ Govemments. 
42. While pnvute sector investment m the tounst infrastructure sector needs to be 
encouraged, the lukewa. m re,ponse of both fore1gn and domestic private mvestors ciearly 
mdacates that there are several bottlenecks and weaknesses in procedures, existing laws and 
other infrastructure areas such as roads, water supply electricity, communications, etc. Ibe 
Commillee recommends that the Cover:uncnl should Identify the rellSODS "by domestic and 
foreign private in>~tmcnts are not comlog ID a big ,.·ay ID the Indian tourism sector. It Is 
wmcwhat premature for the Govemment to withdmw itself completely Crom the tourism 
IDfrastructure areas . 
43. Th'! Committe<: wa~ also told thut in 1996-97 the Department had to divert Rs. 6·8 
crores approx. from 'Tourism information and publicity', which includes its overseas and 
domestic campaigns, to meet a pressing need for infrastructure development. The 
Conuruttee strongly disapproves of this. The funds available for pubhcity arc already limited, 
and these should not be diverted for other uses. U there were pressing needs under 
mfra.,tructurc. then, g1vcn its amportaoce, the Ministry of Frnance may provide additional 
funJs at. 
TAX EXE!'vU'TIONS EXTENDED TO TOURIST SECTOR 
44. Certain an,cntivcs Are proposed to be extended to the tourism sector in the cum:nt 
buJgct: 
Section SO lA lll Income Tax Act 1961 has been re-introduced. Consequently all hotels 
which ~tart operating between 1.4.98 and 31.3.2002 will be eligible for income tax deduction 
as uod~r: 
(i) Hotels located in the htlly areas, rural areas . places of pilgrimage or a specified 
place of tourist importance will be eligible to 50% deductions from the profitY 
gains. 
(ii) !n respect of hotel~ located in other places, the deductions allowed are 30% only 
The above benefits have been extended to the hotels for a period of 10 years but these 
benefits are not available for the hotels located in the metropolis like Mumbai, Delhi, 
Chcnnai and Calcutta. 
45 . The cxp.:11dituae LUA l.a' been waived in rc..pect of the hotels located in hilly oreor. 
or rural areas or a place of pilgrimage or a speci fied p lace of tourist importance w.e.f. 
1.4. 99. 
40. The 1mport duty on the project equipment needed by the hotels which was 35% bas 
now been reduced to 25%. 
47. The import duty on specified food items used by the foreign tourists have been 
reduced from 50% to 25%. 

tO 
48. The Budget also seeks to 'implif) Section 37 of Income Tax A't whtch would abo 
help in the promotion of tourism among~t other ~ectors of the ~onomy f-urther. reductton 
m c:tpital gains tax from 20% to 10% in respect of NR!s and fimmctal tnstituttons is 
expected to give impetus to investment in touri;,m sector. there i< aho " reference to 
proposed amendments in the Urban L:md Ceilling Act which could indtrcctly help in' the 
identification of the hotels sites. The Committee welcomes the concl'ssio11s announced in the 
Budget, and recommends that the Dep1trtmen1 of Tourism should mantain a continuous 
dlalogttc with investors and also 1110nitor how many proposals apr>roved for inv~stment are 
uctually implemented . 
49. The Committee rl'commends thnt the various income ta~ and oth~r fiscal el<emplions 
and conassions announced for the hotel industry in the hilly and rural area;, should nlso, if 
not already so, be extended to cover remote areas like Andaman & Nicobar and Lak~hadweep 
and l\1inicoy islands. 
50. The Committee also rttommends that the Department of Touri~m may in 
con\ ultati on with the Ministres of Finance, Surface Transport , and the '·arious Stale 
Go,ernments, ensure thai lhl're is uniformity on matters like inter-state mo•ement of vehicles, 
ratfS of taxation on hotels etc. 
• 
• 

' • 
' 
MINUTES 

'XIV 
FOU RTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met ~~ 11.00 A . M. on Wednesday, the 26th March, 1997 in Main 
CornmiHee Room , Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi . 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri G. Prathapa Reddy 
3. Shri S. S. SurjcwaJa 
4. Shri Virendra Kataria 
5. Shri Janardhana Poojary 
6. Shri Raghavji 
7. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
8. Shri V. P. Duraisamy 
9. Shri Yerra Narayanaswamy 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri G;~nga Charan Rajput 
11. Shri P. S. Gadhvai 
12. Shri Chamanlal Gupta 
13. Shri K. Vijay Bhaskara Reddy 
14. Shri P. M. Sayeed 
15. Shri P. C. Chacko 
16. Shri K. D. Sultanpuri 
17. Shri A . Sidduraju 
18. Shri Basangouda R . Patil 
19. Shri A . M. Vclu 
20. Shri Anant Muhttdcvgude 
21. Shri G. M. Banatwalla 
REP RESENTAT IVES OF T HE DEPARTMENT OF TOUR ISM 
1. Shri M. P. Bczbaruah , Secretary (Tourism) 
2. Shri Ashok Pradhan, Director General Tourism 
3. Smt. C. 1\hcring Misra , Joint Secretary (Tourism) 
4. Shri K. S. Menon. Financial Advisor and Join t Secy. 
5. Shri R . M. Pur i, Joi nt Director General (Tou rism) 
6. Dr. G. Ravcndran, Dy. Director General 
7. Shri P. J . Vincent, Finandal Controller 
8. Shri Suman Sharma, Dy. Director Gen.:ral (Tour ism} 
9. Shri Anil Bhandari. CMD . ITDC 
SECRETARIAT 
Sh ri A~h ok Tomar, Director 
·~hnu lc s of 1hc mccuna$1 from hi 10 15th rcl.uc 1n \Hhct nw11c r~ 
13 

14 
Shri A. K. Singh, Under Secretary 
Shrimati Sunita Shekaran, Committee Officer 
2. The Commiuee took up for consideration Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the 
Department of Touriom and heard the Secretary, of the Department on the above 
mentioned subject. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
4. The Conuruttee adjourned at 2.00 P . M. 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
TI1e Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, tl1e 8th May, 1997 in Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi . 
.. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri G. M. Banatwalla - in the Chair 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ajit P. K. Jogi 
3. Shri S. S. Surjewala 
4. Shri Bratin Sengupta 
5. Shri V.P. Duraisamy 
6. Shri Yerra Narayanaswamy 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Ram Tohal Choudhary 
8. Shri Dcvi Dux Singh 
9. Shri P. S. Gadhva i 
10. Shri Chamanlal Gupta 
11. Shri P.M. Sayeed 
U. Shri ManoranJUD Bhakta 
13. Shri K. D. Sultanpuri 
14. Shri A. Siddar.1ju 
!5. Shri A. M. Velu 
16. Shri Lgandula Ramana 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ashok Tomar. Director 
Smt. Sumta Sekaran. Committee Officer 
2. In the ah$ence of Chairma n , Shri G. M. Banatwalla was voted to the Ch:llr. 
3. TI1e Committee them considered and adopted its 26th Report on Demands for Gran ts 
1997-98 of the Department of Tourism with some modifications. The Comm ittee authorised 
1b Chairman and in his absence Sbri Bratin Sengupta to present the Report to the Rajya 
Sabha. and Shri P. M Sayeed and in his absence Shri G. l\.1.. Banatwalla to lay the Report 
on the Table of tilt Lok Sabha. 
The Committee then adJOurned at 4.45 P .M. 
15 