 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
308
_ 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Ninety Seventh Report on the subject ‘Functioning of 
Airports Authority of India’ 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT  
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Ninety Seventh Report on the subject ‘Functioning of Airports 
Authority of India’ 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd February, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
  

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-vi 
 4. REPORT                                1-48 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   49-52 
    6.  
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
MINUTES 53-54

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Ninety 
Seventh Report on the subject ‘Functioning of Airports Authority of India’. 
2. The Two Hundred and Ninety Seventh Report of the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  
2nd August, 2021 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Ninety Seventh Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
on 16th December, 2021. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  31st 
January, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
January 31, 2022                                                     Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 11, 1943 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AAICLAS AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company Limited  
ACA Airport Carbon Accreditation  
ACAP Airspace Coordination Application  
ACDM Airport Collaboration Decision Making 
ACI Airports Council International  
ADS Automatic Dependent Surveillance 
AERA Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
AIC Aeronautical Information Circular  
AME Aircraft Maintenance Engineering  
AMO Aircraft Maintenance Organization 
AMPAP Airport Management Professional Accreditation Programme  
AMSL Above Mean Sea Level  
ANB AtmaNirbhar Bharat Abhiyan 
ANS Air Navigation Services  
ANSP Air Navigation Service Provider 
ASA Air Service Agreement 
ASR Airport Surveillance Radar 
ASRS Automatic Storage & Retrieval System 
ATC Air Traffic Control 
ATCOS Air Traffic Controllers  
ATF Air Traffic Flow  
ATFM Air Traffic Flow Management  
ATM Air Traffic Management  
ATS Air Traffic Services 
ATSEP Air Traffic Safety Electronics Personnel  
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BFFC Basic Fire Fighters Course  
BIAL Bengaluru International Airport Limited 
BMS Bachelor of Management Studies  
BTC Basic Training Course  
CAD Civil Aviation Department  
CAPEX Capital Expenditure 
CAR Civil Aviation Requirements 
CARO Civil Aviation Research Organization  
CAT Category or Clear Air Turbulence 
CATC Civil Aviation Training College  
CATFM Central Air Traffic Flow Management 
CBTA Competency Based Training and Assessment  
CCL Child Care Leave  
CCPD Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities 
CDO Continuous Descent Operation  
CDR Conditional Route  

iv 
 
CE Civil Enclave 
CFI Chief Flying Instructors  
CNS Communications, Navigation and Surveillance Systems 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CPL Commercial Pilot License 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CVC Central Vigilance Commission 
DAM Dynamic Airspace Management  
DE Departmental Examination 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DIAL Delhi International Airport Limited 
DME Distance Measuring Equipment  
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DPE Department of Public Enterprise  
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
DR Direct Recruitment 
DVOR Doppler Very High Frequency Omni-range Radar  
E&M Electrical & Mechanical 
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
EESL Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
EMD Earnest Money Deposit 
ETD Explosive Trace Detector 
ETV Elevated Transfer Vehicles  
FC Flight Crew 
FI Flying Instructor  
FIDS Flight Information Display System 
FIR Flight Information Region 
FIU Flight Inspection Unit 
FL Flight Level 
FS Fire Superintendent  
FTI Futuristic Telecomm Infrastructure  
FTO Flying Training Organization  
FUA Flexible Use of Airspace  
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GTE Global Tender Enquiry  
HAC Helicopter Accelerated Cell  
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited  
HEPA High Efficiency Particulate Air 
HIAL Hyderabad International Airport Limited 
IAA Indian Aviation Academy 
IAAI International Airports Authority of India  
IAF Indian Air Force 
IATA International Air Transport Association 
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 
ICMS Integrated Cargo Management System  
IGIA Indira Gandhi International Airport 

v 
 
IGRUA Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
ILS Instrument Landing System  
IMD India Meteorological Department 
INSPIRE Indian Ocean Strategic Partnership to Reduce Emission 
IP Internet Protocol  
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
JFO Junior Fire Officer  
JV Joint Venture 
LED Light-Emitting Diode 
LVP Low Visibility Procedures  
MAFI Modernization of Military Airfields  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MII Make In India 
MII-PPP Make-in India Policy for Public Procurement  
MLD Million Litres Per Day 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoH&FW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoPSW Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MRO Maintenance Repair and Overhaul  
MSSR Mono Pulse Secondary Surveillance Radar 
MWp Megawatt peak 
NAA National Airports Authority  
NAMC National Airspace Management Cells  
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHLAPB National High Level Airspace Policy Body 
NIATAM National Institute of Aviation Training And Management 
NM Nautical Miles 
NPC National Productivity Council 
NR Northern Region 
NSOP Non-Scheduled Operator 
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OLODE Online On-Demand Examination 
PAB Personnel Advisory Board  
PAPI Precision Approach Path Indicator 
PBN Performance Based Navigation  
PG Post Graduation 
PGDAO Post Graduation Diploma in Airport Operations 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
PV Photovoltaic 
QR Quick Response 
RAMC Regional Airspace Management Cells  
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RGNAU Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University  
RHQ Regional Head Quarter 

vi 
 
RNAV Area Navigation 
RNP Required Navigation Performance 
RoFR Right of First Refusal  
RPwD Rights of Persons with Disabilities  
SAO Selected Airline Operator 
SARP Standards and Recommended Practice 
SLA Service Level Agreement  
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
STC Supplemental Type Certificate 
STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
TRA Temporary Reserved Airspace 
TRCS Tourism Regional Connectivity Scheme 
UAH Upper Airspace Harmonization 
UDAN Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UJALA Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LED (Light-Emitting Diode) for All 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
UPR User Preferred Route  
USA United States of America 
USTDA United States Trade and Development Agency  
UT Union Territory 
VBM Vande Bharat Mission  
VGF Viability Gap Funding 
VHF Very High Frequency 
WDTL Watch Duty Time Limitation 
WP Writ Petition  
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT  
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Two Hundred Ninety 
Seventh Report on the subject ‘Functioning of Airports Authority of India’ which was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 2nd August, 2021.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 16th December, 2021 
in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The repl ies have 
been categorized as follows:-  
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.:  9.8, 10.8, 10.9, 10.10, 10.12, 11.10, 11.11, 12.3, 12.7, 13.9, 18.5, 
18.6, 22.3, 30.12, 31.1 and 33.  
Total: 16 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 9.3, 9.7, 10.7, 10.11, 12.5.1, 12.6, 13.8, 13.10, 14.3, 15.1, 16.10, 
19.1, 21.4, 21.5, 21.6, 23.3, 24.4, 25.1, 26.2, 27.A.1 and 29.1. 
Total: 21 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 9.5, 9.6, 10.6, 11.12, 12.2, 12.4, 13.7, 14.2, 17.1, 21.3, 26.3, 27.5, 
28.1, 28.A.1 and 32.    
Total: 15 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil  
Total: Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
Air Traffic Services 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee recommends that a High Powered Committee should be constituted 
both for flexi air space management and issues related to Civil Enclaves to address these 
issues comprehensively. 
(Para 9.8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 NHLAPB (National High Level Airspace Policy Body) has been constituted in 2013 
for the flexible use of Airspace  (FUA) in accordance with the FUA Manual approved by 
Government of India in 2011  
1.2 Based on the directives of Government of India under the AtmaNirbhar Bharat 
Abhiyan (ANB), AAI had taken up issue of e fficient use of airspace usi ng Flexible Use of 
Airspace concept with IAF, Indian Navy and HAL for optimum use of airspace in May 2020. 
The airspace released on daily basis is being utilized by all stakeholders. 
1.3 Actions Taken:- 
(i) 116 Conditional Routes (CDRs) implemented. 
 
(ii) National Airspace Management Cells (NAMC) at Delhi Air Traffic Flow 
Management (ATFM) centre and Regional Airspace Management Cells (RAMC) 
at Delhi (IGIA) & Chennai Airport have been established. 
(iii) Upper Airspace of 46 Restricted Areas of IAF has been converted as Temporary 
Reserved Airspace (TRA). 
(iv) 24 Danger Areas of Army de-notified. Upper limit of Two Danger Areas lowered 
to 10000 ft Above Mean Sea Level (AMSL). 
(v) Five new CDR proposals sent to IAF for concurrence in September 2021. 
 
Development, Upgradation and Modernization of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee underlines the need for a well chalked out Master Plan with regard to 
aviation infrastructure, in order to ensure that the requirements of the growth in the civil 

3 
 
aviation sector are properly catered to. The Committee urges the Ministry to ensure that 
adequate parking space and landing slots are available at the airports. 
(Para 10.8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 All Airports are being comprehensively planned and develo ped considering 30 years 
forecast. Accordingly, land is earmarked/ additional land is requested from State 
Governments based on long-term futuristic development of single runway or parallel runway 
configurations and the type of aircraft expected to operate  in future considering the potential 
of traffic it will be handling. Due to the dynamic nature of development, the Master Plans are 
reviewed regularly based on the revised growth forecast. 
2.2 Based on the futuristic traffic projections adequate Aircraft parking bays and slot 
management are created and planned at the airports, such that it would be able to meet all the 
future traffic demand. 
2.3 Around Rs.  90,000 crores of investments are expected to be pumped into Civil 
Aviation Sector in the next 5 years  out of which AAI alone will invest Rs.25000 crores for 
infrastructure creation. The remaining approx. Rs. 65,000 is being spent by the private sector. 
2.4 To meet the demand, AAI has embarked upon a capital expenditure (CAPEX) plan of 
Rs. 25000 crores in next five years for development / modernization / up gradation of airport 
infrastructure projects of AAI airports in the country.   418 additional parking bays are 
planned at various AAI airports in next five years for night parking of new aircrafts being 
purchased by airline operators. In addition, big ticket projects like expansion of existing 
Delhi, Hyderabad and Be ngaluru airports are being executed by private airport operators. 
Further, new mega Greenfield airports such as Navi Mumbai, Mopa, Jewar, Dhol era, Rajkot, 
Hollongi etc. are also under implementation.  
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee notes that potential growth in the passenger and cargo traffic would 
require enormous investments in terms of construction of new airports and expansion  & 
modernization of existing airports. The Committee understands that lenders are cautious 
about issuing long -term debt to airport operators. The Committee, therefore, would like the 
Ministry to formulate necessary policies, schemes and guidelines, to attr act the requisite 
investment for airport projects. 
(Para 10.9) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Government of India has put the Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008 in place. The policy 
outlines the guidelines for setting up of Greenfield Airports across the country by Government 
or private entities. A Greenfield airport can be developed and operated eit her by AAI / State 
Government or by an Airport Company that has been given a license by DGCA as per its 

4 
 
licensing conditions. As per the policy provisions, the airport developer is solely responsible 
for execution of the airport including funding arrangement.  
3.2 Government has granted “In -Principle” approval for construction of 21 green -field 
airports, out of which 8 airports Durgapur, Kurnool, Shirdi, Kannur, Pakyong  & Kalaburagi 
,Kushinagar and Sindhdurghave been commissioned and the other airports like  Dholera, 
Hirasar, Navi Mumbai, Jewar, Mopa (Goa), Hollongi are under development. 
 
Vande Bharat Mission (VBM)  
 Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that amenities which match up 
to international standards a re available at all the airports and that periodic maintenance is 
carried out efficiently. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure sufficient 
space for commercial shops, while granting approval for new airports. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should consider mandatorily earmarking minimum 100 acres 
of land, while making plans for future airports. Further, 5 Star/3 Star hotels and multiplexes 
should be constructed near the new airports. The Committee also desires that extra land,  if 
any, that has been allocated for the airports should not be sold and should be kept for future 
aviation developmental activities. 
(Para 10.10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The prevailing best practices followed in the world have already been adopted by the 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) while developing Airport infrastructure. Terminal 
Buildings are being designed to accommodate state of Art technologies with world class 
facilities. Terminals are being incorporated with technologies to have touch less movement of 
passengers which includes scanners and monitors at various check points such as entry gates, 
immigration etc. Further Body scanners are being procured for touchless Security checks at 
the Indian Airports. 
4.2 To have a smooth Passenger experience, AAI is in process of implementing Biometric 
Access Control System at 43 airports. AAI also has plans to initiate DIGIYATRA, Bio -
Metric e-boarding system with a facial recognition facilitating seamless passenger movement 
across multiple touch points at  Airport Terminal Buildings, being implemented at 4 AAI 
airports. Kolkata, Pune, Varanasi and Vizag. 
4.3 AAI is also emphasizing the barrier free environment at the Airport by providing 
ramps, toilets for differently abled persons, Braille symbols in lift and auditory signals in lift 
as well as escalators and aerobridges. Efforts are being made to provide ambulifts wherever 
the aerobridges could not be provided. The disabled friendly passenger coaches on airside are 
also being procured.  

5 
 
4.4 Further, Airports Authority of India earns revenues from Aeronautical and Non -
Aeronautical resources. Non -Aeronautical resources include earmarking 10 -15% area of a 
Terminal building for Offices, Retail and F&B. Also city side land is leased for non -
Aeronautical activities as identified in the AAI Act which include hotels, restaurants, 
warehouses etc. 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee has been given to understand that large num ber of institutional 
clearances are required for airport projects, w hich leads to delays and cost escalation. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends in this regard that the Ministry should set up a single -
window clearance mechanism in order to facilitate timely grant of institutional clearances for 
airport projects and ensure completion of such projects within the stipulated time period. 
(Para 10.12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1. For any airport to be developed, activities relating to Air Traffic Services (ATS), 
security, customs and immigration would be reserved for central government agencies. 
Provision of these services would be governed by the policy to be laid down by the Cent ral 
Government from time to time. These activities include Defence clearance, Air Traffic 
Services (ATS) Functions by AAI (CNS-ATM), Security clearances as per Guidelines for this 
purpose, issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation from time to time, Customs  clearance from 
the Department of Revenue for provision of Custom services, MHA Clearance for 
Immigration in case of an international airport, BCAS Clearance for security and IMD 
clearances for Airport Meteorological Services.  
5.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) has been signing Memorandum of 
Understandings ( MoUs) with all the airport operators given under lease to private parties 
whereas there is a provision to provide single window clearances for necessary clearance. 
Further, under Greenfield Airports Policy of MoCA, clearances for new airport projects are 
granted by MoCA as a single window. Therefore, single-window clearance mechanism for 
airport projects is already in place. 
 
 
Privatization of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee realizes the huge demand for more airports in the country. The 
Committee recognizes the fact that it is not feasible for AAI to meet the investment 
requirements to develop and maintain all the airports in the co untry. The Committee 
appreciates the inevitable need for Public Private Partnership in the development and 
maintenance of airports. The Committee endorses the provisions proposed in the Airports 

6 
 
Economic Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2021  which would facilitate the 
development of both high traffic volume and low traffic volume airports together, in a holistic 
manner. 
(Para 11.10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 On the similar endorsement by the Hon'ble Committee, AAI has awarded six airports 
namely, Ahmedabad, Lucknow, Mangaluru, Jaipur, Thiruvananthapuram and Guwahati 
under PPP mode during 2019-2020. 
6.2 AAI is in the process of undertaking next round of PPP transaction of 06 select 
Airports by clubbin g them with 7 smaller Airports for PPP bi dding. Each group will be 
treated as a single airport by the AERA for the purpose of tariff determination. 
6.3 For the purpose, the AERA Act has been amended which will enable AAI to club 
small airports with select airport forming a group while undertaking  PPP transaction of 
Airport. 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee emphasizes the need to ensure absolute transparency in all PPP 
airport projects. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that a proper policy 
and regulatory framework g overning the PPP airport projects, is put in place. The 
Committee underlines the need to ensure a proper auditing mechanism with regard to PPP 
projects. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the 
airport charges on the passe ngers are equitable and commensurate with the operational 
costs. 
(Para 11.11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1. The Concession Agreement has provision of auditing of book of accounts of the 
concessionaires by independent auditors. 
7.2 AAI has the right, either through itself or through any of its authorized representative, 
to inspect the records of the Concessionaire during office hours and require copies of relevant 
extracts of books of accounts, duly certified by the Statutory Auditors, to be provided to the 
Authority for verification of basis of payments, and in the event of any discrepancy or error 
being found, the same shall be rectified and such rectified account shall form the basis of 
payments by either Party under this Agreement. 
7.3 Additionally, the Airport charges of the Airports being taken up for PPP transactions 
are determined by an independent regulator i.e. Airports Economic Regulatory 
Authority AERA. AERA determines the aeronautical tariffs of major airport in accordance to 

7 
 
AERA Act and AERA guid elines issued from time to time. The tariffs are determined to 
maintain and operate the airport along with a reasonable return on investment. 
 
UDAN Scheme 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to closely and meticulously, monitor the 
implementation and impact of the UDAN Scheme and formulate plans and guidelines to 
ensure that the benefits of the Scheme actually reach the passengers, as per the spirit of the 
Scheme. 
(Para 12.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 It is needless to mention that COVID -19 Pandemic has severely impacted RCS -
UDAN operations.  
8.2 The Ministry of Civil Aviation closely and meticulously, monitored the 
implementation and impact of the UDAN Scheme and formulated plans and guidelines to 
ensure that the benefits of the Scheme actually reach the passengers, as per the spirit of the 
Scheme. 
8.3 In order to ensure the benefits of scheme for passengers as well for sustainability of 
RCS-UDAN operations against impact created by Covid -19 pandemic Mo CA approved 
policy reforms and relief package and the same was conveyed to airlines on 29.09.2020 
followed by further relief measures on 07.01.2021 which included 3 -year support period for 
each route instead first commenced route only as per earlier policy . Thus, the total UDAN 
routes in actual operation has reached up-to 294 as on 14.12.2021. 
8.4 Resultantly, the number of passengers travelled, RCS routes operationalized and 
flights operated under UDAN as on 14.12.2021 are as under: 
 Number of passengers travelled: 8.1 million approximately 
 RCS routes operationalized       : 403 
 Total flights operated                  : 160556 approximately 
 (as on 12.12.2021) 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee takes note of the issues related to lack of adequate infrastructure of 
airports due to non-availability of land, delay related to compliance of the regulations by the 
airport operators, lack of road connectivity to the airports etc. that need  to be addressed on 

8 
 
priority. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent remedial steps to 
address these vital concerns. The Committee also notes that support from the State 
Governments in the shape of multimodal connectivity, utilities,  land availability, security etc. 
are critical to the promotion of regional air connectivity under RCS. The Committee would, 
therefore, like to urge upon the Ministry of Civil Aviation to impress upon the State 
Governments, to form a dedicated mechanism ma ndated to offer one-stop solutions to airline 
and airport operators, with the objective of promoting regional air connectivity under RCS. 
(Para 12.7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1. The issues for development of airports are taken up with respective state gover nments 
on regular basis by this Ministry at the highest level. These are monitored and followed up 
through review meetings and regular correspondence. 
 
 
Development of Cargo Sector 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee takes serious note of the fact that due to the Open Sky Policy for cargo 
in India, foreign carriers carry 90% - 95% of the international cargo, to and from India, 
while Indian air cargo operators face many barriers when they go into other countries. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to provide a level playing field for Indian air 
cargo operators, the Ministry of Civil Aviation should make appropriate changes in the Open 
Sky Policy for cargo. The Committee also recommends that Ministry/DGCA should take note 
of Indian cargo operators facing discriminatory and restrictive practices or regulatory 
impediments in operating international cargo flights in any of the foreign countries and take 
urgent steps to address/resolve them. The Committee may be apprised of the action ta ken and 
the outcome achieved in this regard. 
(Para 13.9) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation has already reviewed the Open Sky Policy for Foreign 
Cargo carriers as promulgated vide AIC/1992 dated 11.05.1992 and appropriate changes have 
been made with a view to ensure fair and equal opportunity in the air cargo capacity offered 
by Indian registered airlines and airlines registered elsewhere. The revised open sky policy 
has been promulgated vide AIC 41/2020 dated 31-12-2020. 
10.2 Under the  revised policy, the operations of foreign ad hoc pure and pure non -
scheduled freighter charter service flights have been restricted to 6 airports, namely 
Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Hyderabad, and Mumbai, and Operations of Scheduled 

9 
 
cargo operatio n by foreign carriers is permitted as per the provisions of the Bilateral Air 
Service Agreement (ASA) with the respective country. 
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic 
Recommendation/Observation  
11.  The Committee is well aware of the fact that the aviation sector has been badly hit by 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee understands that the adverse effect of the COVID -
19 pandemic on the airlines operating in the country, which were already reeling under 
heavy losses, was unprecedented. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should adopt 
relief measures to help the airlines tide over the adverse impact of the pandemic and that the 
Ministry should envisage immediate and long term measures, to enable the resurgence of the 
airlines in the country. 
(Para 18.5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 On account of COVID -19 pandemic, Ministry of Civil Aviation has issued 
comprehensive guidelines in May, 2020 for ensuring safe travel. Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation (DGCA), being a regulator, has issued Circulars from time to time to ensure strict 
compliance of COVID-19 protocols at airport premises. 
11.2 In view of extraordinary situation arising due to spread of pandemic, Government of 
India invoking special provisions under Aircraft Act regulated the operations of sc heduled 
airlines through capacity capping and introduction of fare band which was reviewed from 
time to time depending on the pandemic situation and demand. As on date, there is no 
capping and fare bands are operational on 15 days cycle. 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee desires that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure short 
term waiver or short term put off, in terms of aviation charges, for sustaining a viable 
aviation industry. The Committee is of the view that all airlines and  aviation-related business 
must be treated as priority sector lending. The Committee reiterates the recommendation 
made in its 293rd Report that the Ministry should provide a sectoral fund, which is 
professionally managed and which can provide structured debt to the airlines industry. 
(Para 18.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Benefits under Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme(ECLGS) 3.0 have been 
extended to Civil Aviation Sector. 
12.2 Apart from, the capacity capping invoked to regulate the operations of scheduled 
airlines owing pandemic situation has been done away with. 

10 
 
Digi Yatra 
Recommendation/Observation  
13.  The Committee hopes that Digi Yatra will enable seamless and paperless journey for 
the air travelers in the country. The Committee desires that  the Ministry should implement 
more such initiatives which would benefit the passengers. 
(Para 22.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 In the 1 st Phase,   Digi Yatra is being implemented at 04 Airports  (Kolkata, Pune, 
Varanasi and Vijayawada) in AAI. Upon successful implementation of 1 st Phase, Digi Yatra 
will be implemented at other AAI Airports. 
 
Various issues related to airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry on the issues raised 
by the Members of the Committee. The Committee desires that the Ministry should take 
appropriate and timely follow -up action, to ensure that the concerns raised by the Members 
of the Committee are duly addressed. 
(Para 30.12)  
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 Noted. 
 
Suggestions given by private airlines 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take note of the above -
mentioned suggestions given by the private airlines and take concrete steps to ensure that 
they are implemented t imely, so that the Civil Aviation sector is benefitted by the same. The 
Committee should be apprised of the specific action taken in this regard. 
(Para 31.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Recommendation of the Committee noted. 

11 
 
 
Statutory provisions/ guidelines 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry, the imperative need to ensure that the 
recommendations made by the Committee are given serious thought and deliberation; and 
due consideration should be given to the facts and the issues involved therein. Therefore, it is 
necessary that all possible steps are taken to ensure that they are implemented in letter and 
spirit, within a designated time frame. Further, the Committee recommends that the statutory 
provisions/ g uidelines, wherever needed and necessary for the implementation of the 
recommendations, should be formulated by the Ministry without any delay. The Committee 
desires that in case of any difficulty/ problems faced by the Ministry in the implementation of 
the recommendations, the Committee may be apprised thereof. 
(Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Noted. 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Air Traffic Services 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee is of the considered opinion that keeping in view the exponential air 
traffic growth witnessed in the country in the past few years, it is essential that best 
international practices as regards the Air Navigatio n Services are adopted and implemented 
in the country. The Committee strongly feels that a futuristic Master Plan for Air Navigation 
Services is inevitable so that substantial benefits are accrued to all the stakeholders. The 
Committee emphasizes the need to ensure strict adherence to the international standards of 
safety and security. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that steps 
should be taken to upgrade the ANS facilities and procedures and to give due emphasis on 
research, development and training.  
(Para 9.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Airports Authority of India (AAI) is continuously upgrading its Air Navigation 
Services (ANS) Infrastructure to meet the air traffic growth. AAI has undertaken Upper 
Airspace Harmonization (UAH) Programme for better capacity and efficiency facilitating 
safe and seamless movement of air traffic within Indian airspace. Harmonization of Chennai 
and Kolkata airspace has been completed. 
1.2 The entire terrestrial airspace of India is under surveillance  coverage through a 
network of Primary & Secondary Radar and Automatic Dependent Surveiilance -Broadcast 
(ADS-B) surveillance system. From January 2020, the entire oceanic airspace controlled by 
AAI has been brought under surveillance coverage by hiring Satellite based ADS-B services. 
1.3 The communication facilities have been upgraded to Internet Protocol (IP) based 
technology for seamless coverage. AAI has established Futuristic Telecomm Infrastructure 
(FTI). It is a Service Level Agreement (SLA) based sys tem ensuring 99.99% to 99.999% 
availability, using latest technology and communication infrastructure at each AAI location. 
This will help improve airspace safety, capacity, and efficiency. ATM Automation equipment 
completing its lifecycle are continuously  upgraded. AAI planned to upgrade/ replace ATC 
automation System at 38 airports to modernize the ATC System. 
1.4 For optimum use of airport resources and airspace and thus reducing airspace/airport 
congestion AAI has implemented Central Air Traffic Flow Ma nagement (C -ATFM) from 
2017. This will also reduce environmental impact due to less emission and helping fuel 
saving by airlines. 

13 
 
1.5 To continue this modernization effort to meet the future demand, Airports Authority 
of India (AAI) entered into an agreeme nt with United States Trade and Development Agency 
(USTDA) to develop a Communications, Navigation and Surveillance/Air Traffic 
Management (CNS/ATM) roadmap to improve airspace utilization and implement 
CNS/ATM air and ground infrastructure in the short, m edium and long term (upto 10 years)  
for modernization on 16th November, 2018. 
1.6 The study has been carried out by M/s Boeing, USA in consultation with all 
stakeholders such as Airlines, Airport Operators, DGCA and AAI to assist AAI in preparing a 
futuristic comprehensive Masterplan for CNS and ATM facilities and services along with 
guidance on implementation process and regulatory requirements.    
1.7 The report has been submitted by M/s Boeing in October 2021.Based on this 
document, AAI will prepare its roadmap by December 2022 for next 10 years .The Roadmap 
will be dovetailed with th e National Air Navigation Plan to be developed by MoCA , which 
is an ICAO requirement. 
1.8 AAI is upgrading its ANS training facilities with state -of-the-art Training simulators 
(such as Aerodrome Tower Visual Simulator, Flight Simulator Training Device, A TC 
Procedural Simulator, ATC Radar Simulator) as part of training improvement plan.    
1.9 To promote Research & Development in Civil Aviation, AAI is developing a Civil 
Aviation Research Organization (CARO) at Hyderabad. The establishment will provide an 
integrated platform for all Indian stakeholders. 
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee hopes that Modernization of Military Airfields (MAFI) project which 
is a turn key project, would enhance the operational capability, by facilitating air operations 
of civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather conditions, while enhancing 
aerospace safety. The Committee observes that MAFI project of the Indian Air Force should 
decide and cull out those activities which are primarily nav igational equipment including 
approach landing systems, PAPI runway lights, threshold lights, instruments and equipment 
etc., where AAI/ATS have a unique advantage, as they have been handling these systems 
across the country, for over seven decades. Domest ic civil aviation safety is the primary 
responsibility of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, DGCA and AAI. The utilization of these 
navigational aids/approach landing systems/equipment etc., which have been installed across 
the country, is primarily done by t he AAI, which has domain knowledge. They are also 
familiar with the quality procurement processes, maintenance and operational requirements 
of these instruments which they have been using for Civil operations for over fifty years. The 
Committee recommends that a High Level Committee may be created with the Indian Air 
Force to cull out those activities related to navigation and landing facilities which are, 
primarily, in the domain knowledge, with the AAI for Civil operations. The Committee 
recommends that a part from this, the development of the rest of the infrastructure planned 
under the MAFI scheme may continue as envisaged, for a greater synergy between civil 
aviation requirements and operational requirements of Indian Air Force. 

14 
 
(Para 9.7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Since the military airfields are owned and operated by the Defence Forces, based on 
their operational requirements and infrastructure on ground, it is felt that it is not feasible to 
cull out those activities related to navigational equipment i ncluding approach landing 
systems, PAPI runway lights, threshold lights, instruments and equipment etc. as 
recommended because the military requirement may not be compatible with the civil aviation 
requirement. 
2.2 However as recommended by the committee, it is noted for compliance and the 
recommendations have been sent to Ministry of Defence (MoD) for their comments. 
 
Development, Upgradation and Modernization of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee underscores the fact that our airports should be developed in such a 
way that they emerge as symbols of national pride. The Committee highlights the urgent need 
to successfully manage the demand vs. traffic capacity of airports. The Committee urges upon 
the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and futuristic Master Plan for 
implementation of projects to provide world class airport infrastructure, by bringing in 
cutting edge technology and the global best practices of the aviation industry. The Committee 
desires that the Ministry should  address not only the existing capacity constraints in various 
airports, but also address infrastructural requirements in the context of growth scenario 
forecast for the next decade. The Committee emphasizes the need for the removal of the 
existing bottlenecks in order to enable the aviation infrastructure to keep up with the growing 
demand in the Civil Aviation sector. Further, it should be strictly ensured that the 
development/upgradation of airport projects are completed as per the prescribed timelines. 
(Para 10.7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The expansion/ upgradation of airports is a continuous process and is undertaken by 
concerned Airport Operators from time to time depending upon commercial viability, traffic 
demand, availability of land etc. The airports are planned and developed considering 30 
years’ forecast. 
3.2 Around Rs.90, 000 crore of investments are expected to be pumped into Civil 
Aviation Sector in the next 5 years including investment from both Public sector and private 
sector out of which AAI alone will invest Rs.25000 crores for infrastructure creation to meet 
the growing demand and removal of bottlenecks.  

15 
 
3.3 To create additional capacity, work is in progress at Goa, Port Blair, Agartala, 
Guwahati, Chennai, Lucknow, Dehradun, Leh, Tr ichy, Pune, Patna, Darbhanga (CE), 
Kolhapur, Bareilly (CE), Jabalpur, Surat, Adampur (CE), Kanpur (CE), etc.  Work is in 
planning stage at Jaipur, Srinagar, Vijayawada, Agra, Indore, Ahmedabad,   Bhubaneshwar, 
Varanasi etc. AAI is not just building new Greenfield airports but is also upgrading its airside 
infrastructure at a rapid pace with works like runway extension, strengthening and 
resurfacing of runways, construction of parallel taxiways, rapid exit taxiways, ATC Tower 
cum Technical block, setting up adequate ground installations like Instrument Landing 
System (ILS), Doppler Very High Frequency Omnirange Radar (DVOR), Airport 
Surveillance Radar (ASR)/Mono Pulse Secondary Surveillance Radar(MSSR). 
3.4 418 additional parking bays are planned at various a irports in next five years for night 
parking of new aircrafts being purchased by airline operators. 
3.5 Route optimization, Continuous Descent Operation (CDO), Upper Airspace 
Harmonization(UAH), ATM Automation, Flexible Use of Airspace, R&D, 
Telecommunication Infrastructure upgradation, Automation system backup, Remote Tower 
and alternate towers, Procurement of aircraft for FIU, Replacement of CNS facilities etc are 
being taken up by AAI to upgrade/automate/modernize their ANS infrastructure. 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that there is a need to look at the entire 
mechanism of development of airports and the way the airport concessions are given. At 
present, the rights to operate airports are given to individuals or entities who bid the highest 
with the Airports Authority of India. When those services are given to the highest bidder, the 
highest bidder charges the highest amount of money from the airlines, which has little or no 
bearing on the actual cost of the se rvice. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should seriously look into these issues and take urgent steps to ensure that such 
anomalies are rectified. 
(Para 10.11)  
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India  (AERA) being an autonomous 
regulator determines the aeronautical tariffs of major airport in accordance to AERA Act and 
AERA guidelines issued from time to time. The tariffs are not determined to recover the 
investments made but to maintain and operate th e airport along with a reasonable return on 
investment and reasonable User Development Fees to be charged by Airport operators to the 
passengers. Therefore, a fair and transparent mechanism is already in place to determine 
tariffs at major airports. As suc h, the tariffs are not decided by the airport operator but 
AERA. 
 
UDAN Scheme 

16 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee desires that the Ministry should examine the reasons for non -
commencement of the awarded routes; identify the bottlenecks in this reg ard; and chalk out 
strategic steps to timely address the issues involved. 
(Para 12.5.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Sometimes there is a delay in operationalizing routes, for reasons various which 
include: 
i. Airline business generally has challenging environment with low yield and high 
operating costs (partly due to high cost of ATF and other services).  
ii. Non-availability of slots at metro airports like Mumbai & Pune.  
iii. Delay in obtaining Scheduled Commuter Oper ators Permit by new entrant Airlines, 
non-availability of suitable aircraft, aircraft leasing issues, long lead time for delivery, 
maintenance issues of small aircraft difficulties in procuring spares from abroad. 
iv. Collapse of Jet Airways which affected closure of routes awarded to them. 
v. Delay in completing the work owing to fund needs, land requirement and further there 
is delay in removing obstacles resulting into delay in regulatory clearance.  
5.2 Corrective steps taken by the Government  
i. Periodic review of the progress of upgradation works and removal of bottlenecks in 
operationalization of airports  
ii. Provided certain financial flexibilities as a temporary measure which included 
reduced performance guarantee and return of addl. performance guarantee subject to 
fulfilment of certain conditions and operational flexibilities which included flexibility 
to convert RCS seats to non -RCS seats, flexibility to operate between 3and 7/14 
flights per week, suspension of performance criteria and extensio n in contract period 
for lockdown duration. 
iii. MoCA has recently allowed NSOP operations in fixed wing (i/c seaplanes) apart from 
operations in helicopters allowed earlier for expeditious operationalization of routes. 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee understands that there are many non -operational airstrips/ airports 
owned by AAI and State Governments. The Committee is of the view that operationalizing 
these inactive AAI and State Government airstrips will ease out the pressure currently 
prevailing on the airport infrastructure in the country. The Committee recommends that 
unused airstrips and dormant airports should be utilized for promoting regional/remote 
areas air connectivity under RCS. 
(Para 12.6) 
 

17 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Under UDAN, revival/upgradation of unserved & underserved airports is done on its 
identification through valid bid & award to the SAO (Selected Airline Operator). 
6.2 UDAN is market driven mechanism. Development of regional air connectivity routes 
is proposed to be le ft to market forces so that airlines undertake assessment of demand and 
nature of supply required on particular routes and lead the process under RCS.  
6.3 RCS-UDAN was launched by MoCA on 21.10.2016. Since then 154 RCS airports 
including 14 aerodromes and 36 heliports have been identified for operation of RCS flights.  
6.4 65 unserved and underserved airports (including 08 heliports & 02 water aerodromes) 
have been operationalized so far. 
 
Development of Cargo Sector 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. Since automation is crucial for an efficient air freight mechanism, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry, in co -ordination with the stakeholders, should take effective 
steps to automate information systems and to streamline/ simplify the respective process es 
and regulations for faster, transparent and seamless movement of air cargo. 
(Para 13.8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 AAICLAS has established Integrated Cargo Management System (ICMS) which 
integrates all cargo partners for paperless transactions at Major Airports. 
7.2 This is being extended to all other AAICLAS facilities for online processing of both 
International & Domestic Air Cargo. 
7.3 Further, AAICLAS has installed the Automatic Storage & Retrieval system (ASRS) at 
Chennai & Kolkata Airports for safe  handling of Import Cargo & Elevated Transfer vehicles 
(ETV) systems for automated build -up of pallets & containers, weighment, storage of 
palletized & containerized cargo and release to Airlines. 
7.4 Further automation for physical handling of Air Cargo a t its Terminals & improved 
information exchange systems are in progress at AAICLAS handled Air Cargo Terminals. 
Recommendation/Observation  

18 
 
8. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 293rd Report that the 
Ministry should take timely action to address the issues of congestion at the entry of terminal, 
inadequate screening, inadequate storage space, lack of temperature facility etc. at the cargo 
terminals. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should take steps to ensure that 
attractive and uniform transit handling costs and procedures are implemented across all 
airports in the country. 
(Para 13.10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 While the challenges like bunching of flights in morning & evening, bunching of 
export cargo beyond 1500 hrs at  Air Cargo Terminals by stakeholders, traffic restrictions in 
major cities for 24x7 movement of loaded/empty Trucks are existing in India, AAICLAS & 
other Air Cargo Terminal operators have been continuously engaged in smoothening 24x7 
processes at major cities. 
 AAICLAS on its part positioned adequate new &Dual view X-ray machines as per BCAS 
mandates at all its Terminals. 
 Further procurement of X -Ray machines, Explosive Trace Detector (ETD) are also in 
hand with airport operators for the replacement of old machines and for new facilities 
being created. 
 Major Airport operators has established number of  Cold Chambers ranging different 
temperatures to store perishable cargo, pharmaceuticals, vegetables, fruits, vaccines, food 
items, frozen food etc in its International Air Cargo warehouses. Few Domestic Air Cargo 
Terminals having Cold Chambers to handle Agri products. 
8.2 Continuous efforts are put in for augmentation of facilities by AAICLAS and JV 
airports.  
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) infrastructure 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee understands that a major deterrent for the growth of the MRO 
industry is high taxation of MRO components. The Committee strongly recommends that the 
Ministry should give necessary focus on the issues presently faced in the MRO sector in order 
to ensure that India evolves into a key international player in offering MRO facilities. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure that MRO 
workshops are set up in all the me tro cities in the country, in order to attract international 
business. The Committee also emphasizes the need for enhanced collaboration between 
defence and civil MROs. 
(Para 14.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 

19 
 
9.1 Investment decisions in any industry including MROs are dependent on various 
factors which include market forces and regulatory environment. Government has taken 
several measures for a more congenial regulatory environment. In September 2021, Ministry 
of C ivil Aviation (MoCA) announced a new MRO policy, which includes leasing of land 
through open tenders and abolishing royalty charged by the Airport Authority of India (AAI) 
for the Maintenance Repair and Overhaul (MRO) business for ease of doing business an d to 
provide further incentive to the sector. Other key measures undertaken for supporting the 
growth of the Indian MRO sector include the following:  
(i) GST on MRO has been reduced from 18% to 5% with full Input Tax Credit from 
1 April 2020. 
(ii) Custom duty has been waived on tools, toolkits and spares imported by MROs. 
(iii) Transactions sub-contracted by foreign OEMs/MRO to domestic MRO are treated 
as “exports” with zero-rated GST from 1 April 2020. 
(iv) Relaxed restriction on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years. 
(v) The Airports Authority of India (AAI) has come up with a business -friendly 
proposal for MRO with zero airport royalty charges and significantly rationalised 
land rentals for eight AAI airports (Begumpet, Bhopal, Chandigarh, Chennai, 
Delhi, Juhu, Kolkata and Tirupati). 
(vi) Stay of foreign aircraft for MRO in India permitted till completion of MRO work 
or six months, whichever is earlier. 
(vii) Rules simplified for export of leased aircraft in complete or knocked -down 
conditions, opening up new opportun ities in redelivery checks and aircraft 
component recycling. 
(viii) Aircraft lessors are being encouraged to carry out their end -of-lease checks in 
India. 
(ix) Foreign manufacturers are being encouraged to set up their MRO facilities on 
their own or through joint ventures with Indian players.  
9.2 The Government is facilitating civil -military MRO convergence by fostering greater 
technical and business collaboration between leading MRO companies in India and the 
defence establishment. 
 
Pilot Training Institutes 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee emphasizes the imperative need to make available, state -of-the-art 
facilities for the training of professionals in the aviation sector. Keeping in view the rapid 
growth in the Indian aviation industry and shortage of pilots faced in India, th e Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should set up new Institutes for Pilot Training and to revamp 
the existing ones by providing modern simulators and also augment the capacity intake of 
students in the existing Institutes. The Committee recommends th at the Ministry should 
envisage setting up of Pilot Training Institute adjacent to the airport, at least in one airport, 
in each State. The Committee strongly recommends that the training facilities offered to the 

20 
 
various technical professionals in the Civ il Aviation sector, such as pilots, ATC controllers, 
technicians, safety inspectors and engineers should match up with standardized international 
training facilities. The Ministry should also take necessary steps to ensure that sufficient 
number of trainer s are made available, by offering incentives which would attract them to 
this field. 
(Para 15.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 There are 34 DGCA approved Flying Training Organizations (FTOs) in India which 
provide pilot training. During the yea r 2021 (till 15  Nov 2021), 286 C ommercial Pilot 
License (CPL) have been issued through Indian FTOs. Various steps have been taken to 
increase the number of pilots trained in India. The steps taken include: 
(i) With a view to enhance the training capacity of FTOs, Airports Au thority of India 
(AAI) has come up with a liberalised FTO policy wherein the concept of airport 
royalty (revenue share payment by FTOs to AAI) has been abolished and land 
rentals have been rationalised.  Recently, AAI has issued award letters to winning 
bidders for nine FTOs at five airports Belagavi (Karnataka), Jalgaon 
(Maharashtra), Kalaburgi (Karnataka), Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh) and Lilabari 
(Assam).  Under this policy, nine FTOs are to start operation at the 5 AAI airports. 
Soft launch of two FTOs at Kalaburgi was done on 15 August 2021. 
(ii) DGCA CAR Section 7 Series I Part V has been modified to empower Flying 
Instructors (FI) to authorise flight operations at FTOs. This may help increase the 
flying hours at each FTOs significantly leading to suboptimal aircraft utilisation. 
Hitherto, this power has been granted only to Chief Flying Instructors (CFI) and 
Deputy CFIs. 
(iii) India’s largest flying school IGRUA (Amethi, UP), has been permitted to start 
pilot training in Gondia and Kalaburgi to enhance flying hours  which get severely 
affected during winter months due to visibility issues. 
(iv) IGRUA’s operation and management is proposed to be handed over to a private 
operator on a PPP basis for 30 years. This will help replace its ageing aircraft 
fleet, hire more instru ctors at market salaries, improve the simulator facilities and 
enhance the number of pilots passing out every year. 
(v) In Jan 21, agreement between IGRUA and IAA, New Delhi has been made to 
provide ground classes for various pilot licenses. 
(vi) CAR, Section 6, Se ries A, Part II for regulations on STC has been approved by 
DGCA on 10 Sep 2021 
(vii) Total number of DGCA approved Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (AME) 
schools at present is 49. More than 3200 trainees pass out from these AME 

21 
 
schools every two years. With a v iew to meet the increasing demand of aircraft 
maintenance personnel, the AME schools are being strengthened. 
(viii) Several initiatives, which include the modifications in the examination pattern, 
standardisation of syllabus, initiation of graduation programme fo r aircraft 
maintenance personnel, revising of granting of licenses are being taken. 
(ix) Upgradation of AME schools will also be undertaken inter -alia by affiliating them 
with Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU), India's only Aviation 
University.  An AME school is expected to commence at IGRUA in January 
2022. 
(x) Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is ready to introduced a new 
“online on -demand examination” (OLODE) for aircraft maintenance engineers 
(AME) and flight crew (FC) candidates. Thes e will be in addition to the existing 
regular online examinations. 
(xi) RGNAU at Amethi is considering degree courses for pilots.   This will enhance 
the career options and encourage more young Indians to consider aviation as a 
long-term career option. 
(xii) RGNAU has been operating 3 courses, viz. Basic Fire Fighters Course (BFFC), 
Bachelor of Management Studies (BMS) Aviation & Cargo and PG Diploma in 
Airport Operations (PGDAO) in cooperation with the expert private entities as per 
the international best practice. 
10.2 FTOs have added around 30 new aircraft in their fleet in last 2 years.  
 
Pollution Control 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by AAI to reduce Carbon footprints and 
desires that AAI should update its pollution control methods to meet international best 
practices in this regard. 
(Para 16.10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 AAI has implemented the following measures to reduce carbon emissions: 
(i) Implementation of Performance Based Navigation (PBN) in Indian airspace. 
(ii) Implementation of Conditional, Connector routes. 
(iii) Implementation of Continuous Descent Operations (CDO).  

22 
 
(iv) Implementation of Harmonised Upper Airspace of Chennai and Kolkata FIR. 
(v) Implementation of PBN RNAV (Area Navigation) -5, RNAV -2 and RNP 
(Required Naviga tion Performance) -2 routes between city -pairs with reduced 
horizontal separation. 
(vi) 50NM/30NM Reduced Horizontal Spacing between routes and Reduction of 
Longitudinal Separation to 30NM. 
(vii) User Preferred Route (UPR)  Indian Ocean Strategic Partnership to Reduce 
Emission (INSPIRE). 
(viii) Implementation of Departure Slot Management 
(ix) Implementation of Central Air Traffic Flow Management (CATFM). 
(x) Implementation of Airport Collabor ative Decision Making ( ACDM) to reduce 
fuel burn on ground 
(xi) Flexible Use of Airspace (FUA) – in coordination with Indian military to utilise 
the military airspace for providing shorter routes to aircraft thus saving fuel.  
(xii) As a Pollution control measure, to reduce the carbon footprints the Central E&M 
Workshop, Safdarjung Airport,  New Delhi has hired  10 Nos. of E -Vehicles (05 
Nos. for Central E&M, Workshop & 05 Nos. for RHQ -NR) from M/s EESL on 
wet lease basis.  In addition, the Regional headquarters/ Airports has also 
procured/ hired 32 Nos. of E -vehicles as a pollution control measures to reduce 
the carbon footprints 
(xiii) Updation on Installation of Solar PV Plant at Airports:  
 Already installed around 44.91 MWp at 51 Airports.  
 Works in progress of capacity 16.05 MWp at 06 Airports likely to be 
completed by Dec., 2021. 
 Works under planning of capacity 6.32 MWp at 11 Airports likely to be 
completed by June, 2022.  
(xiv) Updation on National LED program (UJALA- UnnatJyoti by Affordable LEDs for 
all): 
 Already completed: In Phase-I, at 23 Airports & in Phase-II, at 58 Airports. 
 Works under progress at 04 Airports likely to be completed by Dec. 2021. 
(xv) Renewal of ACI - Airport Carbon Accreditation (ACA) Certification: 
 Kolkata, Trivandrum, Bhubaneswar & Varanasi Airports have acquired "Level 
2" accreditation certification and is valid up to Dec'21.  
 The renewal of certification of above. airports are under process.  

23 
 
(xvi) Updation on Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs): 
 Already installed at 51 Airports of total capacity 13.45 MLD.  
 Works under progress at 12 Airports of total capacity 5.27 MLD likely to be 
completed by June, 2022.  
 Works under planning stage at 51 AAI Airports out of which at 15 Airports is 
likely to be completed by Dec, 2022. 
(xvii)  Future activities of FUA 
 Development and implementation of Airspace Coordination Application 
(ACAP) for automatic coordination between stakeholders including IAF. 
 Committee constituted for review of Flexible Use of Airspace Manual. 
 HAL Bengaluru reluctance to convert the rigid airspace to flexible airspace. 
 Converting more rigid airspaces below FL250 into flexible airspace structures 
to improve airspace utilization. 
11.2 Plan for transitioning from basic FUA to Dynamic Airspace Management (DAM) 
enabling joint use of airspace by both Civil and Military.  
 
Training Courses conducted by AAI 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee underlines the need for providing training courses to upgrade the 
skills of the employees of AAI. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the 
training courses conducted by AAI match up to international standards and that they are 
tailor made to suit the requirements of the Civil Aviation sector. 
(Para 19.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 At AAI, great focus is laid on building technical and managerial skills among aviation 
professionals. Being part of a highly skill -oriented Civil Aviation industry, the technical 
courses at AAI are tailor -made to cater to industry requirements and ensure high degree of 
accuracy and efficiency in performing job roles. The AAI Training Establishments are Full 
members of ICAO TRAINAIR PLUS, which is a global ne twork of training organizations 
and industry partners working together to develop and deliver ICAO -harmonized training 
packages. 
12.2 Considering the specialized requirement in technical domain, the Civil Aviation 
Training College at Prayagraj conducts in -house training programs for the competency 
development and skill enhancement of all ATCOs and ATSEPs and takes care of all the 
phases of their career in AAI. Also, periodic refresher and upgradation trainings are 
conducted to adapt to the technological and  other advancements in the field of aviation. 

24 
 
CATC also conducts these trainings at its 5 Regional Training Centers and their satellite 
extensions. All the training programs are designed and conducted as per the TRAINAIR 
PLUS methodology of ICAO, thereby e nsuring quality of international standards. Also, the 
institute is ISO 9001:2015 certified. CNS training department of CATC has implemented 
ICAO's Competency Based Training and Assessment (CBTA) framework advocated by 
ICAO Doc 10057 (Manual on CBTA for ATS EP) and all the courses from initial training to 
specialized courses have been developed and conducted in line with CBTA framework. It is 
one of the pioneers in the South East Asian Region in implementation of ICAO's CBTA 
framework. The training courses can be tailored for meeting the requirements of other foreign 
ANSPs. 
12.3 Additionally, there are three ICAO Standardized Training Packages on VHF OTE 
make, DVOR Thales make and Distance Measuring Equipment ( DME) Thales make which 
are of international standa rd and these courses are also listed on the ICAO's website for 
inviting applications to the course from member nations. 
12.4 Similarly, the ATM section of CATC conducts 15 training courses for employees and 
these courses are reviewed frequently to match th e ICAO Standards and Recommended 
Practices and ICAO Docs. All courses are tailor -made to suit the requirements of Civil 
Aviation sector. 
12.5 The training courses conducted by NIATAM, Gondia are DGCA approved and lead 
the participants towards obtaining var ious licenses and ratings in order to provide Air Traffic 
Services as per Rule 95 of The Aircraft Rules 1937.  
12.6 AAI's Fire Training Centre, New Delhi and Fire Service Training Centre at Kolkata 
conduct international standard courses to upgrade the skills of Fire Services employees. Some 
of these courses are: 
 Basic Training Course (BTC) for new recruits 
 Firemanship Course for assistant / leading Fireman / technical assistant who are 
regularly involved in active Fire-Fighting 
 Junior Fire Officer Course (J FO) for Superintendent (FS) / officer / Assistant Fire 
Officer 
 Officers Course considered for Senior Superintendent / Station officers 
 Junior Fire Executive Course for newly recruited Fire Executives of AAI, state 
Fire services and industries 
 Senior Fire O fficers Course for Manager / Divisional Fire Officer / Senior Fire 
Officer 
12.7 Indian Aviation Academy conducts regular training programs to upgrade the skills of 
AAI employees. All trainings conducted are in conformance with the ICAO Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPs). 
12.8 In addition to the above, the Training Cell at Corporate Headquarters organizes 
globally renowned courses like Airport Management Professional Accreditation Programme 
(AMPAP), that provide a holistic view of airport func tioning as well as international best 

25 
 
practices in Airport Management. Aviation-related courses through tie-up with IATA are also 
organized from time to time. 
Vacancies in AAI 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee takes note of the fact that Child Care Leave is not granted to women 
ATCOs in AAI. The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish the reasons therefor, to 
the Committee, in its Action Taken Report. 
(Para 21.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 There is no provisi on of CCL in AAI and hence CCL is not applicable to any of the 
women employees of any cadre including ATCOS. The mater of Child Care Leave (CCL) 
was deliberated in Personnel Advisory Board (PAB), consisting of Chairman and all Board 
Members twice, wherein, it was decided that child care leave cannot be made available in 
AAI due to operational exigency. 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee is given to understand that AAI could not comply with the regulatory 
requirement of DGCA Watch Duty Time Limitation CAR.  The Committee desires that the 
Ministry may furnish the reasons therefor, to the Committee, in its Action Taken Report. 
(Para 21.5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 DGCA CAR on "Watch Duty Time Limitation" (WDTL) was issued on 21st Oct. 
2020, in line with the ICAO prescriptive guideline given in ICAO Annex 11 and Doc 9966. 
14.2 The following facts are apprised regarding implementation of WDTL directives for  
Air Traffic Controllers in AAI:- 
(i) Implementation of "Watch Duty Time Limitation" as per above referred CAR 
issued by DGCA, restricts the duration of duty time of Licensed ATCO, which 
would result in requirement of additional Manpower of ATCOs. In this regard the 
ATM Staffing Policy is being revised and a Committee has been constituted to 
examine the manpower requir ement of ATCOs for next 05 years, taking into 
account the WDTL. 
(ii) Currently recruitment for 361 posts of ATCOs at E1 level (i.e. 264 posts through 
Direct Recruitment and 97 through Departmental Exam) is in process and 
expected to be completed by 31st March 2022. 
(iii) Proposal of creation of 340 additional Posts of ATCO at E2 -E6 levels has been 
sent to Department of Public Enterprise (DPE) for approval. 

26 
 
(iv) Since recruitment and training of ATCOs is time taking process, AAI is in process 
of developing / exploring alternate method viz. Fatigue Risk Management System 
in consent with DGCA, as per provisions of ICAO Annex 11. 
(v) DGCA has given a temporary exemption on compliance of DGCA CAR on 
WDTL till 12.01.2022. 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Chairman, AAI while making  a presentation before the Committee, stated that 
6403 post of Non-Executives have been abolished. The Committee is eager to know about the 
reasons for such abolition of posts and the impact thereof, on the functioning of the 
organization. The Committee de sires that this information may be furnished by the Ministry 
in its Action Taken Report. 
(Para 21.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 In terms with the recommendations of a study assigned to National Productivity 
Council (NPC) regarding Manpower in Non -executive cadres in Airports Authority of India, 
a total of 6403 Nos of vacant posts were abolished in year 2018 in AAI vide Establishment 
Order dated 15.02.2018, in various non -executive cadres across regions, on recommendation 
of Personnel Advisory Board (PAB) and with the approval of Chairman, AAI.   
15.2 The reason for abolition of these posts was due to the fact that AAI had acquired 
majority of it's manpower along with posts through it’s legacy from parent organizations i.e. 
National Airports Authority (NAA) a nd International Airports Authority of India (IAAI), 
which too have acquired these posts through their ancestral organization from CAD, CPWD, 
DGCA etc. However, a large number of such posts became redundant over the period of time 
due to their functionalit y and change in work contents in the organization. Also the vacant 
posts in such cadres were recommended for abolition by the NPC in it's manpower study.  
15.3 The abolition of these 6403  Nos. of posts  have not affected the functioning of the 
organization, since these posts were vacant for the prolong period since post in such cadres 
were not filled on separation of incumbents. Further the carrier prospects of employee 
available in the feeder cadres was taken care. Nevertheless, it is relevant to mention th at AAI 
has created a number of posts in recent years in required disciplines to maintain the effective 
discharge of entrusted functions. 
 
Digital Sky 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. The Committee hopes that 
Digital Sky would turn out to be beneficial to the drone ecosystem in the country. 

27 
 
(Para 23.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Digital Sky Phase -1 platform was launched on 18 th March 2021.  The Digital Sky 
platform is being modified as per new Drone Rules 2021. 
 
Air Sewa 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. While appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, the Committee recommends that the 
Ministry should ensure that the grievances of passengers are addressed effectively in a time -
bound manner. The Committee desires that the Air Sewa Platform should be upgra ded 
periodically, so that it fulfils the dynamic requirements of the air passengers. The Committee 
underlines the need for formulating the desired SOP for the purpose. 
(Para 24.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 AirSewa 3.0 web platform has been made live on 02  Oct 2021. The new features of 
AirSewa 3.0 are as below: 
(i) Grievance escalation by users or on Service Level Agreement (SLA) expiry 
(ii) Grievance transfer among stakeholders 
(iii) Enhanced roles and permissions for nodal officers 
(iv) Enhanced flight information and tracking of flights 
(v) Public forum for discussions. 
(vi) Mobile app for nodal officers 
17.2 The AirSewa QR code has been displayed through standees, Flight Information 
Display System (FIDS) etc at strategic locations at over 82 airports to promote the AirSewa 
Portal.   
17.3 AirSewa QR code has been printed on the boarding cards and tickets of the airlines. 
17.4 The names of top 6 stakeholders with largest number of pending grievances are being 
shown prominently on MoCA website along with the daily pending and resolved grievances. 
17.5 Resolution of pending grievances is taken up with the concerned stakeholders on daily 
basis.  
17.6 Pending grievances on AirSewa portal has been reduced from 1,354 on 20 Jul 2021 to 
81 on 15 Nov 2021(94% reduction). 
 

28 
 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the ‘Accessible India Campaign’ 
Recommendation/Observation  
18. The Committee appreciates the sensitivity and empathy shown by the Ministry, 
towards the genuine needs and concerns of the differently abled people. The Committee 
exhorts the Ministry to take similar steps to ensure a barrier free and conducive travel 
environment for differently abled people. 
(Para 25.1.) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Draft guidelines have been finalized in consultation with Chief Commissioner for 
Persons with Disabilities (CCPD) and public consultation has also been completed .The final 
version will be shared with Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  who will notify the 
guidelines   under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (RPwD) Rules, 2017. 
 
Optimal Utilization of Airspace 
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Committee understands that India’s airspace is very complex and that it gives 
rise to many challenges. One such challenge is ensuring optimal usage of the airspace, which 
requires comprehensive planning and management. The Committee appreciates the steps 
taken by AAI to ensure optimal use of airspace. The Committee hopes that the optimal 
utilization of Indian airspace will lead to reduction in flight time, fuel consumption and 
carbon emission. The Committee desires that the Ministry should explore more effective steps 
in this direction and implement the same. 
(Para 26.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 NHLAPB (National High Level Airspace Policy Body) has been constituted in 2013 
for the flexible use of Airspace  (FUA) in accordance with the FUA Manual approved by 
Government of India (GoI) in 2011  
19.2 Based on the directives of Government of India under the AtmaNirbhar Bharat 
Abhiyan (ANB), AAI had taken up issue of efficient use of airspace using Flexible Use of 
Airspace concept with IAF, Indian Navy and HAL for optimum use of airspace in May 2020. 
The airspace released on daily basis is being utilized by all stakeholders. 
19.3 Actions Taken:- 
(i) 116 Conditional Routes (CDRs) implemented. 

29 
 
(ii) National Airspace Management Cells (NAMC) at Delhi Air Traffic Flow 
Management (ATFM) centre and Regional Airspace Management Cells (RAMC) 
at Delhi (IGIA) & Chennai Airport have been established. 
(iii) Upper Airspace of 46 Restricted Areas of IAF has been con verted as Temporary 
Reserved Airspace (TRA). 
(iv) 24 Danger Areas of Army de -notified. Upper limit of Two Danger Areas lowered 
to 10000 ft Above Mean Sea Level (AMSL). 
(v) Five new CDR proposals sent to IAF for concurrence in September 2021. 
 
Helicopter operations 
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee is of the considered view that much more attention needs to be given 
to helicopter operations in the country. The Committee reiterates its recommendation in its 
293rd Report that the Ministry should address the  issues of proper maintenance of 
helicopters, replacement of aged helicopters and training of the crew, on priority basis. The 
Committee emphasizes the need for simulator module training for helicopter pilots for 
offshore landing. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent steps to 
ensure a network of heliports, in order to give necessary boost to the helicopter operations in 
the country. The Committee underlines the need for greater co -operation between the 
Ministry and State Governments for building heliports in the country. 
(Para 27.A.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation has released ‘Policy for promotion of Helicopter 
Operations’ in the recently held Heli Summit in Dehradun on 8 th October, 2021 to encourage 
helicopter operations creating demand and growth. This policy has been framed to address 
the difficulties being faced by helicopter operators.   The policy also aims to make helicopter 
operations viable by trying to provide facil itation and Ease of Doing Business. This policy 
will open new opportunities for masses to visit inaccessible locations / tourist places by 
helicopter. 
20.2 Heli-Sewa portal has also been launched on 8 th October, 2021 to provide seamless 
single-window digital access to the operator to share information and request permission for 
helipad operation. This portal will also be used by the District Administration to 
communicate assent/denial. The portal will create a central repository of helipad information 
with relevant accuracy and data quality which will be available to operators and pilots to aid 
in flight planning and adding to ease of operation. Due to the data quality of helipads stored 
in the portal, extensive information    about helipads will be easily ac cessible within the 
framework of National Disaster Management Plan. Districts, as part of the State Disaster 
Management Plan will populate the helipad directory in the portal through a standardized 
interface ensuring quality and depth of information on helipads. In addition, the public will be 
able to access information on operators and helicopters through this portal promoting 

30 
 
transparency in governance. The portal will also record data related to helicopter traffic and 
passenger loads to helipads which can be analyzed for understanding trends and growth.  This 
will facilitate helicopter operators for smooth helicopter operations by coordinating with the 
multiple departments in the District Administration. 
20.3 Ministry has also released Heli -Disha, a booklet for administrative guidance material 
on civil helicopter operations. Heli -Disha is a brief and concise guidance material document 
prepared for dissemination at the district administration level. The document simplifies and 
deconstructs the regulatory aspects so that the district administration can proactively improve 
upon the ease of facilitation for helicopter operations with control measures and practices in 
conformity to Civil Air Regulations. Heli-Disha acts as a guidance material without replacing 
the Civil Aviation Requirement and explains the requirements of landing sites, thus providing 
clarity about its usage for uncomplicated permissions and operations of helicopters. 
Dissemination and adoption of the booklet will lead to faster processing of permission. 
20.4 A Helicopter Accelerated Cell (HAC) has also been created in the Ministry to 
facilitate the helicopter industry. An advisory group to be assisted by the HAC has been 
constituted in this Ministry to promote helicopter operations in the country. 
 
Vigilance Mechanism 
Recommendation/Observation  
21. The Committee takes note of the Vigilance mechanism existing in AAI and desires that 
necessary periodic steps should be taken to strengthen the Vigilance mechanism in AAI. 
(Para 29.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 As directed by CVC, the disciplinary cases are monitored for timely completion and 
being informed to the commission time to time. The targets set by the Commission have been 
achieved till date. 
21.2 The redeployment of Vigilance officers / st aff has already taken up in consensus with 
CVC Guidelines. 
21.3 Regarding the complaint handling mechanism, instructions have already been issued 
and being implemented to adhere to the timelines and guidelines as per the advice of the 
commission. 
21.4 The review of vigilance clearance system/ guidelines in line with DoPT / other PSUs 
is being undertaken and will be finalized shortly. 
21.5 The other routine works like inspections, training / workshops, etc. are implemented / 
conducted according to the needs / requirement from time to time.  

31 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Air Traffic Services 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee is disturbed to note that considerable delay in flight operations and 
cancellation of flights occur at various airports, due to non -availability of CAT-II or CAT-III 
facility. The Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience and delays faced by the flyers 
and international & domestic tourists, due to the dearth of requisite navigation technology at 
the airports. The Committee fails to understand the reason behind non -installation of CAT-II/ 
CAT-III facilities in all airports in the country, in the present age of modern technolo gy. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that the upgradation of air 
navigation infrastructure in the country should be given utmost priority and that the 
navigation facilities should be kept in line with international standards. 
(Para 9.5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 AAI provides Air Traffic Services in accordance with the standards prescribed by 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) ensuring safety and security.  AAI has 
continuously upgraded the CNS and ATM infrastructure in line with the global standards and 
international best practices. 
1.2 AAI is in the process of installing and upgrading ILS at airports as per technical 
feasibility at the airport.  
1.3 ILS CAT III have been implemented at 6 airports i.e. Delhi, Amritsar, J aipur, 
Lucknow, Kolkata and Bengaluru. In addition, ILS CAT II has been implemented at Kolkata 
on one runway. AAI has already implemented ILS CAT 1 at 64 airports. 
1.4 Performance Based Navigation  (PBN) procedures have been implemented at 69 
Airports to reduce dependence on the ground based Navaids. 
1.5 Also, Low Visibility Procedures (LVP), which allows aircraft operations in low 
visibility condition, arising due to fog, have been implemented at most of the airports. 
1.6 It may be note d that at many airpor ts ILS can not be installed as per ICAO Standard 
due to constraints like terrain and geographical location, airspace availability, etc.  
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.7 The Committee is constrained to note that the Instrument Landing System (ILS) 

32 
 
CAT III system has been implemented at only six airports whereas ILS CAT II and CAT I 
have been implemented at one and sixty -four airports, respectively. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation for the immediate installation of the advanced ILS CAT II 
and CAT III systems at all the airports in the country  where it is technically feasible  in 
order to mitigate the problems of flight delays or cancellation of flights  due to weather 
conditions. The Committee would like to stress upon the installation of adv anced ILS 
facilities, especially in th ose airfields across the country, where the pilots face difficulty 
throughout the year in landing and take offs due to adverse weather and geological 
conditions, such as table-top runways in Westerns Ghats, North-Eastern Region, J&K and 
other hilly areas.  
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Committee emphasizes the imminent need to employ modern technologically 
advanced navigation aids and facilities at all airports in the country. The Ministry should 
urgently chalk out an Action Plan to operate CAT -II/III(B) ILS in all airports, in a fixed time 
bound manner. 
(Para 9.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 AAI is in the process of installing and upgrading ILS at airports as per technical 
feasibility at the airport.  
2.2 ILS CAT III have been implemented at 6 airports i.e. Delhi, Amritsar, Jaipur, 
Lucknow, Kolkata and Bengaluru. In addition, ILS CAT II has been implemented at Kolkata 
on one runway. AAI has already implemented ILS CAT 1 at 64 airports. 
2.3 Performance Based  Navigation (PBN) procedures have been implemented at 69 
Airports to reduce dependence on the ground based Navaids. 
2.4 11 CAT III ILS have been planned at Jewar (2 nos.), Navi Mumbai (2 nos.), Delhi 
4thRunway (01 no) (on new account) and on replacements a ccount at BIAL, Ba nguluru (2 
nos.), DIAL, Delhi (3 nos.) and HIAL, Hyderabad (01 no). 
2.5 AAI has got exemption for Global Tender Enquiry (GTE) for procurement of ILS 
under Make-in India Policy for Public Procurement (MII -PPP) from Government of India in 
July 2021. 
2.6 Tender has already been floated for procurement of 34 ILS (CAT I -23, CAT III-11) 
in November 2021 and is to be opened in Dec 2021. Award of contract is expected by March 
2022 and commissioning of the equipment is expected by December 2022. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.7   The Committee notes that AAI has got exemption for Global Tender Enquiry (GTE) for 
procurement of ILS under Make -in India Policy for Public Procurement (MII -PPP) from 

33 
 
Government of India in July 2021. The Committee  is of the firm opinion that  manufacturing of 
the ILS systems should be promoted in India under ‘Make-in India’ policy and partnerships 
with top global ILS manufacturing firms for  transfer of technology should be explored . The 
Committee believes that the ILS system have a huge domestic and global market, in  view of the 
expected exponential growth in Civil Aviation  Sector. T he Ministry in coordination with the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, should urgently make a  futuristic Master Plan in this regard  
which will help in boosting the man ufacturing sector as well as aid  the economic 
development of India. 
 
Development, Upgradation and Modernization of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. Airports play a vital role in the economic growth of the country since they open the 
doors for tourism and trade. Despite India being the world’s fastest growing aviation market, 
its airports are grappling with serious capacity constraints because such a quick pace of 
growth in the aviation sector has resulted in a strain on the aviation infrastructure, resulting 
in traffic congestions and delays at many of the airports. If a high growth rate in civil 
aviation se ctor is to be sustained, it is imperative that urgent steps should be taken to 
augment and modernize India’s aviation infrastructure.  
(Para 10.6) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 To meet the high growth rate in civil aviation sector, necessary steps taken to augment 
and modernize infrastructure to overcome the capacity constraints and strain on the aviation 
infrastructure to avoid traffic congestion and delays. Around Rs. 90,000 /- crore of 
investments are expected to be pumped into Civil Aviation Sector in the  next 5 years out of 
which AAI alone will invest Rs.25,000 crore for infrastructure creation and the PPP airports 
have planned to incur Rs. 65,000 crore in expansion/upgradation/setting up of new greenfield 
airports. 
3.2 Ministry of Civil Aviation launched  Regional Connectivity Scheme RCS – UDAN 
(UdeDeshKaAamNagrik) on 21 st Oct 2016 for connecting unserved and underserved airport 
in the country to provide air connectivity. 
3.3 AAI is planning to create 14 water aerodromes under RCS-UDAN Scheme. 
3.4 Government has granted “In -Principle” approval for construction of 21 green -field 
airports, out of which 8 airports Durgapur, Kurnool, Shirdi, Kannur, Pakyong & Kalaburagi, 
Kushinagar and Sindhdurg have been commissioned. 
3.5 To create additional capacity, work is  in progress at Goa, Port Blair, Agartala, 
Guwahati, Chennai, Lucknow, Dehradun, Leh, Trichy, Pune, Patna, Darbhanga (CE), 

34 
 
Kolhapur, Bareilly (CE), Jabalpur, Surat, Adampur (CE), Kanpur (CE), etc.  Work is in 
planning stage at Jaipur, Srinagar, Vijayawada,  Agra, Indore, Ahmedabad, Bihta (CE), 
Bhubaneshwar, Varanasi etc. 
3.6 418 additional parking bays are planned at various airports in next five years for night 
parking of new aircrafts being purchased by airline operators. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.7 The Committee is of the opinion that water aerodromes which is a new concept, 
holds a great amount of potential for the country , as our country has many big rivers 
and lakes. The Committee hence recommends  that the plans for creation of 14 water 
aerodromes should be expeditiously implemented across the country and plans should 
be made for connectivity of water aerodromes as well. 
 
Privatization of Airports 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the career interests of the 
employees of AAI are protected in case of privatization of airports. 
(Para 11.12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 As per the Concession Agreement(s), on implementation of PPP at six airports viz. 
Lucknow, Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Mangaluru, Jaipur and Thiruvananthpuram, the 
Concessionaire is required to make offers of employment to a minimum of 60% (sixty 
percent) of the Select Employees of AAI and the employees have choice to either rema in 
with AAI or opt to join PPP partner as their employee. Those who continue to be with AAI 
are governed by the terms and conditions of service of AAI and those who opt for private 
player are governed by the terms and conditions of service of the private o perator. The terms 
and conditions of employment offer shall in terms of salary, position etc. be the same as the 
current employment terms of the select employees on an annual cost-to-company basis. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.2 The Committee desires to know whether the provision of emplo yment of existing 
staff as containe d in the Concession Agreement(s), on implementation of PPP at six 
airports viz. Lucknow, Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Mangaluru, Jaipur and 
Thiruvananthpuram, has been followed in letter and spirit. The Committee 
recommends that the staff who put in years of service, should not be left in the lurch 
and proper benefits should be extended to them on implementation of PPP scheme. 
 

35 
 
 
UDAN Scheme 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee takes note of the growing demand for regional air services, which 
would make it possible for our country to emerge as a major player in the aviation industry. 
The Committee feels that UDAN Scheme will help in relieving the congestion at major 
airports and enable us to develop the much needed hub -and-spoke mechanism. The 
Committee notes that although the airlines industry got a huge fillip with the launch of RCS, 
air connectivity in the country is largely confined to routes connecting State capitals and 
large towns; and many parts of the country still remain unconnected by air services. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take urgent 
effective steps to ensure adequate air connectivity in different parts of the country under RCS. 
The Committee also desires that the benefits under the Regional Connectivity Scheme, 
currently restricted to three years, should be extended by another two years, to give airlines 
an opportunity to transform a fledgling route into a strong and revenue-generating one. 
(Para 12.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 UDAN Scheme was launched by MoCA on 21.10.2016. Since then 154 RCS airports 
including 14 aerodromes and 36 heliports have been identified for operation of RCS flights. 
In 4 rounds of UDAN bidding conducted so far, 948 valid routes have been awarded.  
5.2 Against these routes, 403 routes connecting 65 unserved and underserved airports 
(including 8 heliports & 02 water aerodromes) have been operationalized as on 14.12.2021.  
5.3 The Special round of bidding 4.1, which is in progress, also includes past round 
(cancelled) routes, as well as the routes that are sponsored by State Government/UTs. 
5.4 With regard to recommendation of the committee for extension of benefits under the 
Regional Connectivity Scheme  by another two years which is currently restricted to three 
years  it is to mention that out of 94 RCS -Udan  routes that have completed 3 year tenure till 
30.11.2021, only 22 routes are in operation. Among 403 routes that have commenced 
operations so far, nearly 300 routes have been affected due to poor demand on account of 
covid-19 pandemic situation. For sustainability of awarded routes and scheme in general 
extension of 1 year benefits has been granted under the scheme in respect of the r outes which 
have completed or going to complete its tenure by 31.12.2021. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.5  The Committee notes with concern that among 403 routes that have commenced 
operations so far, nearly 300 routes have been affected due to poor demand on account 
of Covid-19 pandemic situation. The Committee recommends that the ministry should 

36 
 
formulate plans and expeditio usly revive all the 300 UDAN routes, as and when Covid-
19 pandemic situation improves across the country. 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee observes that direct air connectivity to tourist destinations and 
cultural sites in the c ountry can massively promote the tourism industry which will lead to 
generation of more employment opportunities and faster economic growth. The Committee, 
therefore, observes that there is an imperative need for close co -ordination between the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, and the Ministries of Tourism & Culture, in matters regarding air 
connectivity to important tourist destinations and cultural sites in the country. Hence, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation, to work in tandem with the Ministries 
of Culture and Tourism, who are vital stakeholders in this regard. 
(Para 12.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 On the request of Ministry of Tourism 106 Tourism RCS routes were floated in the 
bidding in 3rd round.  
6.2 Out of these, airlines have submitted bids for 46 Tourism RCS routes and same have 
been awarded to SAOs for which the entire payment of VGF shall be borne by the Ministry 
of Tourism.   
6.3 Till date, 31 Tourism RCS routes have commenced under UDAN providin g direct air 
connectivity to tourist destinations and cultural sites in the country.  
6.4 It has also unlocked India’s tourism potential by connecting iconic tourism hotspots. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.5 The Committee notes that out of the 106 TRCS routes floated by M inistry of 
Tourism, only 31 TRCS routes have commenced operation  so far . The Committee 
strongly  recommends that the ministry should make an exhaustive plan for 
coordination with Ministry of Tourism to start UDAN flights in the rest  of the routes in 
a time bound manner as there is an urgent need to revive the tourism sector which is 
one of the worst affected sectors, after Covid-19 pandemic.  
 
Development of Cargo Sector 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee recognizes the fact that India’s strategic geographical location, 
swelling economy and the growth registered in international & domestic trade in the last 
decade are congenial to the growth in the air cargo sector. The Committee is disappoint ed to 
note that despite these advantages, India has not fully realized its potential in terms of air 

37 
 
cargo. The Committee realizes the sad fact that inadequate infrastructure is a major 
bottleneck in developing the country’s air cargo sector. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should take effective steps to establish dedicated cargo 
airports in the country and to provide requisite facilities for the enhancement of air cargo 
facilities, while setting up new airports. 
(Para 13.7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Currently, in the Air Cargo Sector, the Passenger flights are carrying 80 to 90% of 
Cargo in its belly. Exclusive cargo freighters are handling only 10 to 20% Air Cargo. 
7.2 To establish dedicated cargo Airports the following facilities are the basic needs: 
i) Airport with adequate Runway length to operate scheduled & Non -Scheduled 
Freighters. 
ii) Immigration facility for Crew. 
iii) Customs presence for Crew & Cargo clearances. 
iv) Ground Handling Agencies with fully equipped equipment for handling of 
Aircrafts, pallets & containers. 
v) Accommodation of Airlines Offices. 
vi) Customs Brokers presence for Import Cargo Clearance & Export Cargo process. 
vii) Break Bulk/Consolidation Agents presence as 80 to 90% of cargo are handled in 
“Consolidation” basis. 
viii) Customs app ointed Custodians presence with appropriate warehouse facility 
including for Trans-shipment facilities. 
ix) BCAS/DGCA Clearance/Presence. 
x) Appropriate Security Deployment. 
7.3 Considering the above aspects, the recommendations of the committee can be 
considered by MoCA for strategic planning based on viability. 
7.4 AAI while constructing new Airport or extension activities in the existing Airports, 
consider the development of Air Cargo Terminal as an integral part, which AAICLAS is now 
taking-up. 
7.5 Further, the green field airports established on PPP mode like Bengaluru, Hyderabad 
Airports have already taken care this by providing exclusive Air Cargo handling facilities. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
7.6 The Committee notes that the requirement of basic facilities which are needed to 
develop dedicated cargo airports and reiterates its recommendation for establishment of 
such cargo airports , keeping in view the expected economic growth of the country and 
the consequent increase in domestic and intern ational trade. The Committee strongly 
recommends that effective plan s should be formulated for  the basic facilities for cargo 
airports and cargo facilities should be expanded at existing airports and new facilities 
may be created in a time bound manner. 

38 
 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) infrastructure 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee observes that there has been a tremendous growth in the MRO 
opportunities that can be exploited by our country, enabled due to the rapid growth in the 
Civil Aviation sector witnessed in the recent past. India has huge potential to be an MRO hub 
which can accommodate the growing Civil Aviation needs of the country and also other 
countries. Aircraft MRO services are critical in the aviation value chain and it wo uld be of a 
huge loss for the country, if we do not tap the vast technical and skill personnel available in 
this field in the country. However, the Committee is disappointed to note that the country has 
not yet been able to fully exploit the opportunities available in this sector. 
(Para 14.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Revised guidelines dated 1 September, 2021 have been issued for rationalisation of 
the charges levied on Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Service Providers for ease 
of doing business and  to provide further incentives to the sector, with the following key 
features: 
i. Concession fee, in any manifestation including royalty, shall not be levied in new 
contracts and from the respective date of renewal of existing contracts. 
ii. Selection of agency and procedures for allotment of land/ space under rationalized 
land/ space rental for new MRO contracts and renewal of existing MRO contracts, 
shall be through call of open tender by AAI (e-tendering) 
iii. The bidders to quote the lease fee, which shall be the bid parameter. The agency 
quoting the highest lease fee shall be the selected bidder for that specific land 
parcel. 
iv. The renewal of the existing land leases/ space license of MRO service providers/ 
AMOs shall be on the basis of bidding wherein Right of Firs t Refusal (RoFR) 
shall be given to the existing lessee/ licensee to match the first rank bid in terms of 
the selection criteria provided their bid is within 15% of the most competitive bid 
received. 
v. For the purpose of ensuring serious and apposite level of  participation in the 
Tender, an appropriate amount of EMD, shall be kept. 
vi. The quoted/ accepted lease fee shall be escalated @15% after every 3rd year. 
vii. For the existing MRO organisations that have outstanding dues or are under 
litigation and are seeking re newal of their existing contracts or participation for 

39 
 
the new contracts, their candidature for bidding shall only be considered after the 
settlement of dispute and clearance of outstanding dues by way of settlement/ 
negotiation in a time-bound manner through a Committee constituted by AAI.   
viii. The maximum period of contract for allotment of land/ space under these 
provisions shall be 30 years for new or old renewal  is from the date of handing 
over of site or date of renewal respectively. 
ix. However, in case if  the MRO agency commits default or ceases to perform the 
MROs activities at allotted land/ space, the lease shall be terminated without 
payment of any compensation by AAI. 
x. As of now, MRO activities shall be promoted from the following airports: Bhopal, 
Chandigarh, Chennai, Hyderabad (Begumpet), Juhu, Kolkata, Delhi and Tirupati. 
8.2 Other airports with available land/ space resources, with potential to attract MRO 
service providers/ AMOs for establishing their facilities, shall be identified and notified by  
AAI from time to time. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
8.3 The Committee strongly recommends  that the ministry should give renewed 
focus on the adequate requirements and growth of aircraft MRO service in the country, 
keeping in view the rapid growth of civil aviation sector. This would also help in 
generating job  opportunities for ample technical manpower available in the country , 
besides saving valuable foreign exchange. 
 
COVID-19 Pandemic 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee appreciates the public safety measures adopted by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation during the COVID -19 pandemic. The Committee desires that the Ministry 
should ensure that such measures are periodically updated in tune with international best 
practices in this regard. 
(Para 17.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 All the directions issued by MoCA and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(MoH&FW) in respect of Covid–19 pandemic are being followed at AAI managed airports to 
ensure safe and smooth movement of passengers. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 

40 
 
9.2. The Committee desire s that the technical feasibility of use of HEPA filters at 
airports may be examined, keeping in view the possibility of transmission of Covid-19 
cases at airports , such filters may be installed at all major airports in the country in a 
time bound  manner. 
 
Vacancies in AAI 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee takes serious note of the vacancies existing in AAI at various levels. 
The Committee strongly feels that a vital organization such as  AAI cannot afford to have so 
many vacancies. The Committee is especially perturbed to note the number of vacancies in 
the post of ATCOs. The Committee is apprehensive that such a situation will adversely affect 
the work output of ATCOs by putting them und er immense stress, thereby, compromising the 
safety of flight operations. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take urgent 
concrete steps to fill up the vacancies existing in AAI. 
(Para 21.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1   
Designation DR/DE No. of 
Vacancies Remarks 
Junior 
Executive 
(ATC) 
DR 264 
Document verification completed for the successful 
candidates on 10th December 2021.Background 
verification of the candidates under process and on 
completion the offer of appointment will be issued by 
March 2022. 
Junior 
Executive 
(ATC) 
DE 97 Selection process to start in Jan 2022 and to be 
completed by March 2022. 
Manager 
(ATC) DE 158 Selection process to start in Jan 2022 and expected to 
be completed by March 2022. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
10.2 The Committee again expresses its serious concern at the huge number of 
vacancies, which is bound to have a serious impact on the work efficiency of ATCOs. 
The Committee while noting  the steps taken by the Ministry, recommends that a time 
schedule for completion of the procedural requirements should be adhered to, in view of 
the urgent need to fill up the vacancies of ATCOs. 

41 
 
 
 
Optimal Utilization of Airspace 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee would like to know the actual details of savings of the targeted 1000 
crores by rationalization in the flexi air space. The Committee recommends that a High Level 
Committee should be constituted by including stakeholders such as Airlines, Air Traffic 
Controllers i.e., Airports Authority of India and that a comprehensive exercise should be 
done in this regard. Also, a Road Map should be formulated for negotiation wit h the Indian 
Air Force, in order to achieve the targeted savings. 
(Para 26.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Operational Benefit per flight is estimated as below:- 
1. Mumbai-Srinagar :           Rs  39,015/- 
2. Srinagar-Mumbai :           Rs. 24,926/- 
3. Bagdogra-Delhi     :          Rs.   7,947/- 
4. Dehradun-Delhi   :            Rs.   4,841/- 
5. Lucknow-Jaipur   :            Rs. 30,706/- 
6. Jaipur-Lucknow   :            Rs. 33,777/- 
7. Chandigarh-Delhi:            Rs.   3,576/- 
8. Delhi-Srinagar      :            Rs.   7,767/- 
9. Srinagar-Delhi      :            Rs.   7,333/- 
10. Delhi-Europe         :            Rs.   7,767/- 
11. Europe-Delhi         :            Rs.   1,951/- 
12. Bhubaneshwar-Ranchi: Rs. 26,768/- 
13. Chennai-Durgapur:          Rs. 35,836/- 
14. Chennai- Bengaluru:        Rs.   8,309/- 

42 
 
11.2 The airlines have indicated cumulative savings of about 131 crore due to 
implementation of Flexible Use of Airspace (FUA). Further, about 34000 tonne carbon 
footprint saving has been reported by various airlines. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
11.3 The Committee notes that a saving of only Rs. 131 crore could be made by various 
airlines as compared to the target of Rs. 1000 crore, through the implementation of 
rationalization in the flexi air space policy. The Committee expresses its concern and the 
desires to know the reasons for such a huge difference in the targeted and the actual saving 
achieved and the steps that the ministry proposes to take to achieve this target. 
 
Seaplane Operations 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee recognizes the immense potential available for seaplanes operations 
in the country. However, it is disappointing to note that such potential has not yet been 
exploited fully. The seaplane services will hopefully revolutionize the nation’s regional 
connectivity. The Commi ttee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to encourage 
seaplane operations. The Committee recommends that the Government should put in place, 
requisite policies and infrastructure, in order to enable more seaplane operations in India. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure that the necessary amenities keeping 
up with international standards for seaplane operations, such as terminal buildings, 
facilitation counters, check -in counters, modern ticketing methods, food counters, motels, 
shopping facilities etc. are provided, for the smooth operation of seaplanes. The Committee 
also underlines the urgent need to formulate a ‘Seaplane Policy’. 
(Para 27.5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Ministry of Civil Aviation introduced a new mode of transportation i.e. seaplane 
operations from water aerodromes under UDAN.   
12.2 The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways and Ministry of Civil Aviation have 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding on J une 15, 2021 for the development of seaplane 
services in India. 
12.3 MoU will help in expediting the development of new water aerodromes and also 
operationalization of new seaplane routes in India. 
12.4 A coordination committee with officials from the civi l aviation ministry, shipping 
ministry and tourism ministry will be set up for timely completion of operationalization of 
seaplane services at various locations. 

43 
 
12.5 Seaplane services will be developed as a part of the RCS-UDAN initiative of the Civil 
Aviation Ministry. The aviation ministry, the shipping ministry and Sagarmala Development 
Co Ltd will consider operationalizing seaplane operating routes as identified by all agencies. 
12.6 The Civil Aviation Ministry will select potential airline operator s based on their 
commercial consideration through a bidding process. It will also incorporate the location and 
routes as identified by the Shipping Ministry and routes identified through the bidding 
process in the UDAN scheme document. 
12.7 The Shipping Mi nistry would identify and develop waterfront infrastructure of 
aerodromes and obtain required statutory clearances in coordination with corporate affairs 
ministry, Directorate General of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority of India by defining 
the timelines for all activities involved in the development of facilities for starting seaplanes 
operations. 
12.8 Till now a total of 28 seaplane routes and 14 water aerodromes in Gujarat, Assam, 
Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadwee p are in various 
stages of development as given below:  
1. SardarSarovar Dam (Statue of Unity) in Gujarat 
2. Sabarmati Riverfront, Ahmedabad  
3. Shatrunjay Dam in Gujarat  
4. Swaraj Dweep in Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
5. (Havelock Island) in Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
6. Shaheed Dweep (Neill Island) in Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
7. Port Blair in Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
8. Guwahati riverfront in Assam 
9. Umrangso Reservoir in Assam 
10. NagarjunaSagar Dam in Telangana  
11. Prakasam Barrage in Andhra Pradesh 
12. Minicoy in Lakshadweep Islands 
13. Kavaratti in Lakshadweep Islands 
14. Agatti in  Lakshadweep Islands 
12.9 Operations between Sabarmati River Front & Statue of Unity commenced on 31 
October, 2020. 
12.10 List of Sea Plane routes awarded so far in the 3rd & 4th round of UDAN. 
12.11 RCS flight operations from rest of the water aerodromes shall be commenced as and 
when these are ready for operations. 
12.12 Development of Water Aerodromes will be taken up by Ministry of Port , Shipping 
and Waterways (MoPSW). A MoU in this  regard has been signed be tween MoCA and 
MoPSW on 15/6/2021 to jointly facilitate the development of Non Scheduled / scheduled 
operation of Sea Plane Services within territorial jurisdiction of India under RCS -UDAN 
Scheme. Formulation of Seaplane Policy comes under the purview of MoCA. 

44 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
12.13 The Committee appreciates the initiative of the ministry in introduction of a new 
mode of transportation in seaplane operations from water aerodromes under UDAN 
scheme. The Committee however expresses its concern tha t at some places , namely 
Sabarmati River Front and Sardar S arovar Dam (Guj arat), the operations have been 
closed down due to operational reasons. T he Committee recommends that all the 
operational issues at the aforesaid site may be sorted  out expeditiously. In future, detailed 
planning maybe made before initiating seaplane operations, so that there is no stoppage of 
such flights due to technical, operational or any other reason.   
 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee emphasizes the invariable need to ensure that requisite synergy is 
achieved between/amongst the concerned Ministries/Departments, in order to make certain 
that airports are well connected with other means of transport such as road and railways, so 
that tourists/flyers reach their destinations, from the airports, in a smooth and safe manner. 
Further, the Minist ry should collaborate with the State Governments and other stakeholders 
to ensure that adequate road and rail connectivity is available from the airports. 
(Para 28.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 All airports are connected to the nearest highways/major road during the development 
of master plan. National master plan is being developed by Department for Promotion of 
Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) where -in Airport located near highways are marked, 
accordingly NHAI/MORTH will be identifying the road network Connectivity. 
13.2 Government of India under DPIIT, Ministry of Commerce has undertaken the task of 
combining all the connectivity infrastructure existing and Proposed in one map. The project 
of National Master Plan incorporating the airports, Roadways, R ailways, Shipping, Gas pipe 
lines, Power (existing and proposed) all have been combined to create a National Master 
Plan, which will be inaugurated by Hon’ble Prime Minister. Additionally, letter have been 
sent by Chairman AAI to Chief Secretary of various  State Governments to align and relate 
the city master plan with the airport master plan. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
13.3 The Committee appreciates the proactive action taken by the Ministry, to ensure 
connectivity, and notes that a letter has been sent by Chairman, AAI to Chief Secretary 
of various State Governments to align and relate the city master plan with the airport 
master plan. The Committee desires to know the progress  made on the propos al of 
Chairman, AAI and whether any progress has been made in aligning the city and 

45 
 
Airport Master Plans. The Committee also desires to know the  opinion of the va rious 
States across the country to this idea.  
 
Cancellation or delaying of flights 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience and trouble caused to the 
passengers in the event of rescheduling or cancellation of flights. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should ensure that necessary assistance should be given to the 
air travelers, in case  of rescheduling/ cancellation of flight or missing connecting flight. The 
Committee strongly recommends that designated holding area should be provided at all 
airports to accommodate passengers who are stranded at the airport due to either of the 
above mentioned event. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to urge upon the airlines 
to make sure that facilities such as food, water, medical help and accommodation are 
available to stranded passengers. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to ensure th at 
its guidelines in this regard are scrupulously adhered to by the airlines. 
(Para 28.A.1)  
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 All necessary assistance and facilities are being provided to airlines and passengers in 
the case of cancellation or rescheduling of flights at AAI managed airports. 
14.2 The facilities to stranded passengers due to cancellation or rescheduling of flights at 
AAI airports are made available as per directions issued by MoCA vide letter 
No.AV.29017/14/2020-DT dated 07.12.2020. 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
14.3 The Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation  made in view of the 
Covid-19 pandemic guidelines, which prohibits gathering of huge crowds at public 
places including airports, to decrease the possibility of transmission of the disease. The 
Committee recommends that additional counters may be opened and more staff should 
be deployed to manage the passengers.  
 
 
Aero Club of India 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee takes note that the Aero Club of India is an arm of the Government 
and the action taken by Airports Authority of India has created disruption in the functioning 
of Aero Club of India. The Committee strongly recommends that Airports Authority of India 

46 
 
should waive off the penalty and restore the original status of ACI building to Aero Club of 
India. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Land measuring 17,400sq.ft. (120ft.x145ft.) was allotted to Aero Club of India (ACI) 
at Safdarjung Airport by DGCA for period of 30 years from the date of taking over 
possession of said land i.e. from 19.9.1983 at a nominal rate of Re.1/ - per annum for 
construction of their office complex.  Agreement between DGCA & Aero Club of India 
(ACI) was executed for the said allotment, which has expired on 18.9.2013.   
15.2 After formation of National Airports Authority in the year 1985 by Act of Parliament, 
all assets of DGCA stood transferred to the National Airports Authority and further by the 
Airports Authority of India Act 1994 all the assets got vested with Airports Authority of India 
by virtue of Section 13 of Parliament Act of 1994. 
15.3 As per the decision o f the AAI Board in its 107th meeting, held on 21.02.2007, 
Category-1 Flying Club were charged @ 10% of the normal license fee w.e.f. 21.02.2007 
including Aero Club of India. Whereas other Private Flying club were liable to pay normal 
rate of licensee fee i n addition to royalty @13% on gross turn over/as specified in tender 
document.   
15.4 Due to non -payment of outstanding dues, Eviction and Recovery Proceedings were 
initiated before the Eviction Officer, Safdarjung Airport, AAI and Eviction Officer passed the 
order for eviction on 16/06/2017 holding Aero Club of India as unauthorized occupant of the 
said Land/Premises.  
 15.5 Aero Club of India challenged the Order dated 16.06.2017 passed by the Eviction 
Officer, AAI in the Court of Hon’ble Delhi High Court vide WP No.5403/2017.  The Hon’ble 
High Court of Delhi vide its order dated 04.07.2018 dismissed the case holding the petitioner 
(i.e. Aero Club of India) as an unauthorized occupation of the subject land. 
15.6 AAI took over the possession of the subject  land on 13.07.2017 from Aero Club of 
India.  However, an amount of Rs. 4,35,15,628/ - is outstanding against Aero Club of India 
and  Aero Club of India has not paid any amount till date. 
15.7 Ex. Petition No.18/2021 was filed before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi for 
recovery of outstanding dues  of AAI  and for execution of the Decree/Order dated 
01.07.2017 passed by the Eviction Officer, Airports Authority of India, Safdarjung Airport, 
in Recovery Case no. 03 of 2016, for payment of Rs. 4,35, 15,628/ - further sum of Rs. 1, 
71,82,975/- totalling to Rs. 6,06,98,603/- up to 30.09.2020, as per the Order dated 01.07.2017 
along with 12% interest from 01.10.2020 till the actual payment is made along with 
Affidavit. 
15.8 Matter is still pending in the Hon’ble Hig h Court and the next date of hearing is fixed 
on 14.01.2022. 

47 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
15.9 The Committee is aware that at a given point of time, a proposal to renew the 
license was considered and intimated to the Ministry by the AAI in its 157 th board 
meeting. The Committee would like to know in what situation the same was rescinded to 
by AAI subsequently in its 167th board meeting where the property was not a lease but a 
license and had a right in perpetuity. The Committee was further given to understand 
that the land was allotted to ACI by th e Government on 27.12.1984 for a period of 30 
years as a license to be used for specific purpose which included construction of 
building as approved by the authority at that time and the license agreement, which was 
done for a nominal fee of Re.1/ - for 30 years, is irrevocable. The Committee further 
observes that in the reply submitted by the Ministry, Aero Club of India has been 
erroneously stated as a Flying Training Club, whereas it is a nodal agency which 
promotes and facilitates aviation and airsports.  Moreover, it is an autonomous entity 
working under the MoCA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

48 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-N i l - 
 
**** 
 
 
 
  

49 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Air Traffic Services 
The Committee is constrained to note that the Instrument Landing System (ILS) CAT III 
system has been implemented at only six airports whereas ILS CAT II and CAT I have 
been implemented at one and sixty -four airports, respectively. The Committee reiterates  
its recommendation for the immediate installation of the advanced ILS CAT II and CAT 
III systems at all the airports in the country where it is technically feasible in order to 
mitigate the problems of flight delays or cancellation of flights due to weath er conditions. 
The Committee would like to stress upon the installation of advanced ILS facilities, 
especially in those airfields across the country, where the pilots face difficulty throughout 
the year in landing and take offs due to adverse weather and g eological conditions, such 
as table -top runways in Westerns Ghats, North -Eastern Region, J&K and other hilly 
areas.  
(Para 1.7) 
The Committee notes that AAI has got exemption for Global Tender Enquiry (GTE) for 
procurement of ILS under Make -in India Policy for Public Procurement (MII -PPP) from 
Government of India in July 2021. The Committee is of the firm opinion that manufacturing  of 
the ILS systems should be promoted in India under ‘Make-in India’ policy and partnerships with 
top global ILS manufacturing firms for transfer of technology should be explored. The 
Committee believes that the ILS system have a huge domestic and global market, in  view of the 
expected exponential growth in Civil Aviation Sector. The Ministry in coordination with the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, shoul d urgently make a futuristic Master Plan in this regard 
which will help in boosting the manufacturing sector as well as aid the economic 
development of India. 
(Para 2.7) 
Development, Upgradation and Modernization of Airports 
The Committee is of the opinion that water aerodromes which is a new concept, holds a 
great amount of potential for the country, as our country has many big rivers and lakes. 
The Committee hence recommends that the plans for creation of 14 water aerodromes 
should be expeditiously  implemented across the country and plans should be made for 
connectivity of water aerodromes as well. 
(Para 3.7) 

50 
 
Privatization of Airports 
The Committee desires to know whether the provision of employment of existing staff as 
contained in the Concession A greement(s), on implementation of PPP at six airports viz. 
Lucknow, Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Mangaluru, Jaipur and Thiruvananthpuram, has 
been followed in letter and spirit. The Committee recommends that the staff who put in 
years of service, should not be lef t in the lurch and proper benefits should be extended to 
them on implementation of PPP scheme. 
(Para 4.2) 
UDAN Scheme 
The Committee notes with concern that among 403 routes that have commenced 
operations so far, nearly 300 routes have been affected due to poor demand on account of 
Covid-19 pandemic situation. The Committee recommends that the ministry should 
formulate plans and expeditiously revive all the 300 UDAN routes, as and when Covid -19 
pandemic situation improves across the country. 
(Para 5.5) 
The Committee notes that out of the 106 TRCS routes floated by Ministry of Tourism, 
only 31 TRCS routes have commenced operation so far. The Committee strongly  
recommends that the ministry should make an exhaustive plan for coordination with 
Ministry of Touris m to start UDAN flights in the rest of the routes in a time bound 
manner as there is an urgent need to revive the tourism sector which is one of the worst 
affected sectors, after Covid-19 pandemic.  
(Para 6.5) 
Development of Cargo Sector 
The Committee notes that the requirement of basic facilities which are needed to develop 
dedicated cargo airports and reiterates its recommendation for establishment of such 
cargo airports, keeping in view the expected economic growth of the country and the 
consequent incre ase in domestic and international trade. The Committee strongly 
recommends that effective plans should be formulated for  the basic facilities for cargo 
airports and cargo facilities should be expanded at existing airports and new facilities 
may be created in a time bound manner. 
(Para 7.6) 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) infrastructure 
The Committee strongly recommends that the ministry should give renewed focus on the 
adequate requirements and growth of aircraft MRO service in the country, keeping in 
view the rapid growth of civil aviation sector. This would also help in generating job 

51 
 
opportunities for ample technical manpower available in the country, besides saving 
valuable foreign exchange. 
(Para 8.3) 
COVID-19 Pandemic 
The Committee desires that the technical feasibility of use of HEPA filters at airports 
may be examined, keeping in view the possibility of transmission of Covid -19 cases at 
airports, such filters may be installed at all major airports in the country in a time bound  
manner. 
(Para 9.2) 
Vacancies in AAI 
The Committee again expresses its serious concern at the huge number  of vacancies, 
which is bound to have a serious impact on the work efficiency of ATCOs. The 
Committee while noting the steps taken by the Ministry, recommends that a time 
schedule for completion of the procedural requirements should be adhered to, in view of 
the urgent need to fill up the vacancies of ATCOs. 
(Para 10.2) 
Optimal Utilization of Airspace 
The Committee notes that a saving of only Rs. 131 crore could be made by various 
airlines as compared to the target of Rs. 1000 crore, through the implementat ion of 
rationalization in the flexi air space policy. The Committee expresses its concern and the 
desires to know the reasons for such a huge difference in the targeted and the actual 
saving achieved and the steps that the ministry proposes to take to achieve this target. 
(Para 11.3) 
Seaplane Operations 
The Committee appreciates the initiative of the ministry in introduction of a new mode of 
transportation in seaplane operations from water aerodromes under UDAN scheme. The 
Committee however expresses its co ncern that at some places, namely Sabarmati River 
Front and Sardar Sarovar Dam (Gujarat), the operations have been closed down due to 
operational reasons. The Committee recommends that all the operational issues at the 
aforesaid site may be sorted out expe ditiously. In future, detailed planning maybe made 
before initiating seaplane operations, so that there is no stoppage of such flights due to 
technical, operational or any other reason.   
(Para 12.13) 
 
 
 

52 
 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
The Committee appreciates the proactive action taken by the Ministry, to ensure 
connectivity, and notes that a letter has been sent by Chairman, AAI to Chief Secretary 
of various State Governments to align and relate the city master plan with the air port 
master plan. The Committee desires to know the progress made on the proposal of 
Chairman, AAI and whether any progress has been made in aligning the city and Airport 
Master Plans. The Committee also desires to know the opinion of the various States 
across the country to this idea.  
(Para 13.3) 
Cancellation or delaying of flights 
The Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation made in view of the Covid -19 
pandemic guidelines, which prohibits gathering of huge crowds at public places including 
airports, to decrease the possibility of transmission of the disease. The Committee 
recommends that additional counters may be opened and more staff should be deployed 
to manage the passengers.  
(Para 14.3) 
Aero Club of India 
The Committee is aware that at a given point of time, a proposal to renew the license was 
considered and intimated to the Ministry by the AAI in its 157 th board meeting. The 
Committee would like to know in what situation the same was rescinded to by AAI 
subsequently in its 167 th board meeting where the property was not a lease but a license 
and had a right in perpetuity. The Committee was further given to understand that the 
land was allotted to ACI by the Government on 27.12.1984 for a period of 30 years as a 
license to be used for specific purpose which included construction of buildin g as 
approved by the authority at that time and the license agreement, which was done for a 
nominal fee of Re.1/- for 30 years, is irrevocable. The Committee further observes that in 
the reply submitted by the Ministry, Aero Club of India has been erroneou sly stated as a 
Flying Training Club, whereas it is a nodal agency which promotes and facilitates 
aviation and airsports. Moreover, it is an autonomous entity working under the MoCA. 
(Para 15.9) 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

 
 
  
 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 31 st January, 2022 in Committee Room 
- '4', First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Nadimul Haque 
6. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
7. Dr. Sonal Man Singh 
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
10. Shri Margani Bharat 
11. Shri Tapir Gao 
12. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
13.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
14.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
15. Shri Prince Raj 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Dushyant Singh 
18. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
         
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider  and adopt 
the following Reports:- 
 
A.        Draft Action Taken Report on - 
53

 
 
(i) *   *   *   * 
(ii) *   *   *   *  
(iii) *   *   *   * 
(iv) *   *   *   * 
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ observations 
as contained in its Two Hundre d Ninety Seventh Report on the subject 
‘Functioning of Airports Authority of India’. 
(vi) *   *   *   * 
B.        *   *   *   * 
(i)         *   *   *   * 
(ii)        *   *   *   * 
(iii)       *   *   *   * 
(iv)       *i   *   *   * 
 
 
2.         The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
  
 
 
 
                                                           
* Relates to other matters 
54