Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Phalguna , 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY NINTH REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
Development of National Waterways—Potential 
and Challenges
 
REPORT NO. 
189
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th February, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

35
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY NINTH REPORT
Development of National Waterways—Potential
and Challenges
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—19
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ............................... 20—27
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 9—34

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
15. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
17. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
@18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Prabodh Panda
20. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
21. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
22. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
@23. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
24. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sudhakaran
29. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
*30. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
#31. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
(i)
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his/her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28 th October, 2012.
* Nominated on 14 th December, 2012 vice  Shri Khagen Das.
# Nominated on 9 th January, 2013 vice Dr. Kruparani Killi, who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon
her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty Ninth Report on “Development of National Waterways—Potential
and Challenges”.
2. Even though India is endowed with navigable waterways comprising rivers, canals, back
waters etc., as a means of transport it is operational only in restricted stretches of Ganga-
Bhagirathi-Hooghly Rivers, the Brahmaputra river, the Barak river, rivers in Goa, the back waters
in Kerala, inland waters in Mumbai and the deltaic regions of the Godavari-Krishna rivers. As such
for taking an in-depth view on the potential and the ailments in the sector, the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the
examination of the Inland Water Transport System in the country.
3. On 18
th October, 2012, the Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and
Chairman, Inland Waterways Authority of India to get an overview of the subject. The Committee
also interacted with the stakeholders and beneficiaries like NTPC, ONGC, FICCI, FACT etc., for
taking their views on the subject.
4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the
Ministry of Shipping and Inland Waterways Authority of India for providing necessary inputs and
clarification during deliberations on the subject. The Committee also acknowledges the contribution
of the NTPC, ONGC, FICCI and FACT for extending their valuable suggestions on the subject.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 3
rd January, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
January 3 , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary sStanding
Pausa 13, 1934 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ASSOCHAM – Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India
CIWTC – Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited
CONCORD – Container Corporation of India
CSD – Cutter Suction Dredgers
CSS – Centrally Sponsored Scheme
EXIM – Export and Import Trade
FACT – Fertilizers and Chemical Travancore Limited
FCI – Food Corporation of India
FICCI – Federation of Chambers of Commerce and Industry
HSD – Hydraulic Surface Dredger
INC – Inland Navigation Corporation
IREL – Indian Rare Earths Limited
IWAI – Inland Waterways Authority of India
IWT – Inland Water Transport
LAD – Least Available Depth
LPG – Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MMTPA – Million Tonnes Per Annum
NA TPAC – National Transportation Planning and Research Centre
NER – North Eastern Region
NINI – National Inland Navigation Institute
NMDR – National Maritime Development Programme
NTPC – National Thermal Power Corporation
NW – National Waterway
NWS – National Waterways
ODC – Over Dimensional Cargo
ONGC – Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
PDC – Project Development Consultant
RIS – River Information System
VGF – Viability Gap Funding
(iv)

1
REPORT
History of Inland Water Transport in the Country
India has extensive network of rivers, lakes and canals suitable for shipping and navigation
which if developed properly can provide an efficient network of inland water transportation.
Traditionally, it had been extensively used in regions around major rivers like Brahmaputra and the
Ganges in the North East and Eastern parts of the country.
2. In the 19
th century and first half of 20 th century, IWT was an important mode of transport
and navigation by power crafts/country boats played significant role in the development of trade
and commerce centres along several rivers and canals. The advent of railways and rapid growth
of roads made a dent in the share of water transport in India. Inadequate attention to IWT over
the years gave a decisive set back to IWT. During the later years of 20
th century, except in a few
areas namely, Assam, Goa, Kerala, Mumbai, West Bengal, and some other coastal areas where it
has natural advantage and no developmental intervention was needed, the IWT sector was
marginalized. However, in recent times its importance has further declined because of three reasons:
(i) the development of road networks; (ii) improvement in the cargo movement by railways and
neglect of maintenance and utilization of the water bodies suitable for transportation purposes. The
diversion of river water for irrigation has also reduced the scope of water transportation.
Potential of Water Transport
3. India has inland waterways with a navigable length of 14,500 km, but of this only 5,700 km
is being used for navigation by mechanized vessels. The States of UP and West Bengal have the
maximum length of waterways of 6,444 km and 4,741 km respectively. However, West Bengal fares
better in terms of inland water potential with 97% share of navigable length in the total length of
waterways. The States of Goa, Maharashtra and Bihar also have impressive inland water transport
prospects with the navigable length share in total length being 78%, 73% and 62% respectively.
Present Scenario
4. Inland Water Transport system is having its own advantages, especially in some parts of
the country where the natural advantage already exists. It is estimated that a shift of one billion
tonne km to IWT will reduce the fuel cost by about Rs.25 crores and the cost of transportation
by about Rs.45 crores. For example as per the data provided by the Inland Waterway Authority
of India (IWAI), one 1000 tonne barge is equivalent to 100 trucks. The transportation charges in
IWT mode is less compared to other modes, best suited for bulk goods like coal, cement, ores,
stone chips, food grains, fertilizers, hazardous goods, etc.
5. In the last few years, movement of cargo by IWT mode in organised sector has shown
an upward trend. It increased from 1.63 billion tonne km (btkm) in 2003-04 to 3.6 btkm in 2008-09.
However, its (modal) share vis-à-vis other modes remains insignificant. The target is to increase
the modal share of IWT to 20 billion tonne km by 2025.
6. There is minimum land acquisition required for developing IWT, which also has less
accidents and pollution levels compared to other modes of transport.
7. It was in this backdrop, the Commit tee decided to look into the policy/programme and
institutions meant for promoting water transport in the country, which holds tremendous potential
for supplementing other system of transport that is under great pressure due to India’s growing
demand for an efficient, hassle-free and affordable transport system.

2
8. In this connection, the Committee heard the views of the administrative Ministry ( i.e.
Shipping) and Inland Waterway Authority of India in its meeting held on the 18 th October, 2012 on
our efforts to develop the Inland Water Transport System in the Country. The Committee also
obtained comments from NTPC, ONGC, FICCI, FACT and ASSOCHAM as major users/potential
users for getting their views on the different aspects of development of national waterways in the
country.
Basic Infrastructure Requirement
9. The Committee during its deliberation was informed that the infrastructure requirement for
making a waterway suitable for shipping and navigation are: (a) navigable channel with adequate
depth and width to enable navigation by reasonable size of cargo and passenger vessels,
(b) navigational aids for day and night navigation, and (c) terminals to provide facility for berthing
of vessels, loading and unloading of cargo/passengers and (d) connectivity with road and rail.
National Policy
10. As per the Policy Document of 2001, coal, iron ore, food grains, jute, edible oil, stone
chips, fertilizers, cement, POL, fly ash, containers, Over Dimensional Cargo (ODC) etc. are the
major commodities identified for IWT mode. Measures to absorb this cargo in terms of
infrastructural facilities, availability of vessels and facilitation of private sector participation for
mitigation of perceived risks, require jump in public investment on one hand and simultaneous short
term and long term policy support on the other. It was accepted in the Ninth Plan that efforts will
be made for pooling the resources through captive users such as public sector undertakings dealing
with oil, coal, fertilizers and cement. These agencies will be encouraged to make liberal investments
in IWT sector either as soft loan or as capital investment which would be recoverable either
directly or indirectly over a period of time. The policy also envisages for meeting manpower
requirements for making the inland water transport system a success.
Shortcomings in the Present System
11. Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) submitted that in several
countries, Inland Water Transport accounts for a substantial share as a percentage of the total; 32
per cent in Bangladesh, 20 in Germany, 14 in the US and 9 in China. However, in India only 0.15
per cent of domestic surface transport is accounted for by IWT compared with 68 per cent for
road and 30 per cent for rail. IWT in India over the years has shown very slow growth, except
in the case of the tidal river canal system in Goa. There are examples such as Kerala where traffic
has shifted substantially from IWT to other modes over the last decade. The reasons include lack
of investment for the creation of infrastructure modernization and lack of efficient operators. The
allocations made for IWT have been inadequate and there has been a lack of proper fund utilization.
It is noted that inadequate policy support for the sector were compounding the problems, leading
to IWT losing its competitive edge, The Inland Water Transport Policy Document of 2001 sought
to give an impetus to the Inland Waterways Authority of India, has not been done the follow ups
in a focussed manner.
Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI)
12. Several Committees studied IWT system of the country from time to time and advocated
systematic development of the mode. National Transport Policy Committee in its report (1980)
accordingly recommended for setting up of an Authority for development and regulation of inland
waterways, which led to formation of Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) in October,
1986. The head office of the Authority is at Noida. The Authority also has its regional offices at

3
Patna, Kolkata, Guwahati and Kochi and sub-offices at Allahabad, Varanasi, Bhagalpur, Farakka and
Kollam. The Authority primarily undertakes projects for development and maintenance of IWT
infrastructure on national waterways through grant received from Ministry of Shipping. It also
carries out feasibility studies to assess potential of other waterways, advices Central Government
on matters related to inland shipping and guides States in development of Inland Water Transport
(IWT) sector.
Mandate and Function of IWAI
13. IWAI undertakes infrastructure development and maintenance works on National Waterways.
It also takes up techno-economic feasibility studies and prepares proposals for declaration of six
other waterways as National Waterways. It also advises Central Government on matters related to
IWT and assists States in development of IWT sector. The objective of development of inland
waterways of the country is increased utilization of inland waterways for transportation of cargo
to about 15 billion tonne km by 2017 (from present level of about 4.80 billion tonne km).
Fund Allocation
14. According to the data submitted to the Committee, the funds are allocated and released to
IWAI by the Ministry of Shipping under budget heads/schemes: (i) Grants to IWAI, (ii) North-East
areas, (iii) Subsidy and (iv) Technical Studies and R&D. Funds for development of NW-1, and 3
and also for some other development projects e.g. IWT promotion activities etc. are provided under
the budget head ‘Grants to IWAI’. For development of NW 2, National Inland Navigation Institute
(NINI), Indo-Bangladesh protocol route etc., the funds are provided under the budget head “North-
East Area”. Besides, for development of IWT by respective States in North-Eastern region, a new
Central Sector Scheme was promulgated and its guidelines were issued by the Ministry in August,
2008. Under this scheme, Ministry of Shipping releases funds to the States directly. IWAI provides
assistance to the Ministry in examining the projects for sanction and guides the States in preparing
the projects and implementing them. During the entire Eleventh Plan, no funds were allocated
for development of NW-4 and NW-5, though they were declared as NWs in November, 2008.
Planning Commission has advised Ministry/IWAI to explore the feasibility of taking up
development of commercially viable stretches of these NWs under PPP mode with Viability
Gap Funding (VGF) scheme of the Government.  However, token provision of Rs.4 crores each
has been catered for undertaking preliminary works like hydrographic survey, liaison work with
concerned State Governments for setting up of liaison office etc during 2012-13.
15. While giving the details of expenditure incurred on the development and maintenance of
National Waterways the Committee was informed that the expenditure level of IWAI was about
Rs.35 crores upto Eighth Plan, it rose to Rs.151 crores during Ninth Plan, further to Rs.385 crores
during the Tenth Plan. In the Eleventh Plan, IWAI made a total Plan expenditure of Rs.560.48 crores.
16. The table below gives the fund allocation/expenditure during various Plans period.
(Amount in crores )
Plan BE Grant received Expenditure
Eighth Plan 139.35 53.80 34.69
Ninth Plan 205.38 154.95 151.01
Tenth Plan 559.14 496.27 384.83
Eleventh Plan 693.00 620.83 560.48

4
17. The Working Group recommended a fund requirement of Rs.10,500 crores which
include Rs.4040 crores from GBS, Rs.1140 crores from State sector and balance Rs.5320
crores as private investment. This does not include private investment in inland vessels to
transport additional 10 btkm of cargo for which about 1900 additional vessels of 1000 dwt
each would be required costing about Rs.1300 crores.
18. The development of IWT sector is a thrust area during the Twelfth Plan. It is with
this focus that during Twelfth Plan, a total amount of Rs.1500 crores has been proposed for
IWAI. During 2012-13, the total plan allocation is about Rs.212 crores.
National Waterways
19. As per constitutional provisions, only those waterways which are declared as National
Waterways come under the purview of Central Government while rest of the waterways remains
in the purview of respective State Government. So far, five waterways have been declared as
National Waterways (NWs) in the country maintained by the IWAI. These are:–
(i) NW-1: the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly river system from Allahabad to Haldia (1620 km)
(ii) NW -2: the Brahmaputra river from Sadiya to Dhubri (891 km),
(iii) NW -3: the West Coast Canal from Kollam to Kottapuram with Champakara and
Udyogmandal canals (205 km),
(iv) NW-4: Kakinada-Puducherry canals with rivers Godavari and Krishna (1078 km), and
(v) NW-5: the East Coast Canal with Brahmani river and Mahanadi delta rivers (588 km).
20. These waterways were declared as NWs in 1986, 1988, 1993, 2008 and 2008 respectively.
In addition, declaration of Barak River from Lakhipur to Bhanga (121 km) as sixth NW is under
consideration of the Government.
Role of State Governments
21. The Committee was informed that the development and regulation of waterways other than
NWs are responsibility of the concerned State Governments. Apart from that enforcement of Inland
Vessels Act-like registration and survey of vessels, certification of crew, regulation of ferry services
on waterways etc. are entrusted with States. Moreover, the ownership of the land along the
waterways also is a concern of the State Government. There is no central scheme in force to
finance the state water way project. (for North-Eastern States, there are provisions).
Functional Waterways
22. NWs-1, 2 and 3 are the functional waterways under the IWAI which is implementing
projects for providing IWT infrastructure namely fairway, terminals and navigational aids with the
objective of making them fully functional. Technocommercial study is being undertaken by
M/s. Grant Thortan who is the Transaction Adviser to DEA/ADB to explore the feasibility of
developing more commercially viable stretches of NW-4 and 5 under public private partnership
mode.
23. The Committee was informed that Government is also working on a number of projects
targeting specific movement of bulk cargo by IWT mode. In this regard, regular follow up
meetings are being taken at the level of Secretary (Shipping) with various Ministries/Departments
and other Public and Private Sector agencies.

5
Dredging of Channels
24. The Committee was informed that IWAI is implementing projects for making National
Waterways 1, 2 and 3 fully functional so that fairway with 3 m/2.5 m/2m/1.5 m depth is ideal for
making them navigable through out the year. A judicious mix of fixed and floating terminals and
facilities for 24 hrs navigation is able to make these waterways profitable for operators.
25. On NW-1 and 2 which are alluvial rivers, dredging and bandalling are to be carried out
every year during post monsoon period on shallow areas (called shoals) to maintain targeted Least
Available Depth (LAD). NW-3 however is a tidal canal with predictable tidal variation of water
levels. On this waterway therefore, once the desired depth is provided by capital dredging it can
be maintained for a number of years by carrying out nominal maintenance dredging.
26. Till 2008-09, IWAI had 3 Cutter Suction Dredgers (CSD) and 1 Hydraulic Surface Dredger
(HSD) on NW-1, 1 CSD and 1 HSD on NW-2 and 2 CSD on NW-3. In 2009-10 and 2010-11 six
more CSDs have been added while 2 more CSD and 1 HSD are expected to be added very soon.
IWAI has recently procured two amphibian dredgers which are proving to be quite good and
multipurpose dredgers.
27. With these 19 dredgers, IWAI aims to provide higher LAD in NW-1 and 2, [3 m in Haldia-
Farakka (against 2.5 m at present), 2.5 m in Farakka – Barh (against 2.0 m at present), 2 m
between Barh and Ghazipur for 330 days (against 270 days at present) in NW-1 and 2.5 m between
Dhubri and Neamati (against 2.0 m at present)] and assured 2.0 m in entire NW-3 by January 2013
as against 125 km till March, 2011. In NW-3, out of 205 km capital dredging remains to be done
in only 20 km and it is in progress. With these depths, viability of IWT operations on NW-1, 2
and 3 would increase.
28. Capital dredging in NW-3 is in progress to provide 2.00 m depth in the entire waterway
up to Kollam. A review feasibility study through NATPAC (a Government of Kerala organization)
for extension of National Waterway-3 in Kerala towards North and South is in progress.
Terminals and Jetties
29. The Committee was informed that IWAI has already constructed low level jetties of
permanent river terminals at Patna and Pandu. Construction of high level jetty has been completed
at Patna while at Pandu it is nearing completion. Pandu terminal has also been provided with broad
gauge railway connectivity and alternative road connectivity with National Highway. With these
facilities, Pandu terminal is being developed as a multimodal transport hub for north-eastern sector.
Jogighopa is being planned for developing as a big coal handling terminal. Fixed terminals already
exist at Farakka and Patna while a new fixed terminal is being constructed at Kolkata on NW-1.
Construction of a fixed terminal at Varanasi is also being acted upon.
30. Floating pontoon jetties are also available at various places on NW-1 [(Haldia, Kolkata
(BISN, Botanical garden), Shantipur, Katwa, Farakka, Rajmahal, Sahibganj, Bateshwarsthen,
Bhagalpur, Munger, Semaria, Buxar, Ghazipur, Varanasi and Allahabad) and on NW-2 [Dhubri,
Jogighopa, Tejpur, Silghat, Jamuguri, Neamati, Dibrugarh, Panbari, Sadiya and Saikhowa]. These
floating pontoons can be shifted to/placed at any other location depending on demand.
31. On NW-3, permanent terminals have been constructed at Kottapuram, Aluva, Maradu,
Cherthala, Kayamkulam, Vaikom, Trikkunnapuzha and Kollam while construction of terminal at
Alappuzha is in progress. Recently two Ro-Ro jetties have also been constructed at Bolghatty and
Willingdon islands, which have facilitated seamless connectivity of NW-3 with Vallarpadamm port
for container transportation.

6
Night Navigation
32. The Committee was informed that IWAI has provided night navigation aids from Haldia to
Ballia (1105 km) on NW-1, from Dhubri to Silghat (442km) on NW-2 and entire 205 km in NW-
3. Besides, day navigation marks are maintained in entire lengths of these three NWs. In addition,
for providing state of art computer based navigational aids, IWAI has planned four DGPS stations
each on NW-1 and NW-2. On NW-1, stations at Swaroopganj, Bhagalpur and Patna have been
commissioned and construction at Varanasi shall start soon. As regards NW-2, a DGPS station at
Jogighopa has been commissioned while DGPS stations at Tejpur and Dibrugarh are under
construction. A station at Dhubri has been recently approved. To ensure safe navigation, IWAI has
also developed navigational charts, navigational atlas and software which can be used on NW-1, 2,
3 and Sunderbans waterways. With these, any vessel fitted with a computer and a few more
devices can navigate safely by following navigation route loaded in the computer. In addition, IWAI
provides river pilots on NW-1 and NW-2. IWAI is also planning to provide River Information
System (RIS) on NWs starting with Haldia-Farakka stretch of NW-1 and for this inputs of experts
from Netherlands have been sought under a bilateral cooperation on IWT between the two
countries.
Cargo Transportation by IWT Mode
33. The data provided by the IWAI states that the cargo movement in the first three NWs
stands at 7.06 million tonnes in 2011-12, 4.92 million tonnes in 2010-11. The figures during
2009-10, 2008-09, and 2007-08 are 4.59, 4.30 and 4.31 million tonnes respectively.
34. The Goa water ways in the same period handled 41.65, 54.50, 53.03, 45.58, 38.50 million
tonnes of cargo. Similarly the Mumbai water ways has 19.66, 14.88, 11.99, 10.16, 12.91 million
tonnes of cargo in its share.
35. Transportation of cargo by IWT mode has increased from the level of 32 MnT (1.6 billion
tonne km) in 2003-04 to 74.30 MnT (4.828 btkm) in 2010-11 and 70 MnT (4.755 btkm)
(provisional) for the year 2011-12. But it still forms a very small part of the total transport
network.
36. On NW-1 and NW-2, the cargo moved was stone chips, ODC, project cargo, fly ash, etc.
On NW-3 the main cargo transported was rock phosphate, furnace oil, POL, Sulphur etc. On Goa
waterways, iron ore is the main cargo transported by IWT mode and on Mumbai waterways it is
coal and steel products.
37. During the course of evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee
on ..........
“Inland Waterways enjoy infrastructure status. In the last Budget the service tax which was
payable has been exempted. It has been brought into the negative list, that is , the exempted
category, for payment of service tax. Very recently, just last month , this has become eligible
also for subsidy for transportation in the North- East. Just as any other commodity entitled
to subsidy for transportation through road and rail in the North–East, now Inland
Waterways has also been covered in that definition which has happened last month. Apart
from trying to have policy interventions which will encourage development of cargo
transportation through Inland Waterways, we are also trying to do a couple of things
through these meetings. On one hand we are trying to identify specific cargo of particularly
public sector units like NTPC, FCI and fertilizer companies whereby they can get long-term
commitments for transportation to the Inland waterways, so that we could try and find
somebody to transport that...”

7
Bulk Cargo Projects
38. The Committee was informed that NTPC’s power plants at Farakka and Kahalgaon have
requirement of imported coal amounting to more than 5 million tonnes per annum (MMTPA) which
is brought through Paradip and Haldia ports. But due to capacity constraints of railways, these
power plants regularly face shortage of coal. Further, due to low depth available at Haldia port,
bigger ocean going vessels cannot come there due to which, 70% of imported coal is received at
Paradip port and from there it is transported by railways. Both these power plants are located along
Ganga River (NW-1) quite close to the river bank. IWAI maintains LAD of 2.5 m between Haldia
and Farakka (540 km) and with some more efforts it can be increased to 3.0 m which makes
possible the operation of bigger and more commercially viable size of inland vessels (1500 to 2000
dwt). Therefore, IWAI had been working with NTPC on the project of transportation of imported
coal by IWT mode from Haldia to Farakka and Kahalgaon.
39. In July, 2010, NTPC gave written commitment of transportation of 3 MMTPA of imported
coal from Haldia to Farakka by IWT mode for a period of seven years. Thereafter IWAI and NTPC
developed a project envisaging total investment from private sector. The project includes
(a) transshipment infrastructure at Haldia (b) barges/inland vessels for movement of 3 MMTPA coal
(c) unloading jetty at Farakka; and (d) material handling/conveyor belt system from river front at
Farakka to the coal stack yard of power plant. After open competitive bidding M/s Jindal ITF Ltd.
were selected as operator. They have to invest approximately Rs.650 crores. in transhipper, barges
and unloading infrastructure at Farakka. They have started implementing the project and expect to
start transporting coal by early January, 2013.
40. The coal transportation for Kahalgaon project of NTPC upto Farakka will be through IWT
mode and thereafter by already existing merry go round railway system. NTPC is also considering
Coal transportation of about 3 MT through IWT for their Barh Project. The bid process sought
for Barh project will also be undertaken by IWAI.
Other Potential Projects
41. The Committee was informed that there also is the possibility of movement of project cargo
of Hydro-power projects coming up in Arunachal Pradesh on various tributaries of Brahmaputra.
IWAI is also working on the possibility of transportation of domestic/imported coal for other power
plants of Bihar, UP, West Bengal etc. as well as fertilizers on NW 1 and 2 food grains and jute
on NW-2 and containers on NW-3 etc. Secretary to the PM and Secretary (Shipping) reviews on
a regular basis the implementation of these projects and also identified of new transportation
projects through IWT mode. Some of the projects so identified include:–
(a) Transportation of coal by waterway for NTPC Power Plant at Bongaigaon, Assam.
(b) NTPC is also considering Coal transported of about 3 MT through IWT for their Barh
project. The bid process sought for Barh project will also be undertaken by IWAI.
(c) Transportation of food grains of Food Corporation of India (FCI) by IWT mode in
Kolkata-Tripura through Ashuganj and within NW-2 north bank.
(d) Transportation of container by IWT mode are: (i) Kolkata- Pandu-Kolkata and
(ii) Kolkata-Patna-Kolkata routes.
(e) Transportation of fertilizer by IWT mode in Varanasi-Kolkata route.
42. For scaling up private investment in the Inland Waterways and to identify business model
and new areas for private investment in the IWT Sector, a Committee has been constituted under
Secretary, Planning Commission with Secretary (Shipping) and Chairman, IWAI as Members. The
Committee is expected to give its report by the end of 2012.

8
43. The Secretary while deposing before the Committee stated inter-alia:
“There is a continued stress on the inland waterways. By strengthening of the waterways
and tying up with agencies other than NTPC, we are exploring the possibility of tying up
with other agencies which can give us a large quantity of goods for transport on waterways
like fertilizer companies, FCI, CONCORD, oil companies for LPG , etc. We hope to achieve
some success.”
Human Resource Development
44. The IWT Policy also lays stress on the requirement of human resource development. The
trained manpower of the IWT sector can be classified into two groups. The first category consists
of professionals in various fields like hydrography, navigation, civil engineering, mechanical
engineering, naval architecture and transport economics for the development and management of
the waterways and operation of various supporting infrastructural facilities. The second category
of personnel would be required for operational purposes to man the inland vessels.
45. The Committee was informed that in order to meet the manpower requirement National
Inland Navigation Institute (NINI) was established by IWAI at Patna and has been functional from
February, 2004. Induction course for deck and engine ratings, preparatory course for srang and
drivers, basic and advanced dredging courses, refresher courses for hydrographic surveyors, repair
and maintenance of vessels etc. are conducted in NINI regularly. So far, over 1300 candidates (till
July, 2012) have been trained at NINI for IWT sector. The administration and management of the
Institute is done by M/s ARI, New Delhi. NINI has got ISO 9001:2008 certifications during
February, 2010. 100% placement has been achieved for the trainees of 13
th and 14 th batch and 50%
for 15 th batch. A scheme for placement of NINI trained candidates on board IWAI vessels under
Apprentice Act has also been implemented. An “Inland Vessel Manoeuvring Simulator” has been set
up and commissioned in March, 2010.
46. Further, Memorandum of Understanding has been signed between IWAI and M/s ARI for
setting up of a “Marine Simulator Centre” at NINI on 50:50 revenue sharing bases for which the
work is in progress, and the centre has trained 26 candidates so far. The Institution has been
approved by DG Shipping to conduct Navigational Watch keeping officers courses for manpower
for River Sea Vessels and Coastal Vessels. The first Course commenced on 15
th April, 2012. The
institute has also assisted the Government of Bihar in drafting and adopting Boat Rules 2010 and
IV rules for Government of Bihar. The approval process of Diploma Program in IWT from IMU
is also in progress.
Protocol with other Countries
47. The Committee was informed that the Government of India and Bangladesh have entered
into an arrangement for the use of their waterways for commerce between the two countries.
Under the arrangements certain IWT routes have been undertaken which are:– (i) Kolkata-Silghat-
Kolkata, (ii) Kolkata-Karimganj-Kolkata, (iii) Rajshahi-Dhulian-Rajshahi and (iv) Silghat-Karimganj-
Silghat. For inter-country trade, five ports of call have been designated in each country. These are;
Haldia, Kolkata, Pandu, Karimganj and Silghat in India, Narayanganj, Khulna, Mongla, Sirajganj and
Ashuganj in Bangladesh. This protocol has recently been extended up to 31.3.2014. More than
15 lakh tonnes of fly ash is transported between Kolkata/Haldia and Bangladesh every year under
this protocol.
48. During the Secretary level talks held in Dhaka between India and Bangladesh early July,
2012, it was proposed that the validity of the protocol should be co-terminus with the trade
agreement and the protocol has been reviewed by another two years till 31
st March, 2014. Other
issues which were discussed included:-

9
(a) Operationalisation of Trans-shipment at Ashuganj for movement of cargo to North
Eastern States.
(b) Protocol routes to be made navigable and extension of Protocol route.
(c) Twenty four hours/Night Navigation and Differential Global Positioning System
Facilities.
(d) New/Extended Ports of Call.
49. It was agreed at the Secretary level talks that the follow up on each item would be further
deliberated for implementation in the Standing Committee meetings held biannually.
Indo-Myanmar Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project
50. This project was conceptualized by the Ministry of External Affairs to provide alternative
connectivity of Mizoram with Haldia/Kolkata ports through Kaladan river in Myanmar. The project
envisages Coastal Shipping/ Maritime Shipping from Haldia to Sittwe, IWT from Sittwe to Paletwa
(in Myanmar) and thereafter road from Paletwa to Mizoram. The project is piloted and funded by
the MEA which appointed IWAI as their Project Development Consultant (PDC) vide agreement
dated 19.3.09 for the IWT components. After updating of DPR for port and IWT components,
IWAI invited bids for construction of these facilities and gave its recommendations to MEA for
award of work to the successful bidder. Consequently, MEA has appointed an Indian contractor
[M/s ESSAR projects (I) Pvt Ltd] for construction of port and IWT components at a cost
Rs 342 crores. Contract was signed in May 2010. Construction of Sittwe port is in progress and
the work is likely to be completed by July, 2013.
51. Initially India had tried to persuade Bangladesh to offer transport and transit rights to the
northeastern states. However, Bangladesh has consistently refused to grant such rights, including
access to its Chittagong port, which is less than 200kms away from Agartala, the capital of
Tripura.
North East Region
52. The IWT Policy 2001 envisages that special emphasis would be laid on the development of
inland water transport facilities in the North-Eastern Region. The main bulk commodities which can
be considered suitable for inland water transport movement are coal, POL, food grains, limestone
and dolomite. The development of inland water transport facilities in the North-Eastern Region
would ensure cost effective transportation of the above mentioned commodities.
53. The Government in 2008-09 introduced a Central Sector Scheme for the development of
IWT in the NE States. The activities covered under the scheme include hydrographic surveys,
techno economic feasibility studies, preparation of DPR, bandalling, dredging provision of
navigational aids and setting up of terminal facilities for passenger and cargo handling. 100 % grant
is provided by the Central Government under this scheme. During the 11th Plan period, IWAI has
spent Rs.208.69 crores in the NE Region.
Connectivity of Waterways to Ports
54. IWT Policy Document 2001 gives that interlinking waterways and ports with coastal
shipping holds good prospects in respect of several river systems in India. For instance Ganga-
Brahmaputra- Sunderbans river system has the potential to be integrated with Haldia-Kolkata ports,
the Brahmani-Mahanadi river system with Paradip port, Krishna-Godavari-Buckingham Canal with
Chennai port, West Coast Canal with Cochin Port and the Manddovi-Zuari-Cumburjua Waterways

10
with Murmugao port. The development and connectivity of these waterways with the ports will not
only ensure development of the entire hinterland but will also help in relieving the pressure on the
other already congested modes of transportation. In this connection the Secretary, Ministry of
Shipping stated that “one more area which I did not touch and you had touched in your opening
remarks was connectivity of waterways to the ports. I think, this is another area which has not been
much talked about. This is very crucial. For example, in most of the countries like Holland,
wherever there is 30 to 40 per cent transportation by inland waterways, the river is also connected
to the port and there is only navigation lock –in between. So whatever cargo is coming through
the ships is straightway going into the river system. That is what we need to focus on, and we
have done that exercise. Today, we have started identifying that. Till now, we used to only talk
about road and rail connectivity gap in the port. Now we have widened that definition, we have
included waterways and there is a committee under my Chairmanship. We have already collected
information. Now, we are trying to identify those gaps and then we will see how to fill up those
gaps.”
Techno-Economic Studies and R&D
55. As per the IWT Policy Document 2001, it has been stated that due to nascent stages of
development of the IWT sector, research and development has to play a crucial role in the
development of the sector. Design of low-cost and shallow-draft vessel and introduction of
navigational aids are important factors for improving the economics of IWT. In view of this, during
the Ninth Plan, an R&D cell was set up in IWAI to act as a nodal agency to coordinate the R&D
activities required to be carried out in this sector.
56. The Committee was informed that preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPR) for
Kakinada-Puducherry canals along with Godavari and Krishna rivers and East-Coast Canal along
with Brahmani River and Mahanadi delta were completed in 2009-10 and their EIA/EMP studies are
at advanced stage. In 2011-12 a few more technical studies have been completed. These are:
(a) DPR of Goa Waterways (b) DPR of Barak river (c) decongestion of Mumbai city through IWT
and coastal routes; and (c) identification of potential waterways of north-eastern region. Studies for
(a) design of prototype inland cum coastal vessel (b) Technical feasibility of providing 3 m LAD
in Allahabad-Ghazipur stretch of NW-1; and (c) review feasibility study for extension NW-3 in
north and south sides are in progress.
Central Inland Water Transport Corporation (CIWTC)
57. The Central Inland Water Transport Corporation, Kolkata set up in 1967 was the principal
inland water operator with the following activities:
• Transportation by inland waterways from Kolkata to Bangladesh and to Assam and
lighterage operations in the river Hooghly;
• Transportation from Kolkata to Allahabad;
• Construction and repair of small and medium sized vessels;
• Repairs of ocean-going vessels.
Merger of CIWTC with IWAI
58. The Committee came to know that IWAI in the past, since its formation in the year 1986
has been taking over various river terminals viz. Guwahati, Patna, Allahabad and Haldia, belonged
to the CIWTC without manpower. As a result thereof, the CIWTC got overburdened with excess
staff having no work. This situation has accelerated the loss making process by the CIWTC. In

11
addition to this, the IWAI has taken over some vessels belonged to CIWTC, viz. Tug MOT-III and
Bahika-IV for Re.1/- only, without the crew.
59. They have also taken over the following from CIWTC:–
(a) river conservation works in 2005-06 without the small vessels and manpower;
(b) the “competent authority” for Indo-Bangladesh Protocol in 2003 which CIWTC had
with them since 1973 for 30 years. No manpower was taken over.
All the above measures were being used only for the IWT sector.
Future of CIWTC
60. During the deliberations, the Secretary Shipping has stated that “Recently, we prepared an
inventory of the assets, moveable as well as immoveable, we have found that they own a lot of
land which is also useful for the development of the waterways, particularly in the North East. It
has already been sent to the IWAI. They are having a look at that, As far as the assets are
concerned, there should be no difficulty in the IWAI taking over those assets. They will be of use
to them in their operations. On man power, sir, we would, of course try to see how many can be
absorbed in the IWAI. At the same time we will also explore the possibility of coming out with
an improved voluntary retirement scheme. Even the existing one is accepted by some people. But
if possible we will try to come out with an improved voluntary retirement scheme with the approval
of the cabinet. Then we will move in that direction whereby some accept the voluntary retirement
scheme and the rest move to the IWAI, and the assets, by and large move to the IWAI. We are
trying to do that in an expeditious manner.”
Private Investment in the IWT Sector
61. India has a highly developed railways and roads network of considerable size and capacity
for transportation of goods and passengers. However, in spite of a strong case for development
of inland water transport, this sector remained neglected. The development of infrastructure and
services in the IWT sector needs mobilization of substantial resources to improve the efficiency
and quality of services. It is expected that private sector participation in the development of
infrastructure and services in the IWT sector would result in reducing gestation period for setting
up of the new facilities and services and bring the latest technology and improved management
techniques.
62. Government has decided to permit automatically Foreign Direct Investment up to 100 per
cent equity for infrastructure sector. This would be applicable to IWT sector.
Suggestions for Promoting Water Transport
63. FICCI has suggested that viability and means to attract more investment into the IWT
sector should be studied by creating an institutional frame work for it, IWT should also become
a part of the National Maritime Development Programme. More waterways should be identified for
development and those earmarked be given a push. Also for a viable project, government has to
ensure stable two-way traffic as even large volume of cargo in one direction cannot make a river
service economically viable.
64. The fuel used for the barges are mostly diesel and it has a negative impact on the
operational costs if diesel prices are hiked. The route identification is very important as in certain
stretches the land route is shorter than the river way route. The wide variation in the draft of
rivers is also a cause for concern. On NW-1, according to experts, there are stretches where

12
the draft is as deep as 6 m but there also stretches where its below 1.8 m. This can slow down
a barge.
65. Regarding navigable drafts, FICCI has commented that waterways are suffering from lack
of required depth, width and vertical (overboard) clearance which would allow vessels to pass
through easily. It should be noted that even if any point on the stretch of waterway to be used
is not navigable, the entire stretch becomes useless. Moreover, the waterways should have all-
weather operations. The width of the canals varies from 9m to 20m. It makes movement of the
barges (having width of around 9 meters) very difficult in the narrow stretches. Presence of low-
lying bridges across the canals causes hindrance for the movement of vessels with cargo.
66. Dredging is required for providing and maintaining the depth. Widening of canals require
land acquisition. The road/rail bridges constructed over the canals/waterways become hindrances
in passing of a loaded barge. For example, a bridge at Kovilthottam around half a km away from
Chavara towards Cochin side, posed problems for the free movement on waterway for Indian Rare
Earths Limited (IREL).
67. ONGC has submitted that enhanced usage of Inland Waterways infrastructure shall provide
a competitive and faster mode of transportation of large cargo of food items like wheat and rice,
construction material like steel and cement; coal for power generation and fertilizers. For developing
a robust infrastructure, upgradation of the waterways to enable their navigability around the year
need to be done. Government may consider restructuring of IWAI with authority vesting with
professional having domain knowledge of the sector with long term continuity in position, instead
of the current arrangements of the IWAI which is managed by the generalists drawn from civil
service, with a short term tenure.
68. FACT imports about 2.5 lakh MT of sulphur and 3 lakh MT of rock phosphate annually.
These solid raw materials are moved by barge and road to the production units at Udyogamandal
and Ambalamugal. FACT produces about 85 lakh MT of fertilizers annually.
69. In the wake of restrictions on road movement of these dangerous chemicals like ammonia,
FACT has drawn up plans for transport of ammonia and other raw materials by barges, also has
plans for expansion and diversification of its fertilizer production facilities. With the implementation
of these projects, the volume of raw materials handled and also the finished products transported
would increase considerably. Water transport requirements would need to be augmented to meet
these needs. Dedicated barges are required for transportation of goods like phosphoric acid, sulphur
etc. the major factor influencing success of these initiatives will be the availability of barges often
dedicated ones for transporting these materials. Government agencies like Kerala Shipping and
Inland Navigation Corporation and IWAI should play a more proactive role to support industries in
their requirement by partnering such ventures. The role of private players in water transport is vital
in making these endeavors a success.
70. Periodical dredging of the waterways wherever essential, needs to be carried out by the
authorities concerned to ensure that bulk cargoes can be handled safely and without delay leading
to demurrages. FACT is principally transporting its finished goods by road and rail at present could
also look at water transport as a new alternative especially to locations in Kerala. This would
reduce dependency on rail movement which is becoming more congested leading to delays.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
71. The Committee notes that Inland Water Transport (IWT) is a fuel efficient and
environment friendly mode of transportation. India is richly endowed with navigable
waterways, comprising rivers, canals, backwaters, creeks, etc. that can be developed as
alternate mode of transportation in the coming years.

13
72. This Committee has always stood for developing water transport in a big way which
also has some immense potential. It has been emphasizing this through its
recommendations given in various reports, latest being its 177
th Report on Demands for
Grants, 2012-13, of the Ministry of Shipping. This inter alia states that water transport has
various advantages compared to road transport. Water transport is cheaper, can handle huge
volumes of cargo and less impact on environment. The Committee had felt that a strong
inland water transport system would be able to handle an efficient, cheaper and
environment-friendly cargo transport system. The Committee, had strongly recommended to
make available adequate resources in order to have a well connected water transport
facilities throughout the country.
NATIONAL POLICY
73. India has inland waterways with a navigable length of 14,500 km, but the Committee
notes is constrained to state that even though National IWT Policy document prepared in
the Ninth Plan prescribed for making efforts for pooling the resources through captive users
and PSUs, with liberal investments in IWT sector, the Government have failed to implement
the vision of the policy document in actual terms over these years. On the contrary, water
transport has shrunk even in those areas with great potential. The Committee also notes
that lack of adequate policy support for the sector was also compounding the problems,
leading to IWT losing its competitive edge over other modes of transport. The other modes
of transport received policy support and huge investment in developing its infrastructure,
whereas the water transport seems to have been neglected or has not received the required
attention of the policy makers and the Government. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Government of India should take necessary follow up actions on the
Inland Water Transport Policy Document of 2001 for the optimum utilization of our
potential in the water transport sector.
74. Having emphasized this, the Committee is of the views that IWT as a mode of
transportation cannot be considered in isolation. It needs to be integrated with other modes
of transportation to achieve maximum benefits. Centre-level coordination would be required
for this. The Committee also recommends that IWT operators should be given a level-
playing field vis-à-vis those in other modes – road and rail transports.
75. The Committee notes that national highways are contributing about 40% of the road
accidents and trucks being the major contributor in this. The water transportation being the
safest mode, can reduce the road accident and resulting casualties significantly. It also
reduces treatment and rehabilitation costs to a great extent. Moreover, the land acquisition
for the Highways/Roads have been a major problem which is not only sensitive issue, it is
highly time taking and costly exercise. There is shortage of free land for road construction.
Switching to water mode, therefore, would become the most viable option to reduce the
dependency on roads, particularly for bulk cargo transport. It has lot of tourist potential
especially for pilgrimage which is mainly located on river sides.
FUND ALLOCATIONS
76. Even in the operational waterways, the Committee notes, lack of maintenance and
sufficient funds are the main reasons for insignificant use of National Waterways. We have
five national waterways so far, of which only three are operational and rest of two are to
be started since last three years. The Committee recommends that adequate funds need to
be allocated separately for maintenance and development of the national waterways which
are presently in use. The Committee notes with dismay and express its unhappiness for not

14
being able to operationalise NW 4 and 5 so far. It is believed that these national waterways
will be operationalised on PPP mode as has been decided by the Planning Commission. This
Committee does not know why this have been kept languishing. The Committee feels that
Planning Commission is not much interested in the development of waterways in the
country as their reluctance to allocate adequate budget has resulted the two national
waterways NW-4 and 5 remain in mere papers. To avoid further delay, the Committee
recommends to allocate adequate financial support soon for operationalising these
waterways.
77. The Committee notes that severe dearth of infrastructure and lack of modernization
are the major factors bedeviling the Inland Water Transport sector in the country. The
Committee notes that Infrastructure creation requires continued efforts better planning and
larger quantum of funds.
78. The Committee also notes that not only the allocations made for IWT has been
inadequate, till the end of Eleventh Plan only an amount of Rs.1168 crore approximately
has been incurred. Further only an amount of Rs.1500 crore have been allocated by the
Planning Commission, whereas, the working group as projected requirement of funds to
the line of Rs.10,500 crore for the Twelfth Five year plan. This trend can be observed
in the previous plan periods like Eighth, Ninth and Tenth also. All the above periods,
the Budget Estimates and the actual expenditure incurred left huge gaps. It is a matter
of concern of the Committee that even the inadequate fund are also not being optimally
utilized. Besides, there is no specific planning and roadmap for mobilizing required
investment for the creation of infrastructure and modernization of the existing
waterways and also operationlising new ones that are pending. The Committee
recommends that government should come out with comprehensive projects for
development of IWT in the country in a time bound manner and sanctions for the same
should be made accordingly.
79. In this connection, the Committee would like to reiterates its recommendation
contained in its 130
th Report on the “National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of the
Barak River) Bill, 2007”. The Committee had expressed its concern about the
discontinuance of the centrally sponsored scheme for IWT development in the country by
the Planning Commission, the Committee was of the view that the decision of the Planning
Commission to convert the centrally sponsored scheme (CSS) for IWT development into
central sector scheme would adversely affect the pace of development of Inland water
transport in the county. The Committee had recommended for the revival of the centrally
sponsored scheme for overall development of the IWT Sector.
80. The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation made on its 130
th Report
which was about the proposed NW-6. The Committee was of the view that the proposed
NW-6 would boost the rural economy and provide IWT connectivity for movement of
commodities between the Port of Haldia/Kolkata through Indo-Bangladesh protocol route for
transit and trade in hinterland and Bangladesh. Besides decongestion of roads and fuel
saving, it would provide port-hinterland connectivity, better environment corridor and
generate employment among weaker sections and increase tourism activities in the region.
The Committee had recommended that the existing Protocol routes connecting NW-1 and
NW-6 and NW-2 and NW-6 may be taken up with the Bangladesh on an expeditious way to
convert these waterways into international waterways for effective transportation of inter-
country movement of goods between hinterland cities and Bangladesh. But in the process
the security concern should not be compromised in any way.

15
DREDGING, CHANNELS, TERMINALS AND NA VIGATION
81. The Committee notes that waterways do not have the required depth, width and
vertical (overboard) clearance which would allow vessels to pass through easily. It should be
noted that even if any stretch of waterway to be used is not navigable, the entire stretch
becomes useless. Moreover, the waterways should have all-weather operations. The
Committee also notes that the width of the canals varies from 9m to 20m. It makes
movement of the barges (having width of around 9 meters) very difficult in the narrow
stretches. Also the presence of low-lying bridges across the canals acts as hindrance for the
movement of vessels with cargo. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IWAI should
make a policy standard for all the navigable canals in order to ensure required depth and
width in all the waterways.
82. The Committee also recommends that periodical dredging of the waterways wherever
essential needs to be carried out by the IWAI/Major Ports to ensure that bulk cargoes can
be handled safety and without delay.
83. The Committee notes that the modern day navigation aids have been developed and
implemented by most of the major ports in the country. Therefore, the IWAI could seek
the expertise of the same from the major Ports like Mumbai Port Trust, Jawaharlal Nehru
Port Trust, etc., for making the navigation along the waterways hassle free. Also the GPRS
used by many agencies also can be applied in the NWs to monitor the vessels. The IWAI
may take the expertise from the agencies which are working under the Ministry of Shipping
in this field. The Committee also recommends that initiatives need to be taken to facilitate
night navigation in order to meet the quantity requirements of the industries along the
waterways.
84. The Committee recommends that the road/rail bridges constructed over the canals/
waterways should not become hindrances in passing of a loaded barge. As the Committee
has been informed that a bridge at Kovilthottam around half a km away from Chavara
towards Cochin side, which posed problems for the free movement on waterway for Indian
Rare Earths Limited (IREL). The Committee recommends that wherever possible, existing
bridges should be redeveloped for  providing the required vertical clearance .
85. The Committee also was informed that the fishing activities along the navigable
canals are causing hindrances to the vessel movements. The Committee notes that if the
fishing nets are removed from the waterways, it may cause conflict with the interests of the
fishermen. The Committee recommends that field visits should be organized to address the
concerns of fishermen and make them aware of the problems created by fishing nets.
OTHER USER AMENITIES
86. In order to ensure the optimum utilization of potential of waterways, it is necessary
that River Terminals are connected to the hinterland by proper road terminals. The
Committee recommends that on the lines of Pandu terminal, good quality road links may
be provided connecting all other terminals of the National Waterways. Similarly, feasibility
of rail connectivity to terminals on each NW also need to be worked out for a better cargo
movement to and fro using the waterways.
87. The Committee recommends that the terminal should have properly developed
facilities such as jetties for berthing of vessels, space for loading/unloading, storage area,
space for vehicles movement and parking, etc. These facilities are to be provided by the
government. Apart from these, the Government should encourage setting up of ancillary
infrastructural facilities such as custom bonded area within the terminals.

16
88. The Committee also observes that last mile connectivity is one of the major
hurdles in switching to IWT. While, services are available for moving the cargo from one
terminal to another terminal, finding a service provider for last mile connectivity is
difficult and not so cost-effective. The existing service providers have to evolve an
integrated logistics model wherein they take the responsibility for end-to-end movement.
This would remove the multiple interfaces with different transport service providers that
a shipper is subjected to. Moreover, the shipper would feel relieved and can focus on its
core business. The committee recommends for a holistic approach in providing such
facilities in various waterways.
CARGO HANDLING
89. The Committee is constrained to note that despite huge potential cargo
transportation by Inland Water Transport mode has not shown significant improvement on
these National Waterways as its share is only 0.15 per cent in the country compared to 32
percent in Bangladesh or 9 per cent of China. The Committee also expresses its displeasure
over the fact that no comparative cost-output evaluation for transportation of cargo through
this alternate mode of transport has been carried out by the Government. The Committee
is of the view that such evaluation would further establish the support of Inland Water
Transport over other mode of transports. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
realistic physical target for cargo transportation year-wise should be fixed and time-bound
action plan should be implemented in the IWT sector during the Twelfth Plan period. The
Committee hopes that the target of 15 billion tonne km by 2017 may, at least, be achieved
so as to rejuvenate this sector.
90. The Committee also notes that there are no regular services for movement of cargo
through IWT. Existing service providers cater to full shipload of cargo on charter basis.
However, entities with less than shipload, such as 1-2 TEUs, do not have the facility for
moving the cargo same day by IWT. For having the full load for a barge, the shipper would
have to wait for 7-10 days. This waiting time is not required in case of moving the
containers by road, as the shipper can move any number of containers same day. The
Committee is of the view that regular barge services between the ports and inland water
terminal can resolve this problem.
CARGO TRANSPORTATION OF PSUs
91. The Committee recommends that bulk cargoes like, raw materials, chemicals,
containers and finished products from various industrial units need to be promoted by the
IWT mode. Since many agencies are currently depending solely on the road and rail modes
of transports the new alternative will be able to reduce the road congestions, accidents and
dependency on rail movement which is now facing congestion, lack of stalks etc., leading
to delays.
92. The Committee observes that (National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) is
contributing to the IWT a good share of its raw material movement at many of its thermal
power stations. Since the road and railway networks are causing hindrances for imported
coal movement due to shortage of rakes and congestion at ports, the IWT mode is found
to be more suitable for NTPC. The Committee recommends that NTPC’s project at
Bongaigaon and Barah should be assisted with the IWT system for coal movement and IWAI
should complete the projects within the schedule.
93. The Committee, in view of the restrictions on the movement of dangerous raw
materials of Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) by road like Ammonia,

17
Benzene, Sulphuric acid, etc., recommends that, the opportunity may be explored for
enhancing the cargo transportation in the NW-3. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that IWAI should play a more proactive role for promotion of national waterways and extent
its support to such industries in their requirements by partnering such ventures.
94. The Committee recommends that IWAI may take the matter with FACT so that bulk
movement of raw materials to its various plants could be carried out through the inland
waterway mode. The project will be able to handle the finished products of FACT also to
various parts of the country and to various sea ports. This mode will enable free movement
of materials in a more economic and hassle free manner and may be a mutual benefit for
both the agencies.
95. The Committee is of the view that Food Corporation of India (FCI) could be a
regular beneficiary of the water ways as they have food grain movement round the year.
The Committee notes the initiative taken for transportation of food grains in Kolata-Tripura
through Ashugang. The Committee recommends that IWAI should make a feasibility report
on the movement of food grains through IWT mode on other parts of the country and the
additional facilities required also should be identified so that FCI could be made an active
beneficiary of the waterways.
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS
96. The Committee recommends that linking of ports in Karnataka, Gujarat and Tamil
Nadu also should be worked out as these states are having in-bound and out-bound bulk
cargo potential. The Committee recommends for developing the West coast – Kandla,
Mumbai, Murmogao, Kochi – and East coast – Kolkata, Paradip, Vishakhapatnam, Chennai–
coastal freight corridors. Investing in these corridors will augment scale and improve the
economics for coastal shipping, making it an attractive alternative to other modes. Also, it
will improve last mile road and rail connectivity to and from ports.
97. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to encourage inland water
transport for movement of containers from various ports. It also reduces the costs and
time, if the staking of the customs examined containers directly to the ship. This might
enable to decongest the already congested roads and the transaction costs.
98. The Committee is of the view that if Central and State Governments concerned take
the necessary steps for the promotion of coastal transportation, the free movement of cargo
in a cost-effective manner will benefit the EXIM trade in the country.
99. The Committee also recommends that as in the case of Vallarpadam Terminal, all the
other Ports including private ports of the country may be connected with the Inland Water
Transport System so that cargo movement from ports to other part of the territory can be
met in a cost effective manner.
INDO-BANGLADESH PROTOCOL ON IWT
100. The Committee is of the view that container mode of transport should be promoted
in the area using multi-modal transit route through Bangladesh, which may ease the
transport of essential commodities to the North Eastern States of the country. Already NE
Region is suffering connectivity handicap with the mainland India. The Committee observes
that the land route currently being used for the purpose through the chicken neck is over-
stretched. The Committee recommends that Containers Corporation of India (CONCOR)
may take the initiatives in establishing necessary terminals for the purpose.

18
101. The Committee also recommends that for establishing arrangements through
Bangladesh, the pre requisite is to develop a river port at Ashuganj, on the Meghana River.
The road network connecting Ashuganj with the check-posts also need to be widened for
ease of traffic there. Round the clock navigation facilities need to be provided in the
protocol routes, if feasible, in all aspects.
INDO-MYANMAR KALADAN MULTIMODAL TRANSIT TRANSPORT PROJECT
102. The Committee has been informed that Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport
Project will connect the eastern Indian seaport of Kolkata with Sittwe port in Myanmar by
sea; it will then link Sittwe to Mizoram via river and road transport. This project will reduce
distance from Kolkata to Sittwe by approximately 1328 km and will reduce the need to
transport good through the narrow Siliguri corridor. The Committee recommends that Indo-
Myanmar Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project may be considered for
implementation.
MERGING OF CIWTC WITH IWAI
103. The Committee observes that periodically the assets and work assignments of
CIWTC were taken over by the IWAI without absorbing the employees working on those
assets and work assignments. This has finally resulted in the accumulation of large
numbers of employees without any work. The Committee therefore recommends that the
IWAI should correct the mistake it has committed over these years and should come
forward to take the service of the experienced staff of CIWTC in the IWT sector.
104. In this connection the Committee has conveyed its concern to the Government from
time to time. In its 177 th Report, the Committee has again and again considered the matter
observed and the Committee had expressed its concern over the future of persons working
in CIWTC. The Committee hoped that the staff of CIWTC would not be forced to opt VRS
against individual’s will and CIWTC would be merged with IWAI if the assets of CIWTC
were taken over by it. The Committee also recommended that till the merger process is
completed adequate funds and manpower be made available to CIWTC to carry out its
operations.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
105. The Committee notes that National Inland Navigation Institute (NINI) is providing
various courses required in the water transport and aquatic navigation, dredging repair and
maintenance of vessels, etc. The Committee hopes NINI is able to solve the shortage of
vessel pilots as faced by the Major Ports of the country also. The Committee recommends
that the curriculum and the courses offered must reflect the future requirements of the
country.
CRUISE TOURISM
106. River cruise tourism is a major tourist attraction with enormous potential for further
development in places like Guwahati, Goa, Mumbai, Kolkata and Kerala. The house boats and small
boats are also catering to the tourism needs. The Committee feels that the tourism will get
required boost when the waterways are fully developed and linked properly with various
Ports of the country. This factor, therefore, should be kept in mind while planning for
expansion and development of water transport in the country.

19
107. The Committee would like to draw attention in this respect towards development of
tourism circuit proposed in Alappuzha, which is a river/backwater tourism spot for which the
Government of Kerala has planned a mega circuit project for development of backwaters
and the same is under consideration of the Ministry of Tourism for the grant of central
financial assistance. The Committee would like to know response of the Union Ministry in
this regard.
108. The Committee observes that the river tourism offers multi faceted tourism potential
like hotel barges, river cruise ships, canal tourism, private boats, pilgrim tourism etc.
Currently only a very few stretches of the country are utilizing the potential in a limited
manner. The Committee recommends that states that have water transport potential may
be sensitized to come forward with more river tourism projects and IWAI may assist the
States and Ministry of Tourism for making the efforts a success. This may boost the
revenue earnings from the inland waterways in the country.
MANAGEMENT OF IWAI
109. The Committee observes that the current organizational set up of the IWAI is not
sufficient enough to fulfill its objectives in a wider prespective. The Committee therefore
recommends that the IWAI need to be strengthened with experts having sufficient
experience in the fields like hydrography, navigation, civil engineering, mechanical
engineering, naval architecture, transport economics for the development and management
of the waterways, rather than it be made a dumping ground for the Civil Servants.

20
20
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes that Inland Water Transport (IWT) is a fuel efficient and
environment friendly mode of transportation. India is richly endowed with navigable
waterways, comprising rivers, canals, backwaters, creeks, etc. that can be developed as
alternate mode of transportation in the coming years. (Para 71)
This Committee has always stood for developing water transport in a big way which
also has some immense potential. It has been emphasizing this through its
recommendations given in various reports, latest being its 177 th Report on Demands for
Grants, 2012-13, of the Ministry of Shipping. This inter alia States that water transport has
various advantages compared to road transport. Water transport is cheaper, can handle huge
volumes of cargo and less impact on environment. The Committee had felt that a strong
inland water transport system would be able to handle an efficient, cheaper and
environment-friendly cargo transport system. The Committee, had strongly recommended to
make available adequate resources in order to have a well connected water transport
facilities throughout the country. (Para 72)
NATIONAL POLICY
India has inland waterways with a navigable length of 14,500 km, but the Committee
is constrained to state that even though National IWT Policy document prepared in the
Ninth Plan prescribed for making efforts for pooling the resources through captive users
and PSUs, with liberal investments in IWT sector, the Government have failed to implement
the vision of the policy document in actual terms over these years. On the contrary, water
transport has shrunk even in those areas with great potential. The Committee also notes
that lack of adequate policy support for the sector was also compounding the problems,
leading to IWT losing its competitive edge over other modes of transport. The other modes
of transport received policy support and huge investment in developing its infrastructure,
whereas the water transport seems to have been neglected or has not received the required
attention of the policy makers and the Government. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Government of India should take necessary follow up actions on the
Inland Water Transport Policy Document of 2001 for the optimum utilization of our
potential in the water transport sector. (Para 73)
Having emphasized this, the Committee is of the views that IWT as a mode of
transportation cannot be considered in isolation. It needs to be integrated with other modes
of transportation to achieve maximum benefits. Centre-level coordination would be required
for this. The Committee also recommends that IWT operators should be given a level-
playing field vis-à-vis those in other modes – road and rail transports. (Para 74)
The Committee notes that national highways are contributing about 40% of the road
accidents and trucks being the major contributor in this. The water transportation being the
safest mode, can reduce the road accident and resulting casualties significantly. It also
reduces treatment and rehabilitation costs to a great extent. Moreover, the land acquisition

21
for the Highways/Roads have been a major problem which is not only sensitive issue, it is
highly time taking and costly exercise. There is shortage of free land for road construction.
Switching to water mode, therefore, would become the most viable option to reduce the
dependency on roads, particularly for bulk cargo transport. It has lot of tourist potential
especially for pilgrimage which is mainly located on river sides. (Para 75)
FUND ALLOCATIONS
Even in the operational waterways, the Committee notes, lack of maintenance and
sufficient funds are the main reasons for insignificant use of National Waterways. We have
five national waterways so far, of which only three are operational and rest of two are to
be started since last three years. The Committee recommends that adequate funds need to
be allocated separately for maintenance and development of the national waterways which
are presently in use. The Committee notes with dismay and express its unhappiness for not
being able to operationalise NW 4 and 5 so far. It is believed that these national waterways
will be operationalised on PPP mode as has been decided by the Planning Commission. This
Committee does not know why this have been kept languishing. The Committee feels that
Planning Commission is not much interested in the development of waterways in the
country as their reluctance to allocate adequate budget has resulted the two national
waterways NW-4 and 5 remain in mere papers. To avoid further delay, the Committee
recommends to allocate adequate financial support soon for operationalising these
waterways. (Para 76)
The Committee notes that severe dearth of infrastructure and lack of modernization
are the major factors bedeviling the Inland Water Transport sector in the country. The
Committee notes that Infrastructure creation requires continued efforts better planning and
larger quantum of funds. (Para 77)
The Committee also notes that not only the allocations made for IWT has been
inadequate, till the end of Eleventh Plan only an amount of Rs.1168 crore approximately has
been incurred. Further only an amount of Rs.1500 crore have been allocated by the
Planning Commission, whereas, the working group as projected requirement of funds to the
line of Rs.10,500 crore for the Twelfth Five year plan. This trend can be observed in the
previous plan periods like Eighth, Ninth and Tenth also. All the above periods, the Budget
Estimates and the actual expenditure incurred left huge gaps. It is a matter of concern of
the Committee that even the inadequate fund are also not being optimally utilized. Besides,
there is no specific planning and roadmap for mobilizing required investment for the
creation of infrastructure and modernization of the existing waterways and also
operationlising new ones that are pending. The Committee recommends that government
should come out with comprehensive projects for development of IWT in the country in a
time bound manner and sanctions for the same should be made accordingly. (Para 78)
In this connection, the Committee would like to reiterates its recommendation
contained in its 130 th Report on the “National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of the
Barak River) Bill, 2007”. The Committee had expressed its concern about the
discontinuance of the centrally sponsored scheme for IWT development in the country by
the Planning Commission, the Committee was of the view that the decision of the Planning
Commission to convert the centrally sponsored scheme (CSS) for IWT development into
central sector scheme would adversely affect the pace of development of Inland water

22
transport in the county. The Committee had recommended for the revival of the centrally
sponsored scheme for overall development of the IWT Sector. (Para 79)
The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation made on its 130 th Report
which was about the proposed NW-6. The Committee was of the view that the proposed
NW-6 would boost the rural economy and provide IWT connectivity for movement of
commodities between the Port of Haldia/Kolkata through Indo-Bangladesh protocol route for
transit and trade in hinterland and Bangladesh. Besides decongestion of roads and fuel
saving, it would provide port-hinterland connectivity, better environment corridor and
generate employment among weaker sections and increase tourism activities in the region.
The Committee had recommended that the existing Protocol routes connecting NW-1 and
NW-6 and NW-2 and NW-6 may be taken up with the Bangladesh on an expeditious way to
convert these waterways into international waterways for effective transportation of inter-
country movement of goods between hinterland cities and Bangladesh. But in the process
the security concern should not be compromised in any way. (Para 80)
DREDGING, CHANNELS, TERMINALS AND NA VIGATION
The Committee notes that waterways do not have the required depth, width and
vertical (overboard) clearance which would allow vessels to pass through easily. It should be
noted that even if any stretch of waterway to be used is not navigable, the entire stretch
becomes useless. Moreover, the waterways should have all-weather operations. The
Committee also notes that the width of the canals varies from 9m to 20m. It makes
movement of the barges (having width of around 9 meters) very difficult in the narrow
stretches. Also the presence of low-lying bridges across the canals acts as hindrance for the
movement of vessels with cargo. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IWAI should
make a policy standard for all the navigable canals in order to ensure required depth and
width in all the waterways. (Para 81)
The Committee also recommends that periodical dredging of the waterways wherever
essential needs to be carried out by the IWAI/Major Ports to ensure that bulk cargoes can
be handled safety and without delay. (Para 82)
The Committee notes that the modern day navigation aids have been developed and
implemented by most of the major ports in the country. Therefore, the IWAI could seek
the expertise of the same from the major Ports like Mumbai Port Trust, Jawaharlal Nehru
Port Trust, etc., for making the navigation along the waterways hassle free. Also the GPRS
used by many agencies also can be applied in the NWs to monitor the vessels. The IWAI
may take the expertise from the agencies which are working under the Ministry of Shipping
in this field. The Committee also recommends that initiatives need to be taken to facilitate
night navigation in order to meet the quantity requirements of the industries along the
waterways. (Para 83)
The Committee recommends that the road/rail bridges constructed over the canals/
waterways should not become hindrances in passing of a loaded barge. As the Committee
has been informed that a bridge at Kovilthottam around half a km away from Chavara
towards Cochin side, which posed problems for the free movement on waterway for Indian
Rare Earths Limited (IREL). The Committee recommends that wherever possible, existing
bridges should be redeveloped for  providing the required vertical clearance . (Para 84)

23
The Committee also was informed that the fishing activities along the navigable
canals are causing hindrances to the vessel movements. The Committee notes that if the
fishing nets are removed from the waterways, it may cause conflict with the interests of the
fishermen. The Committee recommends that field visits should be organized to address the
concerns of fishermen and make them aware of the problems created by fishing nets.
(Para 85)
OTHER USER AMENITIES
In order to ensure the optimum utilization of potential of waterways, it is necessary
that River Terminals are connected to the hinterland by proper road terminals. The
Committee recommends that on the lines of Pandu terminal, good quality road links may
be provided connecting all other terminals of the National Waterways. Similarly, feasibility
of rail connectivity to terminals on each NW also need to be worked out for a better cargo
movement to and fro using the waterways. (Para 86)
The Committee recommends that the terminal should have properly developed
facilities such as jetties for berthing of vessels, space for loading/unloading, storage area,
space for vehicles movement and parking, etc. These facilities are to be provided by the
government. Apart from these, the Government should encourage setting up of ancillary
infrastructural facilities such as custom bonded area within the terminals. (Para 87)
The Committee also observes that last mile connectivity is one of the major hurdles
in switching to IWT. While, services are available for moving the cargo from one terminal
to another terminal, finding a service provider for last mile connectivity is difficult and not
so cost-effective. The existing service providers have to evolve an integrated logistics model
wherein they take the responsibility for end-to-end movement. This would remove the
multiple interfaces with different transport service providers that a shipper is subjected to.
Moreover, the shipper would feel relieved and can focus on its core business. The committee
recommends for a holistic approach in providing such facilities in various waterways.
(Para 88)
CARGO HANDLING
The Committee is constrained to note that despite huge potential cargo
transportation by Inland Water Transport mode has not shown significant improvement on
these National Waterways as its share is only 0.15 per cent in the country compared to 32
per cent in Bangladesh or 9 percent of China. The Committee also expresses its displeasure
over the fact that no comparative cost-output evaluation for transportation of cargo through
this alternate mode of transport has been carried out by the Government. The Committee
is of the view that such evaluation would further establish the support of Inland Water
Transport over other mode of transports. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
realistic physical target for cargo transportation year-wise should be fixed and time-bound
action plan should be implemented in the IWT sector during the Twelfth Plan period. The
Committee hopes that the target of 15 billion tonne km by 2017 may, at least, be achieved
so as to rejuvenate this sector. (Para 89)
The Committee also notes that there are no regular services for movement of cargo
through IWT. Existing service providers cater to full shipload of cargo on charter basis.

24
However, entities with less than shipload, such as 1-2 TEUs, do not have the facility for
moving the cargo same day by IWT. For having the full load for a barge, the shipper would
have to wait for 7-10 days. This waiting time is not required in case of moving the
containers by road, as the shipper can move any number of containers same day. The
Committee is of the view that regular barge services between the ports and inland water
terminal can resolve this problem. (Para 90)
CARGO TRANSPORTATION OF PSUs
The Committee recommends that bulk cargoes like, raw materials, chemicals,
containers and finished products from various industrial units need to be promoted by the
IWT mode. Since many agencies are currently depending solely on the road and rail modes
of transports the new alternative will be able to reduce the road congestions, accidents and
dependency on rail movement which is now facing congestion, lack of stalks etc., leading
to delays. (Para 91)
The Committee observes that National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) is
contributing to the IWT a good share of its raw material movement at many of its thermal
power stations. Since the road and railway networks are causing hindrances for imported
coal movement due to shortage of rakes and congestion at ports, the IWT mode is found
to be more suitable for NTPC. The Committee recommends that NTPC’s project at
Bongaigaon and Barah should be assisted with the IWT system for coal movement and IWAI
should complete the projects within the schedule. (Para 92)
The Committee, in view of the restrictions on the movement of dangerous raw
materials of Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) by road like Ammonia,
Benzene, Sulphuric acid, etc., recommends that, the opportunity may be explored for
enhancing the cargo transportation in the NW-3. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that IWAI should play a more proactive role for promotion of national waterways and extent
its support to such industries in their requirements by partnering such ventures.
(Para 93)
The Committee recommends that IWAI may take the matter with FACT so that bulk
movement of raw materials to its various plants could be carried out through the inland
waterway mode. The project will be able to handle the finished products of FACT also to
various parts of the country and to various sea ports. This mode will enable free movement
of materials in a more economic and hassle free manner and may be a mutual benefit for
both the agencies. (Para 94)
The Committee is of the view that Food Corporation of India (FCI) could be a
regular beneficiary of the water ways as they have food grain movement round the year.
The Committee notes the initiative taken for transportation of food grains in Kolata-Tripura
through Ashugang. The Committee recommends that IWAI should make a feasibility report
on the movement of food grains through IWT mode on other parts of the country and the
additional facilities required also should be identified so that FCI could be made an active
beneficiary of the waterways. (Para 95)
CONNECTIVITY TO PORTS
The Committee recommends that linking of ports in Karnataka, Gujarat and Tamil

25
Nadu also should be worked out as these states are having in-bound and out-bound bulk
cargo potential. The Committee recommends for developing the West coast –
Kandla,Mumbai, Murmogao, Kochi – and East coast – Kolkata, Paradip, Vishakhapatnam,
Chennai – coastal freight corridors. Investing in these corridors will augment scale and
improve the economics for coastal shipping, making it an attractive alternative to other
modes. Also, it will improve last mile road and rail connectivity to and from ports.
(Para 96)
The Committee is of the view that there is a need to encourage inland water
transport for movement of containers from various ports. It also reduces the costs and
time, if the staking of the customs examined containers directly to the ship. This might
enable to decongest the already congested roads and the transaction costs. (Para 97)
The Committee is of the view that if Central and State Governments concerned take
the necessary steps for the promotion of coastal transportation, the free movement of cargo
in a cost-effective manner will benefit the EXIM trade in the country. (Para 98)
The Committee also recommends that as in the case of Vallarpadam Terminal, all the
other Ports including private ports of the country may be connected with the Inland Water
Transport System so that cargo movement from ports to other part of the territory can be
met in a cost effective manner. (Para 99)
INDO-BANGLADESH PROTOCOL ON IWT
The Committee is of the view that container mode of transport should be promoted
in the area using multi-modal transit route through Bangladesh, which may ease the
transport of essential commodities to the North Eastern States of the country. Already NE
Region is suffering connectivity handicap with the mainland India. The Committee
observes that the land route currently being used for the purpose through the chicken
neck is over-stretched. The Committee recommends that Containers Corporation of India
(CONCOR) may take the initiatives in establishing necessary terminals for the purpose.
(Para 100)
The Committee also recommends that for establishing arrangements through
Bangladesh, the pre requisite is to develop a river port at Ashuganj, on the Meghana River.
The road network connecting Ashuganj with the check-posts also need to be widened for
ease of traffic there. Round the clock navigation facilities need to be provided in the
protocol routes, if feasible, in all aspects. (Para 101)
INDO-MYANMAR KALADAN MULTIMODAL TRANSIT TRANSPORT PROJECT
The Committee has been informed that Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport
Project will connect the eastern Indian seaport of Kolkata with Sittwe port in Myanmar by
sea; it will then link Sittwe to Mizoram via river and road transport. This project will reduce
distance from Kolkata to Sittwe by approximately 1328 km and will reduce the need to
transport good through the narrow Siliguri corridor. The Committee recommends that Indo-
Myanmar Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project may be considered for
implementation. (Para 102)

26
MERGING OF CIWTC WITH IWAI
The Committee observes that periodically the assets and work assignments of
CIWTC were taken over by the IWAI without absorbing the employees working on those
assets and work assignments. This has finally resulted in the accumulation of large
numbers of employees without any work. The Committee therefore recommends that the
IWAI should correct the mistake it has committed over these years and should come
forward to take the service of the experienced staff of CIWTC in the IWT sector.
(Para 103)
In this connection the Committee has conveyed its concern to the Government from
time to time. In its 177
th Report, the Committee has again and again considered the matter
observed and the Committee had expressed its concern over the future of persons working
in CIWTC. The Committee hoped that the staff of CIWTC would not be forced to opt VRS
against individual’s will and CIWTC would be merged with IWAI if the assets of CIWTC
were taken over by it. The Committee also recommended that till the merger process is
completed adequate funds and manpower be made available to CIWTC to carry out its
operations. (Para:104)
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes that National Inland Navigation Institute (NINI) is providing
various courses required in the water transport and aquatic navigation, dredging repair and
maintenance of vessels, etc. The Committee hopes NINI is able to solve the shortage of
vessel pilots as faced by the Major Ports of the country also. The Committee recommends
that the curriculum and the courses offered must reflect the future requirements of the
country. (Para 105)
CRUISE TOURISM
River cruise tourism is a major tourist attraction with enormous potential for further
development in places like Guwahati, Goa, Mumbai, Kolkata and Kerala. The house boats and small
boats are also catering to the tourism needs. The Committee feels that the tourism will get
required boost when the waterways are fully developed and linked properly with various
Ports of the country. This factor, therefore, should be kept in mind while planning for
expansion and development of water transport in the country. (Para 106)
The Committee would like to draw attention in this respect towards development of
tourism circuit proposed in Alappuzha, which is a river/backwater tourism spot for which the
Government of Kerala has planned a mega circuit project for development of backwaters
and the same is under consideration of the Ministry of Tourism for the grant of central
financial assistance. The Committee would like to know response of the Union Ministry in
this regard. (Para 107)
The Committee observes that the river tourism offers multi faceted tourism potential
like hotel barges, river cruise ships, canal tourism, private boats, pilgrim tourism etc.
Currently only a very few stretches of the country are utilizing the potential in a limited
manner. The Committee recommends that states that have water transport potential may
be sensitized to come forward with more river tourism projects and IWAI may assist the

27
States and Ministry of Tourism for making the efforts a success. This may boost the
revenue earnings from the inland waterways in the country. (Para 108)
MANAGEMENT OF IWAI
The Committee observes that the current organizational set up of the IWAI is not
sufficient enough to fulfill its objectives in a wider prespective. The Committee therefore
recommends that the IWAI need to be strengthened with experts having sufficient
experience in the fields like hydrography, navigation, civil engineering, mechanical
engineering, naval architecture, transport economics for the development and management
of the waterways, rather than it be made a dumping ground for the Civil Servants.
(Para 109)

MINUTES

30

31
II
SECOND MEETING
The newly constituted Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18 th October, 2012 in
Room No. 074, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
6. Dr. Kruparani Killi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shrimati Ranee Narah
9. Shri Prabodh Panda
10. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar Sinha, Secretary
2. Shri Sunil Kohli, JS and FA
3. Shri M.C. Jauhari, JS (S)
4. Shri N. Muruganandam, JS (P)
5. Shri C.B. Singh, Adviser
6. Shri Vishwapati Tripathi, Chairman, Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI)
7. Ms. Jayashree Mukherjee, Vice-Chairperson, IWAI
8. Shri R.P. Khare, CE, IWAI
31

32
*** Relate to other matters.
9. Shri S.S. Mishra, Member (Traffic), IWAI
10. Shri Deepak Das, Member (Finance), IWAI
11. Shri S.S. Pandian, Member (Traffic), IWAI
12. Shri Manish Jain, Chairman, Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT)
13. Shri J.J. Biswas, Dy. Director, KoPT
14. Shri Ashwani Kumar, Director (Parl.)
15. Shri R. Srinivasa Naik, Director (Ports)
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and Inland  Waterways
Authority of India on the “Development of Inland Water Transport System in the country”. The
Ministry made a power point presentation regarding the present status of the National Waterways
I to 5 as well as its proposals in this regard during the Twelfth  Five Year Plan. The present
activities of the IWAI, its future expansion plans, its fleets, etc. were also discussed. Members of
the Committee were of the view that water transport, being a fuel efficient, cost effective and
environment friendly mode of transport, has not been given the required attention by the
Government. The constraints in developing our existing waterways as well as developing new ones
and the suggestions to tide them over were also discussed. Position in neighbouring countries on
the use of water transport also came up for discussion.
4. The Committee also discussed the matter of cargo movement from Bangladesh ports to
India using water transport system and the Committee was informed that Bangladesh Protocol
which expired earlier, has now been extended till March, 2014. The Committee also discussed the
dredging related issues which are causing major bottlenecks on the expansion works and utilization
of the major waterways in the country.
5. Members of the Committee raised queries on specific issues to which the concerned
officials replied. For the unanswered questions and other information sought, the Chairman directed
the officials to submit written replies to the Committee.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.20 
P.M.

33
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 3 rd January, 2013 in Committee Room
‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Prabodh Panda
9. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
***
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and extended them good wishes
for the new year 2013. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft reports on the
(i) Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety; (ii) Development of National Waterways –
Potential and Challenges; and (iii) Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim. After some
discussion the Committee adopted these reports without any modification.
33
*** Relate to other matters.

34
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again on 16 th January, 2013.
*** Relate to other matters.