Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
contained in its One Hundred Seventy Sixth Report on 
the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Tourism
 
REPORT NO. 
184
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

53
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in its One Hundred Seventy Sixth Report on
the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Tourism
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ......................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—42
5. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 43—47
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 49—52
(ii)

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-2013)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shri Khagen Das
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
@17. Dr. Kruparani Killi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
@20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
@25. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
26. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his/her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28 th October, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B, Joint Director
Smt.Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Seventy Sixth Report
on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Tourism.
2. One Hundred Seventy Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 7
th May,
2012 in Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy Sixth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism, on 6 th August, 2012.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report as its meeting held on the 5 th November
2012.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
November 5, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Kartika 14, 1934  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

(iv)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
A & N – Andaman and Nicobar
AIMTC – All India Motor Transport Congress
AOC – Air Operation Certificate
BCAS – Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
CFA – Central Financial Assistance
CII – Confederation of Indian Industry
CRF – Central Road Fund
CSS – Centrally Sponsored Scheme
DGCA – Directorate General of Civil Aviation
DoPT – Department of Personnel and Training
EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
FCI – Food Craft Institute
FEE – Foreign Exchange Earnings
FTA – Foreign Tourist Arrival
HRD – Human Resources Development
IHM – Institute of Hotel Management
IITTM – Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management
ITDC – India Tourism Development Corporation
ITTA – Indian Travel and Tourism Association
LTC – Leave Travel Concession
MCD – Municipal Corporation of Delhi
MHA – Ministry of Home Affairs
MoCA – Ministry of Civil Aviation
MoT – Ministry of Tourism
MoU – Memorandum of Understanding
NLC – National Level Consultant
PIDDC – Product Infrastructure Development of Destination and Circuits
PPP – Public Private Partnership
SLMC – State Level Monitoring Committee
TFIS – T ourist Flow Information System
UNESCO – United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization
UT – Union Territory
VGF – Viability Gap Funding

1
REPORT
1. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred Seventy Sixth Report on Demands
for Grants 2012-13 of the Ministry of Tourism which was presented to both the Houses of
Parliament on 7
th May, 2012.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on the 6 th August, 2012 in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report.
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the concerned ministries. The recommendations of
the Committee contained in the One Hundred and Seventy Sixth Report, action taken thereon by
the Ministry and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has
been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. The Committee is of the opinion that even though the Ministry was able to incur the surplus
expenditure under the scheme, it is equally important is to know reasons for excess expenditure
as the desired targets have not been achieved in terms of creation of infrastructural facilities and
the resultant tourist arrivals. The Committee also emphasizes the need for a thorough review of the
physical achievements made on the infrastructure projects of the Ministry during the Eleventh Plan
period.
(Recommendation at Para 11 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
6. Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits (PIDDC) is the only
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) of Ministry of Tourism (MOT). MOT received more project
proposals for prioritization from various States and UTs, compared to the Budget allocation under
this scheme. Hence, the savings from the other schemes were utilized.
7. Ministry of Tourism monitors the implementation of projects through Regional Conferences,
field inspections by the officers of the Ministry and periodical review meetings taken by senior
officers of MOT with the State/UT officers.
8. During 2011, 6.29 million foreign tourists visited the country with an increase of 8.9% over
2010. During 2011 an amount of `16.56 billion US$ was the Foreign Exchange Earnings (FEE),
with an increase of 16.7% over 2010.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
9. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
10. The Committee notes that the work of the “Integrated Development of Buddhist Circuit at

2
Lalitagiri, Ratnagiri, Udyagiri and Langudi” in Odisha was sanctioned during the Tenth Plan period
and is still going on. In the past also, the Committee has drawn the attention of the Ministry of
Tourism to a number of projects which were taken up and crores of rupees were invested therein
but could not be completed and later on, were dropped. This results in wastage of taxpayers
money and country’s scarce resources. The Committee also desire that information regarding the
status of projects sanctioned before the Eleventh plan period which are still continuing may be
submitted to the Committee. The Committee also recommends that the projects involving large
amount of investment should be monitored carefully during the implementation stage itself to ensure
that work is completed in time and investment made therein do not go waste.
(Recommendation at Para 12 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
11. The State Government of Odisha was sanctioned ‘740.67 lakhs for the “Integrated
Development of Buddhist Circuit at Lalitagiri, Ratnagiri, Udayagiri and Langudi” during the
Financial Year 2004-05, in the Tenth Plan Period. However, only an amount of `592.52 lakhs was
released. The project has been completed by the State Government of Odisha within the released
amount.
12. As per the policy, monitoring system of the projects sanctioned by the Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India is already in vogue. State Level Monitoring Committees are set up under the
Chairmanship of the respective Secretary (Tourism) of the State/UT Government. This Committee
consists of a nominee of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India and a nominee of the
implementing agency. This committee monitors the physical and financial progress of the
sanctioned projects and submits the reports to the Ministry on regular basis.
13. The instructions of the Committee have been noted for future compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
14. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee also notes with satisfaction that the
“Integrated Development of Buddhist Circuit at Lalitagiri, Ratnagiri, Udayagiri and
Langudi” in Odisha has been completed by the State Government that making a saving of
about `150 lakhs.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee recommends that the proposal of the State Government of Madhya Pradesh
for developing Jabalpur as a mega circuit for development of tourist infrastructure may be taken
up by the Ministry of Tourism at the earliest.
(Recommendation at Para 13 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
16. The project proposal for development of Jabalpur as a mega circuit has been received in
the Ministry and is under examination.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee however recommends that the
proposal for development of Jabalpur as a mega circuit be processed expeditiously and
approved for execution of work.

3
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
18. The Committee notes that out of the allocation of `25.65 crores, the Ministry could spend
only `20.78 crores. The Committee also notes that the Ajanta-Ellora project has not yet completed
as some major work on the part of ADI, MTDC and MJP are pending. It is expected to be
completed by July, 2013. The Committee emphazies the need for proper Monitoring and
coordination be ensured with all agencies concerned to complete the project on time.
(Recommendation at Para 16 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
19. Ministry of Tourism has been monitoring and reviewing the Project regularly with
Archaeological Survey of India, Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation, Japan International
Cooperation Agency and Project Consultants M/S Tata Consultancy Services and Oriental
Consultants.
20. The Secretary, Ministry of Tourism held a review meeting on 8.5.2012, wherein all
stakeholders were invited and new timelines were fixed to complete the pending components. It
was decided that all those components of the project which can be implemented will be completed
by 30
th September, 2012 and OC-TCS will submit the Project Closure Report by 30 th September,
2012. All concerned were also directed to expedite completion of respective components and
instructed to send monthly reports regarding the progress made in executing the remaining
components.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
21. The Committee wants to know the current status of the Ajanta-Ellora project as the
work was to be completed by 30
th September, 2012.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22. The Committee notes that Assistance of IHMs/FCIs/IITTM etc. was `495.00 crores as per
Planning Commission outlays but the actual allocation was `387.70 crores only but actual
expenditure being `393.43 crores. Thus, there is over spending. The Committee, however, is not
convinced with the achievement in ratio of the expenditure. There is need for more focused
approach and opening of more institutes for this purpose.
(Recommendation at Para 18 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
23. 17 New State IHMs and 17 New FCIs were sanctioned during the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
On receipt of the project proposal from State/UT Governments, sanction for setting up of State
IHMs or FCIs is considered, subject to adherence to the terms and conditions of scheme
guidelines, their inter-se priority and availability of funds.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
24. The Committee constrained to say that Ministry’s reply is casual in nature and
provided no clear picture about the opening of new IHMs and FCI which were sanctioned
during in Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee may be informed of the latest status in
this regard.

4
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee notes the cuts made in the outlay for Capacity Building for Service
Providers Scheme where in the outlay stands at `95.00 crores and the allocations are `89.00
crores. The actual expenditure of `67.79 crores shows that total allocations could not be utilized
by the end of the Plan period. This is disappointing mainly because Ministry of Tourism is
underutilizing the fund meant for skill development at a time when India is faced with huge
shortage of trained and skilled people in the tourism and hospitality industry. We must have
functional linkages with need of the industry and academic institutions specially IHMs, IITTM,
CCI, NIWS, etc.
(Recommendation at Para 20 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
26. The underutilization of funds under the CBSP Scheme has been only during the year 2007-08
and 2008-09. The low expenditure under the scheme during this period is attributable to the fact
that scheme was relatively new in its operation and was still not known universally. Further, the
scheme as it existed in 2007-08 and 2008-09 generally targeted service providers at lower strata.
Often their day to day compulsions overwhelmed their need for skill upgradation. Even an
allowance of `100/- per day per trainee specific to short duration courses, to partly offset the wage
loss was not very attractive. The CBSP Scheme was therefore reviewed and revised so as to
enlarge its scope and provide for a much larger governmental intervention and pro activism. During
2008-09, a new programme titled Hunar Se Rozgar to create employable skills amongst minimum
8th pass youth in the age group of 18 to 25 years was launched. This scheme has been successful
and is now being implemented through MoT sponsored Institutes, State Governments and
Hotels. As a result the allocated funds have been fully utilized during the year 2009-10, 2010-11
and 2011-12.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27. The Committee hopes that the entire allocation made for the scheme Capacity
Building for Service Providers would be utilized by the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee, while appreciating efforts to tap tourism market overseas, the growing
domestic market should not get ignored. The Committee feels that there is a need for being little
careful in utilizing funds for this purpose as on overseas promotion an over expenditure of `145
crores in 2011-12, has been noticed. The Committee would like to have a clarification in this
regard.
(Recommendation at Para 22 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
29. Ministry of Tourism has been undertaking various measures to promote Domestic Tourism.
These include:
(i) Release of Media Campaigns to promote tourism within the country with focus on the
North Eastern Region and the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(ii) Release of Print advertisements and advertorials in various publications for promoting
tourism destinations and products of the country.

5
(iii) Extending financial assistance to State Governments and Union Territory
Administrations for organizing fairs, festivals and events which have the potential for
attracting tourists.
(iv) Participating in major travel fairs and exhibitions in the country for disseminating
information on tourism destinations and products to the domestic trade and consumers.
(v) Producing publicity material on tourism destinations and products which is widely
distributed through the domestic India tourism offices.
30. These efforts for tapping the domestic market will continue during the Twelfth Plan period
as well.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. It appears to be an attempt to
misguide the Committee as no information has been provided regarding overseas spending.
The Committee recommends that the details of the overseas spending to promote tourism
may be provided to the Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
32. In the case of Incentives to Accommodation Infrastructure, the Committee noted that the
total allocations have been considerably reduced, mere `66 crore was allocated out of `235 crore
outlay. The committee feels that during Eleventh Plan period of the project was not properly
implemented by the Ministry as per the expenditure pattern and this late hour wake up for more
allocations could have been avoided. The Government has identified that there is a shortage of
2,26,040 hotel rooms by 2016. In such a scenario underutilizing the fund meant for creating
accommodation infrastructure reflects that there is something wrong. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to revisit this programme during the Twelfth Plan period so that more funds are
allocated in the coming years and utilized it effectively.
(Recommendation at Para 23 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
33. Considering a great demand for the budget accommodation by domestic as well as
international tourists it is felt to formulate an innovative scheme called “Incentive Scheme for
Budget Hotels” to encourage construction of adequate budget hotels in Public Private Partnership
(PPP) mode, with new and innovative parameters with focus on creation of additional rooms in
the budget category.
34. The Ministry of Tourism approached the Ministry of Finance for continuation of the scheme
beyond 31.03.2008. However, during the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) meeting held on
12.12.2008 it was observed that one of the issues that needed to be addressed is the non-
availability of sites at reasonable rates for budget hotels. EFC observed that “The Scheme needs
to be re-worked so that it addresses the real issues in the sector and a revised scheme that
proposes meaningful interventions could be framed by the Ministry and proposed for consideration
of the EFC”.
35. In this regard, the Ministry of Tourism has forwarded the details of the Scheme to the
Planning Commission for “In Principle” approval.

6
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
36. The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry should pursue with
the Planning Commission and other relevant agencies to ensure that the proposal is through.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The spending pattern on the computerization and Information technology is also very poor
as the total expenditure stands at `57.30 crores out of outlay of `121.00 crores and allocation of
`83.50 crores. In this case also the Committee noticed a reduction of about 1/3 on the allocations
in comparison to the total outlay.
38. The Committee notes that lack of fund is not a hindrance to technological advancement.
What is lacking is the required willpower to implement the programmes and utilize the money
effectively. The Committee recommends that the detailed review may be made to ascertain, in the
age of technological advancement where most of the tourist promotion are dependant on websites
why Ministry of Tourism is unable to tap the potential.
(Recommendation at Para 24 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
39. The funds allocated under the head ‘Computerization and Information Technology’ are
utilized for:
(i) Releasing Online Media Campaigns in the domestic and international markets.
(ii) Providing Central Financial Assistance to State Governments and UT Administrations
for Computerization and IT related proposals.
(iii) Maintaining and updating promotional websites of the Ministry of Tourism.
40. The utilization of funds under this head remained low since the Ministry, due to various
reasons, could not release online campaigns in the international markets during the years 2009-10
and 2010-11. Moreover, expenditure incurred on providing central financial assistance to States/UTs
is dependent upon proposals and utilization certificates received from them.
41. However, the Ministry ran a Global Online Media Campaign at the cost of `23.53 crore and
a Domestic Online Media Campaign at the cost of `1.00 crore during 2011-12 and also completely
revamped the promotional websites of the Ministry i.e.  www.incredibleindia.org  and
www.atithi.org.in .
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
42. The Government should not be satisfied by merely spending of plan outlays of its
different schemes, rather it should be linked to the physical achievement of the scheme.
The Committee desires to know the details of Global Online Media Campaign.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The total spending for Market Research including 20 years Perspective Plan stands at
`14.49 crores, whereas the expenditure is `19.50 crores. The Committee notes that States like
Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, West Bengal, Odisha, J&K and Rajasthan which are having
greater tourism potential were not covered. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
remaining States need to be included in the next phase.
(Recommendation at Para 26 of 176
th Report)

7
Reply of the Government
44. The collection of State level domestic tourism statistics is the responsibility of the
concerned State Governments/Union Territory (UT) Administrations. However, some States like
Delhi, Maharashtra, etc. do not have a mechanism of data collection due to lack of manpower and
required infrastructure.
45. In order to improve the quality of tourism statistics the Ministry of Tourism (MoT) has
taken the initiative of conducting State Tourism Surveys in some States.
46. In the Eleventh Plan, the first phase of State Tourism Surveys covering 5 States of Andhra
Pradesh, Delhi, Jharkhand, Maharashtra and Punjab was conducted from July, 2009 – June, 2010.
The second phase covering another five States of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh and Sikkim started from April/June, 2011.
47. The States which were covered during the Tenth Plan included Assam, Bihar, Goa,
Karnataka, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.
48. Apart from conducting such surveys, through its own panel of consultants, MoT also
provides Central Financial Assistance to the States to conduct surveys on their own. MoT is
supporting a three year Continuous Tourism Survey in the State of Kerala. The first phase of this
survey was conducted from 2008 to 2010; the second phase from 2011 to 2013 is currently
ongoing.
49. The State of Gujarat has a systematic data collection mechanism of “Tourist Flow
Information System” (TFIS) wherein field survey is conducted at 38 destinations, every month;
hence a separate survey for Gujarat is not required.
50. MOT is exploring the possibility of covering the following (remaining) 15 States and UTs
in the next phase of the Survey, subject to the approval of competent authority and willingness of
the State Government/Union Territory Administration:
51. Andaman and Nicobar (A & N) Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Chandigarh, Daman and Diu,
Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep Islands, Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), Manipur Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland, Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and West Bengal.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee notes the reply and desires to know the details of various agencies
engaged for the survey works. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should monitor
the survey closely to ensure that it is done in all the States/UTs without any hindrance.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
53. The Committee noted that Assistance to Large Revenue Generating Projects received a
lukewarm response from private investors. The Ministry has submitted that now it has proposed
to include projects such as hotels, amusement parks, theme parks etc. within the ambit of the
scheme. In view of poor response received for the Assistance to Large Revenue generating Projects
as accepted by the Ministry itself, the Committee recommends that the scheme be reviewed and
redesign and the new guidelines may be framed to attract more entrepreneurs to utilize the scheme.
(Recommendation at Para 27 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
54. This scheme was formulated with an objective to attract private investments in large

8
revenue generating tourism projects such as tourist trains, cruise vessels, convention centres, golf
courses, etc. These projects are envisaged to be implemented with public private partnership (PPP)
and viability gap funding (VGF) provided by the MoT. Since the scheme did not get a good
response, the Working Group on Tourism for Twelfth Plan recommended the revision of the
guidelines to make it more attractive. It has been proposed to include projects such as hotels,
amusement parks, theme parks, etc. within the ambit of this scheme. Working Group has also
recommended the enhancement of viability gap funding to 40% of the equity contribution of the
promoters in the PPP mode from the existing level of 25%. After the approval of Twelfth Plan by
the Planning Commission the necessary action will be taken in this matter.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The committee also wants to know the other areas where the PPP funding has
enhanced.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee notes that creation of Land Bank for Hotels could not pick up during the
Eleventh Plan period as the amount of `12.02 crores actually allocated for the purpose remained
fully unutilized at the end of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee recommends that this project may
be reviewed so that amount, though symbolic, of `1.00 crore for the year 2012-13 earmarked for
the purpose is utilized.
(Recommendation at Para 29 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
57. Ministry of Tourism has been in regular touch with the State Governments and the various
Land Owning Agencies for creation of land banks. In order to make domestic tourism more
affordable, the Ministry of Tourism has advised the State Governments/UT Administrations not to
resort to the auctioning of hotel sites as auctioning hotel sites at a very high reserve price makes
the project unviable, to encourage construction of hotel accommodation including that in the budget
category by following – investor friendly land policies by giving land on long lease, granting extra
Floor Space Index (FSI)/Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for Hotels, Creation of Land Banks etc., permitting
extra commercial usage in the hotels etc., so that budget hotels are promoted. These agencies have
also been asked to allocate land on Joint Venture/Revenue Sharing basis and also to provide
incentives and benefits to facilitate the growth of the accommodation sector in the country.
58. The Committee’s recommendation to review the project of “Creation of Land Bank for
Hotels” 2012-13 has been taken for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
59. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee however hopes that pending review
of the project of “Creation of Land Bank for Hotels, the Government will ensure that there
is no lapse in the effort for growth of accommodation sector.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
60. The Committee observes that Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure
Development was provided extra allocations of `7.01 crores over and above the total outlay of `25
crores, i.e. `32.01 crores whereas the spending stands only at ‘20.51 crores. The Committee feels
that this is the result of poor planning and implementation of the project. The Committee also

9
recommends that if there is any bottlenecks at the administrative level for the scheme, it should
be properly revisited and necessary corrective measures need to be taken.
(Recommendation at para 31 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
61. Recently, the scheme was revised and the scope of the scheme was expanded to include
Central Ministries such as Ministry of Railways as an Implementing Agency. Further, Convention
Centre was also included under permissible list of activities of the scheme. The revision of the
scheme was done in view of the fact that many Central Agencies like Port Trust etc. have large
amount of land which can be used for development of tourism infrastructure. The upgradation of
facilities at selected Railway Stations would be also covered in this scheme.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62. The Committee feels that Port Trusts have to play an active role in promoting cruise
tourism in the concerned State/region. The Committee would like to know the progress
made in implementing the scheme.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63. The Committee appreciates the optimism reflected in the Ministry’s higher targets
specifically for Foreign Tourist Arrival, Domestic Tourist Arrival, Foreign Exchange earnings and
employment generation from tourism during the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee recommends
that Planning Commission may be persuaded not to reduce the allocation so that the objectives of
Twelfth Plan are achieved.
(Recommendation at Para 37 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
64. MOT is vigorously pursuing with Planning Commission for enhancement of budgetary
allocation for MOT during Twelfth Plan period keeping in view the importance of tourism as a
Foreign Exchange Earner and employment generation sector. Hon’ble Minister of Tourism has
already written letters to Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, Finance Minister and Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission in this connection.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee recommends that Planning Commission, in view of the importance of
Tourism sector, enhance the allocations suitably.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
66. As regards the imparting ‘pro-poor approach’ during Twelfth Plan aimed at increasing net
benefit to the poor from tourism and poverty reduction, the Committee finds it better said than
done. It may be theoretically unquestionable but it is practically difficult to achieve. We should
always aim at something that is in the realm of possibilities and closer to ground realities.
(Recommendation at Para 38 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
67. Ministry of Tourism has proposed to adopt ‘Pro-poor tourism’ for development and
promotion of tourism during Twelfth Five Year Plan as envisaged in the approach paper of Planning

10
Commission. MOT’s Flagship scheme ‘Hunar-se-Rozgar’ is aimed at skill development in hospitality
and service sector. This scheme is directed to create employable skills among 8th class pass youth.
MOT has already trained 11,692 persons under the scheme during 2011-12 which is more than the
target set for the year.
68. Ministry of Tourism also proposed the development of integrated tourism circuits for
holistic development of tourism infrastructure in the country. It has been proposed to identify major
tourist circuits/destinations/cities having potential to attract large number of tourists. It will also
ensure to promote local arts, cultural trades, handicrafts to generate livelihoods in the identified
regions through involvement of local level community participation.
69. Apart from the above, during 12th plan, promotion of Rural Tourism will be done through
a cluster approach rather than stand alone approach. Promotion of Rural Tourism helps in
employment generation, enhancing earning capacity, check migration and better livelihood for the
rural population. Rural tourism also helps in inclusive development in remote and backward areas.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
70. The Committee finds the ‘pro-poor’ approach, the scheme ‘Hunar-se-Rozgar’ and
promotion of rural tourism are attractive and hopes that these schemes do not meet the
fate as such schemes normally do.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
71. As for employment figures in tourism given above, the committee would like to know what
kind of employment and for how long and with what income. We should avoid making vague
claims in respect of employment in tourism sector. The committee would like to have full facts
about this data with necessary details.
72. The Committee is not aware of the mode of collection of data on employment in tourism.
Regarding employment, whether it is remunerative employment or otherwise is not known to the
Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the method of collection of data and on
employment in tourism sector and the organizations involved in it may be furnished to the
Committee. The Committee may also be intimated about the details of the sector wise employment
in tourism sector.
(Recommendations at paras 39 and 40 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
73. The figures of employment mentioned are those for the Hospitality Sector (Hotels –
classified and unclassified, eating outlets, Tour Operators, Travel Agents and Medical and Wellness
units) and not the Tourism Sector as a whole. The basis of these figures is a Study titled “Study
to assess the requirement of Manpower in Hospitality and Travel Trade Sector”, commissioned by
the Ministry of Tourism to M/s Market Pulse Pvt. Limited.
74. The segments covered in the Study are Hotels – classified and unclassified, eating outlets,
Tour Operators, Travel Agents and Medical and Wellness units.
75. The primary field survey, for the study, was carried out in 37 cities, important from tourist
point of view. A total of 400 classified hotels, 1000 unclassified hotels, 2000 restaurants, 30
Medical/wellness establishments, 250 Travel and Tour Operators and 150 Hotel Management and
Travel and Tour Institutes were covered in the Study.
76. The segment-wise details of the employment, in Hospitality Sector, as estimated from the
Study are as follows:

11
(Rs. in Lakh )
Segments 2011-12 2012-13 2016-17
4 Star upwards Hotels 1.78 1.92 3.66
1 – 3 Star Hotels 1.17 1.26 2.11
Unclassified Hotels 11.75 12.67 19.93
Motels 6.9 7.44 8.49
All Hotels 21.6 23.29 34.19
Eating Outlets 20.2 21.77 25.49
Travel and Tour 1.03 1.11 1.27
Medical and Wellness 1.01 1.09 2.84
TOTAL : 43.84 47.26 63.79
77. Some facts about the employment pattern, across the Hospitality Sector, as revealed by the
Study are as follows:
1. Housekeeping, followed by F&B and front office, together account for 68% of the
workforce in the hotels industry. Administration and security are the other large
functions by employment.
2. The unclassified accommodation units have a larger proportion of temporary employees
at 17%. This is particularly high in functions such as EDP, security, maintenance,
laundry and even housekeeping.
3. In restaurants and other eating outlets, F&B service closely followed by the kitchen
account for close to 70% of all employees.
4. Approximately 21% of the employees in restaurants are temporary.
5. In travel and tour firms, tours and ticketing functions employ half the total workforce,
followed by accounts and administration.
6. The travel agencies and tour operators reported temporary employment to the extent
of 10% and 25% respectively.
7. Managerial staff account for only 16% of the employee strength in key functions of
both hotels and restaurants. This was reported to be higher in travel trade and stood
at 21%.
78. The average income in Hospitality Sector varies with the functional domain and level of
operation. It also varies across different segments of the Hospitality Sector and type of
establishment.
79. For illustration average salary for the F&B service domain of accommodation units segment,
in 2010, as available from the Study, is given as under:

12
Accommodation Units F&B Service: Average Salary per month (in Rs.)
4 Star upwards 1-3  Star Unclassified
Hotels Units/Motels
Director 108333 28200 26143
F&B Managers 54941 15912 10086
Restaurant Managers 26974 14239 14226
Banquet Manager 32625 14175 14462
Bar Manager 15907 10627 14089
Captains 11777 8075 6451
Stewards 7879 5527 4470
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80. The Committee notes the reply which is quite informative.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
81. The Committee is concerned to note that against projected amount of `2000 crores, only
an amount of `1210 crores has been approved by the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission for
2012-13 that is going to drastically affect various future plans for growth of tourism proposed by
the Ministry of Tourism. Since the tourism inflow is expected to be doubled by the end of the
Twelfth Plan period. Keeping in view various targets fixed by the Ministry regarding the
requirement of additional infrastructure, manpower and other facilities, tourist flow, etc., the
Committee recommends that additional funds may be earmarked for the Ministry of Tourism so that
their future development plans may be progressed as proposed.
(Recommendation at para 46 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
82. Ministry of Tourism appreciates the understanding of the Standing Committee that there is
an additional requirement of funds to reach the various targets fixed by MOT in terms of
infrastructure, manpower, Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) etc. MOT has already taken up this issue
with Hon’ble Prime Minister, Finance Minister and Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission for
enhancing the Outlay for 2012-13.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
83. The Committee would likes to know the latest position in this regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
84. The Committee notes that RE allocation of `582.99 crore for Product/Infrastructure
Development for Destination and Circuits was made in 2011-12. The allocation was optimally
utilized to `567.23 crores upto February 2012 with the likelihood of remaining allocation to be
utilised by March, 2012. The Committee, however, is of the view that spending the entire allocation
should not be the only criteria of success of the scheme, it should also be measured in terms of
actual infrastructure it has established.

13
85. The Committee appreciates that State Level Monitoring Committees (SLMC) have been set
up to regularly review the progress of tourism infrastructure projects. The Committee, however,
recommends that SLMCs in all the States should be created and it’s monitoring done at regular
intervals to check the progress of projects.
(Recommendation at Paras 57 and 58 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
86. Development, promotion, implementation and monitoring of tourism projects are primarily
the responsibility of the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations (UTs). Ministry of
Tourism provides financial assistance for tourism projects based on the proposals received from
them which are complete in all respects as per the Scheme Guidelines, inter-se priority and subject
to availability of funds. Tourism projects to be funded by Ministry of Tourism are decided in
consultation with the States/UTs in prioritization meetings held every year.
87. However, MOT gives emphasis not only on the approval of the tourism projects but also
monitors the implementation of projects through Regional Conferences, field inspections by the
officers of the Ministry and periodical review meetings taken by senior officers of MOT with the
State/UT officers.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
88. The Committee feels that approval process has to be made quicker and monitoring
mechanism more effective.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
89. For identifying tourist circuits and destinations, there is need to make the States proactive
by giving them assistance in selecting the same in each States so that it is spread evenly throughout
the country.
(Recommendation at para 59 of 176th Report)
Reply of the Government
90. Ministry of Tourism has appointed a National Level Consultant (NLC) to identify the
integrated tourism circuits and rural clusters in each State (except those in North Eastern States)
and Union Territories. The NLC is identifying the tourism circuits and rural clusters in consultation
with the States/UTs. Other tourism project proposals are also submitted by the States/UTs
themselves. MOT prioritizes them every year in consultation with them.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
91. The Committee desires that National Level Consultant will be able to complete the
job assigned to it as soon as possible for early approval, etc.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
92. The Committee notes that the scheme covers a vast array of infrastructure for which funds
could be utilized such as cruise terminal, adventure facilities, waste/sewage management, signage,
etc. The Committee recommends that the scheme needs to be publicized and effective coordination
with various Ministries/Departments initiated and close monitoring of proposal for development of
cruise terminal, luxury trains like palace on wheels etc. be done regularly.
(Recommendation at Para 60 of 176
th Report)

14
Reply of the Government
93. Ministry of Tourism has already circulated its Flagship Scheme of PIDDC among all States
and UTs. MOT’s other scheme like Assistance to Central Agencies and Large Revenue Generating
Projects have also been circulated to all the concerned States/UTs, various Central Agencies and
Stakeholders. All the Plan Schemes for tourism infrastructure development have been hoisted in
MOT’s official website www.tourism.gov.in. Various coordination issues are also taken up regularly
with the concerned Ministries/Organizations/Departments.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
94. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95. The Committee notes that religious tourism and pilgrimage are inherent part of Indian
Culture and people are going to pilgrimage for centuries irrespective of the fact that there exists
tourist infrastructure or not. The Committee further notes that if appropriate tourist infrastructures
are developed at all the pilgrim centres, more and more pilgrim tourists from India and abroad can
be attracted to those places. The Committee, therefore, recommends that appropriate modern tourist
infrastructure may be developed at all the pilgrim centres of the country. For this purpose Ministry
should take concerted steps to select circuits and destinations to be covered under the scheme of
Product/Infrastructure Development for Destination and Circuits.
(Recommendation at Para 61 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
96. Religious/Pilgrim Tourism is an important segment of domestic tourism in the country. India
has the unique distinction of being the birth-place of four important religions of the world—
Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism. The historic places associated with these religions are
spread all over the country. Both foreign and domestic tourists like to visit more than one place
of their religion. In view of this, Ministry of Tourism has proposed for development of various
religious circuits in the country like Buddhist Circuit, Jain Circuit, Sikh Circuit, Sufi Circuit,
Hinduism Circuit, Christianity Circuit and Sarv Dharam Circuit for national integration during the
Twelfth Plan period.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
97. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
98. The Committee came to know that the Durga Hatkati Temple situated at the Shimla District
of Himachal Pradesh is famous and thousands of pilgrims including foreigners are visiting the place
annually. The tourist facilities are lacking there and beautification works also need to be done.
Ministry of Tourism may consider the development of the temple in consultation with State
Government on priority basis to facilitate tourist pilgrims.
(Recommendation at Para 62 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
99. Development and promotion of places of tourist interest, including development and
promotion of pilgrim circuits are primarily undertaken by the State Governments/Union Territory

15
Administrations themselves. However, the Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance
(CFA) for tourism projects, identified in consultation with them, subject to availability of funds and
inter-se priority under various schemes of the Ministry. However, the State Government has not
submitted any proposal for development of Durga Hatkati Temple situated in Shimla. The remarks
of the Committee have been communicated to the State Government of Himachal Pradesh for an
appropriate action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
100. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
101. The Committee is of the view that the development of tourism clusters in rural areas is a
welcome initiative. The Indian traditional arts and crafts are now a days on the verge of extinction
and such a step is required to rejuvenate the traditional artisans and cottage industry of the country
which are now sidelined and finding it difficult to face to competition posed by the global products
and trends. The Government, however, has to take concrete action to ensure that the benefits of
tourism growth under “pro-poor approach” should reach to the weaker sections of society,
particularly, the craftsmen.
(Recommendation at Para 63 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
102. The Working Group on Tourism for the Twelfth Five Year Plan in its report submitted to
the Planning Commission has proposed the introduction of a new scheme of Rural Tourism clusters
in the Twelfth Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
103. The Committee feels that it could be a very effective scheme and hopes that the
working group report will address the concerns raised by the Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
104. The Committee is also of the view that markets in the metro cities should also be developed
in collaboration with traders association and should be provided assistance from the scheme of
Product/Infrastructure Development for Destination and Circuits. In this regard the M.G. Road
market at Gangtok can be emulated as it has become a “place must visit” not for its market but
by being sold “Tourist Spot” as the place has been developed to attract tourist.
(Recommendation at Para 64 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
105. Development, promotion and implementation of tourism projects are primarily the
responsibility of the State Governments/Union T erritory Administrations. Ministry of Tourism
provides financial assistance for tourism projects based on the proposals received from them which
are complete in all respects as per the Scheme Guidelines, inter-se priority and subject to
availability of funds. Tourism projects to be funded by Ministry of Tourism are decided in
consultation with the States/UTs in prioritization meetings held every year.
106. Ministry of Tourism will consider for financial assistance in accordance with the scheme
guidelines for the tourism projects for development of MG Road Market at Gangtok, if the proposal
is received from the State Government.

16
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
107. The Committee notes that the Ministry is totally indifferent towards the
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should
be proactive in developing tourism projects on the lines of M.G. Road Market in Gangtok.
The Committee wants the Ministry of Tourism to take up the matter with the State
Government of Sikkim.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108. The Committee notes there is a regular growth in the domestic as well as foreign tourists
during the Eleventh Plan period except during 2009 because of the global recession as informed
by the Ministry of Tourism. Even though India has vast variety of tourist attractions from ancient
to modern, the global tourism share is less than 0.6% annually in terms of world arrivals. The
Committee feels that this percentage is just unacceptable, and what we are aiming at is to achieve
1% during the Twelfth Plan.
(Recommendation at Para 78 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
109. With a view to generating widespread awareness about the tourism destinations and
products of the country and with the objective of increasing India’s share in world tourists arrivals,
the Ministry of Tourism releases Global Media Campaigns in the Print, Television and Online Media.
These campaigns, targeted at important as well as potential source markets are being released
annually in prime print publications leading television channels and most popular websites/portals,
with a view to ensuring maximum reach and visibility. Besides, the Ministry promotes various
tourism destinations and products of the country through its 14 overseas offices, inter-alia by
organizing Road Shows, Know India Seminars, undertaking outdoor branding, participating in
important Fairs and Events abroad, inviting media personalities, tour operators and opinion makers
to visit the country under the hospitality Programme of the Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
110. The Committee feels that the overseas campaign strategy of the Government has not
proved effective enough to boost up the foreign tourist inflow as the share of foreign tourist
arrival stagnating around 0.6% in terms of world arrival. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the overseas promotion scheme may be reviewed for better results.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
111 The Committee notes that the expenditure incurred up to February 2012 is `194.26 crores
for overseas promotion. The Committee is of the view that the expenditure is not commensurate
with the return in the form of number of foreign tourist arrivals i.e. 5.78 million in 2010. The
Committee is surprised that with so many attractions-religious, tourist, health etc.-why we have not
been able to attract enough tourists to India. The Ministry’s efforts should have to be to tap this
potential. Here again, the Committee have doubts about the overseas promotion campaigns. The
Committee recommends that the Government must have re-look into the necessity of various
tourism promotion offices abroad and the efficacy of various officials under Overseas Promotion
and Publicity.
(Recommendation at Para 79 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
112 The Ministry of Tourism has started a programme of special briefing of officers who get

17
posted abroad. They are given in house training for making effective presentations and learning
market trends etc. The performance of various overseas offices is now being monitored against
such objective parameters. Further in order to enhance the reach of India Tourism promotion and
marketing the Ministry plans to appoint India Tourism Marketing Representatives (ITMR) in 16
major tourist generating markets like Russia, Brazil, South Korea, Sweden, Spain, Thailand, Israel,
Turkey, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Malaysia, New Zealand, Sri Lanka, Iran and Switzerland.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
113. The Committee’s specific recommendation could not evoke a specific reply, it is quite
ambiguous. The reply did not give any details of the impact of the overseas offices on
tourist arrivals in India. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the
Government must have a re-look into the necessity of various tourism promotion offices
abroad.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
114. The Committee notes that one of the reasons for low tourist arrival could be lack of
cleanliness among others. The committee further notes that only `10.00 crores have been made
available under this head for Clean India Campaign. The Committee is of the view that a substantial
part of the allocation under this head may be diverted for ‘Clean India Campaign’ as the tourist
will come only when our tourist places are clean and well maintained. With focused approach for
cleanliness once our tourist destinations/infrastructural facilities reach the world standard more and
more tourists will come. However, for this purpose discussions should be also held with the State
and local agencies to make it more effective at the grass-root level.
(Recommendation at Para 80 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
115. Funds from other Schemes of the Ministry, if required, would be diverted after following
the due procedure for Campaign Clean India. The Ministry fully appreciates the views of the
Hon’ble Committee. On 20
th December, 2011 a workshop with various stakeholders was organized
and their recommendations were solicited to raise the level of cleanliness and hygiene. The Ministry
earnestly is working on the same.
116. The Ministry has already entered into MOU with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the
Ministry of Railways, agreeing on the areas of co-operation for taking up tourism destinations
under Campaign Clean India. Hon’ble Minister for Tourism has written letters to the Chief Ministers
of all State Governments urging them to keep the tourist destinations in their respective State clean
and join hands with the Ministry of Tourism in Campaign Clean India.
117. Meetings have also been held with the Department of Post to create awareness about
cleanliness and hygiene through postal stationeries in the country. ITDC has adopted Qutab Minar
as a pilot project under Campaign Clean India to keep the monument clean and hygienic. Delhi
Tourism has put up a map of Delhi for the help of tourists at Qutab Minar. MCD has also been
attending the meetings in this regard convened by ITDC. I ndian Institut es of Hotel Management
have adopted 10 monuments under Campaign Clean India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
118. The Committee, however, is of the view that apart from writing letters to State CMs,
there should be more concrete steps required from the part of Ministry of Tourism in
achieving this goal. The reply does not contain any interaction with ASI or Ministry of

18
Culture, in these efforts of the campaign put by the Ministry of Tourism. Similarly,
Ministry Road of Transport and Highways also could not be spared from their
responsibilities.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
119. The Committee comments that Government of Goa for the initiative to take up major
cleanup operation along Roads and beaches and hope that it will become a model to be emulated
by States in other tourists destinations.
(Recommendation at Para 81 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
120. Hon’ble Minister for T ourism has written letters to the Chief Ministers of all State
Governments including the State Government of Goa, urging them to keep the tourist destinations
in their respective State clean and join hands with the Ministry of Tourism in Campaign Clean
India.
121. In the State of Goa, following destinations have been selected under Campaign Clean India:
1. Se’ Cathedral and St. Francis Assisi Church Complex
2. Churches and Convents of Goa
3. Basilica of Bom Jesus
4. Beaches of Calangute, Baga and Colva
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
122. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of the view that cleanliness
campaign should not be restricted to a particular place as cleanliness of total surroundings
matters for to its success or failure. The Ministry of Tourism may bear this aspect in mind
while formulating the activities under the scheme.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
123. The Committee also recommends that along with aggressive marketing in this age of
technological advancement, the websites should be more attractive and interactive and secure so
that tourist can book from the site itself. This will gradually reduce the expenditure on marketing
and promotion. The Committee also recommends that redressal mechanism should be made
available in the website itself and reply should be given to the persons concerned which will also
help in the form of feedback from the visitors/ tourists for making tourism destinations in India
more responsive.
(Recommendation at Para 82 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
124. The Ministry of Tourism has undertaken total and comprehensive revamping of the
promotional websites of the Ministry www.incredibleindia.org  and www.atithi.org.in. The revamped
websites are interactive and comply with all security protocols. The website has been audited by
a CERT-IN empanelled auditor. A feedback mechanism is also available on the website. However,
there is no provision for direct financial transactions on the websites, as on date.

19
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
125. The Committee further recommends that there should be a spontaneous upgradation
of the website according to the changes in the technology.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
126. The Committee notes that the number of Indians going abroad for tourism has been on
increase with 17.4% in 2010 thereby indicating that even domestic tourists are not being attracted.
The Committee is of the view that we should try to further increase domestic tourists’ movements
in the country as well. The Committee therefore recommends that there should be a review on the
spending on the overseas and domestic promotion projects so as to ensure that domestic promotion
projects get due priority in terms of allocation of funds.
(Recommendation at Para 83 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
127. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. Various measures are being taken
to promote and increase domestic tourism within the country. These include:
(i) Release of Media Campaigns to promote tourism within the country with focus on the
North Eastern Region of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(ii) Release of Print advertisements and advertorials in various publications for promoting
tourism destinations and products of the country.
(iii) Extending financial assistance to State Governments and Union Territory
Administrations for organizing fairs, festivals and events which have the potential for
attracting tourists.
(iv) Participating in major travel fairs and exhibitions in the country for disseminating
information on tourism destinations and products to the domestic trade and consumers.
(v) Producing publicity material on tourism destinations and products which widely
distributed through the domestic Indiatourism offices.
128. These efforts for tapping the domestic market will continue during the 12th Plan period as
well.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
129. The reply of the Government is not clear about the augmented financial allocation
for domestic tourism promotion. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that more
funds may be allocated for domestic tourism promotion.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
130. The Committee notes that there are 33 Institutes of Hotel Management and 7 FCIs which
are conducting various courses of National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology
for training manpower. The Committee keeping in view the projected requirement of `47.26 lakhs
employment in 2012-13 is of the view that the IHMs and FCIs may not be able to handle the
demand. The estimates provided by the Ministry of Tourism States that the training capacity at the
end of the Eleventh Plan stands at 8342 intake for UG/PG courses, 5546 for Diploma/certificate
courses and 36340 for short duration courses. The gap in requirement and supply in 2012-13
would be 5.70 lakhs and the annual intakes at various levels are far less compared to the actual

20
manpower demand. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the new training institutes
proposed to be opened in the coming years should be on the actual requirement of manpower in
each stream. The Committee also recommends that the States which have performed well in the
promotion of tourism gets priority while selecting the places for opening such institutes. The
Committee also recommends that private sector participation wherever unavoidable, needs to be
regulated and controlled suitably if they fail to achieve the requisite standard.
(Recommendation at Para 95 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
131. The new institutes opened by the Ministry of Tourism in the Hospitality Sector are always
on the basis of actual requirement of manpower in each stream. In this regard, States which have
performed well in the promotion of tourism get priority while selecting the places for opening such
institutes. All institutes in the private sector desiring to be affiliated to the National Council for Hotel
Management and Catering Technology, are subjected to rigorous scrutiny of their infrastructure
before granting affiliation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
132. The Committee desires that Ministry of Tourism may approach State Governments to
submit their interests in opening up new institutions. Also the HRD Ministry may be
consulted to this effort so that the infrastructure available with the institution under them
could be utilized without going for additional investments for making such facilities.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
133. The Committee notes that for training manpower the Ministry of Tourism has huge task
before it. However, it is doubtful that a provision of `110.00 crore for the IHMs and `50.00 crores
for the training of personnel in the unorganized sector made in the budget will be sufficient to
meet the manpower training facilities as per the projected demand. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the Government should take steps to provide allocation adequate enough to meet
the requirement of trained personnel to serve the increasing tourism potential of the country.
(Recommendation at Para 96 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
134. The suggestion of the Committee has been noted.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
135. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
136. The Committee notes that the grants are being utilized by very few universities. The
Committee recommends that the universities all over the country may be roped in to avail the grant
and it may be given in those areas where the major tourism potential exists and States which
promotes tourism with vast intervention. The Committee also is of the view that wide publicity
should be given to the scheme so that more Universities are sanctioned the grants.
(Recommendation at Para 97 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
137. The Ministry of Tourism has sought co-operation of Secretary (Higher Education), Ministry

21
of Human Resource Development in informing all Government Universities about the scheme and
availability of Central Financial Assistance for creating infrastructure in terms of existing guidelines.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
138. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
139. The Committee notes the step taken by the Ministry to encourage Budget hotels. The
Committee is of the view that to reduce this shortage some incentives have to be given for
construction of new hotel rooms particularly in the Budget Category hotels. The Committee is also
of the view that concerted efforts need to be taken to meet the massive requirement of 22,60,040
hotels rooms by 2016. The Committee emphasizes the need for putting scientific methods in place
to collect the information regarding the actual availability of hotel accommodation in the country.
In this exercise, the State Governments/UTs as also the local bodies should be involved.
(Recommendation at Para 100 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
140. The Committee’s recommendation for the need for putting a scientific method in place to
collect the information regarding the actual availability of hotel accommodation in the country
involving the State governments/UTs and also the local bodies has been taken for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
141. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
142. The Committee, also in view of the assessment made by the Ministry on the above scheme
recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the State Governments to offer new initiates
for the creation of quality accommodation to the visiting tourists. Central assistance may be
extended for achieving this goal and the new criteria may be worked out for achieving this.
(Recommendation at Para 101 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
143. The Committee’s recommendation has been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
144. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
145. The Committee notes that the North-Eastern States are getting adequate funds in fact more
than 10% during the last three years. This has helped in creation of infrastructure and other
facilities in the region. However, the Committee feels there remains a lot to be done in terms of
provision of hotels and connectivity. The facilities are not adequate to meet the requirements of
increased number of tourists. The Committee also notes that with no five star hotels in the region,
it is resulting in loss of revenue as high end tourists are not turning up. The Committee
recommends that it is time to wake up to augment tourist facilities and for this Ministry of Tourism

22
should review their schemes and seek active participation from States to get more projects
implemented. The Committee also would like to emphasize that Tourism in North East Region is
the main source of livelihood as such it should be provided all the support from the Ministry of
Tourism.
146. The Committee how ever notes that the response to the capital subsidy scheme has not been
encouraging although potential (of setting up 2 star category hotel) is there. The Committee in this
regard reiterates its recommendations contained in its 172
nd Report which is reproduced below:
147. The Committee has observed that most of the States are not geared up for the conventional
tourism in respect of accommodation – affordable hotels and guest houses. They do not have good
and affordable accommodation, both in terms of numbers as well as quality. This was also evident
from field trips to these States. There is no Five Star Hotel in NER till date. The Committee notes
that Government of India has launched the scheme for capital subsidy of 30% for hotels (not
below 2-star category) with effect from 1
st April, 2008 for a period of five years. However, this
scheme has not been successful in this region in achieving the desired results.
(Recommendation at Paras 105 and 106 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
148. Construction of hotels is primarily a private sector activity, however, the Ministry of
Tourism under the scheme “Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits”
provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) for construction of wayside public conveniences.
Further, CFA is also provided for construction of budget accommodation to the North-Eastern
States, Jammu and Kashmir and for eco-tourism projects where private sector investment is not
forthcoming. Tourism projects to be funded by Ministry of Tourism are decided in consultation
with the States/UTs in prioritization meetings held every year.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
149. The committee is of the view that the Central Government has to be proactive and
come out with schemes which encourage the construction of budget accommodation in
North-Eastern States.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
150. The Committee, therefore, would like the Government to see as to why the funds for
setting up of convention centres are not being utilized. The Committee, also notes that despite of
enough funding in the NE region there is dearth of basic facilities there and even the projects
sanctioned by Ministry of Tourism is not getting good responses.
(Recommendation at Para 107 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
151. Development, promotion, identification and implementation/monitoring of tourist places
including Convention Centres are primarily the responsibility of the State Governments/UT
Administrations. However, Ministry of Tourism, Government of India provides Central Financial
Assistance for the project proposals received from them as per the scheme guidelines, inter-se
priority and availability of funds.
152. Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned Convention Centres to the tune of `332.64 lakhs,
`415.68 lakhs and `467.71 lakhs respectively to the North-Eastern States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Manipur and Mizoram during the years 2010-11, 2009-10 and 2009-10 respectively.

23
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
153. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
154. In the Working Group Report pertaining to Ministry of Tourism it was stated that in
majority of the tourist destinations abroad, the luxury tax is ranging from 5 to 7 per cent only,
however, it is 4 to 20 per cent in various States of India. The Committee observed that affordable
destinations are major tourism attractions for medium and low income tourists. However, it is more
important that the tourist facilities also should not be compromised in the effort of making it
affordable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the tax incentives should be as pragmatic
as to generate maximum income. At the same time, there should not be any compromise on the
quality of the services provided.
(Recommendation at Para 111 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
155. The Ministry of Tourism has been working towards rationalization of taxes in the travel and
tourism sector. The Ministry of Tourism had recommended the following to the Ministry of Finance
(i) Deemed Export Status for Earnings for Inbound Tour Operators.
(ii) Extension of Income Tax Benefit under section 35 AD of the Income Tax Act 1961
to Service Providers.
(iii) Extension of Income Tax Benefit under section 35 AD of the Income Tax Act 1961
to Heritage Hotels.
(iv) Rollback of Service Tax on Hotels and Air Conditioned Restaurants.
(v) Extension of Income Tax Benefit under section 35 AD of the Income Tax Act 1961
for Hotel Projects adding at least 25% more rooms.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
156. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
157. The Committee observes that the investment linked tax incentive for new hotels of two star
category and above anywhere in India need to be reviewed so that tax incentive for hotels in
available for below 2 star accommodation and the domestic tourism mostly consisting of middle
class are also benefited.
(Recommendation at Para 112 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
158. To encourage the growth of budget hotels in the country the following steps have been
taken by the Government of India to augment growth of hotel accommodation in the country:
(i) In order to facilitate the clearances required by hotel projects in a time bound manner
and also provide policy advice for development of hospitality sector, the Union
Government has approved the constitution of a ‘Hospitality Development and

24
Promotion Board’ (HDPB). The States/Union Territory Administrations have been
advised to set up similar Boards if the same does not exist in their respective States/
Union Territories.
(ii) To encourage the growth of hotels, on the request of Ministry of Tourism, a five Year
Tax Holiday was announced in the Budget of 2008-09 for two, three and four star
hotels that are established in specified districts which have UNESCO declared ‘World
Heritage Sites’ except the revenue districts of Mumbai and Delhi. The hotel should be
constructed and start functioning during the period April 1, 2008 to March 31, 2013.
(iii) The Government has recently announced the extension of Investment Linked Tax
incentive under Section 35 AD of the Income Tax Act to new hotels of 2-Star
category and above anywhere in India, which will facilitate the growth of
Accommodation in the country.
(iv) The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has also issued revised Guidelines on Classification
of exposures as Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Exposures. Thus, RBI has classified
exposures to hotels outside the CRE Exposure.
(v) Hotel and Tourism related industry declared as high priority industry and Foreign
Direct Investment upto 100%, under the automatic route is permitted in ‘Hotels and
Tourism Sector’, subject to applicable laws/regulations, security and other
conditionalties.
(vi) External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) upto US$100 million to solve the liquidity
crunch being faced by the hotel industry for setting up new hotel projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
159. The Committee desired to know the details of new hotels established during the
period of tax holidays. Details regarding para (v) may also be furnished, agency-wise.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
160. The Committee observes that the broad scope of economic activities involved in tourism
enables wider participation of people in its growth including the participation of the informal sector.
However, one of the major constraints to the tourism growth is multiplicity of tax with high rates.
The Committee therefore recommends that adequate tax exemptions may be given to the tourism
sector to ensure its growth in all the possible areas of the country. Therefore, the Committee also
recommends that both the Central and State Governments should work out a uniform tax structure
in the tourism sector.
(Recommendation at Para 114 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
161. The Committee’s recommendation has been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
162. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
163. The Committee notes the steps taken for seamless travel which was initiated during the
Commonwealth Games to facilitate tourists by the NCT of Delhi, Rajasthan, Haryana and Uttar

25
Pradesh and recommends that similar exercise should be taken to emulate the model by other
States.
(Recommendation at Para 116 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
164. Recommendation has been noted. All the concerned States Tourism Secretaries,
Commissioner-cum-Secretary(Tourism)/Principal Secretary(Tourism) except the States of Delhi,
Rajasthan, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh have been requested to take suitable action in this regard and
send us the ATR/Comments.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
165. The Committee desires that their comments may be furnished in due course.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
166. The Committee notes that the above recommendations of the Ministry of Tourism for
rationalized tax structure; introduction of a system of single point payment of taxes and online
transaction system for smooth traffic movement merit due consideration. The Committee therefore
recommends that Ministry of Tourism should further pursue the matter with all the State
Governments and Union Territories to avoid multiple tax structures and provide single window
payment of taxes for tourism and tourist operators.
(Recommendation at Para 119 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
167. In order to overcome the bottlenecks of multiple inter- State road transport barriers,
Ministry of Tourism has been advocating implementation of seamless travel for commercial tourist
vehicles. It was felt that there is a need for a system, which would ensure single window payment
of taxes for seamless travel, through which tax can be collected centrally and apportioned to
States. This would facilitate smooth movement of tourist traffic and avoid delays and inconvenience
to tourists.
168. The Golden Triangle of Agra–Delhi–Jaipur is one of the most visited by foreign and
domestic tourists. To avoid hindrances in movement of tourist vehicles in the NCR especially, in
the Golden Triangle of Agra–Delhi–Jaipur, Ministry of Tourism in collaboration with the Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways and the State Governments of NCT of Delhi, Rajasthan, Haryana
and Uttar Pradesh has made an arrangement whereby taxes would be collected centrally at each
of the four starting nodes at Delhi, Gurgaon, Jaipur and Agra in such a way that the taxes thus
collected are to be apportioned and the tourist coach/car would be allowed unhindered movement
in the Golden Triangle.
169. Further consequent to the meeting of the Task Force of the 34
th Transport Development
Council on 13.10.2011, a group of representatives from Ministry of Tourism, State Governments,
AIMTC, CII, ITTA and NIC has been formed to study and recommend measures for ensuring
seamless movement of goods and passengers across the country, among other things.
170. Subsequently, in the meeting of the 34
th Transport Development Council (TDC) held on
7.2.2012, the Ministry of Tourism recommended as follows:
• Multiple tax structures in various States severely cramp seamless movement causing
discomfort to tourists. A simplified/uniform and rational tax structure cutting across all
the States/Union Territories have to be implemented on top priority.

26
• A system of single window payment of taxes through which tax can be collected
centrally and apportioned to States, has to be implemented to overcome the bottlenecks
of multiple Inter–State road transport barriers. It is recommended that an online
transaction system be instituted within one year to facilitate smooth movement of
tourist traffic and avoid delays and inconvenience to tourists.
• The proposal for allocation of a separate “TV” series registration for tourist vehicles
and one time/annual payment of taxes would facilitate smooth movement of tourist
traffic as it would do away with the requirement to stop for payment of taxes at State
borders. Ministry of Tourism recommends the implementation of a separate “TV”
series registration for tourist vehicles in the long run.
171. However, as per the recommendations of the Committee all the States/UTs Tourism
Secretaries/Commissioner-cum-Secretary(Tourism)/Principal Secretary(Tourism) have been
requested to take suitable action and send us ATR/Comments so as to avoid multiple tax structures
and provide single window payment of taxes for tourism and tourist operators.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
172. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue the matter further to
implement the recommendation of the Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
173. The Committee recommends that the Committee constituted for the purpose should finalize
the report in time bound manner and make stringent laws to protect the wildlife and protected
areas.
(Recommendation at Para 123 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
174. The guidelines relating to the Eco-tourism in and around Protected Areas have been finalized
by the Committee constituted for the purpose and approved by the competent authority on
12th June, 2012. As directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the same has been filed before it in
the S.L.P. (CIVIL) No. 21339 of 2011 Ajay Dubey Vs Union of India for further directions.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
175. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
176. The Committee also notes that a comprehensive waste management system is lacking in
most of the tourist destinations. This will become a serious problem in the coming years because
of the increase in the number of tourists. The Committee also notes that there is scarcity of
water in almost all tourist places and specially in Hilly areas. This problem is very acute in places
like North Eastern Region, Coastal Region and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The Committee
during its recent visits also got many complaints. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should take up the matter at various levels with State and Municipalities to remove the problem
of shortage of water and waste management. Eco-friendly toilets are the new concept which may
be explored.
(Recommendation at Para 125 of 176
th Report)

27
Reply of the Government
177. Development, promotion and implementation of tourism projects are primarily the
responsibility of the State Governments/Union T erritory Administrations. Ministry of Tourism
provides financial assistance for tourism projects based on the proposals received from them which
are complete in all respects as per the Scheme Guidelines, inter-se priority and subject to availability
of funds. Tourism projects to be funded by Ministry of Tourism are decided in consultation with
the States/UTs in prioritization meetings held every year.
178. MOT provides Financial Assistance to all the States/UTs for development of Tourism
projects under Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits (PIDDC) Scheme.
Under this scheme financial assistance is also provided for the following items under Central
Component:
1. Providing for improvement in solid waste management and sewerage management,
Public Conveniences, Tube Well etc.
2. Construction of Wayside Public Conveniences.
179. Hence, MOT provides financial assistance to the States/UTs to deal with the problem of
water scarcity. However, MOT will consider any such proposal if received from the North Eastern
States, Coastal Region and Andaman Nicobar Islands.
180. In this connection, it is mentioned that Government of Maharashtra has constructed Bio-
Toilets based on Bio-digester Technology in Akkalkot Tehsil of Solapur district in Maharashtra.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
181. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee has the view that, apart from
extending financial assistance, the success of the scheme need to be reviewed periodically.
The Committee also desires to know the success rate of the Bio-digester experimented at
the Akkalkot Tehsil of Maharashtra.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
182. The pollution caused by the plastic products need to be taken as a serious threat to the
environment and the locals and tourists should be made aware of the hazards it may cause in the
region. The Committee recommends that for tourists, carry-bags from local handicrafts should be
made available with slogans on environment and tourism.
(Recommendation at Para 126 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
183. The Ministry of Tourism under the “Campaign Clean India” has initiated the process of
launching an awareness drive against the use of plastic and for promoting sustainable tourism.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
184. The Committee notes the reply and opined that instead of conducting a fresh move
against use of plastic bags, the Ministry of Tourism also should explore the avenues already
existing on these goals and combined approach from other agencies also may be invited to
ministry’s efforts on these lines.

28
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
185. The Committee notes with dismay that the tourism potential in the islands in India is, in fact
more than the popular tourist destinations like Thailand, Singapore, Hawai etc. However, the
insufficient facilities have marred the scope of these amazing islands. So far, there is no such guide
map prepared for benefitting the scenic beauty of these areas as a major tourist attraction. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that a special tourism focus should be given to the
Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands for tourism promotion.
(Recommendation at Para 129 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
186. Ministry of Tourism as part of its on-going activities, releases print, electronic, online and
outdoor media campaigns in the international and domestic markets, under the Incredible India
brand-line, to promote various tourism destinations and products of the country, including Andaman
and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep Islands.
187. The Department of Tourism, Lakshadweep is in the process of preparing guidelines for the
development of tourism. The Island Administration is proposing to draw up a comprehensive guide
map for the development of tourism in Lakshadweep islands.
188. The Andaman and Nicobar Administration has a tourism policy in which short and long term
action plans have been identified. A tourism work shop has been organized on 11 th June, 2012 for
formulating the plan for the promotion of tourism during Twelfth Five Year Plan period.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
189. The Committee feels that there is much more need to be done to achieve the
recommendations of the Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
190. The Committee is, however, of the view that tourism activities should not be allowed to be
detrimental to the environmental balance. The Committee is of the view that there should be strict
adherence to the environmental regulations while promoting tourism. Our environmentally fragile
areas could not be blindly opened for access to the tourists; however the regulations should not
be applied uniformly in a country like India where the diversity of geographical distribution is
maximum.
(Recommendation at Para 130 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
191. The Ministry agrees with the view that tourism activities should not be detrimental to the
environmental balance. The Ministry recognizes following cardinal principles for development of
ecotourism:
1. It should involve the local community and lead to the overall economic development
of the area.
2. It should identify the likely conflicts between resource use for eco-tourism and the
livelihood of local inhabitants and attempt to minimize such conflicts.
3. The type and scale of eco-tourism development should be compatible with the
environment and socio-cultural characteristics of the local community; and

29
4. It should be planned as a part of the overall area development strategy, guided by an
integrated land-use plan while avoiding inter-sectoral conflicts and ensuring sectoral
integration associated with commensurate expansion of public services.
192. The Hon’ble Prime Minister has constituted an Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on
Tourism Sector under the Chairmanship of his Principal Secretary to discuss and sort out various
inter-Ministerial/inter-departmental issues concerning development of Tourism in the country. The
Ministry of Environment and Forests is one of the Central Ministries included in this Committee.
In its first meeting held on 19.01.2012, the Committee decided that a Sub-Committee under the
chairpersonship of Member Secretary, Planning Commission may identify the potential of Eco,
Cultural and Rural Tourism in the country. The Sub-Committee in its first meeting held on
27.02.2012 decided that this Ministry may advise every State Government/UT Administration to
constitute a Committee consisting of Secretary, Department of Tourism; Secretary, Department of
Forests and officers of two Departments as well as other stakeholders to work out the details for
promoting tourism in Wildlife, Forests, Eco-Sensitive Zones, giving full attention to conserving the
Wildlife, Carrying Capacity and Sustainability. Ministry of Tourism has requested all the State
Governments/UT Administrations to constitute the said Committee and give its report within six
months.
193. While sanctioning eco-tourism projects, the Ministry stresses upon the need for
implementing eco-friendly measures like solid waste management, non use of polythene bags,
harnessing solar energy, rain water harvesting, using local architecture, involvement of community,
construction of biodegradable toilets etc.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
194. The Committee likes to know the feedback on these measurers.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
195. Ministry of Tourism provides funds to Major Ports for development of cruise tourism.
However, so far only Mormugao Port Trust has submitted project for financial assistance. The
Committee is of the view that the scheme need to be discussed with all the Ports and appropriate
initiative may be taken to implement the cruise tourism projects in all the Ports.
(Recommendation at Para 134 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
196. The Ministry of Tourism provides financial assistance to various ports for development
of Cruise Tourism infrastructure under its scheme guidelines for assistance to Central agencies
based on proposals received from the Port Trusts. This Ministry has sanctioned an amount of
`491.53 lakh during 2011-12 to Cochin Port Trust for development of Cruise Passenger
Facilitation Centre. The Steering Committee on Cruise Tourism chaired by Secretary, Ministry of
Shipping comprising of chairpersons of major Ports, Ministry of Tourism and other Central
Ministries also discusses the funding requirements of the ports for development of infrastructure
facilities for Cruise Tourism.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
197. The Committee desires to know the facilities available to tourist at this centre and
the initiatives from other State Governments, in development of cruise tourism.

30
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
198. The Committee was also informed of the high taxation rates for Yacht, boats, ships which
are registered in India. This leads to people preferring to go to other countries. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the tax structure should be rationalized to attract more tourists from
abroad.
(Recommendation at Para 135 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
199. The Steering Committee on Cruise Tourism in its fourth meeting held on 6.6.2012 also
discussed the issues pertaining to taxation in cruise industry wherein it was decided that the
Ministry of Shipping will take up the issues with Ministry of Finance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
200. The Committee would like to know the subsequent action taken in this regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
201. The Committee had the occasion to visit cruise terminals at some of the ports. The
Committee noted the absence of basic facilities and poor maintenance of the terminals. The
Committee recommends that to make cruise tourism success in India there is need to make the
terminals more accessible and attractive.
(Recommendation at Para 136 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
202. Cruise tourism has the potential to attract both domestic as well as foreign tourists in the
country. The Ministry of Tourism in association with the Ministry of Shipping promotes cruise
tourism. Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance to the State Governments/UT
Administration/Central Government Agencies under the following schemes for development of
Tourism including Cruise Tourism:
(i) Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits.
(ii) Assistance for Large Revenue Generating Projects.
(iii) Assistance to Central Agencies for Infrastructure Development.
203. Initially, five ports namely Mumbai, Goa, Chennai, Mangalore and Kochi have been identified
for cruise tourism including development of cruise terminal.
204. The Government of In dia has approved the Cruise Shipping Policy in June, 2008. Some
salient features of this policy include conducive fiscal regime, development of facilities at Ports and
connectivity through rail, road transport, air and metro, quick completion of immigration
formalities, hassle free custom clearance and proper waste disposal system ensuring cleaner ocean.
An Inter Ministerial Steering Committee with Secretary (Shipping) as Chairman was constituted in
June, 2010 to address issues relating to development of cruise shipping.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
205. The Committee may be apprised about the initiatives taken by the Ministry to make
the terminals accessible and attractive.

31
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
206. The Committee recommends that the well developed water ways in the States like Kerala,
Goa, Maharashtra, Assam, in the Kolkata-Varanasi route and Kolkata Sunderbans need to be focused
for cruise tourism facilities. The Port Trusts of Goa, Cochin, Mumbai, Chennai and Mangalore may
be financially aided for fulfilling the ‘hub-a home port’ concept.
(Recommendation at Para 137 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
207. The Ministry of Tourism extends financial support to various ports for development of
cruise infrastructure, based on proposals received from them. This may also include developing the
‘hub-a-home port’ concept.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
208. The Committee may be apprised about the details of the proposals reviewed from
various Port Trusts in this regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
209. The Committee notes that in the Western Coast down through Sindhudurg to Goa have
beautiful virgin beaches which are untapped and are equally attractive as overseas destinations like
Singapore to Carribean and to Mediterranean. The Committee recommends that a sea route from
Mumbai down to Goa and Mangalore connecting all these beaches need to be developed which has
tremendous tourism potential.
(Recommendation at Para 138 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
210. The Department of Tourism, Government of Maharshtra is in the process of framing a
policy on Cruise Tourism. The objective is to provide services at all major beach destinations like
Murud, Alibag, Ratnagir, Ganapatipule, Dapoli, Malvan, Devgad etc. Development of a Marina in
Mumbai and at a suitable location in Konkan will also be considered by Government of
Maharashtra.
211. The Government of Maharashtra is also planning to develop the Coastal Highway connecting
Mumbai and Goa.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
212. The Committee further recommends that the matter may be taken up with the
Governments of Goa and Karnataka also to achieve the objectives.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
213. The Committee also recommends that appropriate Rules and Regulations may be formulated
for regulating cruise tourism to ensure planned growth of the sector. Further, there is need to put
strict rules for ensuring safety measures such as provision of safety equipments like life jackets,
trained manpower etc.
(Recommendation at Para 139 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
214. In order to ensure safety and security of tourists, Ministry of Tourism has advised all the

32
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations to deploy Tourist Police in the States/Union
Territories. Some of the State Governments have deployed tourist police in one form or the other.
Further, the guidelines for formation of Tourist Security Organization(s) comprising exservicemen,
formulated by the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India in consultation with the Ministry of
Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs and Directorate General of Resettlements have been forwarded
to the State Governments/UT Administrations.
215. Training and provision of safety equipment for various activities including cruise tourism
and ensuring safety-precautionary measures to prevent any untoward incidents, are under the
purview of the concerned State Governments. However, the Ministry of Tourism from time to time,
emphasizes this with the respective authorities to ensure safety and security of the tourists. A
Training Workshop for the port officials and those agencies in the Port coming in direct contact
with the visitors was organized in Goa from 2
nd-4th July, 2012 with an objective to sensitize the
concerned agencies on the smooth facilitation of cruise passengers visiting the country. This also
included a session on ‘Port Security’.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
216. The Committee notes that the Ministry is silent about the Rules and Regulations for
regulating cruise tourism. The Committee reiterates its recommendations.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
217. The Committee during its visit also noted that there is lack of well maintained boats and
small cruises in A&N Islands. The Committee recommends that the boats should be upgraded to
attract more tourists in A&N Islands.
(Recommendation at Para 140 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
218. The A&N Administration has procured water sports equipments, speed boats, water
scooters, Jet Ski which have been leased out to private operators. Procurement of one 35 room
luxury boat and one mechanized luxury boat is under process.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
219. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Tourism should make a study on the
requirements of A&N Islands and take steps to meet the requirements in co-ordination with
them.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
220. The Committee was informed that State Roads still have to be developed. The Committee
recommends that suitable mechanism may be developed to get these 13 State Roads completed by
utilizing funds from the Central Road Fund (CRF) available with the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways in a time bound manner.
(Recommendation at Para 142 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
221. No scheme of the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India extends financial assistance
for construction of roads except for last mile connectivity for the tourism infrastructure projects.
However, a letter has been sent to the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways for an
appropriate action at their end.

33
222. National Highways of Tamil Nadu are well connected. A sum of `10.00 crore was
sanctioned by the Department of Tourism, Government of Tamil Nadu for the development of
roads leading to tourist destinations in the year 2011-12. The Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways has not allocated any funds for development of roads to Department of Tourism,
Government of Tamil Nadu.
223. The State Government of Karnataka has submitted a proposal for construction of Hospet
to Venkatapur bypass road connecting to Hampi World Heritage Site and Vijaya Vittala Temple to
the Ministry of Road Transport and Shipping for approval and release of funds. The approval is
awaited.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
224. The Committee desires to know the latest developments in the above projects.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
225. The Committee recommends that air connectivity to major small tourist places should be
explored keeping in view the increase in number of tourists to make the tourist places more
popular. The Committee also notes that there is need to connect hill stations by deploying aircrafts
and helicopter services for increased connectivity.
(Recommendation at Para 146 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
226. Recommendation has been noted. Ministry of Civil Aviation and Pawan Hans Helicopters
Ltd. have been requested to take suitable action and send us the ATR/Comments.
227. Further, an interactive session with various stakeholders related to Chartered Operations and
Regional Air-connectivity was chaired by the Hon’ble Minister (Tourism) on 15 th December, 2011
at Hotel Ashok, New Delhi.
228. In the interactive session, a presentation was made by the Ministry of Tourism, followed
by presentations by Wing Commander A. Prasad, Group Captain Anil Thapar and Shri Harsh
Vardhan, ex-MD, Vayudoot. During the session, it was decided that a Working Group of
stakeholders may be formed which will go into the details of issues hindering the development of
chartered operations within the country and Regional Connectivity through development of
helitourism/private sector small aircraft carriers.
229. The recommendations of the working group for improving regional air connectivity in India
to promote tourism in lesser known destinations are as under:-
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
OPERATIONAL REFORMS
(i) Currently agencies like Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) and Bureau of
Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) do not distinguish between large scheduled Airlines and
small operators. Regulatory and compliance requirements for Small/Non Scheduled
operators have to be modified keeping in view the size of Aircraft, fleet and workload
of small operators.
(ii) Create a separate Feeder Scheduled Airlines Category to meet the requirements of
feeder sector. This category should be exclusively reserved for Aircraft/Helicopters

34
below 50 seats with sector length not exceeding beyond 500 kilometres. The Aircraft/
Helicopters below 5700 kilogram with minimum 6 seat capacity irrespective of number
of engines should be permitted to operate in this category. Non scheduled operators
desirous of operating at least one regular commercial flight with thrice weekly
frequency on new sectors (virgin or non operational since preceding 2 years) for
partial aircraft utilisation should be treated as ‘Deemed Operator’ in this category.
(iii) The existing guidelines for code share operations may be amended to promote regional
connectivity as a part of a long – haul itinerary by way of code share between the
long haul operator and the regional operator.
(iv) Non scheduled operators desirous of regular passenger flights with minimum thrice
weekly frequency should be allowed to file their flight schedule for approval of regular
operations for sectors which are not serviced at present. For such regular operations,
the operator should be permitted to advertise their schedules and undertake advance
booking through reservation network and search engines.
(v) Additional administrative/technical posts even in categories which are out sourced to
third party substantially adds to overhead of the operator and makes the small
aircraft operations unviable. In case of small operators flexibility of deployment and
multitasking by staff and crew should be permitted. DGCA should not insist on
minimum sets of flight crew etc. which should be based on level of operations and
flying hours while meeting Flight and Duty Time Limitations. Duality of functions
like quality control by operator and contracted Maintenance, Repair and Operations
(MRO) results in duplication of manpower and conflict in accountability. In technical
departments like engineering and operations one coordinator should be able to
perform all the departmental work and deal with multiple departments in DGCA and
BCAS etc.
(vi) In case of Non scheduled operators, DGCA headquarters should delegate more powers
to Regional Controllers so that they are not required to approach Headquarters for
every small approval.
(vii) In terms of regulatory approvals starting with NOC issuance, import permission,
Aircraft Type Rating and Endorsement, Air Operator’s Certificate (AOC) issuance etc.,
strict time limits should be specified for approval mechanism. Similar committee
mechanism to the present system of Empowered Committee in Ministry of Civil
Aviation should be established in DGCA with monthly frequency wherein all pending
matters requiring approval by Non Scheduled operators can be decided in timely
manner.
(viii) The current policy of Scheduled Airlines (Regional) restricts the operator to operate
from only one Metro Airport whereas the traffic affinity from many important cities
requires connectivity to at least two Metro Cities i.e. Jodhpur needs connectivity to
both Delhi and Mumbai, similarly Ranchi requires connectivity to Delhi and Kolkata.
Permission to connect two metros from any intermediate point will result in better
point to point servicing and provide higher Aircraft utilization of small operators .In
order to safeguard the interest of Scheduled Airlines, policy may forbid Scheduled
Airlines(Regional) to operate point to point nonstop services between two Metro
Airports.
(ix) The current policy of Scheduled Airlines (Regional) permits the operation of flights to
Metro Airport of the Region based on geographical base of operator i.e. Kanpur or
Jaipur based operator can operate to Delhi but not Mumbai. In many cases the traffic

35
requirement of some important cities may require flight operations to Metro Stations
of other Regions i.e., Surat or Pune based operator would find greater traffic flow
towards Delhi or Bangalore compared to Mumbai. Scheduled Airlines policy should
permit the Operator to connect any one Metro Airport instead of such geographical
stratification.
(x) Metro Airports like Delhi and Mumbai have classified the flight operations of Aircraft
less than 40000 kg as non revenue flights and discourage such operations. Small
operators are not given time slots and parking permissions. Ministry may issue strict
guidelines to Airport operators to facilitate Regional Operations.
(xi) Foreign Pilots of Non Scheduled Operators’ Permit (NSOP) Operators face serious
problems in operating flights to Defence Airfields since they have to obtain security
clearance from Ministry of Defence before operating every single flight. Such
clearance has to be filed at least 2 days in advance and during weekends such time
limit becomes even longer. Many times such stipulation results in cancellation of
flights and prohibits last minute substitution of operating crew in case of non
availability of rostered pilot due to any exigency. DGCA should obtain security
clearance of all Foreign Pilots from Ministry of Home Affairs before permitting
Foreign Pilots to fly in India and once they are endorsed, such requirement should
be dispensed with.
(xii) Extension of watch hours becomes a major constraint at airports having single shift
operations. In case the operators wish to operate minimum thrice weekly frequencies
on regular basis, Airports Authority of India (AAI) should provide an extension of
watch hours at such airports without additional overtime charges. This facility should
be extended only in case of regular passenger operations.
(xiii) DGCA should permit bush operations at unmanned Airports with limited Non-
Directional (Radio) Beacon (NDB) and Very High Frequency (VHF) facilities.
INCENTIVES
(i) In order to encourage investment in regional aviation category, Banks and Financial
institution like Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) should create a
special fund in the form of equity and loans including working capital loans against the
securitization of Aircraft Assets. Debt funding up to 50% of Aircraft value subject to
valuation of Aircraft should be provided by banks without seeking additional security
from promoters. Small operators should be entitled to benefits applicable to other Small
and Medium Enterprises (SMEs).
(ii) New sites should be given incentives. Special incentives should be provided for
regional connectivity at airports which are non operational. Allocation of cost of
operation should be done in a manner which makes regional connectivity viable. Start
– up aid or subsidies in the form of waiver of landing/navigational charges, wherever
applicable, should be considered in the initial few years or till such time the economies
of scale are achieved, whichever is earlier.
(iii) S ervice Tax should be rationalized from 10.3% and non scheduled operators should be
charged on per seat basis as the scheduled airlines are charged. Service tax on
Medivac (Medical Evacuation) flights should be abolished.
(iv) Fixed Base Operator (FBO) charges which account for more than half of the flying
charges at airports should be rationalized and make operations viable.

36
STATE GOVERNMENT
OPERATIONAL REFORMS
(i) State Governments should devise long term Aviation policy of the State enlisting the
priority routes for Intra-State connectivity.
(ii) State Governments can provide security and fire tenders during the time of flight if
operators undertake minimum thrice weekly frequency.
INCENTIVES
(i) State Governments may consider introducing scheme of providing limited seed capital
in the form of Equity and nominate one or two officers on the Board of the proposed
airlines. This would help small operators in professionalising their management and
Nominee Directors can assist the company in obtaining timely approval from various
banks and government agencies. This would ensure better market confidence amongst
Aircraft sellers, leasing companies and travelling public. Nominee directors will also
ensure judicious utilisation of funds and focus on well defined business plan including
State priorities. Nominee directors would be also be able to ensure fair cost and
subsidy assessment in cases where State Governments/Government of India are keen
to operate few sectors due to strategic reasons and are willing to subsidize such
flights.
(ii) Subsidies should be available to any operator on ‘first come first serve’ basis to attract
multiple operators within the State, who could become multi aircraft operator in due
course. Duration of subsidy can be limited to 18 to 36 months. Quantum of subsidy
may be up to 25% of seat revenue in case of aircraft below 20 seats and 15% of seat
revenue for aircraft between 20 to 50 seats in the form of seats guarantee or
operational subsidy. Such subsidy should be reimbursed to operator on monthly basis
since delay in providing payment to operator results in cash crunch defeating the very
purpose of such subsidy.
(iii) Reduction in sales tax on Air Turbine Fuel (ATF) should be offered based on the
Maharashtra Model, under which there is no taxation on fuel for flights operated out
of non metro cities for destinations within Maharashtra.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
230. The Committee notes the observations of the working group for improving the
regional air connectivity to promote tourism in new areas. The Ministries of Tourism and
Civil Aviation may examine the recommendations of the working group and may come up
with schemes. The Committee further recommends that there should not be any
compromise on the national security in permitting foreign/chartered flights/tourist in the
restricted air fields.
231. As regards other operational constraints, the concerned agencies may derive at an
amicable solution which may benefit both the industry as well as to the visiting tourists.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
232. The Committee was informed that both Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Tourism have
agreed to collaborate in the upgradation of 24 railway stations in the country. The Committee

37
recommends that this plan should be implemented immediately and in the next year’s railway
budget more railway stations should be included for similar upgradation.
(Recommendation at Para 147 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
233. MOT and Ministry of Railways are already in the process of joint inspection of identified
railway stations for upgradation of passenger amenities. In the first phase, 5 stations have been
identified for joint upgradation. Inspections of four stations have already taken place by a
Committee comprising of the officers of Ministry of Railways and MOT.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
234. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will keep pursuing the
matter.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
235. The Committee also recollects its experience during the study visit to Darjeeling wherein the
roads, NH-31 and NH-55 right from the Bagdogra airport to Darjeeling is in dilapidated condition.
The Committee is surprised as to how the tourists will be attracted to such destinations. The
Committee recommends that the road stretch may be taken up for renovation and repair on a
priority basis.
(Recommendation at Para 148 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
236. The matter falls within the domain of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. They have
been requested to take necessary steps.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
237. The Committee desires to know the steps taken by the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways for improvement of NH-31 and NH-55.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
238. In addition, at various places in the north-eastern circle and hilly regions ropeways and
other modes of transport other than the road journey can be considered for connectivity purposes.
The success of Konkan railway could be replicated with the possibility of tunnels and bridges for
inter-connecting the different hills.
(Recommendation at para 149 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
239. The concern raised by the Hon’ble Committee has been conveyed to the Ministry of Civil
Aviation, Railways and Road Transport and Highways as well as the concerned State Governments
for taking necessary action.
240. Ministry of Civil Aviation has replied that the operations in domestic sector have been
deregulated and flights are being operated by concerned airlines on the basis of commercial viability
subject to adherence of Route Dispersal Guidelines. Government has laid down Route Dispersal
Guidelines with a view to achieve better regulation of air transport services taking into account the

38
need for air transport services if different regions of the country including North-East region. It
is, however, up to the airlines to provide air services to specific places depending upon the traffic
demand and commercial viability while complying with Route Dispersal Guidelines.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
241. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism could not understand the
recommendations of the Committee and they have done little to further the
recommendation of the Committee concerning to the connectivity of hilly areas.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
242. The Committee is also of the view that to develop connectivity in Islands of A&N and
Lakshadweep Islands, intra-island connectivity should also be promoted so that distant islands can
also be visited by tourists.
(Recommendation at Para 150 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
243. A&N Islands: The A&N Administration has informed that Sea plane services are available
for Havelock, Hutbay and Diglipur. Helicopter services are also available up to Campbell Bay. The
Andaman Trunk Road connects South Andaman to Middle and North Andaman. Other speed boats/
ships are also plying. One ship has been chartered to improve connectivity within Southern Group
of Islands and two more vessels are proposed to be built.
244. Lakshadweep Islands: The Lakshadweep Administration is making efforts to connect the
islands by procuring speed boats of different capacities to ply between various islands. During the
fair season, the islands are connected to the mainland by six passenger vessels being operated by
the Lakshadweep Administration.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
245. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that efforts of A&N Administration and
Lakshadweep Administration are able to provide better connectivity to these islands and
tourists may not face any problems in moving from one island to another.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
246. The Committee is of the opinion that tourism development could not be done in isolation
as various Ministries and Departments other than Tourism Ministry have pivotal role in it. The
Committee, therefore, welcomes the step taken to have convergence in the decision making and
execution process with the help of various committees constituted for the purpose. The Committee
also hopes that the above may be a dynamic forum to speedy implementation of projects solving
all the bottlenecks coming in the way.
(Recommendation at Para 153 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
247. An Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee on Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) has already been
constituted by the Office of the Prime Minister under the Chairmanship of the Principal Secretary
to the Prime Minister, to resolve Inter-Ministerial issues involved in the development of tourism in
the country, as well as issues raised by Industry Associations in the tourism sector. The Members

39
of the Committee include Member Secretary, Planning Commission, Chairman, Railway Board,
Secretaries from various Central Ministries and Secretary (Tourism) as the Member Convener. The
first meeting of the Committee was held on 19 th January, 2012 and the 2 nd meeting is likely to be
held shortly.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
248. The Committee desires to know the outcome of these meetings.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
249. The Committee likes to recall various representations received from the stakeholders as
regards extension of LTC by private airlines to Jammu and Kashmir, which is a live example for
the boom in domestic tourism activities as a result of the Leave Travel Concessions to the
Government employees. However, the Committee noted that Air India is not able to take the
increasing load of passengers particularly in vacations. To remedy the situation, the Air India may
be requested to increase the number of seats offered under ‘Air India Holidays’ within the limits
of LTC-80. It is learnt that relaxation for travel by air to North East States has been further
extended for 2 more years beyond May, 2012. The Committee feels that facility of availing LTC
by private airlines for North-Eastern States may be extended to Government employees. Keeping
in view the demands from its stakeholders from Jammu and Kashmir the Committee further
recommends that relaxation for travel by air to Jammu and Kashmir may be extended beyond
June, 2012.
(Recommendation at Para 155 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
250. Based on request received from J&K Government and stakeholders for extending relaxation
for travel by air to Jammu and Kashmir beyond June, 2012, the matter was taken up with
Department of Personnel and Training. A meeting was taken up by Special Secretary (T) on
6.6.2012 with officials from DOPT, MHA, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and
Ministry of Civil Aviation. No objection/clearance from DOPT, MHA, Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) and Ministry of Civil Aviation has been received. As desired by
Department of Expenditure, MoCA has been requested to furnish a clarification regarding travel by
private airlines. As soon as the clarification is received from MoCA, this will be referred to DOPT
for issuing the necessary orders in this direction.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
251. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
252. The Committee recommends that more and more tourist places should be included in
extending this facility to boost tourism in the country.
(Recommendation at Para 157 of 176 th Report)
Reply of the Government
253. Except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, Ministry has not received any request from any
other State/UT seeking relaxation to travel by Air under LTC rules.

40
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
254. The spirit of the recommendations of the Committee is that the Ministry of Tourism
should take initiatives instead of awaiting State Governments to take the initiatives. The
Committee reiterates its recommendations.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
255. The Committee while appreciating the efforts made for tourism development and ‘Incredible
India’ campaign recommends that the unexplored paradise should not remain unexplored. But
efforts should be made to provide adequate facilities to develop the unexplored places to attract
more tourists.
(Recommendation at Para 158 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
256. The endeavour of the Ministry is also to develop and promote new and lesser known
destinations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
257. The Committee may be informed about the initiatives taken by the Ministry in this
regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
258. The Committee appreciates the Clean India concept propagated by the Ministry. The
Committee recommends that it should have a major focus from the grass root levels. Therefore,
the local bodies and civic agencies should be made part of the drive and incentives and financial
aids should be extended. The most important thing is strict monitoring of the success levels
accompanied by media campaigning to spread the message across the length and breadth of the
nation.
(Recommendation at Para 159 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
259. In the workshop held on 20 th December, 2012 various stakeholders had been invited. These
included NGOs, representatives of other civic agencies.
260. The Ministry has devised a Scheme of Creating Awareness under Campaign Clean India for
Schools/NGOs and Adopters (Corporate Houses, PSUs etc). Certain parameters for Cleanliness have
been laid down. This work has been done by the Quality Council of India. The awardees will get
financial help and a citation under “Campaign Clean India”. If local bodies adopt any of the
identified monuments under Campaign Clean India, they can also be considered for award in the
Award Scheme for the Campaign.
261. For monitoring of the project a dedicated Programme Monitoring Unit under Campaign
Clean India has been approved by the Hon’ble Minister of Tourism.
262. Campaign Clean India has been linked to the ‘Athithi Devo Bhava’ website of the Ministry.
263. W ith the help of National Informatics Centre(NIC), a web-enabled management information
system (MIS) is being developed to serve the purpose of an interface with general public for
Campaign Clean India.

41
264. To cre ate awareness among general public and the tourists especially domestic, radio jingles
are being played. Stamp and Logo of Campaign Clean India have been prepared for use in office
stationary etc. Posters depicting the message of Campaign Clean India have also been printed for
distribution among various stakeholders i.e. Indian Railways, Airports, ASI Monuments, Post
Offices etc.
265. Slogans to exhort general public to keep the country in general and tourist destinations in
particular through Rail tickets campaign have also been prepared and the same have been printed
on rail tickets for creating public awareness.
266. The above mentioned endeavors of the Ministry are sure to create desired awareness about
Campaign Clean India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
267. The Committee observes from the reply given by the Ministry that the clean India
campaign is organized as a mere passive work through media ads, website enabled
awareness generations etc. and there is not a single physical activity proposed in it. So the
Committee is doubtful of its success level as field work groups should be identified and
rigorous visible activities for this aim should be organized in coordination with various local
bodies, State Governments, NGOs, etc.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
268. The Committee observed that the MoU with Ministry of Civil Aviation may yield good results
in the coming seasons. Also the cleanliness oriented initiatives at the major railway stations of the
country may be effectively implemented so as to develop them at par with the airports as far as
cleanliness is concerned. The Committee also recommends that ads on the train bogies both inside
and outside giving message of the importance of cleanliness will be able to convey the message
effectively among the masses.
(Recommendation at Para 160 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
269. The Ministry has entered into an MOU with the Ministry of Railways for keeping the
railway stations clean and also for creating Awareness among passengers and general public.
Further, the Ministry of Tourism will also undertake branding of long distance trains running on
important routes in different regions of the country, whereby one side would depict important
tourism sites of the country and the other side would carry Campaign Clean India messages on
mutually agreed routes and terms.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
270. The Committee also recommends that there is a need for enforcing the clean India concept
among the general public. The Committee may be apprised about the outcome of the MoU with
Ministry of Railways.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
271. The Committee notes that the Elephanta Caves of Maharashtra are lacking adequate tourist
facilities and other developmental activities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that concrete
plan for the Elephanta Caves may be formulated at the earliest.
(Recommendation at Para 161 of 176
th Report)

42
Reply of the Government
272. The Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) was appointed as a
consultant to prepare a detailed development plan for the beautification and facility upgradation at
Elephanta. This plan is proposed to be implemented and executed solely by MTDC. The works on
toilet facilities with bio-digester technology, jetty have been completed and other works of
beautification and amenity development are in progress.
273. The Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation (MSRDC) has planned development
of Trans Harbour link from Mumbai to Navi Mumbai. It is proposed to develop the connecting arm
to this harbour link so as to connect Elephanta by road.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
274. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
275. The Committee notes that the region in and around Kumarakom and Alleppy in Kerala are
famous for backwaters and houseboats thereby attracting tourists from India and abroad. The bird
watching facilities in Kumarkom is also world famous. However, this tourist destination needs a
lot of improvement and development to make it a world class tourist attraction. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism in coordination with the Government of Kerala
should formulate a master plan for comprehensive development of the Kumarakom Alleppy region
as a major tourist destination.
(Recommendation at Para 162 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
276. The State Government of Kerala has proposed a Mega Circuit Project for Development of
Backwater Circuit in Allapuzha during the year 2011-12 which is under consideration of the
Ministry for the grant of CFA.
277. During the year 2006-07, the Ministry sanctioned an amount of `234.35 lakh to the State
Government of Kerala for ‘Development of Kumarakom’. The State Government has initiated action
for preparing a Master Plan for the comprehensive development of Kumarakom.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
278. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
279. The Committee also suggests that Ministry of Tourism should take initiatives with the State
Governments’ tourism departments for better delivery of services to the visiting tourists.
(Recommendation at Para 163 of 176
th Report)
Reply of the Government
280. In various meetings with State/UTs, this issue is highlighted by MOT. For specific issues
like security of tourists, State/UTs are requested to give specific attention.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
281. The Committee notes the reply.

43
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 9)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee also notes with satisfaction that the
“Integrated Development of Buddhist Circuit at Lalitagiri, Ratnagiri, Udayagiri and
Langudi” in Odisha has been completed by the State Government that making a saving of
about `150 lakhs. (Para 14)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee however recommends that the
proposal for development of Jabalpur as a mega circuit be processed expeditiously and
approved for execution of work. (Para 17)
The Committee wants to know the current status of the Ajanta-Ellora project as the
work was to be completed by 30
th September, 2012. (Para 21)
The Committee constrained to say that Ministry’s reply is casual in nature and
provided no clear picture about the opening of new IHMs and FCI which were sanctioned
during in Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee may be informed of the latest status in
this regard. (Para 24)
The Committee hopes that the entire allocation made for the scheme Capacity
Building for Service Providers would be utilized by the Ministry. (Para 27)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. It appears to be an attempt to
misguide the Committee as no information has been provided regarding overseas spending.
The Committee recommends that the details of the overseas spending to promote tourism
may be provided to the Committee. (Para 31)
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the Ministry should pursue
with the Planning Commission and other relevant agencies to ensure that the proposal is
through. (Para 36)
The Government should not be satisfied by merely spending of plan outlays of its
different schemes, rather it should be linked to the physical achievement of the scheme.
The Committee desires to know the details of Global Online Media Campaign. (Para 42)
The Committee notes the reply and desires to know the details of various agencies
engaged for the survey works. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should
monitor the survey closely to ensure that it is done in all the States/UTs without any
hindrance. (Para 52)
The committee also wants to know the other areas where the PPP funding has
enhanced. (Para 55)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee however hopes that pending review
of the project of “Creation of Land Bank for Hotels”, the Government will ensure that
there is no lapse in the effort for growth of accommodation sector. (Para 59)
43

44
The Committee feels that Port Trusts have to play an active role in promoting cruise
tourism in the concerned state/region. The Committee would like to know the progress
made in implementing the scheme. (Para 62)
The Committee recommends that Planning Commission, in view of the importance of
Tourism sector, enhance the allocations suitably. (Para 65)
The Committee finds the ‘pro-poor’ approach, the scheme ‘Hunar-se-Rozgar’ and
promotion of rural tourism are attractive and hopes that these schemes do not meet the
fate as such schemes normally do. (Para 70)
The Committee notes the reply which is quite informative. (Para 80)
The Committee would likes to know the latest position in this regard. (Para 83)
The Committee feels that approval process has to be made quicker and monitoring
mechanism more effective. (Para 88)
The Committee desires that National Level Consultant will be able to complete the
job assigned to it as soon as possible for early approval, etc. (Para 91)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 94)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 97)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 100)
The Committee feels that it could be a very effective scheme and hopes that the
working group report will address the concerns raised by the Committee. (Para 103)
The Committee notes that the Ministry is totally indifferent towards the
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should
be proactive in developing tourism projects on the lines of M.G. Road Market in Gangtok.
The Committee wants the Ministry of Tourism to take up the matter with the State
Government of Sikkim. (Para:107)
The Committee feels that the overseas campaign strategy of the Government has not
proved effective enough to boost up the foreign tourist inflow as the share of foreign tourist
arrival stagnating around 0.6% in terms of world arrival. The Committee therefore,
recommends that the overseas promotion scheme may be reviewed for better results.
(Para 110)
The Committee’s specific recommendation could not evoke a specific reply, it is quite
ambiguous. The reply did not give any details of the impact of the overseas offices on
tourist arrivals in India. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the
Government must have a re-look into the necessity of various tourism promotion offices
abroad. (Para 113)
The Committee, however, is of the view that apart from writing letters to State CMs,
there should be more concrete steps required from the part of Ministry of Tourism in
achieving this goal. The reply does not contain any interaction with ASI or Ministry of
Culture, in these efforts of the campaign put by the Ministry of Tourism. Similarly,
Ministry Road of Transport and Highways also could not be spared from their
responsibilities. (Para:118)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of the view that cleanliness
campaign should not be restricted to a particular place as cleanliness of total surroundings

45
matters for to its success or failure. The Ministry of Tourism may bear this aspect in mind
while formulating the activities under the scheme. (Para 122)
The Committee further recommends that there should be a spontaneous upgradation
of the website according to the changes in the technology. (Para 125)
The reply of the Government is not clear about the augmented financial allocation
for domestic tourism promotion. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that more
funds may be allocated for domestic tourism promotion. (Para 129)
The Committee desires that Ministry of Tourism may approach State Governments
to submit their interests in opening up new institutions. Also the HRD Ministry may be
consulted to this effort so that the infrastructure available with the institution under
them could be utilized without going for additional investments for making such facilities.
(Para 132)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 135)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 138)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 141)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 144)
The committee is of the view that the Central Government has to be proactive and
come out with schemes which encourage the construction of budget accommodation in
North-Eastern States. (Para 149)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 153)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 156)
The Committee desired to know the details of new hotels established during the
period of tax holidays. Details regarding para (v) may also be furnished, agency-wise.
(Para 159)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 162)
The Committee desires that their comments may be furnished in due course.
(Para 165)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should pursue the matter further to
implement the recommendation of the Committee. (Para 172)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 175)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee has the view that apart from
extending financial assistance, the success of the scheme need to be reviewed periodically.
The Committee also desires to know the success rate of the Bio-digester experimented at
the Akkalkot Tehsil of Maharashtra. (Para 181)
The Committee notes the reply and opined that instead of conducting a fresh move
against use of plastic bags, the Ministry of Tourism also should explore the avenues already
existing on these goals and combined approach from other agencies also may be invited to
ministry’s efforts on these lines. (Para 184)
The Committee feels that there is much more need to be done to achieve the
recommendations of the Committee. (Para 189)

46
The Committee likes to know the feedback on these measurers. (Para 194)
The Committee desires to know the facilities available to tourist at this centre and the
initiatives from other State Governments, in development of cruise tourism. (Para 197)
The Committee would like to know the subsequent action taken in this regard.
(Para 200)
The Committee may be apprised about the initiatives taken by the Ministry to make
the terminals accessible and attractive. (Para 205)
The Committee may be apprised about the details of the proposals reviewed from
various Port Trusts in this regard. (Para 208)
The Committee further recommends that the matter may be taken up with the
Governments of Goa and Karnataka also to achieve the objectives. (Para 212)
The Committee notes that the Ministry is silent about the Rules and Regulations for
regulating cruise tourism. The Committee reiterates its recommendations. (Para 216)
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Tourism should make a study on the
requirements of A&N Islands and take steps to meet the requirements in co-ordination with
them. (Para 219)
The Committee desires to know the latest developments in the above projects.
(Para 224)
The Committee notes the observations of the working group for improving the
regional air connectivity to promote tourism in new areas. The Ministries of Tourism and
Civil Aviation may examine the recommendations of the working group and may come up
with schemes. The Committee further recommends that there should not be any
compromise on the national security in permitting foreign/chartered flights/tourist in the
restricted air fields. (Para 230)
As regards other operational constraints, the concerned agencies may derive at an
amicable solution which may benefit both the industry as well as to the visiting tourists.
(Para 231)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will keep pursuing the
matter. (Para 234)
The Committee desires to know the steps taken by the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways for improvement of NH-31 and NH-55. (Para 237)
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism could not understand the
recommendations of the Committee and they have done little to further the recommendation
of the Committee concerning to the connectivity of hilly areas. (Para 241)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that efforts of A&N Administration and
Lakshadweep Administration are able to provide better connectivity to these islands and
tourists may not face any problems in moving from one island to another. (Para 245)
The Committee desires to know the outcome of these meetings. (Para 248)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 251)
The spirit of the recommendations of the Committee is that the Ministry of Tourism
should take initiatives instead of awaiting State Governments to take the initiatives. The
Committee reiterates its recommendations. (Para 254)

47
The Committee may be informed about the initiatives taken by the Ministry in this
regard. (Para 257)
The Committee observes from the reply given by the Ministry that the clean India
campaign is organized as a mere passive work through media ads, website enabled
awareness generations etc. and there is not a single physical activity proposed in it. So the
Committee is doubtful of its success level as field work groups should be identified and
rigorous visible activities for this aim should be organized in coordination with various local
bodies, State Governments, NGOs, etc. (Para 267)
The Committee also recommends that there is a need for enforcing the clean India
concept among the general public. The Committee may be apprised about the outcome of
the MoU with Ministry of Railways. (Para 270)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 274)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 278)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 281)

MINUTES

50

51
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday the 5 th November, 2012 in Room ‘E’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
3. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
4. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
7. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
8. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
10. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
12. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
13. Shri Prabodh Panda
14. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
17. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
51

52
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered the draft Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its (a) One Hundred Seventy-fifth
Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Culture; (b) One Hundred Seventy-
sixth Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Tourism; and (c) One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry of Shipping. The
Committee after some discussion adopted the reports.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 12.00 N
OON.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.