 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
332
_ 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY SECOND REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations as contained in its Three Hundred Twenty First 
Report on the subject ‘Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation 
Sector’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED THIRTY SECOND REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/ 
observations as contained in its Three Hundred Twenty First 
Report on the subject ‘Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation 
Sector’ 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-26 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   27-28 
    6. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended  
29-31


i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Smt. Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, h aving been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Thirty Second Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/ observations as contained in its Three Hundred 
Twenty First Report on the subject ‘Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation Sector’. 
2. The Three Hundred  Twenty First Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  31st March, 
2022 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Twenty First Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
15th September, 2022. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  25th 
November, 2022.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
November 25, 2022                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 4, 1944 (Saka)                              Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AAIB Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau  
AAIB-UK Air Accidents Investigation Branch-United Kingdom 
AGA Aerodrome and Ground Aids  
AIG Accident and Incident Investigation  
AIR Airworthiness of Aircraft 
AME Aircraft Maintenance Engineer 
ANS Air Navigation Services 
ATCO Air Traffic Controller  
BEA Bureau d'Enquêtes et d'Analyses/ Bureau of Enquiry and Analysis 
CA Civil Aviation 
CAP Corrective Action Plan  
CAR Civil Aviation Requirements 
CE Critical Element 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force  
CMA Continuous Monitoring Approach 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CPL Commercial Pilot License  
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
DFT Directorate of Flying Training  
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DMRL Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory 
DOC Document 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EASA European Union Aviation Safety Agency  
eGCA e-Governance of Civil Aviation 
EGT Exhaust Gas Temperature 
EI Effective Implementation  
EPPM Enforcement Policy and Procedures Manual  
ESR Engineering Statistical Report  
FAA Federal Aviation Administration  
FTO Flying Training Organisation  
GASP Global Aviation Safety Plan  
GST Goods and Services Tax 
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 
ICVM ICAO Coordinated Validation Mission  
IFSD In-Flight Shut Down 
IGRUA Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi  
ILS Instrument Landing System 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
LEG Legislation 
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise  

iv 
 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NAL National Aerospace Laboratories 
NE North-Eastern 
NML National Metallurgical Laboratory 
NTSB National Transportation Safety Board 
OJT On the Job Training 
OPS Aircraft Operations 
ORG Organisation 
PEL Personnel Licensing and Training 
PLI Production-Linked Incentive  
RT-PCR Reverse Transcription–Polymerase Chain Reaction 
SARPs Standards and Recommended Practices 
TSB Transportation Safety Board 
UDAN Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik 
UK United Kingdom 
UP Uttar Pradesh 
USA United States of America  
USOAP Universal Safety Oversight Audit Program 
VFR Visual Flgiht Rules 
VMC Visual Meteorological Conditions 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the recommendations/observations as contained in its T hree Hundred Twenty First 
Report on  „Issues related to S afety in Civil Aviation Sector‟ which was presented to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 31st March, 2022.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 13th September, 2022 in 
respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies hav e been 
categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 19, 24 and 50  
Total: 3 
 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 7, 10, 11, 13, 15, 17, 26, 29, 34, 37, 40, 44, 47, 48, 52 and 56  
Total: 16 
 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 8, 20, 31, 41, 43 and 55  
Total: 6 
 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are 
still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil  
Total: Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
Accident Investigation 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) has been 
allocated a meagre allocation of Rs. 1 crore, against its projected requirement of Rs. 4.40  crore 
in B.E. 2022 -23. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may request the 
Ministry of Finance to provide AAIB with higher allocation at the R.E. 2022 -23 stage so as to 
enable it to perform its functions in the desired manner and contri bute towards improving the 
safety aspect of the civil aviation sector in India. 
 (Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) has surplus funds available in 
comparison to its expenditure. However, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted 
for compliance. 
 
Passenger Safety 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee commends the extensive measures taken by the Ministry for the safety of 
flight passengers, airport staff, CISF and medical personnel, against the spread of the 
Coronavirus pandemic. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that best 
possible measures m ay continue to be employed across the airports in the country to keep a 
check on the rapid spread of any new Coronavirus variants in the future.  
(Para 24) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. Apart from the 
steps taken for prevention of spread of Coronavirus, the guidelines/ instructions issued by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare from time to time regarding prevention of COVID-19 are 
strictly followed at all the airports.  

3 
 
Scheduled Airlines Accident Rate 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee appreciates that India’s Scheduled Airlines Accident Rate is much below 
the world average rate and congratulates the Ministry of Civil Aviation and DGCA for ensuring 
such high safety standards. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may continue to give 
ample focus to ensure best global standards of aviation safety in the civil aviation sector in 
India. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may have similar focussed approach 
towards the safety of helicopter operations as well. 
 (Para 50) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 DGCA has issued several publications like Rules, CARs, Circulars etc. for safe helicopter 
operations. However, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes the mechanism existing at present in order to prevent aircraft 
accidents and thus ensure safety in civil aviation. The Committee recommends that the DGCA 
must regularly coordinate with AAI, various airport operators and airline operators and ensure 
the implementation of its specifications and guidelines regarding aviation safety. State -of-art 
technology may be installed and utilized for prevention of aircraft accidents/ malfunctioning. 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the budgetary allocation 
made to DGCA is sufficient to meet its requirements and it does not face any budgetary shortfall. 
Due focus may also be laid on ensuring that the human resource requirements of DGCA are met 
at all times so that it can effectively carry out the important mandate of ensuring safety in the 
civil aviation sector in the country. 
 (Para 7) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) conducts meetings with stakeholders/ 
airline/ airports operators as and when required for ensuring safe operations of aircraft. DGCA 
takes the input from the stakeholders, as and when required. The Governmen t has recently held 
meeting and sensitised the scheduled airlines to give utmost importance to safety of operations. 
Various steps have been taken which inter-alia include:              
(i) Scheduled Airlines have been asked to increase their engineering r elated capabilities at all 
base stations and transit stations.              
(ii) Additional special audits and spot checks have been ordered by DGCA.     
(iii) Airlines have been asked to take appropriate mitigation action and greater internal 
surveillance to ensure safety of air operations. 
  
1.2 Further, to ensure safety, DGCA implements the regulations and guidelines under 
Aircraft rules 1937 for regulating the airlines‟ operations. Further, these regulations are 

5 
 
amended/ revised by DGCA from time to time based upon the amendments in International Civil 
Aviation Organization ( ICAO) Annexes and based upon safe ty recommendations of Aircraft 
Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) / Directorate of Air safety, DGCA. Compl iance with 
these regulations is ensured during certification and during the regular surveillance of airline 
companies by DGCA. DGCA also conducts the Annual Surveillance Programme so as to meet 
the state obligations and to promote safe, orderly and efficie nt operation of aviation activities for 
safety oversight. 
  
1.3 Budgetary allocation to DGCA is always sufficient to meet its requirements. However, 
the observation of the Committee has been noted.  Further, adequate financial powers have also 
been delegated to DGCA. 
 
Safety of Air Transport Operations 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may review the efficiency of the mechanism 
presently in place for implementation of the processes recommended by ICAO for safety of air 
transport operations, from time to time so that these processes are implemented by the 
concerned organizations in letter and spirit. DGCA may hold periodical meetings with the 
stakeholders involved in the implementation of such processes and iron out any 
difficulties/bottlenecks being faced in following the processes laid down under the various ICAO 
Annexes. Concrete timelines may be prescribed by DGCA for effectuating any changes made by 
ICAO in its Annexes so as to ensure that best possible safety practic es are employed in the 
Indian civil aviation sector. 
 (Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 DGCA has a laid down process for ensuring compliance with the Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPs) laid down in the various ICAO safety -related Annexes. The 
process requires a time -bound action by DGCA wherein on receipt of the amendment to the 
Annexes, the same is reviewed and changes in regulations/ requirements are proposed. 
Thereafter, the draft regulation/ requirement after a stakeholder consultation process are 
finalised. Additionally, DGCA holds meetings with the stakeholders from time to time to discuss 

6 
 
and resolve issues in the implementation of the regulations based on the ICAO  Annexes and 
addresses any bottlenecks to ensure compliance and adherence to the Annexes. The Ministry of 
Civil Aviation regularly monitors the functionality of DGCA. The regulations proposed by 
DGCA are examined by the MoCA and whenever required suitable amendments are done in the 
Aircraft Act, 1934 or the Aircraft Rules, 1937. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee feels that the licensing of personnel including pilots, other Flight crew 
members, Aircraft Maintenance Engineers, Air Traffic Controlle rs etc. is a crucial process with 
a direct effect on the safety of the air transport operations in the country and thus utmost care 
must be taken to ensure that the licensing process for all such personnel is carried out strictly as 
per the established nor ms. The licences thus issued should be renewed periodically after 
carrying out necessary inspection and tests necessary for such approval. The Committee further 
recommends that training programmes may be arranged for different aviation sector personnel 
from time to time in order to keep them updated regarding the best safety practices in the 
aviation sector.  
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The rules for licensing of personnel including Pilots, other Flight Crew Members, 
Aircraft Maintenance Engineers, Air Traffic Controllers etc., are contained in the Aircraft Rules 
1937. To ensure that licensing process is carried out strictly as per the es tablished norms, 
„Training and Procedure Manual‟ is prepared for the guidance of officials performing these 
functions. This manual also contains the training requirements for all such officials for ensuring 
effective compliance of laid down norms. Procedur e for renewal of various license is also laid 
down in the same „Training and Procedure Manual‟ to ensure the compliance of above rules and 
regulations. Pilot license and ratings are issued and renewed only after ensuring strict compliance 
of relevant Aircraft Rules, 1937 and Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs). These licenses/ratings 
are issued and renewed only by Personal Licensing and Training (PEL) trained and qualified 
officers, such officers undergo PEL refresher course once in every two years in accord ance with 
laid down procedures covering aspects of updated regulations, global best practices, ICAO 
Annex amendments etc. In addition to the above, PEL trained and qualified officers periodically 

7 
 
undergo various in -house courses / trainings as well as trai nings conducted by ICAO and other 
Contracting State approved organizations covering aspects of best safety practices in the aviation 
sector.  
  
3.2 DGCA laid down the Civil Aviation Requirements for imparting training and issuance of 
license of personnel involved in maintenance of aircraft. DGCA has adopted international 
standard and best practices of European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) and F ederal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) for issuance of CAR for AME license. DG CA has approved 50 
aircraft maintenance training organisations to impart basic training under CAR -147 (Basic). 
DGCA conducts the modular exams for issuance of license under CAR -66 under proviso of 
Rule-61 of Aircraft Rule 1937. Further, DGCA ensure the compliance of laid down requirements 
issued for issuance of Aircraft Maintenance Engineering License and continuous validity. 
Licenses and ratings are issued and renewed only after en suring compliance of relevant Aircraft 
Rules, 1937 and Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs), in compliance of ICAO Annex 1 
standards. All licenses/ ratings applications are processed through the e-Governance of Civil 
Aviation (eGCA) online portal. Licenses/r atings are Issued and Renewed (as applicable) by 
trained and qualified officers. These officers undergo refresher course periodically in accordance 
with laid down procedures covering aspects of updated regulations, global best practices etc. In 
addition to the above, officers periodically undergo various in-house courses / trainings including 
courses conducted by ICAO covering aspects of best safety practices in the aviation sector. 
 
Safety of Workers/Employees including those operating the Aircraft 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. While the Committee feels that the mechanism presently in place to ensure safety of 
workers/ employees including those operating the aircraft, is satisfactory, steps may be taken to 
review the same from time to time to avoid any complacency. The curriculum of the training 
programme for the aviation sector workers/ employees may also be refreshed from time to time 
and best global safety practices may be incorporated in the same.  
(Para 13) 
 
 

8 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Mechanism is already laid down in CAR for ensuring safety of aircraft and 
workers/employees including personnel involved in aircraft maintenance through providing 
proper skill based training i.e. Refresher/Recurrent/Human Factor for effectively performing 
their privileges.   
  
4.2 Airlines/organizations are responsible for providing technical training from time to time 
as prescribed in Civil Aviation requirements. DGCA ensures the compliance of prescribed 
training requirements through conducting surveillanc e/spot check/night 
surveillance/planned/unplanned surveillance of organization and personnel. 
 
Surveillance of Airlines and Approved Organizations 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee recommends that the frequency of the inspections, audit, spot checks etc. 
carried out by DGCA may be looked into and if need be, the same may be increased in order to 
ensure that the guidelines and instructions issued by DGCA are timely imple mented by the 
concerned organizations. 
 (Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Surveillance program are reviewed from time to time on risk -based methodology to 
include areas where DGCA feels more surveillance are required to be conducted for ensuring 
establishment requirements. DGCA increases the audit frequencies as and when it is required 
apart from the planned surveillance. Besides planned audit, DGCA also conduct unplanned 
audits like Night surveillance, Spot checks. Regulatory Audits, Surveillance  and Spot checks are 
carried out in accordance with the Annual Surveillance Program. In addition, Special Audits are 
carried out with little or no notice with focus on specific areas of concern arising from safety 
issues. 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
Punitive action in case of violations 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee recommends that best global safety standards may be adopted by DGCA 
and suitable action according to international standards may be initiated by DGCA to deter 
serious lapses, in order to further encourage  compliance of safety provisions by concerned 
organizations. 
 (Para 17) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 DGCA has laid down the Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs) in line with the ICAO 
standards and recommended practices as contained in various annexes to the Chicago 
Convention and consistent with the Aircraft Rule 1937 and State requirements. DGCA adopts 
global standards and best practices of Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA), European Union 
Aviation Safety Agency ( EASA) etc. and issues CARs, advisory circulars, guidelines from time 
to time. DGCA ensures the compliances to the approvals, certificates, aut horizations granted at 
the time of issuing and continuous validation. DGCA ensures safety through the mechanism of 
surveillance, spot check, night surveillance etc of the airlines/ organizations and personnel and 
takes action in case, if any serious lapses / non- compliance observed. The enforcement action is 
taken as per the procedure laid down in Enforcement Policy and Procedures Manual (EPPM) 
which include Suspension, Cancellation including imposition of Financial Penalty. The safety 
oversight programme are reviewed/ amended from time to time on risk-based methodology. 
 
Passenger Safety 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee feels that the cost of RT -PCR is prohibitively high in some of the States. 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation, in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
and respective State Governments, may work on lowering the price for mandatory RT -PCR tests 
carried out at airports and to bring a parity in the pricing of the tests at the airports across the 
country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may bring out guidelines to provide space 
at airports to test lab oratories for free and the lab oratories may accordingly reduce the price of 
the RT-PCR tests to the extent possible. 
 (Para 26) 

10 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 RT-PCR tests are conducted at airports as per the rates prescribed by the respective State 
Governments. Moreover, AAI has withdrawn its revenue share for the Covid -19 testing at its 
airports, thereby reducing charges of Covid-19 tests and providing relief to the passengers. 
 
Airworthiness of Aircraft Engines 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee feels that ensuring that all regulations are followed in the import as well 
as maintenance of aircrafts/ aircraft engines is absolutely critical from a safety point  of view. 
The Committee hopes that the surveillance and spot checks to ensure that the aircraft and 
engines are maintained in airworthy condition, are carried out at regular intervals so as to 
ensure the safety of aircraft flights at all times. The stipulated guidelines for quality maintenance 
of engines may be followed and provisions may be made to impose heavy penalty on any airline 
operators found breaking the rules in this regard. The Committee recommends that DGCA may 
hire expert technical personnel wi th the required know -how for carrying out such surveillance 
and spot checks of maintenance of aircraft and aircraft engines in airworthy condition.  
(Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 DGCA carries out the inspection of the organisations, approvals, author isation issues as 
per the established procedures/requirements, however, DGCA ensure the safety of aircraft and 
engines through mechanism of surveillance, spot check, night surveillance etc. DGCA also 
review the Engineering Statistical Report (ESR) every mo nth for scheduled operator and every 
three month of non -scheduled operator to ensure the engine health/trend like engine oil 
consumption, IFSD, EGT etc. Airworthiness officers are qualified and experienced AMEs who 
are trained on regulation, procedure and provided OJT before being assigned responsibility. In 
addition, the officers are trained on surveillance and audit techniques. 
 
Night Landing 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. In view of the significant safety that Instrument Landing System offers in landing of 
aircrafts at night time or in bad weather conditions, the Committee recommends that the 

11 
 
Ministry may make arrangements for installation of Instrument Landing Systems at all functional 
airports across the country at the earliest and a strict timeline may be devised for the same. The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation may work closely with the Ministry of Defence to ensure that 
approvals, if any, that might be needed for installatio n of ILS at civil enclaves, are processed in 
a time-bound, streamlined manner so as to avoid undue delays. 
 (Para 34) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The upgradation of airports, including provision of night landing facility is a continuous 
process, which depends upon operational requirements, traffic demand, commercial feasibility 
etc. and varies from airport to airport in the country. However, AAI and private airport operators 
make every possible effort to make infrastructural improvements at the airports on need basis. To 
sort out the various issues with the Ministry of Defence, regular meetings are convened between 
the two Ministries at different levels including at the level of Hon'ble Ministers. 
 
Air India Express Crash at Kozhikode Airport 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee would like to emphasize upon the need to ensure that runway accidents 
such as the ones that happened in Mangalore (May, 2020) and Calicut (August, 2020) do not 
recur. The Committee recommends that the latest adv anced technological instruments should be 
installed at all the airports in the country so that there is smooth and safe landing during thick 
fog conditions, when there is near zero visibility. It has come to the notice of the Committee that 
the Report on t he aircraft accidents sometimes takes too long to be finalized. The Committee 
feels that a strict timeline should be prescribed for submission of final report after an accident 
has occurred since laxity in the same can cause accidents happening because of similar reasons, 
which could otherwise be avoided if the actual reason is known at the earliest and steps are 
taken timely to ensure that similar instances do not recur. 
 (Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 All Investigations are regularly monitored to ensure completion in a timely and 
professional manner. The time taken to complete an investigation depends on the scope of work 
and its complexity, number of stakeholders involved, extent of component/documenta tion and 

12 
 
examination required etc. All efforts are made to complete the investigations within the 
prescribed period of 12 months. A provision also exists in ICAO Annex 13 wherein at any stage 
of the investigation of an accident or incident, AAIB can issue safety recommendations that it 
considers necessary to be taken promptly to enhance aviation safety. 
 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee appreciates the introduction of liberalized Drone Rules by the Ministry 
and feels th at the same will bring much -needed clarity and regulation for the drone industry 
which is rapidly gaining traction in India and across the world. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry may come up with policy provisions for the promotion of local manuf acture of 
drones in the country, working in coordination with the concerned Ministries/Departments. 
 (Para 40) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The Production -Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for drones and drone components has 
been notified on 30 September 2021 to  promote the manufacturing of drones and drone 
components in India. The details of the PLI scheme are as follows: 
(i) An incentive of Rs. 120 crores have been provided for Indian manufacturers of drone 
and drone components on the basis of their value addition in India, calculated as the 
annual sales revenue from drones and drone components (net of GST) minus the 
purchase cost (net of GST) of drone and drone components. The incentive is spread 
over three financial years commencing from 2021-22. 
(ii) The PLI that can be claimed by a manufacturer is 20% of the value addition by such 
manufacturer. The PLI rate is constant at 20% for all three years. 
(iii) Minimum value addition is specified as 40% of net sales. 
(iv) Eligibility norm for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME s) and start-ups is 
specified as Rs. 2 crore of annual sales revenue for drone manufacturers and Rs. 50 
lacs of annual sales revenue for drone component manufacturers. 
(v) PLI for a beneficiary is capped at 25% of the total annual outlay to allow widening of 
the number of beneficiaries. 

13 
 
(vi) In case a manufacturer fails to meet the threshold for the eligible value addition for a 
particular financial year, the manufacturer will be allowed to claim the lost incentive 
in the subsequent year if the manufacturer makes up the shortfall in the subsequent 
year. 
11.2 The incentive under the PLI scheme is applicable only on domestic value addition and 
will encourage manufacturers to reduce imports and go for higher capacity building and value 
addition in the sector. 
 
Safety of Helicopter Operations 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes that since decades, many lives are lost in helicopter accidents.   The 
Committee feels that the Government should give paramount importance to the safety of 
helicopter operations in the country. The Committee may be apprised of the helicopter accident 
incidents in the country and furnish a comparison of the same with developed countries during 
the last few years. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may thoroughly 
examine the safety provisions presently in place to ensure safe helicopter operations and further 
strengthen the safety features and airworthiness checks for helicopters. The Ministry may bring 
clear guidelines regarding the weather conditions in which helicopt ers can be permitted to be 
operated in a safe manner and work on issuing alerts/warnings to dissuade helicopter operations 
in particular regions owing to inclement weather conditions. 
 (Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Clear guidelines already exist reg arding visibility and distance from clouds in which 
helicopters are permitted to operate in a safe manner, the guidelines for flights in Visual 
Meteorological Conditions (VMC) are mentioned at Para 3.9 of CAR Section 9 Series C Part I. 
In addition, for commercial operations the visibil ity for conduct of Special Visual Flight Rules 
(VFR) flights is mentioned  at Para 1 of Appx A to CAR Section 8 Series O Part IV and the 
training and qualification requirements for the same are mentioned at Para 8 of CAR Sec tion 8 
Series H Part II. For General Aviation operations the same are mentioned at Para 7.6 and Appx 
A respectively, of CAR Section 8 Series O Part V. Further, issuance of alerts/ warnings for 
inclement weather conditions are done by the respective Air Tra ffic Services units, and the same 

14 
 
is available to all operational personnel before flight and at the time of filing the Air Traffic 
Clearance. The comparison between helicopter accidents in India, USA and United Kingdom is 
tabulated below: 
Year India USA UK 
2018 2 129 5 
2019 3 126 1 
2020 0 94 2 
2021 0 123 7 
2022 1 35 0 
  
Audits by International Agencies 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee takes note of the aviation safety and security audits periodically carried 
out in India by ICAO and FAA. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that 
the findings of such audits may be worked upon on a priority basis so as to ensure that India 
maintains the highest possible ratings as per these audits. Internal audits may be carried out on 
a regular basis to track the progress made in addressing the issues identified by the international 
audits and necessary corrective measures may be taken from time to time to stay on course for 
addressing such issues timely. 
 (Para 47) 
Recommendation/Observation 
13.1 The Committee notes that the India’s Effective Implementation (EI) score measured by 
the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP) Continuous Monitoring Approach 
(CMA) presently is 72.93%. The Committee further note s that as per the 2020 -22 edition of 
Global Aviation Safety Plan (GASP), all States are expected to reach the target EI score of 75% 
by 2022. In light of this, the Committee desires that the Ministry/DGCA may work on improving 
India’s EI score and ensure t hat the target EI score of 75% is reached by 2022. DGCA has all 
the technical knowhow and trained manpower in comparison to any other country in the world. 
The Committee desires that DGCA should rise to such a level of efficiency that it should become 
a mo del to be followed by other major countries of the world in implementing the ICAO 
guidelines for safety. 
 (Para 48) 
 

15 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.2 International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) requires the contracting States to 
establish and implement an effective safety oversight system taking into account eight critical 
elements (CEs). “Critical Elements” of the State‟s Safety Oversight System – ICAO has 
identified eight “Critical Elements” of the State‟s Safety Oversight System which require a 
contracting State to: 
1. Establish a comprehensive and effective aviation law.  
2. Establish operating regulations in conformity with the Standards and Recommended Practices 
(SARPs) contained in the Annexes to the Convention on International Civil Aviation. 
3. Establish State system and functions: Establish relevant authorities or government agencies, as 
appropriate, supported by sufficient and qualified personnel and provided with adequate financial 
resources for the management of safety.  
4. Establish techn ical personnel knowledge and training for technical personnel performing 
safety oversight functions.  
5. Establish technical guidance (including processes and procedures), tools (including facilities 
and equipment) and safety critical information for the technical personnel.  
6. Licensing, certification, authorization and approval obligation – Implement processes and 
procedures to ensure that the personnel and organizations performing an aviation activity meet 
the established requirements before they are al lowed to exercise the privileges of a licence,  
certificate, authorization and/or approval to conduct the relevant aviation activity.  
7. Surveillance obligation – Implement processes, such as inspections and audits, to proactively 
ensure that aviation licen ce, certificate, authorization and/or approval holders continue to meet 
the established requirements and function at the level of competency and safety required by the 
State to undertake an aviation -related activity for which they have been licensed, certi fied, 
authorized and/or approved to perform.  
8. Resolution of safety issues – Implement processes and procedures to resolve identified 
deficiencies impacting aviation safety, which may have been residing in the aviation system and 
have been detected by the regulatory authority or other appropriate bodies. In order to ensure that 
States are fulfilling their obligation of safety oversight under the Chicago Convention, ICAO, 
under its Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP), Continuous Monitoring 
Approach (CMA), conducts regular, mandatory, systematic and harmonized safety audits of all 

16 
 
the contracting States. The results of the audit are indicated in terms of the Effe ctive 
Implementation (EI) which is a  measure of the State‟s safety oversight capab ility, calculated for 
each critical element, each audit area or as an overall measure. The EI is expressed as a 
percentage. A high EI shows that the State‟s safety oversight capability is robust and meets the 
ICAO Standards while a low EI is indicative of poor safety oversight capability. The ICAO 
USOAP audit is carried out in the following eight areas: 
 
1. LEG (Primary Aviation Legislation and Specific Operating Regulation)  
2. ORG (Civil Aviation organization)  
3. PEL (Personnel Licensing)   
4. OPS (Aircraft Operations)  
5. AIR (Airworthiness of aircraft)  
6. Accident and Incident Investigation (AIG)  
7. Air Navigation Services (ANS)  
8. Aerodrome and Ground Aids (AGA)  
  
13.3 Based on the previous audits conducted by ICAO, the current EI of India is above the 
world average EI of 67.4%.  
  
13.4 Further, ICAO has planned an ICAO Coordinated Validation Mission (ICVM) of India in 
November, 2022. The scope of the ICVM would cover LE G (Legislation), ORG (Organisation), 
PEL (Personnel Licensing and Training), OPS (Aircraft Operations), AIR (Airworthiness of 
aircraft) and AGA (Aerodromes and Ground Aids) and will include an assessment and validation 
of the implementation of India‟s updated Corrective Action Plans (CAPs) addressing the findings 
from previous USOAP activities. DGCA has commenced preparation for the above ICVM. With 
the actions completed in particular related to the licensing of ATCOs by DGCA and the 
introduction of imposition of fines by DGCA, the score of India during the ICVM in November 
would raise the current EI. 
 
 
 

17 
 
Miscellaneous Recommendations 
Hotels and Ancillary Facilities at Airports 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. In light of the huge 
revenue generation opportunities through building of hotels and ancillary facilities, the 
Committee recommends that AAI may mandatorily carry out feasibility exercises for including 
provisions for hotels and other ancilla ry facilities and wherever feasible, it may be incorporated 
at the DPR stage itself. The feasibility of acquisition of land for such purposes near existing 
airports may also be explored by AAI. 
 (Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The Master Plans for Greenfield Airports are developed earmarking land for Non - 
Aeronautical/ Commercial developments in the city side. The same is also included in the 
financial viability assessment in the DPRs. Further in the existing Airports additional land is 
requested from respective State Governments and Master Plans are prepared incorporating city 
side land plots for Non- Aeronautical/ Commercial Purposes such as Hotels, Restaurants etc. and 
developed on business principles. 
 
Bird Hits 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee takes note of the incidents of bird hits in many parts of India, especially 
in Thiruvananthapuram Airport. In view of the same, the Committee recommends that all 
possible remedial measures may be taken at all airports across the country in order  to minimize 
such incidents at all airports across the country and thus ensure aviation safety. The Ministry 
may reissue the guidelines for compliance by the appropriate authorities. 
 (Para 56) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 DGCA CAR Sec tion 4 Series B Part I Para 9.4 stipulates the requirements for wildlife 
strike hazard reducti on at the Airports. Moreover, D GCA has issued the aerodrome advisory 
circular 6 of 2017 on “Guidance on Wildlife Hazard Management” which includes wildlife 
hazard identification and ris k assessment, wildlife management program, etc. Therefore, DGCA 

18 
 
CAR Sec tion 4 Series B Part I, ICAO DOC 9137 part  3 and DGCA Aerodrome. Advisory 
circular 6 of 2017 are available for all airports for birds/wildlife control at and around the 
Airport. 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee desires to be apprised of the past aircraft/helicopter accidents in the 
country or involving Indian airlines. The Committee may also be informed about the guidelines 
issued by DGCA in view of aircraft/helicopter accidents in India and the monitoring mechanism 
in place for implementation of the same by the concerned organizations across the country. 
 (Para 8) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Detail of aircraft/helicopter accidents from year 2018 to 2021 
Year Total Accidents Helicopter Accidents 
Fixed Wing 
Accident 
2018 8 2 6 
2019 10 3 7 
2020 07 0 7 
2021 09 0 9 
  
1.2 Guidelines issued by DGCA in view of aircraft/helicopter accidents in India:  
DGCA has specified Civil Aviation Requirement in compliance with ICAO Standard and 
Recommended Practices as contained in various Annexes to the ICAO Chicago Convention and 
consistent with the Aircraft Rule 1937 and Aircraft Act 1934.  
 
1.3 Monitoring mechanism in place for implementation:  
Compliance of the Civil Aviation Requirements and conditions of issue of Licence/Approval/Air 
Operator Certificate/Air Operator Permit is assessed through the mechanism of annual 
surveillance program.  

20 
 
1.4 As part of Annual Surveillance Program Surveillanc e, Regulatory Audits and Spot 
Checks of aviation service providers are carried out. In case of violations detected during the 
implementation of Annual Surveillance Program, enforcement action including financial penalty 
is imposed. 
 
1.5 Accidents/Serious Incidents/Incidents are investigated as per the provision of the Aircraft 
(Investigation of Accidents and Incidents) Rules 2017. Safety recommendations emanating from 
the investigation reports are followed up for implementation. Regulatory Assessment is ca rried 
out by the DGCA following an accident or serious incident with an objective to identify 
deviation from the established/approved procedures, conditions of approval or a certificate 
granted to a service provider. Based on the outcome of the Regulatory Assessment, preventive 
measures including enforcement action are taken, as the case may be. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.6 The Committee notes with satisfaction that there have been no helicopter accidents  
in the years 2020 and 2021, as compared to 2 accidents in 2018 and 3 in 2019. However, the 
Committee notes with serious concern that the fixed wing aircraft accidents have been 
increasing steadily from 6 in 2018 to 7 each in 2019 & 2020 and 9 accidents in 2021. The 
Committee would like  to know the reasons for the steady increase in the number of 
accidents and remedial measures taken to stop them. The Committee also recommends that 
root cause for such accidents may be seriously investigated and recommendations of the 
investigation Report s may be implemented without any delay to reduce the number of 
accidents. 
 
Accident Investigation 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the methodologies 
adopted and technology used by AAIB for investigation of aircraft accidents is at par with the 
best global standards for the same, so that the actual reasons that caused an accident can be 
identified and necessary corrective measures can be taken to ensure that similar accidents do not 
recur in the country. 

21 
 
 (Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 AAIB has signed MoU with different laboratories and agencies like DGCA, CSIR-NML, 
CSIR-NAL, and DMRL etc for providing access to their facilities and equipment for use in 
investigations. AAIB is also in process of setting up its own State -of-the-Art Flight Recorders 
Laboratory for joint use by AAIB and DGCA for investigation purpose. Investigation of aircraft 
accidents and incidents are carried out as per Aircraft (Investigation of Accidents and Incidents ) 
Rules, 2017 and in compliance of Standards and Recommended Practices (SARP) contained in 
ICAO Annex 13. Under provisions of ICAO Annex 13, AAIB can also seek assistance from 
Accident Investigation Authorities of Advanced Nations like Bureau of Enquiry an d Analysis 
(BEA),France; National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB), USA;  Transportation Safety 
Board (TSB), Canada; Air Accidents Investigation Branch ( AAIB), UK, etc. in investigation of 
aircraft accidents and serious incidents. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.2 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the AAIB is in the process of setting up 
its own State-of-the-Art Flight Recorders Laboratory for joint use by AAIB and DGCA for 
investigation purpose. The Committee desires to know the present status of setting up of 
said laboratory, fund-position and mechanism with which it will help in accurate and faster 
investigation of accidents. 
 
Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs) 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee feels that Airport Traffic Controllers play an indispensable role in the 
safe operations of aircrafts. The Committee notes that there is a backlog of vacancies in the post 
of ATCOs. The Committee is of the opinion that the demand for ATCOs wi ll rise exponentially 
with the growth of the aviation sector in the country and feels that the Ministry should have 
anticipated the requirement of more number of ATCOs well in advance and inducted ATCOs 
continuously over the years. The Committee, therefore , recommends that procedural issues 
regarding manpower requirements of ATCOs should be addressed in a proactive way to ensure 

22 
 
operationalization of new airports that are being constructed in near future do not suffer due to 
lack of ATCOs.  
(Para 31) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Recently, 340 posts of the ATCOs have been created in Airports Authority of India 
(AAI) to tackle the immediate shortage of ATCOs. Moreover, a proposal for creation of 456 
additional posts of ATCOs has been forwarded to Department of Pu blic Enterprises for their 
concurrence. Further, all efforts are being made by AAI to fill up the existing vacancies/newly 
created posts of ATCOs at the earliest. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.2 The Committee notes the steps taken by the AAI to fill up the existing 
vacancies/newly created posts of ATCOs and desires to know the present status of the 
proposal for creation of 456 additional posts of ATCOs. Also, the Committee would like to 
be apprise d of the vision of the Ministry in terms of creation and filling up of posts of 
ATCOs expeditiously in the near future to ensure smooth and safe operations of aircrafts.   
 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that the Drone Rules, 2021 state that the Central Government may, 
in future, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify safety features to be installed on an 
unmanned aircraft system by persons owning it. The Committee feels that drones pose a safety 
risk to the  people in the area where these are being operated, especially in case the drones 
malfunction or are operated with malafide intentions. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry may notify the safety features that must be installed on d rones, within a strict 
timeline so as to curb the safety risks posed by drones to the extent possible. 
 (Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 As per Drone Rules 2021, the Central Government may, in future, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify safety features to be installed on a drone by persons owning it, which 
may include among others, the following safety features, namely:– 

23 
 
(a) „No Permission – No Takeoff‟ hardware and firmware; 
(b) Real-time tracking beacon that communicates the drone‟s location, a ltitude, speed and 
unique identification number; and 
(c) Geo-fencing capability 
4.2 A six-month lead time will be provided to the industry for compliance from the date of 
publication of such notification. The Central Government may notify the safety features b y 
December 2022. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.3 The Committee reiterates its recommendation to expedite the process of notifying 
the safety features to be installed on an unmanned aircraft system. The Committee would 
also like to know the stance of the Ministry in terms of control over the Drone operations 
once the safety rules are notified. 
 
Core Group on Safety 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee commends the collaborative efforts being made by the various Ministries 
to supplement  each other in improving the safety and security in the respective sectors. The 
Committee recommends that the Core Group may ensure that ISO Safety Audits may be 
conducted periodically so that best safety standards are strictly followed across the various 
verticals of the transport sector in the country. The Committee further recommends that the Core 
Group on Safety may further devise a mechanism to ensure that damage caused by any sort of 
accident in the transport sector is minimized by timely and effectiv e coordination between the 
various Ministries and Departments. 
 (Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 India is a contracting State to the Convention on International Civil Aviation  (ICAO). 
Each contracting state  is required to implement ICAO Standard and Recommended Practices 
(SARPs) laid down in various Annexes to the convention. To meet State obligations, DGCA has 
specified Civil Aviation Requirement in compliance with ICAO Standard and Recommended 
Practices which are consistent with the Aircraft Rule 1937 and Aircraft Act 1934. To ensure their 

24 
 
compliance by aviation industry regular surveillance and audits are carried out as per the Annual 
Surveillance Program. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
5.2 The Commi ttee notes the reply and would also like to know the comments of the 
Ministry on the recommendation of the Committee that  the Core Group on Safety may 
further devise a mechanism to ensure that damage caused by any sort of accident in the 
transport sector is minimized by timely and effective coordination between the various 
Ministries and Departments. 
 
Miscellaneous Recommendations 
Pilot Training 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may strive to have pilot training facilities 
and runways at all the existing small airports and the new airports being constructed under the 
UDAN scheme, to fulfil the aspirations of Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision of skill development 
in civil aviation sector. Adequate space for the trainee pilots to keep their training materials may 
also be provided within the premises of Airport. Wherever feasible, provisions for creation of 
pilot training facilities with adequate space inside the airport may be incorporated at the DPR 
stage itself. 
 (Para 55) 
6.1 Reply of the Ministry 
1. India issued 862 Commercial Pilot Licenses (CPLs) in the year 2021. However, 40% of 
CPLs have been issued to cadets who have undergone their flying training in a Foreign 
FTO. We are expanding the capacity of Indian FTOs wit h a view to reduce the 
dependence on foreign FTOs. 
2. FTOs are regulated by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA). The Aircraft 
Rules, 1937, require that the flying experience required for issue of private pilot and 
commercial pilot licenses shall be acquired only at DGCA-approved FTO. 

25 
 
3. DGCA follows a five -phase certification process for setting up a FTO to check all the 
laid down rules and regulations. The Directorate of Flying Training (DFT) at DGCA 
conducts scheduled annual inspections and unscheduled spot checks at FTOs. 
4. There are 35 DGCA -approved Flying Training Organisations (FTOs) in the 
country.  Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi ( IGRUA) at Amethi (UP) is under the 
administrative control of the Central Government. Eight FTOs are under State  
Governments and 26 are owned by the private sector. 
5. Airports Authority of India (AAI) has, on 25th September 2020, come up with a 
liberalised Flying Training Organisations (FTO s) policy wherein the concept of airport 
royalty (revenue share payment by FTOs  to AAI) has been abolished and land rentals 
have been significantly rationalised. 
6. AAI has issued award letters on 31st May 2021 and 29 October 2021 for nine FTOs to be 
established at five airports at Belagavi (Karnataka), Jalgaon (Maharashtra), Kalaburagi  
(Karnataka), Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh) and Lilabari (Assam). Soft launch of two 
FTOs at Kalaburagi was done on 15th August 2021 under the liberalised policy. Lilabari 
FTO, the First ever FTO in North-Eastern ( NE) States has been inaugurated on 12th 
April, 2022 and the remaining eight FTOs are targeted to be made operational by the end 
of 2022. 
6.2 Furthermore, in the second round 6 FTOs have been awarded at 5 Airports viz., 
Kishangarh, Hubballi, Kadapa, Bhavnagar and Salem Airports on 3rd June 2022. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
6.3 The Committee commends the steps taken to increase pilot training facilities. It 
would like to know the status of the operatio nalization of remaining 8 FTOs.  The 
Committee would also like to reiterate its recommendation to create provisions for creation 
of pilot training facilities with adequate space inside the airport may be incorporate d at the 
DPR stage itself. Further, the Committee may be apprised of the action taken to remove 
the deficiencies emerging out of audit of these schools recently.  
  

26 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil - 
 
***** 
  

27 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that there have been no helicopter accidents in the 
years 2020 and 2021, as compared to 2 accidents in 2018 and 3 in 2019. However, the 
Committee notes with serious concern that the fixed wing aircraft accidents have been 
increasing steadily from 6 in 2018 to 7 each in 2019 & 2020 and 9 accidents in 2021. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons for the steady increase in the number of 
accidents and remedial measures taken to stop them. The Committee also recommends that 
root cause for such accidents may be seriously investigated and recommendatio ns of the 
investigation Reports may be implemented without any delay to reduce the number of 
accidents. 
(Para 1.6) 
Accident Investigation 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the AAIB is in the process of setting up its own 
State-of-the-Art Flight Recorders Laboratory for joint use by AAIB and DGCA for 
investigation purpose. The Committee desires to know the present status of setting up of 
said laboratory, fund-position and mechanism with which it will help in accurate and faster 
investigation of accidents. 
(Para 2.2) 
Air Traffic Controllers (ATCOs) 
The Committee notes the steps taken by the AAI to fill up the existing vacancies/newly 
created posts of ATCOs and desires to know the present status of the proposal for creation 
of 456 additional posts of  ATCOs. Also, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
vision of the Ministry in terms of creation and filling up of posts of ATCOs expeditiously in 
the near future to ensure smooth and safe operations of aircrafts.   
(Para 3.2) 

28 
 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation to expedite the process of notifying the 
safety features to be installed on an unmanned aircraft system. The Committee would also 
like to know the stance of the Ministry in terms of control over the Drone  operations once 
the safety rules are notified. 
(Para 4.3) 
Core Group on Safety 
The Committee notes the reply and would also like to know the comments of the Ministry 
on the recommendation of the Committee that  the Core Group on Safety may further 
devise a mechanism to ensure that damage caused by any sort of accident in the transport 
sector is minimized by timely and effective coordination between the various Ministries and 
Departments. 
(Para 5.2) 
Miscellaneous Recommendations 
Pilot Training 
The Committee commends the steps taken to increase pilot training facilities. It would like 
to know the status of the operationalization of remaining 8 FTOs. The Committee would 
also like to reiterate its recommendation to create provisions for creation of  pilot training 
facilities with adequate space inside the airport may be incorporated at the DPR stage 
itself. Further, the Committee may be apprised of the action taken to remove the 
deficiencies emerging out of audit of these schools recently.  
(Para 6.3) 
***** 

91 
 
_________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________ 
 
  
29

92 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25 th November, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
5. Shri A. A. Rahim 
6. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES: xxx xxx xxx  
___________________ 
 xxx Relate to other matters. 
  
30

93 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e. (i) to consider and adopt the 
five draft Reports on Action Taken by the government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its various Reports; and 
 (ii)  xxx xxx xxx 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda of the meeting i.e. consideration 
of the five draft Action Taken Reports on the following Reports of the Committee: 
(i)  xxx xxx xxx 
(ii)  xxx xxx xxx 
(iii)  xxx xxx xxx 
(iv)  xxx xxx xxx 
(v)  321st Report on Issues related to Safety in Civil Aviation Sector; 
  
4. The Committee considered the said draft Reports and after a brief discussion, adopted 
all the five draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry out minor 
modifications of typographical and factual errors.  
  
5 to 35.The Committee also au thorized Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak, M.P. and in her absence, 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, M.P., to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha on 13 th 
December, 2022 and Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Chhedi Paswan, M.P. to 
lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date.  xxx xxx xxx 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
36. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
37. The meeting adjourned at 5:04 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi,       Swarabji B. 
25th November, 2022     Director 
 
___________________ 
 xxx Relate to other matters. 
31