 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
 
REPORT NO. 
295
_ 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT  
Potential of Tourist Spots in the Country - Connectivity and 
Outreach 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th July, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th July, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIFTH REPORT  
Potential of Tourist Spots in the Country - Connectivity and 
Outreach 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th July, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th July, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
  
Hindi Version of this publication is 
also available 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A GE S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION          (iv) 
3. ACRONYMS                (v)-(viii) 
4. REPORT                                 1 - 54 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   55 - 74 
    6. MINUTES  75- 82  
7. ANNEXURES        83 - 105 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. *Kumari Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
9. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
12.  Shri Anto Antony 
13.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
14.  Shri Tapir Gao  
15.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
17.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
18.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
19.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
20.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
21.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
22.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
23.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
24.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
26.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
29.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
_________________________________________________________ 
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020  
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd April, 2020 and re-nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd  
July, 2020  
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
 (i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. *Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
10. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat   
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
________________________________________________________  
*Shri Raj Babbar ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020  
**Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 
(ii) 
  

SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety Fifth Report on 'Potential of Touris t Spots in the 
Country - Connectivity and Outreach'. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Association of Domestic Tour Operators of 
India, Indian Association of Tour Operators, Indian Tourist Transporters Association and 
Federation of Association in Indian Tour ism & Hospitality on the subject on 13 th October, 
2020. The Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of Tourism, ITDC, State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh, Tourism Police, Travel & Tour operators, Hoteliers etc. on 
the subject at Visakhapatnam on 7th January, 2020. The Committee heard the views of the 
officials of Ministry of Tourism, ITDC, State Government of Maharashtra, Tourism Police, 
Travel & Tour operators, Hoteliers etc. on the subject at Mumbai on 9th January, 2020. The 
Committee heard the views of the officials of Ministry of Tourism on the subject  during the 
onboard Cruise Ship from Mumbai to Goa  on 10th January, 2020. The Committee heard the 
views of the officials of Ministry of Tourism;  UT Government of Jammu & Kas hmir; J&K 
Police; Institute of Hotel Management, Srinagar; Indian Institute of Skiing & 
Mountaineering, Gulmarg; and various stakeholders of Tourism sector on the subject at 
Gulmarg on 22 nd January, 2021. The Committee heard the views of  officials of Ministry of 
Tourism on 19th April, 2021. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Tourism; ITDC; State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra;  UT Government of Jammu & Kashmir; 
J&K Police; Tourism Police ; Travel & Tour operators ; Hoteliers; and other private 
stakeholders for placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  25th 
June, 2021.   
 
 
 (T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                             Chairman, 
June 25 , 2021                                                                Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
4 Ashadha, 1943 (Saka)                                  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                  Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
ALM Asset and Liability Management 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ATOAI Adventure Tour Operators Association of India 
B&B Bed and Breakfast 
BE Budget Estimates 
BOQs Bill of Quantities 
BSF Border Security Force 
CBEC Central Board of Excise and Customs 
CBSP Capacity Building for Service Providers 
CC Cash Credit 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
ChPT Chennai Port Trust 
CRIF Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
CoPT Cochin Port Trust  
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CRIF Central Road and Infrastructure Fund 
CRISIL Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited 
CSSS Champion Services Sector Scheme 
DCCO Date of Commencement of Commercial Operations 
DEA Department of Economic Affairs 
DFS Department of Financial Services 
DIPP Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
DPPH Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DSCR Debt Service Coverage Ratio 
EBITDA Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and 
Amortization 
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
 
                  (v) 

   EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
EPCG Export Promotion Capital Goods 
EPF Employee Provident Fund 
EPFO Employees' Provident Fund Organization 
FB Funds Book 
FCI Food Craft Institute 
FEE Foreign Exchange Earnings 
FIs Financial Institutions 
FTAs Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
FY Financial Year 
GECL Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line 
GFC Good for Construction 
GITB Great Indian Travel Bazaar 
GoI Government of India 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
HML Harmonised Master List  
IC Independent Charge 
ICI Indian Culinary Institute 
IDBI Industrial Development Bank of India 
IHMs Institutes of Hotel Management 
IHR Indian Himalayan Region 
IIB&B Incredible India Bed & Breakfast 
IISM International Institute of Sports Management 
IITF Incredible India Tourist Facilitator 
IITTM Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management 
INR Indian Rupee 
IRCTC Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation 
ITAs International Tourist Arrivals 
ITC Input Tax Credit 
ITDC India Tourism Development Corporation 
ITM International Tourism Mart 
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
IWT Inland Water Transport 
   J&K Jammu and Kashmir  
JMVP Jal Marg Vikas Project 
MbPT Mumbai Port Trust 
 
                (vi) 

MD Managing Director 
MDA Market Development Assistance 
MICE Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Events 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MoPT Mormugao Port Trust 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoT Ministry of Tourism 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
MT Metric Ton 
MUDRA Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency  
NBFC Non- Banking Financial Company  
NCAER National Council for Applied Economic Research 
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trusty Company 
NCHMCT National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology 
NCSM National Council of Science Museums 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NIDHI National Integrated Database of Hospitality Industry 
NITI National Institute for Transforming India 
NIWS National Institute of Water Sports 
NMPT New Mangalore Port Trust 
NPA Non Performing Asset 
NRI Non- Resident Indian 
NWs National Waterways 
O&M Operations and Maintenance 
OPMD                Overseas Promotion and Publicity including Marketing Development 
OPP                 Overseas Promotion and Publicity 
OTA Online Travel Aggregators 
   OTM Outbound Travel Mart 
OTR One Time Restructuring 
PPP Public- Private Partnership 
PRASHAD                Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation Drive 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
 
                (vii) 

RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
SAATHI System for Assessment, Awareness and Training for Hospitality 
Industry 
SBI                 State Bank of India  
SCBs                 Scheduled Commercial Banks 
SD Swadesh Darshan 
SDS Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
SEIS Service Export from India Scheme 
SGoS Sectoral Group of Secretaries 
SIDBI Small Industries Development Bank of India 
SMA Special Mention Account 
SMS Short Message Service 
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures 
TCS Tax Collected at Source 
TFC Tourist Facilitator Certification 
TVCs Television Commercials 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UDAN Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UT                 Union Territory 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
India is one of the popular tourist destinations in Asia. India has fascinated people from all 
over the world with her secularism and her culture. Bounded by the Himalayan ranges in the 
North and surrounded on three sides by sea i-e. Arabian sea, Bay of Bengal and Indian Ocean, 
India offers a wide array of places to see and things to do. The enchanting backwaters, hill 
stations and landscapes make India a beautiful country with a huge tourism potential. There 
are historical monuments, beaches, places of religious interests, hill resorts, etc. that attract 
tourists. Every region is identified with its handicraft, fairs, folk dances, music and its people.  
Hence, India is a country with a great potential for tourism.  The tourism industry employs a 
large number of people, both skilled and unskilled. It promotes national integration and 
international brotherhood. Tourism is highly labour intensive industry of a unique type. It 
provides different services needed as well as expected by the incoming tourists. At the world 
level, it is one of the largest in terms of money spent by tourists in the countries they visit. The 
Indian hotel industry particularly, expects a major part of their income from tourists. There is 
no other country in the world which offers such wide choice of destination s like India. The 
services rendered to foreign tourists visiting India are the invisible products of tourism 
industry. These products, i.e., hospitality services of all sorts for tourists tu rn into invisible 
exports because these are included in this category. More the foreign exchange earnings, 
greater is the gain. In the same manner more the number of visitors from foreign countries, 
more is our foreign exchange earnings.  It is in this back drop that the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the 
subject “ Potential of Tourist Spots in the Country - Connectivity and Outreach ” for 
examination and Report thereon.  
2.  In this connection, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of 
Tourism; Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser, Ministry of Tourism; Director-General, 
Ministry of Tourism; and Chairman & Managing Director , ITDC; on 23rd October, 2019 a nd 
18th March, 2020 and 16 th February, 2021. The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of 
Tourism in its meetings held on 18 th March, 2020 and 19 th April, 2021. The Committee also 
heard the stakeholders of the Tourism industry on 13 th October, 2020. The Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture undertook a study visit 
to Visakhapatnam, Mumbai and Goa from 7 th to 12 th January, 2020; and a study visit to 
Srinagar and Gulmarg from 21 st to 23 rd January, 2021 and interacted with the Secretary, 
Ministry of Tourism , State Government / UT representatives and various stakeholders  of the 

2 
 
tourism industry on different subjects and also undertook on -the-spot study. A questionnaire 
on the subject was forwarded to Ministry of Tourism  and written replies were obtained on 
various aspects of the Ministry and on its efforts  and progress  to harness the potential of 
Tourist spots in the country.  
3.  Some of the major points discussed during the deliberations of the Committee are:  
         (i) Development of Tourism Infrastructure  under Swadesh Darshan and PRASHAD 
Scheme;  
(ii)  Assistance to Central Agencies;  
(iii) Connectivity Related Issues;  
(iv)  Digital Connectivity and Outreach;  
(v)  Domestic Promotion and Publicity;  
(vi) Overseas Promotion and Publicity;  
(vii) Development of Adventure Tourism;  
(viii) Safety and Security of Tourists;  
(ix)  Development of Cruise Tourism;  
(x) Training and Skill development; and 
(xi)  Impact of Covid-19 pandemic on Travel and Hospitality Sector. 
Development of Tourism Infrastructure  
(a)  Swadesh Darshan Scheme    
4. One of the issues which was at the centre stage of the deliberations of the Committee 
was to provide better connectivity to the sites identified for development under thematic 
circuits of Swadesh Darshan Scheme (SDS) (Integrated Development of Theme-Based Tourist 
Circuits), launched in January , 2015. Under SDS, fifteen thematic circuits identified for 
development are: North -East India Circuit, Buddhist Circuit, Himalayan Circuit, Coastal 
Circuit, Krishna Circuit, Desert Circuit, Tribal Circuit, Eco Circuit, Wildlife Circuit, Rural 
Circuit, Spiritual Circuit, Ramayana Circuit, Herita ge Circuit, Tirthankar Circuit and  Sufi 
Circuit. 

3 
 
5. In reply to a question, the Committee has been informed that the Ministry of Tourism 
has identified 15 th emes under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme for the development of theme 
based circuits. As on date, Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned 75 projects across 31 
States/Union Territories for an amount of Rs.5865 Crore under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
of which an amount of Rs.3877 Crore ha s been released for implementing the projects. The 
detailed status of projects sanctioned under 15 thematic circuits is as under: 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the Theme No. of 
Projects 
sanctioned 
Amount 
Sanctioned 
(INR in Cr.) 
Amount 
Released 
(INR in Cr.) 
Physical 
Progress  
% 
1 Buddhist 5 355 222 62% 
2 Coastal 10 767 509 71% 
3 Desert 1 64 51 100% 
4 Eco 7 585 419 71% 
5 Heritage 10 837 508 62% 
6 Himalayan 7 639 411 57% 
7 Krishna 2 189 124 90% 
8 North East 9 761 518 67% 
9 Ramayana 2 203 155 83% 
10 Rural 2 125 45 16% 
11 Spiritual 12 700 425 54% 
12 Sufi - - - - 
13 Tirthankar 1 52 26 72% 
14 Tribal 4 380 302 82% 
15 Wildlife 2 188 150 89% 
 Sub Scheme Way-side 1 18 11 52% 
 TOTAL 75 5865 3877  
 
6. In its written reply, the Ministry has apprised the Committee that the guidelines for 
development of tourism infrastructure under the SDS and PRASHAD scheme s have been 
developed with the following objectives: 
• Community -based development through ‘Pro -Poor’ tourism concept and 
‘responsible tourism’ initiatives.  

4 
 
• Active involvement of local communities.  
• Creating awareness among the local communities about the importance of tourism for 
them in terms of increase in sources of income, improved living standards and overall 
development of the area.  
• Promote heritage in the form of heritage structures especially under integrated 
tourism development of heritage city, local arts, culture, handicrafts, cuisine, etc., to 
generate livelihood in the identified places.  
• Generate sufficient job opportunities for locals as part of the execution and after 
completion of the projects. 
7. The Committee is constrained to note that despite the SDS being launched way 
back in January, 2015, only one of the 15 thematic circuits under the Scheme has been 
completed and the physical progress in respect of the remaining 14 circuits ranges from 
16 percent to 90 pe rcent which is far from being satisfactory. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry that all the destination points covered under the thematic 
Ramayana circuit, Buddhist circuit and Himalayan circuit have high tourist value and 
mythological significance, which will go a long way in promoting cultural and heritage 
value of the country besides earning valuable foreign exchange income . Even the 
important thematic circuits that have potential of attracting both international and 
domestic tourists, th e physical progress and development of amenities in these circuits 
from 2015 is less than 70%. Therefore, we can not give impetus to tourism without 
providing an integrated approach where apart from good stay arrangements , 
multimodal connectivity and wayside amenities should also be developed.  Hence the 
potential of many tourist sites under these identified circuits is still untapped. Since the 
creation of good tourism infrastructure is a pre -requisite towards attracting more 
tourist, both domestic and international , to the t ourist destinations and also has had its 
multiplier effect in terms of employment generation and increased National and State 
revenues apart from improving the country’s tou rism productive capacity, t he 
Committee recommends that the Government must take st ringent measures for 
expediting the completion of remaining 14 thematic circuits in a time bound manner. 
7.1. According to a Report by NITI Aayog on ‘Sustainable Tourism in the Indian 
Himalayan Region’, the Indian Himalayan Region (IHR) tourism has experie nced a 
continued growth and increasing diversification over the last few decades and is 

5 
 
expected to grow at an average annual rate of 7.9% from 2013 to 2023. Keeping in view 
the tourist potential of this area, the Committee recommends that tourist sites under the 
Himalayan circuit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme should be developed on priority basis 
with modern infrastructure and air connectivity to boost both domestic and 
international tourism.  
7.2. Buddhism is not limited to India only but is also followed in countries such as 
Cambodia, Thailand, Myanmar, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Vietnam and Japan. 
The Committee is also aware of the potential of Buddhism tourist sites in India 
especially in the North -Eastern region. The Ministry had already identified Budd hism 
and North -East circuit s among the 15 thematic circuits of Swadesh Darshan Scheme. 
The Committee would, therefore, recommend that sites under these two circuits should 
be developed on priority in an integrated manner to attract tourists from the above  
mentioned countries which would not only boost foreign exchange earnings but will also 
generate employment opportunities in the country. 
8. The Committee observes that  rural tourism is one of the few emerging 
dimensions of the Tourism industry, but is very less emphasized upon. Till date, only two 
projects have been approved under the rural circuit of SDS and funds were released only 
for the one. India being rich in tradition of arts, crafts and culture, rural tourism, if 
exploited intelligently in a sustaina ble manner ha s the potential to provide sustainable 
livelihood to rural communities. Rural areas especially in the States of Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Odisha, Kerala, North -east region etc. are still unexplored and 
needs to be focused upon. The Ministry should develop schemes/ programmes that 
showcase the rural life, art, culture and heritage at rural locations, thus benefiting the 
local community economically and socially  by enabling interactions between the tourists 
and the locals for a more enriching tourism experience. The Committee simultaneously 
recommends that the Government should adopt a proactive interventionist approach to 
ensure that the pro -poor tourism approach leads to redistribution of resources and 
opportunities to the poor and marginalized and address es the larger picture of poverty 
reduction because a well coordinated programme for tourism infrastructure 
development can give significant returns and can create sustainable livelih ood in the 
rural areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that more rural areas should be 
included in tourism circuits in the country so that connectivity to these areas is boosted 

6 
 
with infrastructure development for ease of travel and the goal of pro -poor tourism i.e., 
to bring out benefit to the poor and marginalized through tourism activities is realized. 
9. The Committee has also been informed that the Ministry is focusing on improving 
connectivity to the 19  identified Iconic Sites as well as to important Buddhist sites in the 
country. On being asked about the outlay for development of the Iconic Sites for 2020 -21 and 
the forward movement made in the implementation, the Committee has been informed that 
Ministry of Tourism has submitted the EFC Note to the MoF in October, 2019 for approval of 
the scheme for the Development of Iconic Tourist Sites. The EFC meeting regarding the same 
is yet to be held. Funds will be allocated for the scheme after the same is approved. In the 
meantime, the consultants appointed by the Ministry have formulated the draft master plans 
and identified shelf of projects for all the 19 identified Iconic sites based on consultations held 
with stakeholders both at the Centre and the State level which includes Central Ministries and 
Departments, respective State Governments and Departments, local communities, travel and 
trade associations, etc. 
10. The Ministry had identified 19 Iconic tourist sites such as Taj Ma hal and 
Fatehpur Sikri (Uttar Pradesh); Ajanta & Ellora (Maharashtra); Humayun’s Tomb, 
Red Fort and Qutub Minar (Delhi); Colva (Goa); Amer Fort (Rajasthan); Somnath and 
Dholavira (Gujarat); Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh) ; Hampi and Mysore (Karnataka); 
Mahabalipuram (Tamil Nadu); Kaziranga (Assam); Kumarakom (Kerala); Konark 
(Odisha); and Mahabodhi Temple (Bihar). The Committee would recommend that 
development of these sites should be taken up in a prioritized manner and each target 
should be fixed and a  clear project implementation timeline should be created for 
completion of the projects as all these sites have the potential to attract both 
international and domestic tourists. 
10.1. The Committee notes that pursuant to the Budget announcement of 2020 -21, the 
Ministry of Tourism has identified 19 Iconic sites for development as world class tourist 
destinations. Since the project involves various central Ministries, State Governments/ 
Union Territories and other stakeholders, the Committee recommends that a robust 
coordination mechanism of the concerned Central Ministries, State Governments/ 
Union Territories and other stakeholders be put in place for prompt resolution of 
issues/ bottlenecks.  
10.2. The Committee notes that the Ministry had identified 19 Ic onic tourist sites for 
tourism infrastructure development in the country. Since most of these tourist sites are 
hugely popular among international tourists, these sites should have proper air 

7 
 
connectivity. The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the M inistry that the 
Iconic tourist sites that have domestic airports only, their status should be converted to 
that of an international airport on priority basis for ease of traveling of international 
travelers. Further, the Iconic tourist sites which do not have direct air connectivity , a 
proposal for development of Greenfield Airports should be initiated at such tourist sites 
in order to boost both domestic and international tourism. 
 
11. The Committee also notes that availability of land free from all encumbrances is 
the responsibility of the respective State Governments/ Union Territories. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
12. The Committee has been informed that one of the major objective s of the tourism 
infrastructure development schemes including the PRASHAD scheme is to generate 
employment through active involvement of local communities. The development under the 
scheme is focused on community based development with pro -poor tourism appr oach. It is 
expected that projects sanctioned under the scheme during its execution and after completion 
will be able to generate sufficient job opportunities for the locals.  
 
13. The Ministry has also informed that the lockdown due to COVID -19 has affected the 
implementation of the projects. The State Governments have informed that the work on most 
of the sites has stopped due to non -availability of the workers. Ministry of Tourism has 
agreed for extension of completion of the projects timelines, whenever  a request is received 
from the State Government s/implementing agency regarding the same. In addition, Ministry 
of Tourism has revised the guidelines for the Swadesh Darshan Scheme as per which 4 th 
installment amounting to 15% of the sanctioned project cost  is released in advance on receipt 
of Utilization Certificate in respect of funds released earlier to provide addition al liquidity to 
the states for completing the sanctioned projects.    
 
14. To a query regarding the impact of development of tourism infra structure under the 
SDS and PRASHAD Schemes on livelihood benefits to locals and promotion of pro -poor 
tourism, the Ministry has informed that the guidelines of the Swadesh Darshan and  
PRASHAD Schemes have been developed with the following objectives: 

8 
 
• Community-based development through ‘Pro -Poor’ tourism concept and 
‘responsible tourism’ initiatives. 
• Active involvement of local communities.  
• Creating awareness among the local communities about the importance of tourism 
for them in terms of increase in sources of income, improved living standards and 
overall development of the area. 
• Promote heritage in the form heritage structures especially under integrated 
tourism development of heritage city, local arts, culture, handicrafts, cuisine, etc., 
to generate livelihood in the identified places. 
• Generate sufficient job opportunities for locals as part of the execution and after 
completion of the projects.  
 
15. Shedding light on the funding pattern of the SDS and PRASHAD Schemes, the 
Ministry has furnished the following information: 
15.1. Under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, two funding patterns are being followed: 
I. Funding pattern for projects sanctioned upto October, 2017 
Sl. 
No 
Instalment Amount to be released Condition 
1. 1st 20% of the sanctioned 
cost of the project 
On sanction of the project  
2. 2nd 30% of the sanctioned 
cost of the project minus 
unutilized amount of 1st 
installment 
After utilization of minimum 75% of the 
first instal lment and submission of UC 
in the prescribed format 
3. 3rd 30% of the  sanctioned 
cost of the project minus 
unutilized amount of 2nd 
installment 
After utilization of 100% of 1st 
installment and minimum 75% of the 
second instal lment and submission of 
UC in the prescribed format 
4. 4th 15% of the sanctioned 
cost of the project m inus 
unutilized amount of 3rd 
installment 
After utilization of 100% of 1st and 2nd 
installment and minimum 75% of the 
third instal lment and submission of UC 
in the prescribed format 
5 Physical No release of funds. Certificate of 100% physical completion 

9 
 
Completion 
of the 
Project 
Milestone for 100%  
physical completion of 
the project 
of the project from Implementing 
Agency countersigned by 
Administrative Secretary. UC of the 
amount released so far to be submitted 
in the prescribed format. 
Final Project Cost to be frozen. Excess 
amount, if any, to be refunded to the 
Ministry. 
6. 5th 5% of the sanctioned cost After successful O&M of Toilet TFC, 
Cafeteria facilities for one year as 
certified by an independent agency. 
7. Final 
Closure of 
the Project 
No release of funds. 
Milestone for final 
closure of the project 
Final Utilization Certificate of funds 
released to the Implementing Agency to 
be submitted and project closed by the 
Ministry 
 
II. Funding pattern for projects sanctioned after November, 2017  
Sl. 
No 
Instalment Amount to be released 
1. 1st 30% of the project cost on submission of work orders, Good for 
construction DPR with GFC statuary approvals from respective 
agencies for construction initiation and detailed BOQs  
2. 2nd 30% of the project cost aft er receipt of utilization certificate for the 
first installment 
3. 3rd 25% of the project cost after receipt of utilization certificate for the 
second installment 
4. 4th 10% of the project cost on completion of the work and receipt of 
utilization certificate 
5 5th 5% of the project cost after successful O&M of Toilet, TFC, 
Cafeteria facilities for one year as certified by an independent 
agency 
 
15.2. Implementing agencies can approach the Ministry of Tourism for release of next 
installment of funds after submission of UC for 75% of released funds.  

10 
 
 
16. The objective of the Swadesh Darshan Scheme is to develop basic infrastructure and 
other enabling facilities at the destinations to attract the Private Investors to develop products 
needed by the tourists and are revenue earning in nature such as Resorts, Hotels, Amusement 
Parks, Convention Centers, etc . under PPP model. The PRASHAD and  Swadesh Darshan 
Schemes also have a provision to explore for PPP partner for operation, maintenance and 
sustenance of the facilities created. 
 
17. The Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model has been explored in number of projects 
under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme. Various St ate Governments have started taking 
initiatives in leveraging the assets developed under Swades h Darshan Scheme to attract 
private investors in developing products such as resorts, hotels, amusement parks, convention 
centers, etc. under PPP model. One such example is of Odisha , wherein at Gopalpur various 
components developed under Swadesh Darshan S cheme are being leveraged by the State 
Government to develop additional land of 28 acres by way of setting up of Wellness Resort 
and Hotel under PPP mode.  The Swadesh Darshan and  PRASHAD Schemes also have a 
provision to explore for PPP partner for operation, maintenance and sustenance of the 
facilities created. 
18. Informing the Committee about the improvement in connectivity due to infrastructure 
development under SDS and PRASHAD  Schemes, it has been stated that the Ministry of 
Tourism under the Swadesh Darshan and PRASHAD Schemes is providing last mile 
connectivity to improve accessibility to the destinations/ facilities being created as part of the 
projects sanctioned under the above schemes which include developing/improving approach 
road, nature trails, construction of helipads, river cruises, jetties, ropeways, passenger sheds, 
illumination, etc. Out of the 75 Projects sanctioned under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme, a 
total of Rs. 22,471 Lakh has been provided for the improvement of accessibility at 177 sites 
across the country. Under the PRASHAD Scheme, last mile connectivity has been provided 
in all the 30 projects sanctioned under the scheme. The details of the State -wise sanctioned 
amount for improving connectivity are given below: 
Sl. 
No 
State Road Air Rail Total 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 336 179 - 516 
2 Assam 827 - - 827 
3 Bihar 406 - - 406 

11 
 
4 Chhattisgarh 364 - - 364 
5 Goa 273 344 - 617 
6 Gujarat 426 - - 426 
7 Himachal Pradesh - 300 - 300 
8 Jammu & Kashmir 725 24 - 749 
9 Kerala 2,737 - - 2,737 
10 Madhya Pradesh 1,762 - - 1,762 
11 Maharashtra 664 - - 664 
12 Meghalaya 2,855 - - 2,855 
13 Mizoram 258 - - 258 
14 Nagaland 981 - - 981 
15 Odisha 714 - - 714 
16 Puducherry 230 - - 230 
17 Punjab 633 - - 633 
18 Rajasthan 340 - 1,937 2,277 
19 Sikkim 649 - - 649 
20 Telangana 486 - - 486 
21 Tripura 188 - - 188 
22 Uttar Pradesh 2,129 374 - 2,503 
23 Uttarakhand 973 - - 973 
24 West Bengal 361 - - 361 
 
Total 19,314 1,221 1,937 22,471 
 
19. The Committee notes that the objectives of the SDS and PRASHAD Schemes 
inter-alia include pro -poor tourism concept, active involvement of local communities 
and generation of sufficient job opportunities for locals as part of the execution and 
after completion of the projects. The Committee observes that it has often been seen 
that the local people do not benefit from new tourism business due to multiple factors 
like capacity constraints, inadequate financial resources for enterprises, lack of business 
opportunities, etc. and also because the poor and marginalized communities do not have 
the avenues to negotiate with tourism companies. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government must adopt a proactive interventionist approach to 
effectively implement the SDS and PRASHAD Schemes in line with pro-poor principles. 

12 
 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry in close coordination with State 
Governments/ Union Territories should create robust and clear policies that cater for 
the needs of locals, expand business and employment policies for the poor through 
capacity building and  enterprise support and contribute to local livelihoods. The 
Ministry must also focus on skill development to enable local community to take up 
skilled jobs during the execution and after the completion of projects under the SDS 
and PRASHAD Schemes. 
(b) PRASHAD Scheme 
20. The Ministry in its background note informed the Committee that the PRASHAD 
(Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation Drive) scheme launched in 
January, 2015 with the objective of integrated development of pilgrimage destinations in a 
planned, prioritized and sustainable manner to provide complete religious tourism experience,  
provide better connectivity to the destinations identified for development. Under this Scheme 
51 destinations have been identified in 28 States for development. 
21. While replying to a query, the Secretary apprised the Committee that Ministry of 
Tourism has sanctioned 30 projects in 19 States for an amount of Rs.916.56 Crore of which a 
total amount of Rs. 542.12 Crore has been released for these projects. Out of these 30 
approved projects 9 have been completed and 7 more projects are l ikely to be completed 
shortly. While replying to a specific query on funding pattern of the projects under PRASHAD 
Scheme, it was informed that the following two funding patterns are being followed:  
(A) For the pre-October, 2017 approved projects: Funds r eleased in advance upto first 
three installments of 20%, 30% and 30% each. Last installment of 20% is to be released as re -
imbursement to the States/UTs only after completion of the project in all respects.  
(B) For the projects approved in October, 2017 or thereafter: Funds released in 
advance upto first three installments of 30%, 30% and 25% each. Fourth installment of 10% of 
project cost to be released as re -imbursement to the State s/UTs only after completion of the 
project in all respect s. Fifth and the las t installment of 5% to be released after completion of 
one year by the States/UTs for the facilities created under the project. 
22. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that s ince the inception of PRASHAD 
Scheme in  2014-15, total 30  projects in 19 S tates have been sanctioned under it, out 
of which 7 projects are complete in all respect s and 11 more projects are likely to be 

13 
 
completed by December, 2020.  The Committee , during its interactions with the officials of 
Ministry of Tourism was also informed that there is no cost overrun in the projects but tim e 
overruns have been observed and maj or reasons for delay is land availability, statutory 
clearances and slow tendering by the implementing agencies. 
23. The Committee feels that the progress of implementation of sites under 
PRASHAD Scheme needs to be monitored regularly through a dedicated mechanism to 
ensure that there is no time overrun and cost escalation. The Committee notes that the 
lockdown due to Covid-19 pandemic hampered the construction activities under the SDS 
and PRASHAD schemes. The Committee observes that development of tourism 
infrastructure under the above flagship schemes of the Ministry will not only act as a 
catalyst to economic developme nt of the country but also promote more inclusive 
growth. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should re -orient its 
strategy to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on implementation of projects under the 
above schemes so that the targets set out are achieved in a specified time -frame. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the policy measures initiated to accelerate the 
pace of implementation of projects and effectiveness thereof. 
24. The Committee takes note of the submission of the  Ministry that the Public -
Private Partnership (PPP) model has been explored for certain components of projects 
under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme and PRASHASD Schemes also have a provision to 
explore for PPP partner for operation, maintenance and sustenance of the facilities 
created. The Committee observes that creation of quality infrastructure for developing 
tourist products and for providing better services to both domestic and international 
tourists is a pre-requisite not only to generate employment and achieve broad based and 
inclusive growth of the economy on a sustained basis, but also to have a favourable 
impact on the preservation of art, culture and heritage. However, projects like the SDS 
and PRASHAD have high social but an unacceptable commercial rate of return and are 
generally characterised by long gestation periods, substantial investments, fixed returns 
due to which they require financial support from the Government through appropriate 
financial investments and incentives. Since the development of tourism infrastructure 
requires very large investments and cannot be undertaken out of public financing alone, 
the engagement of the private sector in provisioning of tourism infrastructure under the 
SDS and PRASHAD is warranted. The Committee is of the  firm view that the 
involvement of the private sector will not only bring in the efficiencies of the private 

14 
 
sector and commercial enterprise but will also go a long way in supplementing the 
scarce public sector resources vis-à-vis the requirements of brid ging the infrastructure 
deficit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to meet the funding gap, 
make SDS and PRASHAD commercially viable  and facilitate private sector efficiencies 
in the development of tourism infrastructure under the SDS and PRASHAD, the 
Ministry should formulate a transparent policy framework for participation of private 
operators in developing products such as hotels, r esorts, convention centres, tourist 
trains, etc., with the Government acting as a facilitator and catalyst and also set up a 
Viability Gap Funding window for tourism infrastructure development under the SDS 
and PRASHAD.   
Assistance to Central Agencies 
25. As per the written reply furnished by the Ministry of Tourism, t he details of the 
financial assistance given to Central Agencies for projects pertaining to tourism infrastructure 
development during the last three years is given below: 
 
Year States / 
UTs 
Name of Projects Implementing 
Agency 
Amount 
Sanctioned 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
Amount 
Released 
(Rs. in 
lakhs) 
2017- 
18 
Uttar  
Pradesh 
Illumination of three 
monuments in Varanasi, 
Uttar Pradesh-  
1. Dashashwamedh Ghat to 
Darbanga Ghat (stretch of 
300 m)  
2.  Tulsi Manas Mandir 
3. Sarnath Museum 
CPWD 293.55 234.84 
 Punjab Project for Infrastructural 
Development at JCP Attari 
BSF 1312.00 1029.59 
 Haryana Sound and Light Show at 
Yadavindra Gardens, 
Pinjore, Haryana. 
ITDC 600 300.00 
 Andhdra Sound and Light Show at ITDC 708.67 354.33 

15 
 
Pradesh Puttaparthy, Andhra 
Pradesh 
 Delhi Sound and Light Show  at 
Red Fort, Delhi (Purana 
Quila) 
ITDC 1370.00 685.00 
 Maharashtra Up-
gradation/modernization to 
International Cruise 
terminal at Indira Dock, 
Mumbai.   
Mumbai Port 
Trust 
1250.00 1250.00 
2018-
19 
Goa  Improvement of 
immigration facility and 
deepening of existing 
cruise berth at Mormougao   
Mormugao Port 
Trust 
1316.40 658.20 
 Kerala  
 
 Developing infrastructure 
at Cochin Port Cruise 
Terminal. 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
120. 79 60.39 
 Kerala  
 
Creation of additional 
tourism facilities at the 
Cochin Port Trust 
Walkway 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
466.47    233.23 
 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Construction of Cruise -
cum-Coastal Cargo 
Terminal at Channel berth 
area in Outer Harbour of 
Visakhapatnam Port   
Visakhapatnam 
Port  Trust 
3850.00 1925.00 
 Punjab Letter of Authorization 
(LOA) for Restoration/ 
Renovation of ‘Jallianwala 
Bagh Memorial’ &  
Additional work to be 
taken at Jallianwala Bagh 
National Memorial at 
ASI 2302.00 2037.00 

16 
 
Amritsar, Punjab.     
2019-
20 
Delhi CFA for Development & 
renovation of selected 
facilities of National 
Museum 
National 
Council of 
Science 
Museums 
(NCSM) 
4373.00 2186.00 
 Delhi CFA for Illumination of 
Building of National 
Gallery of Modern Art -
2019-20.  
National 
Council of 
Science 
Museums 
(NCSM) 
380.00 190.00 
 Kerala CFA for Development of 
Additional infrastructure in 
the new Cochin Port Trust 
Terminal 
Cochin Port 
Trust 
1029.70 514.85 
 -- CFA for Development of 
Jetties at nine (09) main 
points of embarkation/ 
disembarkation of River 
Cruise on National Water 
ways No. 1& 2 
IWAI 2803.05 700.76 
 
26. The scrutiny of the above table reveals significant shortfall in release of funds as 
compared to the sanctioned funds in respect of several schemes of tourism infrastructure 
development. For example, the shortfall witnessed in the amount released vis-à-vis the 
amount sanctioned in 2017 -18 in respect of Sound and Light Show Project at 
Yadavindra Gradens, Pinjore, Haryana; Light and Sound Show Project at Puttaparthy, 
Andhra Pradesh; and Light and Sound Show Project at Red Fort and Purana Quila, 
Delhi is to be  the tune of Rs 300.00 lakh s, Rs. 354.34 lakhs and Rs 685.00 lakhs 
respectively. No reasons have been adduced by the Ministry for the shortfall. Since the 
above projects have been conceived with the aim of developing and improving tourism 
infrastructure, t he Committee expects the Ministry to urgently address the pending 
issues pertaining to the above projects to avoid delays and cost escalation in their 

17 
 
implementation. The Committee expects to be apprised of the action taken to address the 
recurrent problem of delays and cost overrun in implementation of projects. 
 
27. The d etails of r ailway projects sanctioned to Ministry of Railways under the 
Assistance to Central Agencies Scheme during the last three years (2017 -18, 2018 -19 and 
2019-20) are given below: 
Sl. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Amount 
Sanctioned 
(MoT share) 
Rs. (Cr) 
Amount 
Released 
Rs. (Cr) 
FY-2017-18 
1.  Tamil Nadu Rameshwaram Railway Station 4.70 2.35 
2. Maharashtra Aurangabad Railway Station 5.71 2.85 
3. West Bengal Rampurhat Railway Station 3.48 1.74 
4. West Bengal Tarakeshwar Railway Station 3.87 1.93 
Total 17.76 8.87 
 
FY- 2018-19 
5. Tamil Nadu Madurai Railway Station 4.48 2.24 
6. Assam Kamakhya Railway Station 4.96 3.97 
7. Assam Guwahati Railway Station 4.99 3.98 
Total 14.43 10.19 
 
FY -2019-20 
8. West Bengal New Jalpaiguri Railway Station 4.55 2.27 
9. Rajasthan Chittorgarh Railway Station 4.99 2.50 
Total 9.54 4.77 
Other Railway Projects Sanctioned under the Scheme “Assistance to Central Agencies” 
Sl. No State Name of the Project Amount 
Sanctioned            
(MoT share 
in  Rs.(Cr) 
Amount 
Released till 
date. 
FY-2017-18 

18 
 
1. Goa CFA to Konkan Railway 
Corporation Ltd. for development of 
Madgaon, Thivim and Karmali.(    
Fully  Funded) 
        25.00 12.50 
 
28. The Committee notes that for all the projects that have been sanctioned since the 
year 2017, only 50 percent of the sanctioned amount was released so far. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to adopt strategies for speedy 
completion of the st alled projects. The Committee is of the view that this will also help 
in effective utilization of funds and skilled manpower to the maximum possible extent. 
29. The Committee recommends that an audit of the expenditure incurred under the 
Scheme of ‘Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development’  
should also be conducted, the details of which should be uploaded on a web based 
platform for effective monitoring of the progress of the implementation. 
30. To a question regarding the roadmap for development of tourism infrastructure in the 
country for the next five years, the Ministry has stated that the Government has articulated a 
vision of India becoming a $5 Trillion Economy by 2024 -25 to give a sharper focus to higher 
economic growth.  The SGoS Group 7 on Economy which is represented by 12 
Ministries/Departments including Ministry of Tourism has ad opted the above vision and has 
formulated development plans for different sectors including tourism. The SGoS Tourism 
Sectoral Plan aims at several interventions over a period of 5 years to enhance the visitor 
experience for increasing the number of foreig n and domestic tourists and includes the 
following action points:  
i.  Developing Buddhist Tourist Circuit  
ii.  Tented accommodation at Buddhist sites (CSSS-Tourism & Hospitality Services) 
iii.  Development of Iconic Tourist Sites 
iv.  Development of infrastructure at  Buddhist sites attempt to link Buddhist Circuit with 
Golf Tourism 
v.  Promote Buddhist heritage in Far East and South East Asian Markets Launch of 
localised campaigns across platforms for promotion of Buddhist sites (CSSS -Tourism 
& Hospitality Services) 
vi.  Information related to various places, tourist packages and activities of interest to 

19 
 
tourists on Incredible India Website 
vii.  Effective use of TV and Social Media to promote tourism 
viii.  Develop and promote lesser known tourist spots 
ix.  Identify countries from which not a single tourist is coming to India 
x.  Organize various events and programmes involving foreign participation at Statue of 
Unity 
xi.  Development of wayside amenities 
xii.  Incentive to foreign tour operators (CSSS-Tourism & Hospitality Services) 
xiii.  Incentives for improving Air Connectivity (CSSS -Tourism & Hospitality Services) 
xiv.  Improving the Benchmark of India in the Global Competitive Index as a Tourism 
Destination 
xv.  Development of Cruise Tourism along the coast and particularly Andaman & Nicobar 
and Lakshadweep 
xvi.  Tourism for different segments e.g. beach, medical, wedding tourism etc. 
xvii.  Development of Infrastructure-Artha Ganga 
xviii.  Rail connectivity - Introduction of tourist trains connecting pilgrimage sites and 
upgradation of railway stations within the pilgrimage circuits. 
xix.  Air Connectivity- 
 Development of airport at 20 tourist destinations  
 International air connectivity to Buddhist Circuit and North East from South 
East Asia. 
 Introduction of flights to Buddhist sites under UDAN scheme 
 Helicopter services to hilly areas and destinations in North East Region.  
 Air connectivity to underused and unused airports to take tourism to the 
remotest corners of the country.  
 Customs/Immigration facilities to enable greater presence of international  
flights at airports located in tourist destinations. 
xx.  Skill Development – 
 Destination Level Skill Development 
 Tourist Facilitator Certification (TFC) Programme 
xxi.  A facility of GST card to lessen the burden of GST to attract tourists 
 

20 
 
31. The Committee observes that the tourism sector not only provides employment 
to wide spectrum of job seekers from the unskilled to the specialized but also makes 
significant contribution to the national economy by stimulating other economic factors 
through its backward and forward linkages. Since tourism is multi -sectoral activity and 
the related sector includes airlines, surface transport, hotels, basic infrastructure, etc, 
the growth of the sector cannot be attained unless issues related to all these secto rs are 
addressed simultaneously. The Committee notes from the information furnished by the 
Ministry that with a view to make India a 5 trillion dollar economy by 2024-25, the SGoS 
Tourism Sector Plan aims at implementation of 21 tourism development project s over 
the next five years. The Committee is of the considered view that if the goal of becoming  
a 5 trillion dollar economy is to be achieved, the Government needs to fastrack the 
development of these 21 tourism infrastructure projects in collaboration w ith all the 
Ministries/ entities concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that convergence 
and synergy be created across programmes of Ministries/ Departments so that the 
implementation of these 21 tourism development projects could be expedited and  an 
integrated development of enabling infrastructure through partnerships with all the 
stakeholders could be accomplished. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the 
strategies adopted in this regard. 
Connectivity Related Issues 
32. To a question regarding connectivity requirements to tourist destinations and 
measures taken to improve connectivity to existing and potential tourist destinations , it has 
been informed that the Ministry of Tourism, in consultation with stakeholders had forwarded a 
list of important tourist destinations, to the Ministry of Civil Aviation for augmenting air 
connectivity. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has approved 46 tourism routes for inclusion 
under RCS-UDAN-3. Out of these 46 routes, 16 routes have been made operationa l. List of 
the 46 Tourism Routes approved and the routes operationalized is at Annexure-A. 
33. The Committee is of the vi ew that air connectivity is key to unlocking India’s 
tourism potential and proper steps must be taken to operationalize the remaining routes 
under RCS- UDAN-3 to meet the emerging demand of tourism industry in the region of 
North-East, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh etc. 
34. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should also ensure that these 
projects are completed within the designated timeline and the approved cost  so that 

21 
 
proper air connectivity is established between the less connected regions with high 
tourism potential at affordable prices which would provide a boost to tourism industry 
leading to higher employment and greater revenues. 
35. The Ministry of Tourism has also submitted a list of 50 tourism destinations to the 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways for improvement of road connectivity in the first 
phase (Annexure B). In addition, MoRTH has also been requested for setting up of wayside 
amenities, prominent signages and beautification of the area, at a distance of 15 -20 km. on 
either side of the tourist destination where good road connect ivity already exists. The 
States/Union Territories have been requested to identify important tourism destinations 
requiring improved and efficient road connectivity or development of wayside amenities for 
taking up with the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in the second phase. 
 36. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that  the Ministry of Tourism under the 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme has signed a MoU with the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways (MoRTH) for development of wayside amenities . As  part of MoU , the land is 
provided by MoRTH and Ministry of Tourism develops the facilities. As part of the above, 
Ministry is developing wayside amenities in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar at Varanasi-Gaya; 
Lucknow-Ayodhya-Lucknow; Gorakhpur-Kushinagar; and Kushinagar-Gaya-Kushinagar. The 
project at above sites is under implementation. 
37. In regard to the above, the 1st virtual meetings of the Task Force constituted vide MoT 
Order No. TT/16/2020 -TT dated 18.03.2020 and 07.08.2020 respectively to look into issues 
related to connectivity was held on 01.09.2020 under the chairmans hip of Secretary 
(Tourism), Government  of India. The issue related to connectivity was deliberated with  the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Railways and IRCTC. 
Record of discussion with the M/o Civil Aviation 
 MoCA to share the details of 100 airports which they have finalized to be developed 
so that these could be prioritized in consultation with MoT. 
 International connectivity to Buddhist Sector to be given prio rity: MoCA informed 
that these are done on the basis of market forces of demand for air traffic. 
 MoCA had shared list of 78 routes identified for RCS -UDAN 4, which mainly 
include routes for the North Eastern Region. 
 Increasing connectivity of Leh to other major source destinations such Mumbai/  
Ahmedabad and commencing of helicopter services for Kargil and Nubra valley was also 

22 
 
discussed. MoCA conveyed that Helicopter service is expensive and hence it should be first 
promoted with the help of big tour operators and they should be invited for this purpose. 
 In regard to easing of the Charter policy and removal of emergency clause from the 
existing policy, J .S. (MoCA) informed that these aspects are being reviewed keeping in 
view the interest of both the parties (operators and travelers) involved. 
 It was suggested that the stakeholders of tourism and air lines should have  closer 
interaction and they should be informed about the new tourism products/destinations and road-
shows. 
 It was also agreed that there should be one to one meetings between the senior 
officers of both the Ministries to have greater synergy and coordination for sorting out the 
issues related to connectivity and for promotion of destinations. 
Record of discussion with the M/o Railways/ IRCTC  
 The issue of connectivity to pilgrimage sites and running pilgrimage trains was 
deliberated during the meeting.  IRCTC informed that they already have a numbe r of trains 
under operation dedicated to pilgrimage theme. 
 It was pointed out by Secretary (T) that M/o Railways have identified 500 railway 
stations for development and upliftment of traveler’s amenities. However, the representative 
of M/o Railways expressed that she was not aware of the fact and would revert on this. 
 The issue of development of tourist amenities at 26 identified railway stations under 
the ongoing project of joint development  by M/o Railways and M/o Tourism, was also taken 
up. It was opined that the projects which are nearing completion should be focused on and 
they should be completed at the earliest. 
 
38. During its study visit, the Members of the Committee raised the issue of development 
of basic tourism amenities. In this regard, t he Ministry furnished details of the  Last Mile 
Connectivity for developing tourism facilities like Public Conveniences, Helipads, Tourist 
Facilitation Centres, Interpretation Centres, Exhibition Halls, CCTVs, Wi -Fi, Sitting Spaces, 
Parkings etc. With a vie w to enhance air connectivity to selected tourist destinations, 46 
tourism routes have been included under the RCS-UDAN (Regional Connectivity Scheme), an 
initiative of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Further, to enhance connectivity through inland 
waterways, a country wide waterways network as an economical, environment friendly 
supplementary mode to transport for rail and road was also declared. 
39. The Committee observes that despite the fact that easy access to the wayside 
facilities is a pre -requisite for the development of tourism, there is an appalling lack of 

23 
 
wayside amenities for long distance travelers. It is in this context that the developme nt of 
wayside amenities at Varanasi -Gaya; Lucknow -Ayodhya-Lucknow; Gorakhpur -
Kushinagar; and Kushinagar -Gaya-Kushinagar assume added significance.  The 
Committee recommends that the Government must ensure that the implementation of 
above projects also enabl es local artisans and local craftsmen to sell their products to 
commuters during their journey and generates employment opportunities for local 
youths and farmers. The Committee also recommends that the wayside amenities should 
be integrally planned and developed alongwith the highways and expressways. 
 
40.    The Committee observes that despite India being endowed with nature’s bounty 
and being a land of great tourism potential, its share in International Tourist Arrivals is 
a meager 1.23% (Source - India Tourism Statistics at a Glance 2020) . Poor connectivity, 
especially air connectivity remains one of the biggest hurdles and is impacting the 
growth of the Indian tourism sector in general, and that of International Tourist 
Arrivals in particular. The issue  related to connectivity was deliberated with the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation on 01 -09-2020 wherein details pertaining to development of 
100 airports and 78 routes approved under the fourth round of Regional Connectivity 
Scheme were inter-alia shared. Since the all round department of the tourism sector has 
the potential to act as the key driver of inclusive growth and unless air connectivity 
improves, the number of high-end tourists is not goin g to increase, t he Committee 
recommends that at least 19 Iconic spots should be taken on priority and suitable 
mechanism be developed to get the above projects implemented within a designated 
time-frame. 
 
41. The Committee takes note of the fact that during the Secretary (Tourism) ’s 
interaction with the representative of the Ministry of Railways,  development and 
upliftment of traveler’s amenities found mention and the representatives of Ministry of 
Railways has assur ed to ascertain the factual position in this regard and report back. 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the factual position in this regard.  
 
42. The Committee observes that the availability of hotel rooms in India is limited 
because of acute sh ortage of land in cities due to land market distortions and there is a 
need to significantly augment hotel room capacity. In order to meet the requirement o f 

24 
 
accommodation, the Committee recommends that the surplus railway land at railway 
stations may be utilized for constructing budget hotels. 
 
43. The Committee observes that Vande Bharat trains have been introduced for 
some important tourist destinations. The Committee is of the opinion that some more 
Vande Bharat trains should be introduced on routes such as Jaisalmer-Jodhpur, Jaipur-
Agra, Mumbai - Nagpur, Howrah -Patna-Varanasi, Chennai - Trichy-Madurai-
Kanyakumari- Thiruvananthapuram and Varanasi -Chitrakoot-Satna-Jabalpur. These 
are the key places where maximum tourist travels and these trains can reall y mobilize 
more trains. 
 
44. The Committee is of the view that in the States of North -East, Uttarakhand and 
Himachal Pradesh, most tourist destinations are reachable by road and entail long travel 
time between the destinations. There is also a lack of roadside amenities including 
affordable stay-homes, toilets, and cafeterias in the routes. Also, there is lack of proper 
intra-State rail connectivity. The Committee would, therefore, desire that the Ministry of 
Tourism should focus on tackling the above i ssues and apprise the Committee of the 
hurdles being faced in the implementation of the road and rail connectivity projects  
alongwith the steps taken to deal with these issues. 
 
45. As per the details furnished by the Ministry of Tourism in its Background Note, the 
list of operational National Waterways (NWs) connecting tourist destinations is given below:  
 NW 1 (Allahabad -Haldia Stretch of the Ganga —Bhagirathi-Hooghly Rivers) - Prominent 
Tourist Location – Varanasi.  
 NW 2 (Sadiya-Dhubri stretch of Brahmaputra River) - Prominent Tourist Location – Majuli 
Island.  
 NW 3 (Kollam -Kozhikode Stretch of West Coast Canal) -Prominent Tourist Locations – 
Vembanad Lake, Alappuzha backwaters.  
 NW 4 (River Godavari and  River Krishna) -Prominent Tourist Locations – Cruise Service 
from Telangana to Andhra Pradesh, Bhwani Island, Durga Ghat, Amaravathi and Vedadri on 
river Krishna, Bhadrachalan and Papi Hills on river Godavari. 

25 
 
 NW 5 (river Brahmani) -Prominent Tourist Locations – Rengali Dam, Kamakhya forest 
range, Kapilash Sanctuary, Kapilash Temple, Bhitarkanika National Park.  
 NW 8 (Alappuzha -Changanassery Canal) -Prominent Tourist Location – Alappuzha 
backwaters.  
 Waterways of Goa namely, NW 25 (Chapora River), NW -27 (Cumberjua river), NW -68 
(Mandovi river), NW -111 (Zuari river) -Prominent Tourist Locations – Morjim Beach, river 
walk, Dr. Salim Ali Bird Sanctuary, Crocodile trip on Mandovi, Aguada fort etc.  
 NW 28 (Dhabol Creek Vashishti River) - Prominent Tourist Location – Gopalgad Fort. 
 NW-64 (river Mahanadi) -Mahanadi river Sunset view point, Odisha State Maritime 
Museum etc.  
 NW 89 (Bankot Creek Savitri River) - Prominent Tourist Locations – Harihareshwar Temple 
and Beach, Bankot Fort.  
 NW 97 (Sunderban Waterways) -Prominent Tourist Locations – Cruise Service from    
Kolkata to Sunderbans. 
46. The challenges in the development of inland waterways in India such as varying and 
limited depths during lean season due to the excessive upstream withdrawal/ utilization 
resulting in meandering and braiding of alluvial rivers, erosion of their banks causing 
excessive siltation, lack of cargo earmarked  for IWT and non mechanized navigation lock 
systems, were also highlighted in the Background Note.  
 
47. In reply to a question regarding setting up of dedicate d terminals for the tourists at the 
Ports both Major and Minor, t he Committee was also apprised of the Jal Marg Vikas Project 
(JMVP) for capacity augmentation of navigation on NW -1 on the Haldia -Varanasi stretch of 
Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River System with the technical and financial assistance of the 
World Bank. The traffic handled on inland waterways  in 2017-18 was approx. 55 MT and 
was increased to 72 MT in 2018-19, registering an increase of 31 %.  
 
48. Cruise tourism in India is still a nascent industry, though we have a huge 
opportunity to capture the market because geographically, India is strategically located 
between Western Europe and Asia and every ship to Europe has to pass through it. The 

26 
 
Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to enable the cruise sector to reshape 
the Indian travel industry, the Government must revamp the country’s current Port 
infrastructure, set up dedicated terminals to cater to the needs of tourists and undertake 
riverfront development on a massive scale. 
 
49. The Committee desires that this mode of transport facility should be affordable 
to the tourists who could not afford cruise tourism facilities so that cruise tourism can 
reach the masses.  
 
Digital Connectivity and Outreach 
50. The Ministry has informed that w ith the growing need for expanding the user base to 
viewers from countries which drive majority of tourist footfall in our country, Incredible India 
website and mobile  app has been launched in March, 2020 in the following international 
languages: Chinese, Arabic and Spanish.  
51. It was further informed that t he website is further being translated into five other 
prominent int ernational languages: Japanese, Russian, French, German and Korean. The 
Incredible India website has been provisioned with information around popular tourist 
destinations and attractions along with a variety of content around experiences across the 
country. Also, t he information is being continuously updated and theme -based content is 
regularly featured on the website. The Incredible India mobile app also offers on-the-go digital 
content to tourists with a plethora of information around tourist destinations  including event 
calendars, integrated maps, tourism experiences, attractions, etc. 
52. The officials of the Ministry , during their deposition before  the Committee  apprised 
the Committee about advancement in digital connectivity, proliferation of social me dia and 
the growing ease with which services can be availed online.  
 
53. Advances in technology are spurring innovations and redefining notions of travel 
altogether. However, about 70 % of the tourism units in India  come under the c ategory 
of MSMEs who often lack the necessary technical measures in their workforce to fully 
reap the budget of digital potentials. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Government should chalk out a programme for providing technical assistance to 
MSMEs so that they could digitize their operations. 
 

27 
 
54. With increasing variations in demand of tourism, the Committee feels that 
creative ways of digitally showcasing the different facets of our Heritage needs to be 
explored and this would require a paradigm s hift in understanding customer’s travel 
interests and focus on developing alternative attractions.  
 
55. The Committee  desires the Ministry of Tourism to target foreign tourists, 
Indians living abroad, foreign universities etc. digitally to market the country’s br and 
image as one of the popular tourist destination s globally and develop special travel 
packages covering three to four prominent destinations of every region in the country. 
 
Domestic Promotion and Publicity 
56. As per its written reply, t he Ministry of Tourism has commissioned a Third Party 
Evaluation of the Domestic Promotion and Publicity Including Hospitality (DPPH) Scheme 
in 2019. This study report has indicated effectiveness of advertising in different media viz., 
Television, Print, D igital, Social Media, Outdoor, Radio, SMS, Airline Boarding Passes, 
Railway Tickets, etc., for developing awareness about various tourist locales, culture, 
regional cuisines, and places of religious importance etc., among the domestic tourists. 
Regional campaigns undertaken to promote tourism particularly to North-Eastern Region and 
Jammu & Kashmir had great impact on tourist footfalls.  
 57. Officials of the Ministry of Tourism had also apprised the Committee that events such 
as Bharat Parv and Paryatan Parv are being organized in this regard and participation  in 
tourism related exhibitions through India tourism domestic offices is being done to create 
awareness about tourism destinations within the country. The d etails of the domestic 
campaigns and the Bharat  Parv and Paryatan Parv events organized by the Ministry of 
Tourism during the years 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 for promoting domestic tourism is given 
below:  
2018-19  
 TV Campaigns were released on Doordarshan and on private channels in the country to 
promote tourism to the North -Eastern region and to the State of Jammu & Kashmir. Various 
TV campaigns were also released in these channels on various subjects like yoga, iden tified 
Iconic sites, Swachhta at tourist sites, Statue of Unity.       

28 
 
 Online Campaign on Swachhta at tourist sites, for promoting tourism to the North East 
Region, promoting and publicising the Statue of Unity 
  Campaign in Cinema Houses to promote nic he products like Yoga and to promote and 
publicise the Statue of Unity  
 Radio and SMS Campaign and Print Advertisements for promoting Bharat Parv and 
Paryatan Parv. 
  Advertisement on airline boarding passes and on railway tickets to publicise the Statue of 
Unity. 
  “Do You Know” Campaign released on Doordarshan to coincide with Paryatan Parv.  
 Photo Contest – ‘Musafir Hoon Yaaron!’ undertaken on Doordarshan to coincide with 
Paryatan Parv.  
 Wide publicity with live feeds to events organized by the M inistry, viz., Bharat Parv, 
Paryatan Parv, International Buddhist Conclave, International Tourism Mart, ITM – North 
East, etc.  
 Extensive promotion of Statue of Unity undertaken on Social Media accounts  
 The Ministry of Tourism participated in various tourism related exhibitions such as 
SATTE, OTM, GITB etc.  
 Paryatan Parv was organized from 16 th to 27th September, 2018; at National Level during 
which more than 3150 activities across all States /UTs wer e held through various Central 
Ministries, India Tourism Offices, Institutes of Hotel Mana gement, State Governments / 
Union Territory Administrations etc.  
 Bharat Parv was organized from 26 th to 31st January, 2019 at Red Fort Lawns to coincide 
with the Republic Day celebrations. The theme of Bharat Parv was -, ‘150 years of celebrating 
the Mahatma’. In addition, the idea of ‘Ek Bharat Shreshth Bharat’ was also publicized during 
the event.  
2019-20  
 Radio Campaign for promoting Bharat Parv.  

29 
 
 SMS Campaign for promoting Bharat Parv.  
 Print Advertisements released in major newspapers for promoting and Publicising Bharat 
Parv. 
  Advertising on Airline Boarding Passes and Railway Tickets to promote Statue of Unity.  
 TV Campaign on Yoga released on Doordarshan and Private Channels in June , 2019, to 
coincide with International Day of Yoga.  
 TV Campaign on “Swachhta” released on Doordarshan and on Private Channels.  
 Web Campaign on Swachhta.  
 Organized Paryatan Parv, Bharat Parv etc. during the financial year 2019 -20, with the 
objective to promote and spread the message of Dekho Apna Desh, Ek Bharat - Shreshth 
Bharat’ and ‘Tourism for All’ etc. and to create interest amongst general people abo ut various 
tourism destinations and products of the country. The Domestic Tourist Visits during 2018 
were 1854.93 Million. 
 58. The growth in Indian travel and tourism sector has largely been driven by 
domestic tourism. As per the information furnished in the Annual Report 2019-20 of the 
Ministry, there were 1854.93 M illion domestic tourist visits during the year 2018.  
However, in the aftermath of C ovid-19 pandemic and the enforcement of lockdown, 
tourists are hesitant about  travelling due to the fear of C ovid-19 and the tourism sector 
has been among the worst -hit areas. Since revival of international tourism would take 
some time, domestic tourism would play an important role in reviving the economy. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government m ust focus on promoting 
domestic tourism and adopt aggressive online and other marketing strategies to 
advertise domestic destinations in a big way so that tourist footfall could  be increase d.
  
59. The Committee is of t he view that many advertisement agencies often intend to 
increase their revenue by promoting their services, but fail to connect to their target 
audience. The Committee, therefore, recommends that advertisements should be 
designed in such a way that they connect to their target audience by even reaching to 
the remotest part of the country and by showcasing its rich heritage and culture.  

30 
 
 60. The Committee notes that the Scheme of Domestic Promotion and Publicity 
including Market Development Assistance was launched with the major objective of 
creating a general awareness amongst the domestic population about the tourist 
destinations and to develop tourist market within the country. The Committee desires 
that the Ministry should pay attention to how people search for travel ing options, how 
they reach out to travelers at the right tim e and in what way they embrace F acebook/ 
Twitter/ Instagram advertisements. 
61. In reply to a question, the Ministry has informed about the main activities undertaken 
for Domestic Promotion & Publicity include Media Campaigns in the different domestic 
media including Electronic (Television, Radio and other), Print (Newspapers, magazines, 
including ad -hoc advertisements in publication), Online/digital/Social Media, outdoor and 
other Media such as railway tickets, a irline boarding passes, support  for organizing Events/  
Fairs & festivals and Niche Tourism etc. 
 
62. The Committee understands that u nder the scheme of Domestic Promotion and 
Publicity, as per the guidelines, Ministry of Tourism is recognizing the need of the State 
Governments/UTs to produce quality promotional materi al and is supporting  State 
Governments/ UTs and private stakeholders jointly , with financial assistance including 
Films/TVCs. The Ministry, in this regard, had produced Films/TVC on various Niche Tourism 
Products such as Yoga, Wellness etc, various tourist destin ations of India including North -
East, State of Jammu and Kashmir and Iconic sites of India etc. 
 
63. Responding to queries raised during the course of oral evidence  about the promotion 
of tourism in region of North -East, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, i t was informed that in 
addition to its regular holistic promotion, new campaigns are proposed  to be undertaken to 
improve connectivity and digital outreach in the regions of  Jammu and Kashmir, North East, 
Ladakh, Statue of Unity etc. Further, as per vision of Hon’ble Prime Minister, promotion of 
domestic tourism under the theme of Dekho Apna Desh and Ek  Bharat Shrestha Bharat would 
also be undertaken in these areas.  
 
64. The Committee takes note of the submission that new campaigns are proposed to 
be undertaken to improve connectivity and digital outreach in the regions of Jammu and 
Kashmir, North -East, Ladakh etc. While appreciating the pr oposed campaigns, the 
Committee observes that the North -Eastern region is most enticing part of our country  

31 
 
and a veritable delight to the tourists . However, due to various factors, the tourism 
potential of the North -Eastern region has not been properly showcased. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should formulate a media strategy for giving 
wide publicity about the North -Eastern region as a tourist destination and its cultural 
uniqueness in both print and electronic media. The Ministry should also organize 
cultural activities, fairs, seminars and workshops aimed at showcasing the varied society 
of the North-Eastern region so that the inherent tourism potential of the region could be 
fully tapped and utilized. 
 
65. Another concern of the Committee is regarding promotion of tourist sites such as 
Jim Corbett National Park (Nainital, Uttarakhand), Daman and Diu, Rameswaram 
(Tamil Nadu). Shirdi and Lonar Crater Lake (Maharashtra), Jammu and Kashmir, 
North Eastern States, Ladakh region. The Ministry should chalk out ways to promote the 
above mentioned tourist sites digitally so that there is increase in tourist footfall in these 
regions. This would not only help in modernization of tourism infrastructure but also 
lead to employment and revenue generation. 
 
Overseas Promotion and Publicity 
66. The Committee understands the significance of the Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) 
in the country in terms of employment and revenue generation. The Committee, in this regard 
has been apprised of the launch of  “Incredible India 2.0 Campaign” in the year 2017, which 
marks a shift from generic promotion of market specific promotional plans and product 
specific content creation.  As a sequel to this, Global Campaigns were released in the 
electronic, online and print media.  
 
67. While appreciating the shift from generic promotion to more focused and niche 
products of the country under the Incredible India 2.0 campaign, t he Committee 
recommends that Ministry should commission surveys for an impact analysis of the 
campaigns in key source markets overseas. 
 
68. As per the background Note, t he Ministry, through its India Tourism Offices 
overseas, endeavors to position India as a proposed tourist destination in tourism generating 
markets to promote various tourism products and destinations and to increase India’s share in 
the global tourism market. The objectives are met through a n integrated marketing and 

32 
 
promotional strategy and a synergized campaign in association with the Travel Trade, State 
Governments and Indian Missions overseas. India tourism offices overseas participated in the 
major international Travel Fairs and Exhibitions in important tourist generating markets the 
world over as well as in emerging and potential markets to showcase and promot e the tourism 
products of the country.  
 
69. In reply to a question regarding the financial performance of the Scheme – Overseas 
Promotion and Publicity including Market Development Assistance, the Ministry has 
informed that funds allocated under the Scheme for the year 2018 -19 and 2019-20 have been 
spent judiciously and optimally based on the Annual Action Plan of the India Tourism Offices 
overseas approved by the Ministry towards undertaking promotional activities such as 
participation in Travel Fairs and Exhibitions; advertising in the local print, electronic and 
outdoor media; organizing Road Shows, India Evenings, Seminars & workshops; organizing 
and supporting Indian Food Festivals and cultural festivals; offering brochure  support to tour 
operators, and joint advertising/joint promotions with airlines, tour operators and other 
organizations etc.  
 
70. The objective of Overseas Promotion and Publicity including Marketing 
Development Assistance Scheme is to position India as a favoured tourism destination in 
the tourism generating markets  overseas and to increase India’s share of the global 
tourism market. As per information given in the Annual Report (2019 -20) of the 
Ministry of Tourism, Fo reign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) were 1 0.89 M illion during 2019 
and International Tourist Arrivals (ITAs) (which include both FTAs an d arrivals of 
NRIs) were 17.82 M illion in the year 2018. As a result  of the Covid -19 pandemic, 
tourism has been hit hard and the growth of International Tourist A rrivals to India has 
declined sharply. The Committee desires to be apprised of the extent to which ITAs are 
expected to drop as compared to the original 2020 forecast and whether any  targeted 
marketing strategy has been adopted to revive the growth of ITAs to India.  The 
Committee also takes note of the submission that in order to promote and market brand 
India and promote India’s share in global tourist arrivals, a synergized campaign  in 
association with the Travel Trade, State Governments and Indian Missions overseas has 
been launched. Since the abrupt fall in ITAs and the resultant plunge in the tourism 
sector has wiped out many small and medium sized firms that had catered to touris ts 

33 
 
overseas, the Committee recommends that financial assistance be provided to approved 
tourism service providers for undertaking the tourism promotional activities overseas.  
 
71. Foreign Tourist footfall is one of the key aspects of emerging tourism industry. 
The Committee in this regard, would like the Ministry to follow the strategy given 
below, point -wise, to advertise country’s image as one of the prominent tourist 
attractions globally:- 
 Highlighting the main tourist attractions. 
 Identification of target visitors. 
 Obtain and utilize data to get to know your visitors. 
 Focus on Branding country’s rich heritage and culture. 
 Seek Public Private Partnerships. 
 Create a compelling destination website. 
 Engagement Marketing. 
 Training and Skill development programme for professionals. 
 Giving visitors an immersive experience. 
 Using Social Media platforms. 
 Attracting Influencers/ travel operators. 
 Exploring various online advertising methods. 
 Creating offline overseas marketing strategies.  
 
72. The Committee also recommends that in order to achieve higher intern ational 
visitor levels, country-wise targets of Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) should be worked 
out and the Ministry should focus on diversification of source markets so that countries 
which offer high growth  potential but from where present level of tourist is low could 
be covered.  
 
Development of Adventure Tourism 
    73. Adventure tourism tends to be associated with high levels of activity by the 
participant, most of it outdoors.  It expects Adventure travelers to experience various level s of 
risks, excitements and encourage explorers / travelers  to travel to  unspoiled and unexplored 
tourist places in and around the world. The Ministry of Tourism in this regard, i n the year 
2018, introduced ‘Adventure Tourism Guidelines' covering 29 land, air and water -based 
activities detailing out the role of a guide, important equipment required, operating 

34 
 
instructions, risk mitigation, m edical safety etc. According to the Ministry of Tourism, these 
guidelines on 'Safety and Quality Norms for Adventure Tourism in India' were formulated in 
coordination with the Adventure Tour Operators Association of India (ATOAI), in an effort to 
make adve nture sports safer.  The detailed guidelines educate tour operators and other 
concerned agencies about important safety requirements and less known dangers. The 
guidelines also emphasized upon the creation of  strong foothold in the field of adventure 
sports. 
 
74. During the study visit of the Committee, t he representatives of the State Government 
of Goa mentioned about the wide range of tourist attractions across the State in the form of 
beautiful churches, mighty sea forts, beach  tourism, State festivals etc. The Committee was 
briefed about the features of spice plantation, the festivals and nightlife, food and shopping 
counters in Goa, alongwith adventure tour ism. New tourism related services such as e -bikes 
tour, hop on hop off bus and hot  air balloon rides, as also the safety a nd security aspects of 
tourists were also highlighted.  
 75. Despite its unique endowments of biodiversity and having unparalle led natural 
resources and 73 percent of the diverse Himalayan range for exploration, adventure 
tourism in India is at a nascent stage and the country is yet to exploit the immense 
potential of adventure tourism  which can make India a round the year destination. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must come out with a policy 
document focusing on harnessing  the potential of adventure tourism in a safe and 
environment-friendly manner. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the specific 
measures initiated to promote and exploit the adventure tourism.  
 
76. The Committee is aware that in order to boost and regulate adventure tourism in 
India, the Ministry of Tourism had issued guidelines for Adventure Tourism in the year 
2018. The Committee would like to know  whether all the Stat es adopted and 
implemented the g uidelines. The Committee would like t he Ministry to ensure that the 
adventure tourism guidelines are followed by all the States / UTs  as it would go a long 
way in promoting inbound adventure tourism. The Committee also recommends a 
dedicated promotional campaign be launched to promote India as a adventure tourism 
destination.    
 

35 
 
77. The Committee noticed that inbound adventure tourism in India is growing by 
5-7 percent annually and domestic adventure tourism is growing by 20 -25 per cent  (as 
per the Survey Report of the Indian Tourism and Hospitality Industry) .  According to 
market research experts, over one billion travelers experienced adventure tourism 
globally and India attracted just over 3.4 Million adventure tourists in 2015 as compared 
to Western nations which attracted relatively higher numbers. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should apprise it of the reasons for the slow 
growth of adventure tourism industry and why is there a lack of clear cut policy instance 
on it. 
 
 78. Indian Association of Amusement Parks and Industries, in its written submissions, 
inter alia stated that the Ministry of Tourism in association with State Governments  should 
promote amusement parks and that GST rates which is 18% at present, should be reduced to 
single digit rates.  
 
79. Since India is  a highly populated country, amusement parks sector has a very 
high growth potential in the country. The Committee is therefore, of the considered view  
that promotion of amusement parks will boost tourism, social infrastructure and 
revenue generation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of 
Tourism in close coordination with the States / UTs should chalk out a roadmap for 
promotion of the amusement parks sector and also explore the possibility of lowering the 
GST. 
 
80. The Committee would like  the Ministry to focus on developing adventure 
tourism activities given below and apprise the Committee of the steps being taken for the 
same: 
 Chadar Trek in Ladakh 
 White River Rafting in Rishikesh 
 Jim Corbett Safari- Uttarakhand 
 Scuba Diving in Andaman Island, Malvan Island and Goa. 
 Roopkund Trek- Uttarakhand 
 Manali to Leh Bike/ Jeep Trip 
 Caving in Meghalaya 
 Skiing in Gulmarg and Manali 

36 
 
 Bungee Jumping in Rishikesh 
 River Rafting in Tons Valley- Uttarakhand 
 Hot Air Ballooning in Jaipur and Solang Valley 
 Dune Bashing in Jaisalmer 
 Paragliding in Bir-Billing- Himachal Pradesh 
 White Water River Rafting in Kullu 
 Water sports at affordable prices in Goa 
 Skydiving in Mysore 
 Flying Fox Adventure in Neemrana- Rajasthan 
 Rock Climbing in Satpura 
 Sandakphu Trek-West Bengal 
 Wildlife Safari in Gir National Park- Gujarat 
 Dudhsagar Trek in Goa 
 Kayaking in Aguada River- Goa 
 Skiing in Kufri 
 Cycling in Munnar 
 Camping in Coorg 
 Tiger Safari in Bandhavgarh National Park- Madhya Pradesh 
 Giant Swing in Rishikesh 
 Gulmarg-Gondola Ride 
 Microlight Flying in Bangalore 
      
Safety and Security of Tourists 
81. As per the information furnished, the Ministry of Tourism had issued a letter on 10.8.2016 
to all State Governments/ UTs with the advice to take following measures that could go a long 
way in avoiding any mishappenings:-  
(1) Identification of all such tourist spots which are prone to accidents.  
(2) Erection of signage war ning visitors of the danger involved in taking selfies at such       
locations.  
           (3) Posting of volunteers/ tourist police at such identified places, if feasible.  
(4) Sensitization through Public Address system.  
(5) Spreading awareness through social and other media campaigns.  
(6) Barricading areas, wherever possible danger is identified. 
 

37 
 
82. The Committee has been informed that t he Ministry has also taken up the matter with all 
State Governments/ UTs for setting up of a dedicated Tourism Police. With the efforts of Ministry 
of Tourism, the State Governments /UT s of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir , Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh have deployed Tourist Police in one form or the other. 
 
83. In one of the deliberations during the study visit of the Committee, the representatives of 
the Ministry of Tourism apprised the Committee that a 24x7 Toll -Free Multi -Lingual Tourist 
Helpline has been launched in 12 International Languages. Various  initiatives such as launch of e-
Visa facility in 4 sub -categories i.e., e-Tourist visa, e -Business Visa, e -Medical Visa and e -
Medical Attendant Visa were also highlighted.  
 
84. Poor experiences with regard to safety and security of tourists lead to a negative 
image of tourist site/ country in the mind of tourist, whether d omestic or international. The 
Committee recommends that in the light of the security concerns at tourist destinations, 
watchful tourist police and other law and order force supported by smart intelligence should 
be introduced with efficient communication systems at airports, Ports, railway/ bus stations 
etc. 
85. As regards the issue of safety/ security in cruise tourism, the Committee recommends 
that operating agencies should have a detailed operational procedure and only trained and 
skill tested personnel should be allowed to handle tourists at risk -prone sea/ river areas.  
Further, the landings should have facilities of speedboats, trained divers and security people 
lighting facilities, generators and vessel communication systems.  
 
Development of Cruise Tourism  
86. The Ministry has informed the Committee that to harness t he potential of cruise 
tourism in the country, a Task Force had been constituted with the Secretary (Tourism) as the 
Chairman and Secretary (Shipping) as the co -Chairman.  On the recommendations of Task 
Force, the following measures were taken for the development of cruise tourism:- 
 Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) have been formulated to be followed by the 
various agencies for handling cruise ships. 
 The facility of e -tourist visa has been extended to passengers arriving at the ports of 
Mumbai, Mormugao, Mangalore, Kochi and Chennai. 

38 
 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs has waived off biometric requirements for cruise 
passengers arriving on e-via for a period of three years, i.e., upto 31.12.2020. 
 To address manpower, co -ordination and logistical issues for handling cruise vessels 
at ports, “Port Level Facilitation Committees” have been formed under the respective 
Chairman of the Major Ports to facilitate seamless handling of cruise ships and 
passengers. 
 Foreign flag vessels carrying passengers have been allowed to call at Indian P orts 
without obtaining license from Director General of Shipping. 
87. The Committee takes note of the measures taken for the development of cruise 
tourism but would like to be apprised of the efficacy of the above measures in 
promoting India as a cruise tourism destination. 
 
88. On being asked as to why the Ministry has not utilized any other waterway s, except 
for National Waterway -1 and National Waterway -2, for developing cruise circuits in the 
country and what are the difficulties faced by the Ministry in developing cruise tourism 
projects in Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Ministry has stated the following: 
 
(a) The mandate of Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) is to develop and 
regulate National Waterways for cargo shipping & navigation.  
 
(b) The infrastructure developed for transportation on National Waterways by IWAI 
including fairway, terminals, jetties, navigation aids etc. are used by the river cruise 
tourism operators. IWAI plays the role of a technical facilit ator for river cruise tourism 
on National Waterways. 
 
(c) River cruise tourism has been a regular feature on National Waterway (NW) -1(Ganga-
Bhagirathi-Hooghly river system) and NW -2 (river Brahmaputra) since several years. 
Various cruise operators viz., M/s Heritage River Cruises Pvt. Ltd., M/s Vivada Inland 
Waterways and M/s Assam Bengal Navigation Company operate their cruise vessels 
on NW-1, NW-2 and Sunderbans waterways. 
 
(d) National Waterway (NW) -1 (Ganga - Bhagirathi-Hooghly river system from 
Allahabad to Haldia), NW – 2 (River Brahmaputra from Dhubri to Sadiya), NW -3 

39 
 
(West Coast Canal from Kottapuram to Kollam along with Udyogmandal and 
Champakara Canals) have already bee n developed with fairway navigational aids, 
jetties and terminals with mechanized equipment handling facilities for loading and 
unloading of cargo. 
 
(e) In addition to NW -1 & NW -2; NW-3 Kerala is a world renowned tourist destination 
for domestic and foreign to urists where house boat tourism with food and 
accommodation facilities are available. The area of operation of these boats include 
Vembnad lake of Alapuzha, Kuttanad area and Astamudi lake of Kollam area. 
 
89. In the background Note furnished by the Ministry, the Committee was apprised about 
the number of domestic and international cruise ships with passengers being handled now -a-
days in Indian ports alongwith the current and proposed domestic and international routes, 
with new destinations being developed in Maharashtra, Kerala, Gujarat and Lakshadweep 
islands. The representatives of the Ministry elaborated upon the First International Cruise 
Ship Home in India, First Domestic Cruise Liner with Indian Flag and about the arrival of the 
First Domestic Luxury Cruise Liner in India. 
90. In one of the meetings of the Committee, t he representatives of the Ministry 
mentioned about the initiatives taken by the Government of India in cruise shipping such as 
E-visa with exemption of biometrics, Single e -Landing card a nd volume discount in Port 
Tariff. The official of the Ministry of Tourism recognized Cruise Tourism as a ‘Niche’ 
tourism product in order to promote India as a 365 days’ destination and attract tourists with 
specific interest.  
 
91. It was informed that a task force on cruise tourism has been formed jointly by the 
Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Shipping with the representatives of all major 
stakeholders.  The Committee was apprised that t he five Major Ports of the country viz., 
Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT), Mormugao Port Trust (MoPT), New Mangalore Port Trust 
(NMPT), Cochin Port Trust (CoPT) and Chennai Port Trust (ChPT) have been developed to 
attract cruise ships with dedicated terminals and other related infrastructure for berthing of 
cruise vessels and embarking and disembarking of cruise passengers. 
 

40 
 
92. Cruise tourism in India is still in its nascent stage but  India has an immense 
potential to emerge as a leading destination for cruise tourism in Asia. In recent years, 
India has witnessed increase in the number of calls made by cruise ships. However, the 
Covid-19 pandemic and enforcement of the lockdown in its wake has had a catastrophic 
impact on cruise tourism in the country. Since cruise industry supp orts multiple shore 
side businesses, the Committee would like the Ministry to make an assessment of the 
overall damage caused to cruise tourism due to the Covid -19 pandemic -induced 
lockdown and take remedial measure s to mitigate its massive cascading effec t on the 
overall travel and hospitality industry.  
 
93. The Committee is also of the opinion that establishing a 24 -hour tourist service 
center, providing a complete cruise logistics service, inviting foreign cruise operators to 
inspect special resources in India, cooperating with Taiwan, Japan and South -East 
Asian countries for promotion of cruise tourism and setting up a special Government 
unit for the purpose would boost India’s cruise industry. 
 
94. The Committee takes note of the fact that the five Major Ports at Mumbai, Goa, 
Mangalore, Cochin and Chennai have been developed to be cruise destinations with 
dedicated terminals. The Committee desires to know whether the cruise terminals at the 
above P orts have produced the desired results. The Committee also desires to be 
apprised whether the present structure of levy of taxes needs any changes/ modifications 
to tap the tremendous potential of cruise tourism in India. 
 
Training and Skill development 
95. As per the background Note  furnished by the Ministry of Tourism , the Scheme of 
“Capacity Building for Service Providers” (CBSP) of the Ministry aims to provide education, 
training and certification to the tourism service providers at every level with its main 
objectives being to train and up -grade manpower at every stra tum of service in order to (i) 
capitalize on the vast tourism potential of the country to the fullest, and (ii) provide 
professional expertise to the local populace as well as create fresh opportunities for 
employment generation in the tourism sector both in urban as well as rural areas. These 
trained service providers could be engaged in providing service directly to the tourist or 
involved in the important task of teaching, administering or planning. 
 

41 
 
96. CBSP Scheme is implemented by the Ministry through Institutes of Hotel 
Management and Food Craft Institutes including such institutes approved by the AICTE, 
Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel Management, NCHMCT, Tourism Departments of State 
/ UT Governments,  State Tourism Development Corporations, India Tourism Development 
Corporation (ITDC), State/Central Training/academic Institutions and the specialized 
academic training institutes in the private sector engaged in giving training in the hospitality 
sector. The following programmes were conducted under the CBSP Scheme:- 
(a) Hunar Se Rozgar Tak - The total achievement under this Programme is that 
11624 persons were trained against the target of 19250.  There were 3533 persons under 
training at the end of F.Y 2018 -19.  In reply to a question the Ministry has informed that till 
the year 2015-16, the Hunar Se Rozgar Tak Programme was geared only towards the creation 
of employable skills. However, with the adoption of common norms on skill development 
notified by the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, it has been made 
mandatory on the part of the training provider institutes to arrange placement/self-employment 
for at least 70% of the certified trainees within 3 months of completion of the courses. Though 
the necessity to provide for compulsory placement within 3 months has helped, the 
implementing agencies needed time to adjust to this new provision.  
(b) Skill Testing and Certification -Under this Programme, 5015 persons have 
been certified upto 30.11.2019. 
(c) Entrepreneurship Programme- Under this, 1076 persons have been trained 
and 347 trainees were under training upto 30.11.2019. 
(d) Tourism Adventure Courses - A total of 55 trainees have been trained and 
certified during 2019-20. 
(e) Linguistic Tourist Facilitation-225 persons were trained during 2019-20.  
 
97. Tourism is a multi -sectoral activity c haracterized by multiple services and 
therefore, the tourism industry is one of the largest generators of employment across the 
world and has the potential  to emerge as a key economic driver. Servicing the sector 
with skilled manpower is therefore of utmost importance. The Committee t akes note of 
the fact that the s cheme of “Capacity Building for Serv ice Providers” aims to train and 
upgrade manpower at every stratum of service. The Committee also notes that under 
the Hunar se Rozgar Tak programme, 11 ,624 persons have been trained against the 
target of 19 ,250 during 2018 -19 and observes that the tourism sector’s annual 
requirement of skilled manpower is much more than the supply from educational and 

42 
 
skill training institutions which also gets reduced du e to attrition. The Committee , 
therefore, expresses its displeasure at the shortfall in the target of trained persons under 
the Hunar se Rozgar Tak programme  and recommends that the Ministry should 
formulate a robust strategy to meet the problem of trained manpower gap.   
 
98. The Ministry has informed that based on the interaction with the stakeholders in the 
Tourism sector, the Ministry took various steps in terms of following new initiatives:- 
 
i. Destination Based Training Programmes: -In order to scale  up in a big way, the Ministry of 
Tourism has initiated the Destination Based Skill Development training programme at various 
Iconic Sites i.e. Tajmahal at Agra, Humayun Tomb, Red Fort, Qutab Minar at Delhi, Mahabodhi 
Temple at Bihar, Kolv a Beach at Goa and Kanziranga at Assam. To begin with, the pilot of the 
destination-based training programmes has  been rolled out from 13 I nstitutes. It is proposed to 
expand the programmes to 150 tourist destinations during the year 2020-21. 
 
ii. Entrepreneurship Programme: -The objective of this programme is to  facilitate micro and 
small business start -ups under the scheme of ‘Capacity Building for Service providers’ . To begin 
with, 150-hour courses are being offered in the five trades of (i) Cook  – Tandoor (ii) Barman (iii) 
Baker (iv) Homestay (Multi -Skilled Caretaker) and (v) Halwai – Indian Sweets under this 
Programme. 
 
iii. Online Incredible India Tourist Facilitator (IITF) :- The Ministry of Tourism has also 
initiated Incredible India Tourist Facilitator (IITF) Certification Programme. The objective of 
the Programme is to provide online training and accreditation of the Tour Facilitators through 
a centralized PAN India e -learning module. The institution of tourist facilitators would be a 
basic component of the infrastructural requirement both for International and Domestic 
tourism. 
99. While dwelling upon the need to increase the quality of training and skill 
development in the tourism sector, the Ministry, in its written reply informed the Comm ittee 
of the extension of Central Financial Assistance to expand and upgrade existing Institutes of 
Hotel Managements (IHMs), Food Craft Institutes (FCIs), Indian Institutes of Tourism and 
Travel Management (IITTM), National Council of Hotel Management and  Catering 
Technology (NCHMCT), National Institute of Water Sports (NIWS) and also to set up new 

43 
 
institutes such as Institute of Hotel Management (IHM) and F ood Craft Institute (FCI) so as to 
meet the requirements of trained manpower in the tourism industry. 
100. The Committee is of the view that the realization of the country’s  tourism 
potential cannot be tapped without addressing the issue of capacity constraints. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should conduct a tourism industry 
training provider assessment and review available data from previous assessment; work 
with industry to develop a survey instrument that assesses current and projected 
workforce needs in different tourism domains and occupations (e.g., hotels and lodging, 
travel and transportation, etc.); focus the assessment on entry -level; and entrepreneurial 
occupations that can be filled by vulnerable populations such as youth. 
101. The Committee also desires that the Ministry of Tourism should identify 
occupational needs in different sectors of the tourism industry and develop an approach 
to provide needed skills/ training/ job placement services to youth who want to pursue 
these occupations and careers in tourism. The aim of the scheme so designed should be to 
address the labor market needs of the tourism industry; provide a targeted program of 
technical assistance and training including revising curriculum and producing 
educational materials; and to improve education and training provider quality. 
Impact of Covid-19 pandemic on Travel and Hospitality Sector 
102. The Committee in Paras 44 to Para 77 of its 288th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) of Ministry of Tourism , presented to the Parliament on the 9 th March, 2021 
has done a rigorous analysis of the impact o f Covid-19 pandemic on Tourism, T ravel 
and Hospitality sector and covered the gamut of issues arising there from and made 
substantive recommendations thereon . The Committee, therefore does not consider it 
necessary to repeat the details contained in its 288th Report in this Report. The Ministry 
may refer to Para 44 -77 of the 288 th Report and take appropriate remedial measures.     
(Paras 44 to 77 are given in Annexure-C for ready reference) 
 
103. However, the issue of lending to Travel, Tourism and Hospitality  sector was not 
comprehensively covered in the 288 th Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22). The 
Committee therefore called for a Background Note from the Ministry on the issue. The 
Ministry in its Background Note furnished i n the month of January, 2021 inter alia  made 
following submissions.     

44 
 
104.       Tourism and Hospitality Sector is one of the worst hit sectors during COVID -19 
pandemic since March, 2020 on account of nationwide lockdown imposed, which had 
disruptive imp act on the entire travel and tourism ecosystem directly impacting the 
hospitality industry. While all the States have permitted resumption of major activities in the 
sector viz. hotels, restaurants, resorts , etc, due to continued fear of COVID -19 pandemic, 
there has been low level of bookings in hotels and resorts.  
 
I. Credit Advances to Services-Tourism, Hotel and Restaurants 
Outstanding (O/S) advances to Tourism, Hotel and Restaurants year -wise for Scheduled  
Commercial Banks (SCBs) are summarized below: 
      
  (Amount in Rs crores) 
  31-03-2018 31-03-2019 31-03-2020 31-09-2020 
Particular
s 
Total Advances 
(o/s-Funded) 
Total Advances 
(o/s-Funded) 
Total Advances 
(o/s-Funded) 
Total Advances 
(o/s-Funded) 
SCBs 52,095 56,194 60,039 62,313 
Source: RBI 
 
II. Various Challenges being faced by Banks in lending to Tourism, Hotel and 
Restaurants are -  
 (a)      High fixed operating cost structure with expenses like power and staff cost. Staff cost 
are the largest cost components in Indian hotels and account for around 35% of total cost. 
Fixed cost varies depending upon geography, type (rented/  owned) & star category and are 
an average of 50% of total cost. 
(b) Grounding of international flight has significantly impacted  the inbound travel by 
foreigners (leisure and corporate). Even as borders open up, recession across economics and 
universal vaccination is also expected to have a bearing on demand from this segment.  
 
(c) Social distancing norms and restrictions over all owable capacity has led to deferral of 
Meetings, Incentives, Conventions and Exhibitions (MICE) activities, barring  small events. 
 

45 
 
(d) With corporates moving into work from home mode and digital interface replacing 
face-to-face interactions, corporate dem and is muted as companies continue to extend travel 
advisories for work-related travel. 
(e) Increasing incidences of Covid cases and travel curbs has also led to domestic leisure 
coming to standstill in the first half (but leisure demand has since picked up on account of 
revenge travel).This sector particularly Hotels, which operate on a Asset Heavy Model 
(requiring huge capital expenditure) are facing liquidity issues due to unstable cash flows and 
blockage of working capital, thereby impacting the lendin g decisions of Banks/FIs.  
 
105. As informed by the Banks and Stakeholders/A ssociations, a stimulus package may be 
considered by the Ministry of Tourism for hospitality sector to cater to the following issues:- 
1) Establishment cost such as electricity bill, w ater bill, rent , property tax which still stand 
are payable.   
2) Lease rentals/ License fee payable by hotels to various Government authorities  
3) GST rules on hospitality   
4) TCS under GST payable pay Online Travel Aggregators (OTA)  
5) Bailout packages to fund and support the salaries   
6) Subsidies of heat- light- power costs. 
106. It was further informed that t he Department of Financial  Services (DFS) /Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) and Ministry of Corporate  Affairs has taken following measures under 
the Atma Nirbhar Bharat package to mitigate the impact of COVID -19 on this sector: - 
(a)   RBI has permitted a term - loan moratorium and working capital interest deferment 
w.e.f. 1.3.2020 to 31.8.2020 along with an asset classification standstill for this period and 
other measures to enhance liquidity.   
(b)  In addition to above, RBI on 06.08.2020 has also provided a window under the 
"Prudential Framework on Resolution of Stresse d Assets dated 7th June, 2019" to enable 
leaders to implement a resolution plan in respect of eligible corporate exposures exceeding 
Rs. 25 crore, including those in the Tourism, Hotels and Restaurants, which were not more 
than 30 days past due as on 01.03 .2020 and where the stress is on account of COVID -19 
pandemic, to be invoked not later than 31 st December, 2020 and implemented within 180 
days thereafter. 

46 
 
(c)  As part of the Aatma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan, Emergency Credit Line Guarantee 
Scheme (ECLGS 1 .0) was launched on 23.05.2020 . Under the scheme fully guaranteed and 
collateral- free Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line (GECL) from Member Landing 
Institutions is provided to eligible MSME units, business enterprises, individual loans for 
business purpose and interested MUDRA borrowers. The amount of GECL funding under the 
scheme to the eligible borrowers are up to 20 percent of their outstanding credit up to Rs. 50 
crore as on 29.2.2020, subject to the account being less than 60 days past due as on that date  . 
The loans provided under ECLGS 1.0 have a 4 year tenor, with a 12 month moratorium on 
repayment of principal. There is a cap on interest rate and 100% credit guarantee by NCGTC. 
Tourism, Hotels and Restaurants meeting the eligibility criteria would also  be eligible under 
scheme. 
(d) ECLGS has been extended through ECLGS 2.0 to the 26 sectors identified by the 
Kamath Committee on Resolution Framework vide its Report dated 04.09.2020 and the 
Health Care sector. Tourism, Hotels and Restaurants is also one o f the 26 sector identified by 
the Kamath Committee and covered under ECLGS 2.0. Under the Scheme, entities with total 
outstanding credit above Rs 50 crore and upto Rs 500 Crore as on 29.02.2020, which were 
less than or equal to 30 days past due as on 29.02 .2020 are eligible under ECLGS 2.0 for 
additional funding up to 20% (which could be fund based or non fund based or both) of their 
entire outstanding credit (fund based only) as a collateral free GECL, which wo uld be fully 
guaranteed by NCGTC . The loans pr ovided under will have a five -year tenor with the 12 -
month Moratorium on repayment of principal. 
(e)  Under ECLGS Scheme, as informed by NCGTC, for Tourism, Hotels and Restaurant 
sector, 98737 guarantees towards a loan amount of Rs 5034 crore have bee n executed as on 
10.01.2021. 
 
(f)  Rs 15000 crore Special Refinancing Facility for Small Industries Development Bank 
of India (SIDBI)for on-lending/ refinancing purposes. SIDBI has also announced schemes for 
special liquidity through which it will provide suppo rt to NBFCs Micro Finance Institutions 
and banks through term loan of up to one year for on lending to MSMEs across all sectors. 
(g)  RBI had permitted a one -time restructuring of GST - registered MSME accounts that 
have become stressed, on 1.1.2019, which have an aggregate exposure of up to Rs. 25 crore. 
These loan accounts can be classified as 'standard ' without a downgrade in the asset 
classification, subject to certain conditions, with the implementation of the restructuring to be 

47 
 
completed before 31.03 .2020. On 11.02.2020, RBI extended the scheme till 31.12.2020 for 
entities that were in default but 'standard ' as on 01 .01.2020. Further on 06.08.2020 , RBI 
extended the scheme till 31.03.2021 to support viable MSME entities o n account of the 
fallout of Covid -19 that were 'standard ' as on 01.03.2020. 
(h)  On 24.03.2020, vide Gazette notification issued by Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
threshold of default under Section 4 of the IBC has been increased from Rs 1 Lakh to Rs 1 
crore with the intention to p revent triggering of insolvency proceedings against small 
borrowers. Further, no insolvency proceedings can be initiated against any borrower for 
defaults arising on or after 25.03.2020 under IBC till 25.03.2021. 
107. During their depositions, the representatives of the Public Sector Banks have made 
following submissions while apprising the Committee of the difficulties faced by them in 
lending to Travel, Tourism and Hospitality sector, in the aftermath of Covid-19 pandemic. 
108. The Committee observes that the tourism and hospitality industry is reeling 
under the impact of Covid -19 pandemic. With business coming almost to a standstill, 
the unprecedented crisis has shaken the very foundation of this vibrant sector. 
Hospitality and tourism sector is a very important component of our economy as it has 
the potential to stimulate other economic sectors through its backward and forward 
linkages and contributes significantly to the national economy as well as the creation of 
jobs in the country. It also earns huge foreign exchange for the country. The Committee 
is, therefore, of the considered view that this sector which right now is in huge distress 
needs strong liquidity and policy support from the Government/ Financial Instit utions/ 
Banks to bounce back. The Committee notes from the information made available to it 
that as part of Atma Nirbhar Bharat Package, RBI had permitted a term -loan 
moratorium and working capital interest deferment w.e.f. 01.03.2020 to 31.08.2020 
alongwith an asset classification standstill for that period and other measures to 
enhance liquidity. In view of the fact that the situation continues to be dire and due to 
stagnation of cash flows in the wake of Covid -19 pandemic, the tourism and hospitality 
sector stakeholders are unable to repay existing dues as per their existing repayment 
tenor, the Committee recommends that the moratorium on all working capital, 
principal, interest payments, loans and overdrafts may be further extended , bringing in 
liquidity and allowing for business continuity without categorising the companies as 
NPAs. The Committee is of the firm view that such a moratorium will go a long way in 
salvaging the entire tourism and hospitality industry.    

48 
 
109. The Committee also invited repre sentatives of some Public Sector Banks to throw 
light on the subject ‘Lending to Travel, Tourism and hospitality sector’ in the aftermath of 
Covid-19 pandemic. During their depositions, the representatives of Public Sector Banks 
have made the following submissions. 
 
110. The MD & CEO, Punjab National Bank while deposing before the Committee on the 
subject ‘Lending aspects of Road and Hospitality sector’, stated that: 
“With respect to hospitality or hotel industry, they have been doing well. Pre -
pandemic, there was no issue. On the contrary, it was one of the sunrise industries 
where bankers were also funding to them.  However, the pandemic has impacted it 
very badly because it is impacting the human behaviour in terms of how they can go 
while it has impact ed the airline industry also.  So, what we are seeing is that in the 
current phase, many of the projects have got impacted even though they were running 
well prior to pandemic.  Now, in terms of the window opened by Reserve Bank of 
India with respect to th e restructuring profile, the work is in progress. Many of the 
requests have been invoked by all the banks in undertaking the restructuring so that 
we can give them a window”. 
 
111. The MD & CEO, Punjab National Bank, while replying to a query regarding major 
issues being faced by the Bank while lending to Hospitality Sector, informed that as per RBI 
guidelines on Harmonized Master List of Infrastructure Sub -sectors, Hotels with three-star or 
higher category located outside cities with population of more than 1 million is classified as 
Tourism Infrastructure. Thus, the scope of coverage of Hotels under Infrastructure sector is 
very limited. Considering this, the benefit of larger extension in DCCO as available to 
infrastructure sector is not available to H otels. As such, scope for coverage of Hotels under 
Infrastructure need to be reviewed. Further,  Hotel Industry is capital intensive in nature, as 
such the payback period for the industry is also very high. This has resulted in longer 
gestation period & lon ger repayment periods in case of financing to Hotel projects.  It was 
further informed that post the revision of GST rates, hotels with room rates above Rs.7500/ - 
are taxed at 18% and those with room rates Rs.2501 – Rs.7500/- are taxed at 12%. Further 
there is no tax on rooms priced at rates below Rs.1000/ -. The tax rates for many cities as 
compared their pre-GST levels have come down and is a positive sign for the industry going 
forward.  

49 
 
112. The General Manager, Canara Bank apprised the Committee that on account of 
stagnation of cash -flows due to Covid -19 pandemic , the tourism sector stakeholders are 
unable to repay existing dues as per existing repayment tenor. As per CRISIL Research 
Report for March 2020, Tourism Sector is rated “Unfavourable”. The perfo rmance of the 
industry has gone downhill on account of the Covid -19 outbreak and subsequent lockdown 
and suspension of all modes of travel, thereby affecting repayment capacity of the existing 
borrowers pertaining to the sector. Further, Government has also introduced and implemented 
Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line loans to support such units adversely affected by the 
pandemic, the beneficiaries of which also include those pertaining to Hotels and Tourism 
Sectors. Bank has extended support to eligible unit s under the scheme. Bank has sanctioned 
around 7905 accounts under Tourism, Hotel and Restaurants sector, amounting to around Rs. 
518 Crores till 19.02.2021 in FY 2020-21. 
113. The MD & CEO, Central Bank, apprised the Committee of the following major issue s 
being faced by the Bank while lending to Hospitality Sector : 
1. Generation of lower revenue than expected. 
2. Longer gestation period to obtain approvals and implementing the project. 
3. Availability of skilled human resources 
4. Cost of Land – high compared to other countries. 
 
114. The MD & CEO, Central Bank further informed that as on 31.12.2020, there are 18 
accounts with FB outstanding of Rs  221.92 crore in NPA category in Hospitality Sector. The 
total FB outstanding is Rs 607.78 crore ( 69 accounts). Thus the NPA constitute 36.51 % of 
the FB outstanding and 26.09% in number of the total accounts in the sector. The COVID 19 
pandemic has affected this sector i n a big way and most of the projects are facing high 
liquidity issues. Out of 51 standard a ccounts with F B outstanding of Rs  385.86 crores, 19 
accounts with FB outstanding of Rs  181.40 crore (47%) are in SMA category.  Bank has 
already provided additional support / restructuring under RBI framework (wherever eligible 
and requested). The sector is on a recover y path. Being a huge capital intensive sector, it will 
take time for revival.  Bank has already classified this sector as ‘stressed sector’ and 
providing accelerated provision of 1% in standard accounts. In order to help the hospitality 
sector sustain the tough times in view of COVID -19 pandemic, he emphasized upon certain 
schemes such as: 
1. CGECL 

50 
 
2. COVID-19 Sahayata Scheme 
3. One Time Restructuring (OTR) to support the stressed sectors. 
4. Additional funding for delay on case to case basis. 
5. Six months moratorium to repayment of installment and servicing of interest is 
being allowed. 
 
115. The representatives of Indian Bank apprised the Committee of the following major 
issues being faced by the Bank in the Hospitality Sector such as: 
 High Land prices especially across  major business destinations like Mumbai, 
NCR, Bengaluru, Pune etc has impacted development costs for hotel projects. 
 Increase in cost of construction due to which payback period has increased. 
 Increase in operating costs like employee costs, power and fuel costs and other 
operating costs. 
 Decreasing ARPU affecting the repayment capacity 
 High end projects require long gestation resulting in mismatch in ALM. 
 Requirement of constant maintenance and upgradtion of the standards 
increases the project cost.  
 Competition among players. 
 COVID scenario affecting demand 
 Irregular income level from a project resulting in default. 
 Withdrawal of tie up arrangements by the hotel chains resulting in reduced 
customer inflow and income. 
 
116. While replying to a query regarding not offering to the hospitality sector, the CC limit 
opportunity for growth for 2022 when the planning should be done in 2021, the 
representatives of Indian Bank  informed that banks have not put any freeze on lending to 
hospitality sector. Bank has been supporting the industry keeping in view the adverse impact 
of the pandemic on this sector by extending faci lities under GECLS 1.0 and 2.0 and also 
extending restructuring of loan facilities. Bank is also extending loan for renovation / 
refurbishing o f the properties wherever necessary and also offering CC limits in deserving 
cases and not to make money as stated in the questionnaire. The Banks has to make profit to 
give good return to the investors and also to the depositors.  

51 
 
117. While replying to a  query regarding the steps taken to address the problems being 
faced by the tourism industry because of the pandemic situation in this country, the Chief 
General Manger, IDBI, apprised the Committee that banks might consider lending to hotels 
with large sc ale operations (4 to 5 star hotels) which generally have substantial high value 
fixed assets. Banks can consider fresh lending to companies having a satisfactory track record 
and good fixed asset coverage ratio. Loans can be extended initially for a period  of 5 years 
with 2 years of moratorium with takeout finance options to help the liquidity constraints. 
Such lending by banks can be guaranteed by GOI so that the risk on banks is mitigated.  
 
118. The Chairman, SBI, apprised the Committee of the following challenges 
a) Elongation in payback period as initial occupancy would be on a lower side. 
b) Hotel Industry has higher Fixed Operating Cost Structure. Thus, they have normally 
higher break-even levels. 
c) Covid-19 have impacted the sector, resulting in furthe r challenges to the sector like 
reduction in profitability, loss of Revenues, lower Occupancy rates etc. Due to Lower 
Occupancies, along with higher fixed cost structure, breakeven levels are difficult to 
achieve. 
d) It is expected that Pre -Covid levels for Hospitality Industry may not come before FY  
2023. In such a scenario, high stress may come from the Industry. 
119. The Chairman, SBI,  further informed that a new Ad-hoc facility by way of 
‘Emergency Credit Line’ was extended  to all eligible borrowers whereb y, additional loan 
facility to the tune of up to 10% of the existing fund based working capital limits with a cap 
of Rs.200.00 crore was extended to enable borrowers to manage their reduced cash flows 
during the pandemic period. The loan was repayable in 2 4 months with a moratorium of 6 
months. Additionally, as part of the  Resolution Framework for COVID -19 related stress, 
borrowers in the hospitality industry have been extended relief as per  Kamath Committee 
recommendations by way of moratorium of up to 2 y ears in repayment of installments of 
principal and consequential extension of tenor of loan by up to 2 years. Interest moratorium 
of up to 6 months is also permitted in accounts. 

52 
 
120. The Committee is aware that in view of the uncertainties created by the 
resurgence of Covid-19 Pandemic, the RBI on 5 th May, 2021 has announced Resolution 
Framework 2.0 for Covid -related stressed assets of individual borrowers and small 
businesses. Restructuring under the Resolution Framework 2.0 can be invoked upto 30th 
September, 2021. Borrowers having aggregate exposure of upto Rs. 25.00 crores and 
who have not availed restructuring under any other scheme and who are classif ied as 
“standard” as on 31 st March, 2021 are eligible for the window of resolution under 
Resolution Framework 2.0. Tourism entities, hotels and restaurants meeting the criteria 
are also eligible under the Scheme. In respect of individual borrowers and small 
businesses who have availed restructuring of their loans and where the resolution plan 
permitted a m oratorium of less than two years, financial institutions have been 
permitted to use Resolution Framework 2.0 to modify such plan to the extent of 
increasing the period of the moratorium or extending the residual tenure upto a total of 
two years. Considering the fact that the Covid -19 induced crisis has led to a shut -down 
of the Travel and Tourism industry, it may take 2 -3 years for the tourism and 
hospitality industry to see a return to some semblance of normalcy in its operations. The 
Committee therefore recommends that the period for restructuring for this Sector be 
extended up to March, 2023.   
121. The Committee simultaneously recommends that the Government/ financial 
institutions should put in place a robust mechanism to prevent abuse of the 
restructuring route for ever greening of faulty loans prior to impact of Covid -19 
pandemic.  
122. The Committee notes that under Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
(ECLGS) 2.0 entities, subject to certain conditions, are eligible for additional funding as 
a collateral free Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line (GECL). The loans provided under 
ECLGS 2.0 have a 5- year tenor with a 12 month moratorium on repayment of 
principal. Given the fact t hat the Covid -19 pandemic has had a debilitating impact on 
hospitality sector, the Committee recommends that the repayment period for the 
hospitality industry under ECLGS 2.0 be extended up to 10 years. 
Miscellaneous 

53 
 
123.       The Committee reiterates the recommendations made in Para 177 to Para 179 
of its 288 th Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Tourism, presented 
to the Parliament on the 9th March, 2021. 
“Tourism is the largest sector in the economy of the M aldives as it 
plays a vital role in earning foreign exchange revenues and 
generating employment. In order to promote tourism, the 
Maldivian Government has leased dozens of uninhabited islands 
to local and foreign resort developers. The Committee notes that 
India has a number of islands. These islands have several virgin 
places, beaches and an array of  features to transform them into 
global tourism hotspot. But a lack  of strategy has worked as a 
barrier to such transformations.  The Committee would  like the 
Ministry to explore the possibility of following  the Maldivian 
model in  places in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and 
Lakshadweep Islands and facilitating leasing of islands to local  
and foreign resort developers for tourism        purposes.” 
 “Since the road, highway and railway networks play an 
important role in promotion of tourism and also improving the 
Indian economy, the Ministry should  formulate a policy to 
promote tourism by connecting tourist spots across the country 
through roads, National Highways and Railways. Last mile road 
connectivity to most frequented destinations also needs immediate 
attention. The Ministry should, therefore, give policy push to last 
mile road connectivity to enhance  connectivity to preferred 
tourist destinations.” 
 “The Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CRIF) is 
earmarked for various infrastructure sectors. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to help formulate a policy for earmarking 
of CRIF funds for developing  and providing highway link as well 
as last mile road connectivity to tourist destinations, including 
historical places and temples such as Gulmarg, Pahalgaam,  
Shankracharya Temple, Srinagar, Leh, Ladakh, Manali, Coorg, 
Alleppey, etc., historical places and temples.” 
 

54 
 
124.     In order to make our country a 365 days tourist destination, connectivity by all 
the modes of transportation is extremely important. The Committee finds absence of 
proper mode of transportation to reach even the most visited tourist destinations like 
Agra, Tirupati, etc. If ou r country has to be made a major Tourism Hub, the 
destinations should be well connected. The Committee, therefore, desires that a Master 
Plan should be prepared and shared among the Ministries for achieving better 
connectivity. 
125. Religious Tourism in In dia is one of the key dimensions to boost tourism and to 
attract both domestic and international tourists. India is already blessed with a large 
number of religious tourism places for every sect of religion. Places such as Madurai, 
Tirupati, Shirdi and Sab arimala are few amongst them. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends to the Ministry that these tourist places should have proper and frequent 
air connectivity. Further, for sites without airport, the Ministry of Tourism should 
coordinate with the Ministry o f Civil Aviation on priority basis for development of 
airports, as these tourist places are mostly visited by elderly tourists.  
126. The Committee is of the view that India has a huge potential of religious tourism 
which would enhance India’s soft power p rojection in Southeast Asia, which is already 
emerging as a new tourism hub for international tourists across the world. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to embrace the opportunities presented by the 
North-South Economic Corridor in order to encourage  travelers from the north of 
Myanmar and to Southern China alongwith South - East Asian countries, which in turn, 
may lead to more interest in India’s religious tourism spots and would definitely boost 
foreign exchange earnings of India. 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
Development of Tourism Infrastructure  
(c)  Swadesh Darshan Scheme    
 The Committee is constrained to note that despite the SDS being launched way 
back in January, 2015, only one of the 15 thematic circuits under the Scheme has been 
completed and the physical progress in respect of the remaining 14 circuits ranges from 
16 pe rcent to 90 percent which is far from being satisfactory. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry that all the destination points covered under the thematic 
Ramayana circuit, Buddhist circuit and Himalayan circuit have high tourist value and 
mythological significance, which will go a long way in promoting cultural and heritage 
value of the country besides earning valuable foreign exchange income . Even the 
important thematic circuits that have potential of attracting both international and 
domestic tourists, the phys ical progress and development of amenities in these circuits 
from 2015 is less than 70%. Therefore, we can not give impetus to tourism without 
providing an integrated approach where apart from good stay arrangements, 
multimodal connectivity and wayside ame nities should also be developed.  Hence the 
potential of many tourist sites under these identified circuits is still untapped. Since the 
creation of good tourism infrastructure is a pre -requisite towards attracting more 
tourist, both domestic and internati onal, to the tourist destinations and also has had its 
multiplier effect in terms of employment generation and increased National and State 
revenues apart from improving the country’s tourism productive capacity, the 
Committee recommends that the Governmen t must take stringent measures for 
expediting the completion of remaining 14 thematic circuits in a time bound manner.                 
(Para: 7) 
 According to a Report by NITI Aayog on ‘Sustainable Tourism in the Indian 
Himalayan Region’, the Indian Himalay an Region (IHR) tourism has experienced a 
continued growth and increasing diversification over the last few decades and is 
expected to grow at an average annual rate of 7.9% from 2013 to 2023. Keeping in view 
the tourist potential of this area, the Committee recommends that tourist sites under the 
Himalayan circuit of Swadesh Darshan Scheme should be developed on priority basis 
with modern infrastructure and air connectivity to boost both domestic and 

56 
 
international tourism.                
                 (Para: 7.1) 
 Buddhism is not limited to India only but is also followed in countries such as 
Cambodia, Thailand, Myanmar, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Vietnam and Japan. 
The Committee is also aware of the potential of Buddhism tourist sites in India 
especially in the North -Eastern region. The Ministry had already identified Buddhism 
and North -East circuit s among the 15 thematic circuits of Swadesh Darshan Scheme. 
The Committee would, therefore, recommend that sites under these two circuits should 
be develop ed on priority in an integrated manner to attract tourists from the above  
mentioned countries which would not only boost foreign exchange earnings but will also 
generate employment opportunities in the country.         (Para: 7.2) 
 The Committee observes th at rural tourism is one of the few emerging 
dimensions of the Tourism industry, but is very less emphasized upon. Till date, only 
two projects have been approved under the rural circuit of SDS and funds were 
released only for the one. India being rich in t radition of arts, crafts and culture, rural 
tourism, if exploited intelligently in a sustainable manner has the potential to provide 
sustainable livelihood to rural communities. Rural areas especially in the States of 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Odisha,  Kerala, North -east region etc. are still 
unexplored and needs to be focused upon. The Ministry should develop schemes/ 
programmes that showcase the rural life, art, culture and heritage at rural locations, 
thus benefiting the local community economically and socially by enabling interactions 
between the tourists and the locals for a more enriching tourism experience. The 
Committee simultaneously recommends that the Government should adopt a proactive 
interventionist approach to ensure that the pro -poor tou rism approach leads to 
redistribution of resources and opportunities to the poor and marginalized and 
addresses the larger picture of poverty reduction because a well coordinated 
programme for tourism infrastructure development can give significant returns and can 
create sustainable livelihood in the rural areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that more rural areas should be included in tourism circuits in the country so that 
connectivity to these areas is boosted with infrastructure development for e ase of travel 
and the goal of pro -poor tourism i.e., to bring out benefit to the poor and marginalized 
through tourism activities is realized.                            (Para: 8) 

57 
 
 The Ministry had identified 19 Iconic tourist sites such as Taj Mahal and 
Fatehpur Sikri (Uttar Pradesh); Ajanta & Ellora (Maharashtra); Humayun’s Tomb, 
Red Fort and Qutub Minar (Delhi); Colva (Goa); Amer Fort (Rajasthan); Somnath and 
Dholavira (Gujarat); Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh ); Hampi and Mysore (Karnataka);  
Mahabalipuram (T amil Nadu); Kaziranga (Assam); Kumarakom (Kerala); Konark 
(Odisha); and Mahabodhi Temple (Bihar). The Committee would recommend that 
development of these sites should be taken up in a prioritized manner and each target 
should be fixed and a clear project i mplementation timeline should be created for 
completion of the projects as all these sites have the potential to attract both 
international and domestic tourists.             (Para: 10) 
 The Committee notes that pursuant to the Budget announcement of 2020 -21, the 
Ministry of Tourism has identified 19 Iconic sites for development as world class tourist 
destinations. Since the project involves various central Ministries, State Governments/ 
Union Territories and other stakeholders, the Committee recommends tha t a robust 
coordination mechanism of the concerned Central Ministries, State Governments/ 
Union Territories and other stakeholders be put in place for prompt resolution of 
issues/ bottlenecks.                       (Para: 10.1) 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry had identified 19 Iconic tourist sites for 
tourism infrastructure development in the country. Since most of these tourist sites are 
hugely popular among international tourists, these sites should have proper air 
connectivity. The Committee wou ld, therefore, recommend to the Ministry that the 
Iconic tourist sites that have domestic airports only, their status should be converted to 
that of an international airport on priority basis for ease of traveling of international 
travelers. Further, the I conic tourist sites which do not have direct air connectivity, a 
proposal for development of Greenfield Airports should be initiated at such tourist sites 
in order to boost both domestic and international tourism.           (Para: 10.2) 
The Committee also notes that availability of land free from all encumbrances is 
the responsibility of the respective State Governments/ Union Territories. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.          (Para: 11) 
 The Committee notes t hat the objectives of the SDS and PRASHAD Schemes 
inter-alia include pro -poor tourism concept, active involvement of local communities 
and generation of sufficient job opportunities for locals as part of the execution and 

58 
 
after completion of the projects. The Committee observes that it has often been seen 
that the local people do not benefit from new tourism business due to multiple factors 
like capacity constraints, inadequate financial resources for enterprises, lack of business 
opportunities, etc. and also because the poor and marginalized communities do not have 
the avenues to negotiate with tourism companies. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Government must adopt a proactive interventionist approach to 
effectively implement the SDS and PRASHAD Schemes in line with pro-poor principles. 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry in close coordination with State 
Governments/ Union Territories should create robust and clear policies that cater for 
the needs of locals, expand business and em ployment policies for the poor through 
capacity building and enterprise support and contribute to local livelihoods. The 
Ministry must also focus on skill development to enable local community to take up 
skilled jobs during the execution and after the comp letion of projects under the SDS 
and PRASHAD Schemes.                        (Para: 19) 
(d) PRASHAD Scheme 
 The Committee feels that the progress of implementation of sites under 
PRASHAD Scheme needs to be monitored regularly through a dedicated mechanism to 
ensure that there is no time overrun and cost escalation. The Committee notes that the 
lockdown due to Covid -19 pandemic hampered the construction activities under the 
SDS and PRASHAD schemes. The Committee observes that development of tourism 
infrastructure under the above flagship schemes of the Ministry will not only act as a 
catalyst to economic development of the country but also promote more inclusive 
growth. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should re -orient its 
strategy to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on implementation of projects under the 
above schemes so that the targets set out are achieved in a specified time -frame. The 
Committee desires to be kept apprised of the policy measures initiated to accelerate the 
pace of implementation of projects and effectiveness thereof.          (Para: 23) 
 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that the Public -
Private Partnership (PPP) model has been explored for certain components of projects 
under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme and PRASHASD Schemes also have a provision to 
explore for PPP p artner for operation, maintenance and sustenance of the facilities 
created. The Committee observes that creation of quality infrastructure for developing 
tourist products and for providing better services to both domestic and international 

59 
 
tourists is a pre-requisite not only to generate employment and achieve broad based and 
inclusive growth of the economy on a sustained basis, but also to have a favourable 
impact on the preservation of art, culture and heritage. However, projects like the SDS 
and PRASHAD have high social but an unacceptable commercial rate of return and are 
generally characterised by long gestation periods, substantial investments, fixed returns 
due to which they require financial support from the Government through appropriate 
financial investments and incentives. Since the development of tourism infrastructure 
requires very large investments and cannot be undertaken out of public financing alone, 
the engagement of the private sector in provisioning of tourism infrastructure under the 
SDS and PRASHAD is warranted. The Committee is of the firm view that the 
involvement of the private sector will not only bring in the efficiencies of the private 
sector and commercial enterprise but will also go a long way in supplementing the 
scarce public se ctor resources vis-à-vis the requirements of bridging the infrastructure 
deficit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to meet the funding gap, 
make SDS and PRASHAD commercially viable  and facilitate private sector efficiencies 
in the develop ment of tourism infrastructure under the SDS and PRASHAD, the 
Ministry should formulate a transparent policy framework for participation of private 
operators in developing products such as hotels, resorts, convention centres, tourist 
trains, etc., with the  Government acting as a facilitator and catalyst and also set up a 
Viability Gap Funding window for tourism infrastructure development under the SDS 
and PRASHAD.                         (Para: 24) 
 
Assistance to Central Agencies 
 
   The scrutiny of the above table reveals significant shortfall in release of funds as 
compared to the sanctioned funds in respect of several schemes of tourism infrastructure 
development. For example, the shortfall witnessed in the amount released vis-à-vis the 
amount sanctioned in 2017 -18 in respect of Sound and Light Show Project at 
Yadavindra Gradens, Pinjore, Haryana; Light and Sound Show Project at Puttaparthy, 
Andhra Pradesh; and Light and Sound Show Project at Red Fort and Purana Quila, 
Delhi is to be  the tune of Rs 300.00 lakhs, Rs. 354.34 lakhs and Rs 685.00 lakhs 
respectively. No reasons have been adduced by the Ministry for the shortfall. Since the 
above projects have been conceived with the aim of developing and improving tourism 
infrastructure, t he Committee expects the Ministry to urgently address the pending 

60 
 
issues pertaining to the above projects to avoid delays and cost escalation in their 
implementation. The Committee expects to be apprised of the action taken to address the 
recurrent problem of delays and cost overrun in implementation of projects.    (Para: 26) 
 
  The Committee notes that for all the projects that have been sanctioned since the 
year 2017, only 50 percent of the sanctioned amount was released so far. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to adopt strategies for speedy 
completion of the st alled projects. The Committee is of the view that this will also help 
in effective utilization of funds and skilled manpower to the maximum possible extent.  
                    (Para: 28) 
  The Committee recommends that an audit of the expenditure incurred under the 
Scheme of ‘Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development’  
should also be conducted, the details of which should be uploaded on a web based 
platform for effective monitoring of the progress of the implementation.   (Para: 29) 
  The Committee observes that the tourism sector not only provides employment 
to wide spectrum of job seekers from the unskilled to the specialized but also makes 
significant contribution to the national economy by stimulating other economic factors 
through its backward and forward linkages. Since tourism is multi -sectoral activity and 
the related sector includes airlines, surface transport, hotels, basic infrastructure, etc, 
the growth of the sector cannot be attained unless issues related to all thes e sectors are 
addressed simultaneously. The Committee notes from the information furnished by the 
Ministry that with a view to make India a 5 trillion dollar economy by 2024-25, the SGoS 
Tourism Sector Plan aims at implementation of 21 tourism development projects over 
the next five years. The Committee is of the considered vie w that if the goal of becoming 
a 5 trillion dollar economy is to be achieved, the Government needs to fastrack the 
development of these 21 tourism infrastructure projects in collabora tion with all the 
Ministries/ entities concerned. The Committee, therefore, recommends that convergence 
and synergy be created across programmes of Ministries/ Departments so that the 
implementation of these 21 tourism development projects could be expedit ed and an 
integrated development of enabling infrastructure through partnerships with all the 
stakeholders could be accomplished. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the 
strategies adopted in this regard.               (Para: 31) 
Connectivity Related Issues 

61 
 
  The Committee is of the view that air connectivity is key to unlocking India’s 
tourism potential and proper steps must be taken to operationalize the remaining routes 
under RCS- UDAN-3 to meet the emerging demand of tourism industry in the reg ion of 
North-East, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh etc.    (Para: 33) 
  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should also ensure that these 
projects are completed within the designated timeline and the approved cost so that 
proper air  connectivity is established between the less connected regions with high 
tourism potential at affordable prices which would provide a boost to tourism industry 
leading to higher employment and greater revenues.      (Para: 34) 
 The Committee observes that  despite the fact that easy access to the wayside 
facilities is a pre -requisite for the development of tourism, there is an appalling lack of 
wayside amenities for long distance travelers. It is in this context that the development of 
wayside amenities at Varanasi-Gaya; Lucknow -Ayodhya-Lucknow; Gorakhpur -
Kushinagar; and Kushinagar -Gaya-Kushinagar assume added significance.  The 
Committee recommends that the Government must ensure that the implementation of 
above projects also enables local artisans and local  craftsmen to sell their products to 
commuters during their journey and generates employment opportunities for local 
youths and farmers. The Committee also recommends that the wayside amenities should 
be integrally planned and developed alongwith the highways and expressways.  (Para: 39) 
 
      The Committee observes that despite India being endowed with nature’s 
bounty and being a land of great tourism potential, its share in International Tourist 
Arrivals is a meager 1.23% (Source - India Tourism Statistics at a Glance 2020). Poor 
connectivity, especially air connectivity remains one of the biggest hurdles and is 
impacting the growth of the Indian tourism sector in general and that of International 
Tourist Arrivals in particular. The issue related to connectivity was deliberated with the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation on 01 -09-2020 wherein details pertaining to development of 
100 airports and 78 routes approved under the fourth round of Regional Connectivity 
Scheme were inter-alia shared. Since the all round department of the tourism sector has 
the potential to act as the key driver of inclusive growth and unless air connectivity 
improves, the number of high -end tourists is not going to increase, the Committee 
recommends that at least 19 Iconic spots sho uld be taken on priority and suitable 

62 
 
mechanism be developed to get the above projects implemented within a designated 
time-frame.                   (Para: 40) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that during the Secretary (Tourism)’s 
interaction with the representative of the Ministry of Railways,  development and 
upliftment of traveler’s amenities found mention and the representatives of Ministry of 
Railways has assured to ascertain the factual position in this regard and report back. 
The Committee desi res to be kept apprised of the factual position in this regard.            
           (Para: 41) 
 
 The Committee observes that the availability of hotel rooms in India is limited 
because of acute shortage of land in cities due to land market distortions an d there is a 
need to significantly augment hotel room capacity. In order to meet the requirement o f 
accommodation, the Committee recommends that the surplus railway land at railway 
stations may be utilized for constructing budget hotels.       (Para: 42) 
 
 The Committee observes that Vande Bharat trains have been introduced for 
some important tourist destinations. The Committee is of the opinion that some more 
Vande Bharat trains should be introduced on routes such as Jaisalmer -Jodhpur, Jaipur-
Agra, Mumbai - Nagpur, Howrah -Patna-Varanasi, Chennai - Trichy-Madurai-
Kanyakumari- Thiruvananthapuram and Varanasi -Chitrakoot-Satna-Jabalpur. These 
are the key places where maximum tourist travels and these trains can really mobilize 
more trains.               (Para: 43) 
 
 The Committee is of the view that in the States of North -East, Uttarakhand and 
Himachal Pradesh, most tourist destinations are reachable by road and entail long travel 
time between the destinations. There is also a lack of roadside amenities including 
affordable stay-homes, toilets, and cafeterias in the routes. Also, there is lack of proper 
intra-State rail connectivity. The Committee would, therefore, desire that the Ministry of 
Tourism should focus on tackling the above issues and apprise the Committ ee of the 
hurdles being faced in the implementation of the road and rail connectivity projects 
alongwith the steps taken to deal with these issues.      (Para: 44) 
 

63 
 
 Cruise tourism in India is still a nascent industry, though we have a huge 
opportunity to capture the market because geographically, India is strategically located 
between Western Europe and Asia and every ship to Europe has to pass through it. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to enable the cruise sector to reshape 
the Indian travel industry, the Government must revamp the country’s current Port 
infrastructure, set up dedicated terminals to cater to the needs of tourists and undertake 
riverfront development on a massive scale.        (Para: 48) 
 
 The Committee desires that this mode of transport facility should be affordable 
to the tourists who could not afford cruise tourism facilities so that cruise tourism can 
reach the masses.             (Para: 49) 
 
Digital Connectivity and Outreach 
 Advances in technology are spurring innovations and redefining notions of travel 
altogether. However, about 70% of the tourism units in India come under the category 
of MSMEs who often lack the necessary technical measures in their workforce to fully 
reap the budge t of digital potentials. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Government should chalk out a programme for providing technical assistance to 
MSMEs so that they could digitize their operations.       (Para: 53) 
 
 With increasing variations in demand  of tourism, the Committee feels that 
creative ways of digitally showcasing the different facets of our Heritage needs to be 
explored and this would require a paradigm shift in understanding customer’s travel 
interests and focus on developing alternative attractions.      (Para: 54) 
 
 The Committee desires the Ministry of Tourism to target foreign tourists, 
Indians living abroad, foreign universities etc. digitally to market the country’s brand 
image as one of the popular tourist destinations globally and develop special travel 
packages covering three to four prominent destinations of every region in the country.  
                   (Para: 55) 
Domestic Promotion and Publicity 
  The growth in Indian travel and tourism sector has largely been driven by 
domestic tourism. As per the information furnished in the Annual Report 2019-20 of the 

64 
 
Ministry, there were 1854.93 Million domestic tourist visits during the year 2018. 
However, in the aftermath of Covid -19 pandemic and the enforcement of lockdown, 
tourists are hesitant about travelling due to the fear of Covid -19 and the tourism sector 
has been among the worst -hit areas. Since revival of international tourism would take 
some time, domestic tourism would play an important role in reviving the economy. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must focus on promoting 
domestic tourism and adopt aggressive online and other marketing strategies to 
advertise domestic destinations in a big way so that tourist footfall could  be increased.
                   (Para: 58) 
  The Committee is of the view that many advertisement agencies often intend to 
increase their revenue by promoting their services, but fail to connect to their t arget 
audience. The Committee, therefore, recommends that advertisements should be 
designed in such a way that they connect to their target audience by even reaching to 
the remotest part of the country and by showcasing its rich heritage and culture.  
                    (Para: 59) 
  The Committee notes that the Scheme of Domestic Promotion and Publicity 
including Market Development Assistance was launched with the major objective of 
creating a general awareness amongst the domestic population about the tou rist 
destinations and to develop tourist market within the country. The Committee desires 
that the Ministry should pay attention to how people search for traveling options, how 
they reach out to travelers at the right time and in what way they embrace Face book / 
Twitter / Instagram advertisements.         (Para: 60) 
  The Committee takes note of the submission that new campaigns are proposed to 
be undertaken to improve connectivity and digital outreach in the regions of Jammu and 
Kashmir, North -East, Ladakh etc. While appreciating the proposed campaigns, the 
Committee observes that the North -Eastern region is most enticing part of our country 
and a veritable delight to the tourists. However, due to various factors, the tourism 
potential of the North -Eastern region has not been properly showcased. The Committee, 
therefore, r ecommends that the Ministry should formulate a media strategy for giving 
wide publicity about the North -Eastern region as a tourist destination and its cultural 
uniqueness in both print and electronic media. The Ministry should also organize 
cultural activities, fairs, seminars and workshops aimed at showcasing the varied society 

65 
 
of the North-Eastern region so that the inherent tourism potential of the region could be 
fully tapped and utilized.            (Para: 64) 
 
  Another concern of the Committee is regarding promotion of tourist sites such as 
Jim Corbett National Park (Nainital, Uttarakhand), Daman and Diu, Rameswaram 
(Tamil Nadu), Shirdi and Lonar Crater Lake (Maharashtra), Jammu and Kashmir, 
North Eastern States, Ladakh region. The Ministry should chalk out ways to promote the 
above mentioned tourist sites digitally so that there is increase in tourist footfall in these 
regions. This would not only help in modernization of tourism infrastructure but also 
lead to employment and revenue generation.        (Para: 65) 
 
Overseas Promotion and Publicity  
 
  While appreciating the shift from generic promotion to more focused and niche 
products of the country under the Incredible India 2.0 campaign, the Committee 
recommends that Ministry should commission surveys for an impact analysis of the 
campaigns in key source markets overseas.        (Para: 67) 
 
  The objective of Overseas Promotion and Publicity including Marketing 
Development Assistance Scheme is to position India as a favoured tourism destination in 
the tourism generating markets overseas and to increase India’s share of the global 
tourism market . As per information given in the Annual Report (2019 -20) of the 
Ministry of Tourism, Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) were 10.89 Million during 2019 
and International Tourist Arrivals (ITAs) (which include both FTAs and arrivals of 
NRIs) were 17.82 Million  in the year 2018. As a result of the Covid -19 pandemic, 
tourism has been hit hard and the growth of International Tourist Arrivals to India has 
declined sharply. The Committee desires to be apprised of the extent to which ITAs are 
expected to drop as comp ared to the original 2020 forecast and whether any targeted 
marketing strategy has been adopted to revive the growth of ITAs to India. The 
Committee also takes note of the submission that in order to promote and market brand 
India and promote India’s share  in global tourist arrivals, a synergized campaign in 
association with the Travel Trade, State Governments and Indian Missions overseas has 
been launched. Since the abrupt fall in ITAs and the resultant plunge in the tourism 
sector has wiped out many small  and medium sized firms that had catered to tourists 

66 
 
overseas, the Committee recommends that financial assistance be provided to approved 
tourism service providers for undertaking the tourism promotional activities overseas.  
                    (Para: 70) 
 
  Foreign Tourist footfall is one of the key aspects of emerging tourism industry. 
The Committee in this regard, would like the Ministry to follow the strategy given 
below, point -wise, to advertise country’s image as one of the prominent tourist 
attractions globally:- 
 Highlighting the main tourist attractions. 
 Identification of target visitors. 
 Obtain and utilize data to get to know your visitors. 
 Focus on Branding country’s rich heritage and culture. 
 Seek Public Private Partnerships. 
 Create a compelling destination website. 
 Engagement Marketing. 
 Training and Skill development programme for professionals. 
 Giving visitors an immersive experience. 
 Using Social Media platforms. 
 Attracting Influencers/ travel operators. 
 Exploring various online advertising methods. 
 Creating offline overseas marketing strategies.      (Para: 71) 
 
 The Committee also recommends that in order to achieve higher international 
visitor levels, country-wise targets of Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) should be worked 
out and the Ministry should focus on diversification of source markets so that countries 
which offer high growth potential but from where present level of tourist is low could 
be covered.             (Para: 72) 
 
Development of Adventure Tourism 
 
Despite its unique endowments of biodiversity and having unparalleled natural 
resources and 73 percent of the diverse Himalayan range for exploration, adventure 
tourism in India is at a nascent stage and the country is yet to exploit the immense 
potential of adventure tourism which can make India a round the year destination. The 

67 
 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must come out with a policy 
document focusing on harnessing the potential of adventure tourism in a safe and 
environment-friendly manner. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the specific 
measures initiated to promote and exploit the adventure tourism.    (Para: 75) 
 
  The Committee is aware that in order to boost and regulate adventure tourism in 
India, the Ministry of Tour ism had issued guidelines for Adventure Tourism in the year 
2018. The Committee would like to know whether all the States adopted and 
implemented the guidelines. The Committee would like the Ministry to ensure that the 
adventure tourism guidelines are foll owed by all the States/ UTs as it would go a long 
way in promoting inbound adventure tourism. The Committee also recommends a 
dedicated promotional campaign be launched to promote India as an adventure tourism 
destination.                     (Para: 76) 
 
  The Committee noticed that inbound adventure tourism in India is growing by 
5-7 percent annually and domestic adventure tourism is growing by 20 -25 per cent (as 
per the Survey Report of the Indian Tourism and Hospitality Industry).  According to 
market re search experts, over one billion travelers experienced adventure tourism 
globally and India attracted just over 3.4 Million adventure tourists in 2015 as compared 
to Western nations which attracted relatively higher numbers. The Committee, 
therefore, recom mends that the Ministry should apprise it of the reasons for the slow 
growth of adventure tourism industry and why is there a lack of clear cut policy instance 
on it.                      (Para: 77) 
 
  Since India is a highly populated country, amusement parks sector has a very 
high growth potential in the country. The Committee is therefore, of the considered view 
that promotion of amusement parks will boost tourism, social infrastructure and 
revenue generation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that t he Ministry of 
Tourism in close coordination with the States/ UTs should chalk out a roadmap for 
promotion of the amusement parks sector and also explore the possibility of lowering the 
GST.                     (Para: 79) 
 

68 
 
  The Committee would like the Mi nistry to focus on developing adventure 
tourism activities given below and apprise the Committee of the steps being taken for the 
same: 
 Chadar Trek in Ladakh 
 White River Rafting in Rishikesh 
 Jim Corbett Safari- Uttarakhand 
 Scuba Diving in Andaman Island, Malvan Island and Goa. 
 Roopkund Trek- Uttarakhand 
 Manali to Leh Bike/ Jeep Trip 
 Caving in Meghalaya 
 Skiing in Gulmarg and Manali 
 Bungee Jumping in Rishikesh 
 River Rafting in Tons Valley- Uttarakhand 
 Hot Air Ballooning in Jaipur and Solang Valley 
 Dune Bashing in Jaisalmer 
 Paragliding in Bir-Billing- Himachal Pradesh 
 White Water River Rafting in Kullu 
 Water sports at affordable prices in Goa 
 Skydiving in Mysore 
 Flying Fox Adventure in Neemrana- Rajasthan 
 Rock Climbing in Satpura 
 Sandakphu Trek-West Bengal 
 Wildlife Safari in Gir National Park- Gujarat 
 Dudhsagar Trek in Goa 
 Kayaking in Aguada River- Goa 
 Skiing in Kufri 
 Cycling in Munnar 
 Camping in Coorg 
 Tiger Safari in Bandhavgarh National Park- Madhya Pradesh 
 Giant Swing in Rishikesh 
 Gulmarg-Gondola Ride 
 Microlight Flying in Bangalore            (Para: 80) 
      
Safety and Security of Tourists 

69 
 
  Poor experiences with regard to safety and security of tourists lead to a negative 
image of tourist site/ country in the mind of tourist, whether domestic or international. 
The Committee recommends that in the light of the security concerns at tourist 
destinations, watchful tourist police and other law and order force supported by smart 
intelligence should be introduced with efficient communication systems at airports, 
Ports, railway/ bus stations etc.         (Para: 84) 
 
  As regards the issue of safety/ s ecurity in cruise tourism, the Committee 
recommends that operating agencies should have a detailed operational procedure and 
only trained and skill tested personnel should be allowed to handle tourists at risk -prone 
sea/ river areas. Further, the landings should have facilities of speedboats, trained divers 
and security people lighting facilities, generators and vessel communication systems.     
              (Para: 85) 
 
Development of Cruise Tourism  
 
 The Committee takes note of the measures taken for the  development of cruise 
tourism but would like to be apprised of the efficacy of the above measures in 
promoting India as a cruise tourism destination.        (Para: 87) 
  
Cruise tourism in India is still in its nascent stage but India has an immense 
potential to emerge as a leading destination for cruise tourism in Asia. In recent years, 
India has witnessed increase in the number of calls made by cruise ships. However, the 
Covid-19 pandemic and enforcement of the lockdown in its wake has had a catastrophic 
impact on cruise tourism in the country. Since cruise industry supports multiple shore 
side businesses, the Committee would like the Ministry to make an assessment of the 
overall damage caused to cruise tourism due to the Covid -19 pandemic -induced 
lockdown and take remedial measures to mitigate its massive cascading effect on the 
overall travel and hospitality industry.        (Para: 92) 
 
 The Committee is also of the opinio n that establishing a 24 -hour tourist service 
center, providing a complete cruise logistics service, inviting foreign cruise operators to 
inspect special resources in India, cooperating with Taiwan, Japan and South -East 

70 
 
Asian countries for promotion of cru ise tourism and setting up a special Government 
unit for the purpose would boost India’s cruise industry.                (Para: 93) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that the five Major Ports at Mumbai, Goa, 
Mangalore, Cochin and Chennai have been dev eloped to be cruise destinations with 
dedicated terminals. The Committee desires to know whether the cruise terminals at the 
above Ports have produced the desired results. The Committee also desires to be 
apprised whether the present structure of levy of taxes needs any changes/ modifications 
to tap the tremendous potential of cruise tourism in India.         (Para: 94) 
 
Training and Skill development 
 Tourism is a multi -sectoral activity characterized by multiple services and 
therefore, the tourism industry is one of the largest generators of employment across the 
world and has the potential to emerge as a key economic driver. Servicing the sector 
with skilled manpower is therefore of utmost importance. The Committee takes note of 
the fact that the scheme of “Capacity Building for Service Providers” aims to train and 
upgrade manpower at every stratum of service. The Committee also notes that under 
the Hu nar se Rozgar Tak programme, 11,624 persons have been trained against the 
target of 19,250 during 2018 -19 and observes that the tourism sector’s annual 
requirement of skilled manpower is much more than the supply from educational and 
skill training institu tions which also gets reduced due to attrition. The Committee, 
therefore, expresses its displeasure at the shortfall in the target of trained persons under 
the Hunar se Rozgar Tak programme and recommends that the Ministry should 
formulate a robust strategy to meet the problem of trained manpower gap.     (Para: 97) 
 
  The Committee is of the view that the realization of the country’s tourism 
potential cannot be tapped without addressing the issue of capacity constraints. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should conduct a tourism industry 
training provider assessment and review available data from previous assessment; work 
with industry to develop a survey instrument that assesses current and projected 
workforce needs in different touris m domains and occupations (e.g., hotels and lodging, 
travel and transportation, etc.); focus the assessment on entry -level; and entrepreneurial 
occupations that can be filled by vulnerable populations such as youth.   (Para: 100) 

71 
 
 The Committee also desires that the Ministry of Tourism should identify 
occupational needs in different sectors of the tourism industry and develop an approach 
to provide needed skills/ training/ job placement services to youth who want to pursue 
these occupations and career s in tourism. The aim of the scheme so designed should be 
to address the labor market needs of the tourism industry; provide a targeted program 
of technical assistance and training including revising curriculum and producing 
educational materials; and to improve education and training provider quality.  
           (Para: 101) 
Impact of Covid-19 pandemic on Travel and Hospitality Sector 
 The Committee in Paras 44 to Para 77 of its 288th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) of Ministry of Tourism, presented  to the Parliament on the 9 th March, 2021 
has done a rigorous analysis of the impact of Covid -19 pandemic on Tourism, Travel 
and Hospitality sector and covered the gamut of issues arising therefrom and made 
substantive recommendations thereon. The Committe e, therefore does not consider it 
necessary to repeat the details contained in its 288 th Report in this Report. The Ministry 
may refer to Para 44 -77 of the 288 th Report and take appropriate remedial measures.  
(Paras 44 to 77 are given in Annexure-C for ready reference)     (Para: 102) 
 
 The Committee observes that the tourism and hospitality industry is reeling 
under the impact of Covid -19 pandemic. With business coming almost to a standstill, 
the unprecedented crisis has shaken the very foundation of this vibrant sector. 
Hospitality and tourism sector is a very important component of our economy as it has 
the potential to stimulate other economic sectors through its backward and forward 
linkages and contributes significantly to the national economy as well as the creation of 
jobs in the country. It also earns huge foreign exchange for the country. The Committee 
is, therefore, of the considered view that this sector which right now is in huge distress 
needs strong liquidity and policy support from the Governm ent/ Financial Institutions/ 
Banks to bounce back. The Committee notes from the information made available to it 
that as part of Atma Nirbhar Bharat Package, RBI had permitted a term -loan 
moratorium and working capital interest deferment w.e.f. 01.03.2020 to 31.08.2020 
alongwith an asset classification standstill for that period and other measures to 
enhance liquidity. In view of the fact that the situation continues to be dire and due to 
stagnation of cash flows in the wake of Covid -19 pandemic, the touris m and hospitality 

72 
 
sector stakeholders are unable to repay existing dues as per their existing repayment 
tenor, the Committee recommends that the moratorium on all working capital, 
principal, interest payments, loans and overdrafts may be further extended, bringing in 
liquidity and allowing for business continuity without categorising the companies as 
NPAs. The Committee is of the firm view that such a moratorium will go a long way in 
salvaging the entire tourism and hospitality industry.          (Para: 108) 
 
 The Committee is aware that in view of the uncertainties created by the 
resurgence of Covid-19 Pandemic, the RBI on 5 th May, 2021 has announced Resolution 
Framework 2.0 for Covid -related stressed assets of individual borrowers and small 
businesses. Restructuring under the Resolution Framework 2.0 can be invoked upto 30 th 
September, 2021. Borrowers having aggregate exposure of upto Rs. 25.00 crores and 
who have not availed restructuring under any other scheme and who are classified as 
“standard” as on 31 st March, 2021 are eligible for the window of resolution under 
Resolution Framework 2.0. Tourism entities, hotels and restaurants meeting the criteria 
are also eligible under the Scheme. In respect of individual borrowers and small 
businesses who have avai led restructuring of their loans and where the resolution plan 
permitted a moratorium of less than two years, financial institutions have been 
permitted to use Resolution Framework 2.0 to modify such plan to the extent of 
increasing the period of the moratorium or extending the residual tenure upto a total of 
two years. Considering the fact that the Covid -19 induced crisis has led to a shut -down 
of the Travel and Tourism industry, it may take 2 -3 years for the tourism and 
hospitality industry to see a return to some semblance of normalcy in its operations. The 
Committee therefore recommends that the period for restructuring for this Sector be 
extended up to March, 2023.               (Para: 120) 
 The Committee simultaneously recommends that the Government/ f inancial 
institutions should put in place a robust mechanism to prevent abuse of the 
restructuring route for ever greening of faulty loans prior to impact of Covid -19 
pandemic.                (Para: 121) 
 The Committee notes that under Emergency Credit Lin e Guarantee Scheme 
(ECLGS) 2.0 entities, subject to certain conditions, are eligible for additional funding as 
a collateral free Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line (GECL). The loans provided under 
ECLGS 2.0 have a 5 - year tenor with a 12 month moratorium on repayment of 

73 
 
principal. Given the fact that the Covid -19 pandemic has had a debilitating impact on 
hospitality sector, the Committee recommends that the repayment period for the 
hospitality industry under ECLGS 2.0 be extended up to 10 years.   (Para: 122) 
Miscellaneous 
 The Committee reiterates the recommendations made in Para 177 to Para 179 of 
its 288th Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of Ministry of Tourism, presented to 
the Parliament on the 9th March, 2021. 
“Tourism is the largest sector in the economy of the Maldives as it 
plays a vital role in earning foreign exchange revenues and 
generating employment. In order to promote tourism, the 
Maldivian Government has leased dozens of uninhabited islands 
to local and foreign resort developers. The Committee notes that 
India has a number of islands. These islands have several virgin 
places, beaches and an array of  features to transform them into 
global tourism hotspot. But a lack  of strategy has worked as a 
barrier to such transformations.  The Committee would  like the 
Ministry to explore the possibility of following  the Maldivian 
model in  places in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and 
Lakshadweep Islands and facilitating leasing of islands to local  
and foreign resort developers for tourism              p    urposes”. 
 
 “Since the road, highway and railway networks play an 
important role in promotion of tourism and also improving the 
Indian economy, the Ministry should  formulate a policy to 
promote tourism by connecting tourist spots across the country 
through roads, National Highways and Railways. Last mile road 
connectivity to most frequented destinations also needs immediate 
attention. The Ministry should, therefore, give policy push to last 
mile road connectivity to enhance  connectivity to pr eferred 
tourist destinations.” 
 
 “The Central Road and Infrastructure Fund (CIRF) is 
earmarked for various infrastructure sectors. The Committee 

74 
 
would like the Ministry to help formulate a policy for earmarking 
of CRIF funds for developing  and providing highway link as well 
as last mile road connectivity to tourist destinations, including 
historical places and temples such as Gulmarg, Pahalgaam,  
Shankracharya Temple, Srinagar, Leh, Ladakh, Manali, Coorg, 
Alleppey, etc., historical places and temples.”          (Para: 123) 
 In order to make our country a 365 days tourist destination, connectivity by 
all the modes of transportation is extremely important. The Committee finds 
absence of proper mode of transportation to reach even the most visited tourist 
destinations like Agra, Tirupati, etc. If our country has to be made a major Tourism 
Hub, the destinations should be well connected. The Committee, therefore, desires 
that a Master Plan should be prepared and shared among the Ministries for 
achieving better connectivity.            (Para: 124) 
 Religious Tourism in India is one of the key dimensions to boost tourism 
and to attract both domestic and international tourists. India is already blessed with 
a large number of religious tourism places for every sect  of religion. Places such as 
Madurai, Tirupati, Shirdi and Sabarimala are few amongst them. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to the Ministry that these tourist places should have proper 
and frequent air connectivity . Further, for sites without airport,  the Ministry of 
Tourism should coordinate with the Ministry of Civil Aviation on priority basis for 
development of airports, as these tourist places are mostly visited by elderly tourists.                
               (Para: 125) 
 The Committee is of the view that India has a huge potential of religious 
tourism which would enhance India’s soft power projection in Southeast Asia, which 
is already emerging as a new tourism hub for international tourists across the world. 
The Committee would like the Ministry  to embrace the opportunities presented by 
the North-South Economic Corridor in order to encourage travelers from the north 
of Myanmar and to Southern China alongwith South- East Asian countries, which in 
turn, may lead to more interest in India’s religiou s tourism spots and would 
definitely boost foreign exchange earnings of India.        (Para: 126) 
                                        *** 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
 

75
 
 
 
III
 
THIRD MEETING
 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 13
th
 
October, 2020 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
Members present:
 
1.
 
Shri T.G. Venkatesh
                  
 
-
 
Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
 
Shri Prasanna 
Acharya
 
3.
 
Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
 
4.
 
Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
 
5.
 
Shri K.C. Venugopal
 
LOK SABHA
 
6.
 
Shri Margani Bharat
 
7.
 
Shri
 
Rahul Kaswan
 
8.
 
Shri
 
Sunil Baburao Mendhe
 
9.
 
Shri Chhedi Paswan
 
10.
 
Shri Kamlesh Paswan
 
11.
 
Shri Tirath Singh Rawat
 
12.
 
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
 
13.
 
 
Shri Dushyant 
Singh
 
14.
 
 
Shri
 
Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas
 
15.
 
Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
     
 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary
 
Shri
 
P. Narayanan, Director
 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
 
 
 
Witnesses
  
 
 
 
I.
 
  
*              *              *
 
 
 
* Relates to other matters
 
 
 
 

76
 
 
II.
   
ASSOCIATION OF DOMESTIC TOUR OPERATORS OF INDIA
 
1.
 
Mr. P.P. Khanna
 
President
 
2.
 
Mr. Anil Rajput
 
Joint Secretary
 
INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF TOUR OPERATORS
 
3.
 
Mr. Pronab Sarkar
 
President
 
INDIAN TOURIST TRANSPORTERS ASSOCIATION
 
4.
 
Mr. Satish Sehrawat
 
President
 
FEDERATION OF ASSOCIATIONS IN INDIAN TOURISM & HOSPITALITY
 
5.
 
Shri Ashish Gupta
 
Consulting
 
 
CEO
 
 
2.
        
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to hear the 
* * *
.
 
3.
        
 
Before taking up the agenda, the Chairman drew the attentio
n of the Commit
tee to the 
fact
 
that 
* * *
.
 
I. 
*
 
*
 
*
 
4.
         
*
 
 
*
 
 
*.
 
5.
        
 
*
 
 
*
 
 
*.
 
6.
        
 
*
 
 
*
 
 
*.
 
7.
        
 
*
 
 
*
 
 
*.
 
(The witnesses then withdrew)
 
II. Oral Evidence of stakeholders of Tourism sector
 
8.
        
 
The Chairman welcomed Shri P.P. Khanna, 
President and Shri Anil Rajput, Joint 
Secretary, Association of Domestic Tour Operators of India; Shri Satish Sehrawat, President, 
Indian Tourist Transporters Association; Shri Pronab Sarkar, President, Indian Association of 
Tour Operators; and Shri Ashish
 
Gupta, Consulting CEO, Federation of Associations in 
Indian Tourism and Hospitality, to the meeting of the Committee.
 
9.
        
 
Shri P.P. Khanna,
 
 
stated that India's domestic tourism market is the second largest in 
the world, next to China. He drew the 
Committee’s attention to the vision of the tourism 
industry to double India's share of domestic tourism to four billion domestic tourist visits in 
 
 
 
*
Relates to other matters
 

77
 
 
five years, post
-
COVID 19 and further increasing it to eight billion in the nex
t five years. He 
apprised the Committee that small fixed
-
wing choppers from private operators would be 
allowed to use the air strips in the States of Himalayan region. He emphasized upon the 
potential of tourism in North
-
East region and informed the Commit
tee of the proposals for 
connecting flights for the routes of Agartala
-
Aizawl
-
Agartala and Guwahati
-
Dibrugarh
-
Mechuka Ziro
-
Pasighat.
 
 
10.
        
 
He mentioned about promoting winter sports in the areas of in Ladakh, such as Dras, 
Kargil, Zanskar and Leh. 
He apprised the Committee of the proposal for promoting border 
tourism in places such as Kargil, Gurez, Janiwala and Lakhpat in Gujarat and similarly, in the 
States of Manipur and Sikkim. In order to boost domestic tourism, he proposed for income 
tax exemp
tion on travelling within India for domestic tourists. He concluded his deposition 
by emphasizing upon safety, sanitization and sensitization to boost employment generation 
and capital expenditure in the country.
 
 
11. 
     
 
Shri Anil Rajput emphasized upon
 
the need for further research and development in 
the tourism sector. He threw light upon organizing c
ultural welfare programmes for 
the tribal 
communities to promote tourism in the region. He further elaborated upon the connectivity 
measures which are und
er implementation/ to be implemented. He suggested that the State 
Tourism Policies should be in coordination with the National Tourism Policy.
 
 
12. 
     
 
Shri Pronab Sarkar emphasized upon the need for better air connectivity to modernize 
tourism sector an
d to generate greater revenues and employment and also suggested avenues 
of promotion of tourism in Eastern India and Southern India. He then briefed the Committee 
about the features of the Services Export Incentive Scheme and the condition of tour 
exporte
rs during the COVID
-
19 pandemic.
 
 
13. 
     
 
Shri Satish Sehrawat began his deposition by elaborating upon the need for ensuring 
free flow and movement of tourists at the borders to make tourism hassle free at such sites. 
He raised the issue of documentatio
n at toll booths and suggested number plating system on 
four wheelers for ease of tourists travelling in commercial vehicles.
 
 
14.
      
 
Shri Ashish Gupta flagged the issue of connectivity to hinterlands by means of rail/ 
road/ air/ water transport to the 
State capitals and commercial capitals of the nation. He then 
expressed his concern over the post COVID
-
19 pandemic situation in terms of foreign 
exchange earnings. He further highlighted the issues related to LTC mechanism, GST on 
hotels, IGST issue for S
tate tour and travel operators and GST set
-
offs on State parkings and 
fuel prices.
 
 

78
 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew)
 
15.
        
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
 
16.
        
 
The meeting adjourned at 4:55 P.M.
 
 
 
New Delhi,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
P. Narayanan
 
13
th
 
October, 2020
                                                     
 
                                  
 
   
Director
 

79
 
 
 
XVIII
 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
 
The Department
-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & 
Culture, met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 19
th
 
April, 2021 in Committee Room ‘4’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi.
 
Members present:
 
 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA
 
1.
 
Shri T.G. Venkatesh
                  
 
-
 
Chairman
 
2.
 
Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
 
3.
 
Shri Sushil Kumar Modi
 
LOK SABHA
 
4.
 
Shri Rahul Kaswan
 
5.
 
Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi
 
6.
 
Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe
 
7.
 
Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu
 
8.
 
Shri Rajiv 
Pratap Rudy
 
9.
 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas
 
10.
 
Shri Manoj Tiwari
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director
 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
 
 
 
Witnesses
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TOURISM
 
 
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri Arvind Singh
 
Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri Rakesh Kumar Verma
 
Joint Secretary
 
3.
 
Ms Rupinder Brar
 
Additional Director General
 
4.
 
Shri B. B. Dash
 
Director
 
 
2.
      
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He 
informed the Members that the agenda of 
the meeting was to hear the Secretary, Ministry of 
Tourism on
 
the subject
 
'Potential of Tourist Spots in the Country
-
 
Connectivity and Outreach'.
 
 
 
Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Tourism
 

80
 
 
3.
 
The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and
 
other senior officials 
from the Ministry to the meeting. The Secretary, during the course of his presentation, 
highlighted the existing coordination and monitoring mechanism of the Inter
-
Ministerial 
Coordination Committee for Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) under
 
the Chairmanship of 
Cabinet Secretary to address various issues related to tourism. He also threw light upon the 
various ongoing projects of the Ministry of Tourism for improvement of road connectivity 
to important tourist destinations, in coordination wi
th the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways. H
e
 
furthe
r
 
informe
d
 
th
e
 
Committe
e that m
eetings have been held with the 
officials of Airports Authority of India and Railway Board to discuss the improvement of 
amenities at the airports and also for early co
mpletion of railway projects to improve 
tourism connectivity.
 
4.
 
The Secretary then apprised the Committee of the overseas promotional campaigns 
undertaken by the Ministry of Tourism such as organizing road shows, seminars, 
workshops, Global Media Campaigns a
nd Marketing Development Assistance (MDA) 
Scheme to provide financial support to the tourism sector. While emphasizing upon the 
domestic tourism campaigns, the Secretary apprised the Committee of various events such 
as Tapping the Tourism Potential of Kash
mir, Meet in India MICE
 
(Meetings, Incentives, 
Conferences and Exhibitions)
 
road
-
show at Khajuraho, Incredible India Homestay 
Development and Training Mega Workshop at Kolkata and 1000 Bar Dekho
-
 
North East 
Dekho campaign.
 
5.
 
He informed the Committee of the 
Adopt a Heritage Scheme of Ministry of Tourism for 
the development of amenities across the identified heritage sites to enhance overall tourist 
experience and economic development of the region through active participation from 
corporations, organizations 
and individuals. The Additional Director General (Tourism) 
then apprised the Committee of the Human Resource Development and Capacity Building 
Programmes of the Ministry such as Pan India Online Learning Certification Programme 
launched in January, 2020,
 
H
unar Se Rozgar Tak, Mid
-
Day Meal 
Programme
 
and
 
Destination Based Skill Development
 
Programme.
 
6.
 
The Additional Director General (Tourism) concluded her deposition by apprising the 
Committee of the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry to contain the spread 
of the Covid
-
19 pandemic such as SAATHI (System for Assessment, Awareness & Training for 
Hospitality Industry) and NIDHI (National Integrated Database of Hospitality Industry) in 
order to assist the hospitality industry in their preparedness to continue op
erations safely 
and mitigate risks arising out of the Covid
-
19 pandemic.
 
7.
 
Members of the Committee raised various queries, some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary. The Chairman then directed that written replies to the queries which remained 
unanswer
ed may be sent to the Secretariat within a week.
 
(The witnesses then withdrew)
 
8.
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
 
9.
 
The meeting adjourned at 4:26 P.M.
 
 
 
New 
Delhi,
                                                                                             
 
P. Narayanan
 
19
th
 
April
, 2021
                                                                                               
 
Director
 
 

81
 
 
 
XX
 
TWENTIE
TH
 
MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Fri
day, the 
2
5
th
 
June, 2021
 
in 
Committee 
Room
 
‘A’
, 
Ground
 
Floor, 
Parliament House
 
Annexe
,
 
New Delhi.
 
Members present:
 
1.
 
Shri T.G. Venkatesh
                  
 
-
 
Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
 
Shri Prasanna 
Acharya
 
3.
 
Shri 
Sambhaji Chhatrapati
 
4.
 
Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
 
5.
 
Shri K.C. Venugopal
 
6.
 
Shri Sushil Kumar Modi
 
LOK SABHA
 
7.
 
Shri
 
Anto Antony
 
 
     
8
. 
  
Shri 
Margani Bharat
 
 
 
 
  
 
9
.
  
 
Shri 
Tapir Gao
 
    
10
.   
Shri Rahul Kaswan
 
    
11
.   
Shri 
Ramesh Chandra Majhi
 
    
12
.
 
Shri 
Sunil Baburao Mendhe
 
    
13
.   Shri 
K. Muraleedharan
 
    
1
4
.   
Shri 
Kamlesh Paswan
 
    
1
5
.   
Shri 
Sunil Kumar Pintu
 
    
1
6
.   
Shri
mati
 
Mala Roy
 
    
1
7
.   Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
 
    
1
8
. 
  
Shri Dushyant Singh
 
    
19
. 
  
Shri 
Ramdas Chandrabhanji 
Tadas
 
    
2
0
.
 
Shri Manoj Tiwari
 
    
2
1
.
 
Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane
 
SECRETARIAT
 
     
 
Dr. 
Shikha Darbari
, Joint Secretary
 
& Financial Advisor
 
Shri
 
P. Narayanan, Director
 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary
 
 
 
 
 
2.
 
At the
 
outset, the Chairman extended a very war
m welcome to the Members of the
 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the 
  
following 
draft 
R
eports:
-
 

82
 
 
(i)
 
*
 
 
 
*
 
 
*
;
 
 
(ii)
 
Report on 
‘Potential of Tourist Spots in the Country
-
 
C
onnectivity and 
Outreach’
;
 
and
 
 
(iii)
 
*
 
 
 
*
 
 
*
.
 
 
3.
 
 
The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor
 
changes
.
 
4
.
 
*
 
 
*
 
 
*
.
 
5
.
   
The meeting adjourned at 12
:0
5
 
P.M
.
 
 
 
New Delhi,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
      
 
P. Narayanan
 
2
5
th
 
June
, 20
21
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
      
Director
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
 

 
Annexure-A 
State-wise sanctioned amount on improvement of connectivity 
(Rs. in Lakh) 
Sl. 
No 
State Road Air Rail Total 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 336 179 - 516 
2 Assam 827 - - 827 
3 Bihar 406 - - 406 
4 Chhattisgarh 364 - - 364 
5 Goa 273 344 - 617 
6 Gujarat 426 - - 426 
7 Himachal Pradesh - 300 - 300 
8 Jammu & Kashmir 725 24 - 749 
9 Kerala 2,737 - - 2,737 
10 Madhya Pradesh 1,762 - - 1,762 
11 Maharashtra 664 - - 664 
12 Meghalaya 2,855 - - 2,855 
13 Mizoram 258 - - 258 
14 Nagaland 981 - - 981 
15 Odisha 714 - - 714 
16 Puducherry 230 - - 230 
17 Punjab 633 - - 633 
18 Rajasthan 340 - 1,937 2,277 
19 Sikkim 649 - - 649 
20 Telangana 486 - - 486 
21 Tripura 188 - - 188 
22 Uttar Pradesh 2,129 374 - 2,503 
23 Uttarakhand 973 - - 973 
24 West Bengal 361 - - 361 
 
Total 19,314 1,221 1,937 22,471 
 
 
 
83

 
46 Tourism Routes awarded by MoCA under RCS-UDAN 3 
Sl. No. Route Status 
1) 1 Agra to Bhopal  
2) 2 Bhopal to Agra  
3) 3 Agra to Indore  
4) 4 Indore to Agra  
5) 5 Bengaluru to Mysuru  
6) 6 Mysuru to Bengaluru 
7) 7 Dibrugarh to Dimapur  
8) 8 Dimapur to Dibrugarh  
9) 9 Dimapur to Imphal Operationalised 
10) 10 Imphal to Dimapur 
11) 11 Gaya to Kushinagar  
12) 12 Kushinagar to Gaya  
13) 13 Lucknow to Saharanpur (Sarsawa)  
14) 14 Saharanpur (Sarsawa) to Lucknow  
15) 15 Port Blair to Shibpur (Diglipur)  
16) 16 Shibpur (Diglipur) to Port Blair  
17) 17 Shimla to Kullu  
18) 18 Agartala to Aizawl  
19) 19 Aizawl to Agartala  
20) 20 Ahmedabad to Udaipur Operationalised 
21) 21 Udaipur to Ahmedabad 
22) 22 Amritsar to Jaipur Operationalised 
23) 23 Jaipur to Amritsar 
24) 24 Amritsar to Kolkata Operationalised 
25) 25 Kolkata to Amritsar 
26) 26 Amritsar to Patna  
27) 27 Patna to Amritsar  
28) 28 Aurangabad to Udaipur  
29) 29 Udaipur to Aurangabad  
30) 30 Bhopal to Udaipur Operationalised 
31) 31 Udaipur to Bhopal 
84

 
32) 32 Bhubaneshwar to Varanasi Operationalised 
33) 33 Varanasi to Bhubaneshwar 
34) 34 Bikaner to Jaisalmer  
35) 35 Jaisalmer to Bikaner  
36) 36 Delhi to Calicut (Kozhikode)  
37) 37 Calicut (Kozhikode) to Delhi  
38) 38 Delhi to Khajuraho  
39) 39 Khajuraho to Delhi  
40) 40 Dibrugarh to Imphal  
41) 41 Imphal to Dibrugarh  
42) 42 Jodhpur to Udaipur  
43) 43 Udaipur to Jodhpur  
44) 44 Rajamundhry to Vishakapatnam Operationalised 
45) 45 Vishakapatnam to Rajamundhry 
46) 46 Varanasi to Patna  
*******
85

 
Annexure-B 
LIST OF TOURIST DESTINATIONS FOR IMPROVING CONNECTIVITY 
Sl. No. Tourist Destination State / UT 
1.  Lepakshi Andhra Pradesh 
2.  Vizag Andhra Pradesh 
3.  Itanagar Arunachal Pradesh 
4.  Kaziranga National Park Assam 
5.  Nalanda Bihar 
6.  Bodhgaya Bihar 
7.  Chandigarh Chandigarh 
8.  Raipur Chhattisgarh 
9.  Diu Fort UT of Daman & Diu 
10.  Colva Beach Goa 
11.  Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park Gujarat 
12.  Rani-ki-Vav, Patan Gujarat 
13.  Somnath Gujarat 
14.  Kurukshetra Haryana 
15.  Shimla Himachal Pradesh 
16.  Gulmarg J&K 
17.  Patnitop J&K 
18.  Hampi Karnataka 
19.  Pattadakal Karnataka 
20.  Kumarakom Kerala 
21.  Bekal Fort Kerala 
22.  Pangong Lake Ladakh 
23.  Kargil Ladakh 
24.  Bhimbetka Madhya Pradesh 
25.  Jabalpur Madhya Pradesh 
26.  Khajuraho Madhya Pradesh 
27.  Sanchi Madhya Pradesh 
86

 
28.  Ajanta Caves Maharashtra 
29.  Ellora Caves Maharashtra 
30.  Loktak Lake Manipur 
31.  Shillong Meghalaya 
32.  Aizawl Mizoram 
33.  Dimapur Nagaland 
34.  Chilika Lake Odisha 
35.  Konarak Odisha 
36.  Patiala Punjab 
37.  Chittorgarh Fort Rajasthan 
38.  Kumbhalgarh Fort Rajasthan 
39.  Amer Fort Rajasthan 
40.  Gangtok Sikkim 
41.  Mahabalipuram Tamil Nadu 
42.  Thanjavur Tamil Nadu 
43.  Warangal Fort Telangana 
44.  Agartala Tripura 
45.  Sarnath Uttar Pradesh 
46.  Shravasti Uttar Pradesh 
47.  Kushinagar Uttar Pradesh 
48.  Rishikesh Uttarakhand 
49.  Bishnupur West Bengal 
50.  Shantiniketan West Bengal 
*** 
 
 
 
 
87

 
Annexure-C 
Paras 44—77 of the 288th Report on Demands for Grants (2021-22) 
of Ministry of Tourism 
 
44. The Committee notes an amount of Rs. 1239. 83 crore 
remained unspent  in FY 2020 -21 on account of  the budgetary cuts 
imposed by the Ministry of Finance  in the wake of the unprecedented 
crisis induced by the COVID -19 pandemic, and wa s surrendered to 
Ministry of Finance on 08-02-2021. The Committee is concerned that a 
huge amount of Rs. 1239.83 crore was kept till the penultimate month of 
the  financial year 2020-21. The Committee observes  that India’s COVID-
19 induced lockdown was first imposed in March, 2020 and its cost on the 
Indian economy and  economic activities was visible from the very 
beginning. The Ministry should, therefore, have anticipated the unspent 
provisions well in advance and surrendered  them promptly instead of 
keeping them idly parked. Timely surrender of savings  could have been 
gainfully utilized for other fund -starved projects. The Committee,  
therefore, exhorts the Ministry to gear up its monitoring mechanism so as 
to ensure realistic assessment of budgetary requirements 
 
45. The Committee takes note of the submissions of the Ministry 
that strict monitoring of Utilization Certificates (UCs) is done through the 
review meetings. The  Committee is, however, concerned to note that the 
number of pending UCs under the  Swadesh Darshan Scheme and 
Assistance to IHM/FCI/IITTM scheme, and the amount involved therein, 
are still substantial. This leads the Committee to conclude  that the steps 
taken so far have not yielded  the desired  results. The Committee,  
therefore, would like the Ministry to review the methodology of 
monitoring the progress of utilization of funds so that the execution of 
projects under the flagship  schemes of the Ministry is not hamstrung by 
lack of funds. The Committee desires to  be kept apprised of  the measures 
88

 
initiated in this regard. 
46. The Committee observes that though tourism contributes 
significantly to  the GDP as well as job creation, the quality of data on 
different sectors of tourism  leaves much to be desired. Though the 
Ministry of Tourism has got prepared, through National Council of 
Applied Economic Research, three Tourism Satellite  Surveys of India, for 
assessing the contribution of tourism in GDP, there are still  serious data 
gaps in tourism sector. Even the basic statistics of the accommoda tion 
units, expenditure incurred by foreign and domestic tourists, impact of the 
marketing strategies and publicity campaigns are not available. Similarly, 
though the actual  implementation of tourism projects takes place at 
State/UT level, most of the States/UTs don’t have proper mechanisms for 
collection of accurate tourism statistics. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that under the Scheme of Market  Research for which an 
allocation of Rs. 20 crores has been made in BE 2021 -22, a  proper 
mechanism be developed for collection of robust data on different aspects 
of tourism. 
II) IMPACT OF COVID-19 PANDEMIC ON TOURISM, TRAVEL AND 
HOSPITALITY SECTOR 
47. The unprecedented COVID -19 induced crisis has led to a 
shutdown of the  Travel and Tourism industry. In reply to a question regarding 
steps taken to bailout various  stakeholders related to the tourism sector which 
have been hit hard by the COVID -19 Pandemic, the Ministry has informed the 
Committee that Government of India provided a  number of fiscal and 
regulatory relief measures for survival of businesses. A major policy  decision 
under this package was the change of the definition of MSMEs by doing away  
with the distinction of services and manufacturing MSME and introduction of 
the additional criteria of turnover.  About 70% of the tourism units come under 
the category of  MSMEs and are expected to be benefited under these 
provisions. In addition, provisions  were made regarding collateral free 
automatic loan for businesses and reduction of PF  contribution of both 
89

 
employer and employee. Other demands of the industry including  status as 
industry, status as infrastructure projects, withdrawal of tax collection at 
source for outbound booking  etc. have  been taken up with  the Ministry  of 
Finance. 
48. In reply to a question regarding the magnitude of financial loss to 
the tourism  sector, and steps taken to revive the sector in the aftermath of 
COVID-19 pandemic, the  Ministry has stated that since the situation is still 
evolving, the final impact in numerical  terms can only be  ascertained in due 
course. However, the Ministry has held several rounds  of discussions and 
brainstorming sessions with industry stakeholders to access the impact  on the 
segment and has recently engaged National Council for Applied Economic 
Research (NCAER) to conduct study on “India and the Coronavirus Pandemic: 
Economic Losses for 
Households Engaged in Tourism and Policies for Recovery.” The objectives of 
the study includes following: 
1. Quantifying the sector-wise and overall loss in income of the economy 
and of the  household sector and also the loss in jobs, due to the impact of 
Coronavirus pandemic on the tourism sector 
2. Propose policy measures appropriate to provide relief to the tourism 
sector, in general, and households involved in tourism related activities, in 
particular, based on feedback received from various stakeholders. 
49. The Committee has been informed that FTAs during 2020 were 
24.62 million  (Jan-Nov) (Provisional) with a growth of -74.6% over same 
period of the previous year.  India’s share in global international tourist arrivals 
was 1.23% in 2019 as against the target of 3% set by NITI Aayog. 
50. FEEs (i.e. Foreign Exchange Earnings) during the January 2020  – 
March 2020 were Rs. 44203 crores (provisional estimates) with a growth of  – 
15.6% over the same period of the previous year. 
 
51. Apprising the Committee of the support provided in the wake of 
90

 
the COVID - 19 pandemic, the Ministry has informed that with a view to 
facilitating and extending  support to foreign tourists who were stranded in 
the country the Ministry had set up a portal „Stranded in India‟ to 
disseminate information regarding the services that could be  availed by them. 
The portal helped tourists get information/details of State / UT Tourism  
Departments and Regional offices of Minis try of Tourism. The site also 
provided Helpline  numbers of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
Bureau of Immigration, Ministry of  Tourism and Ministry of External Affairs. 
The 24x7 Tourist Info -Helpline of the Ministry  had also received calls related 
to COVID 19 and responded to them based on the advisories 
/ guidelines issued by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and other 
Ministries / Authorities. 
52. The Committee has been informed that with a view to preparing 
for a post- COVID 19 revival, the Min istry of Tourism formulated Operational 
Recommendations for different segments of Tourism Service Providers in the 
Travel sector for facilitating smooth and safe resumption of business. Such 
recommendations have been issued for  Travel Agents, Tour Operators, Tourist 
Transport Operators, Tourist Guides and Facilitators. They were formulated in 
consultation with State Governments and tourism /  hospitality stakeholders and 
in keeping with the overall guidelines issued from time to time  by the Ministry 
of Health. 
53. On 8th December, 2020 the Ministry of Tourism has issued 
modified guidelines for Recognition of Tourism Service Providers dated 
08.12.2020 which would be  effective from January, 2021. As per the modified 
guidelines, Category of Greenshoot / Start-up- Agencies is being introduced for 
the first time. This is in keeping with the policy  of the Govt. of India for 
encouraging Start-Ups and will also further the cause of ‘Atmanirbhar India’. 
There will be no requirement of minimum Annual Turnover and Previous 
Experience for this category. These provisions are in line with the Startup 
policy of the Govt. of India. The requirement of Paid Up Capital and number of 
91

 
staff will also be less than for other categories. 
54. The Committee has also been informed that Ministry of Tourism 
had given an opportunity to the tourism stakeholders to put forward queries and 
make representations on issues regarding GST on Tourism. The representations 
received by the Ministry were taken  up with CBEC and corrective 
notifications/advance press releases have been issued on the following: 
i. The threshold limit for applicability of 28% GST to hotels has been raised 
from Rs.5000/- to Rs.7500/- per room per day. 
ii. All stand -alone restaurants irrespective of air conditioned or otherwise, 
will attract  5% without Input Tax Credit (ITC). Food parcels (or takeaways) 
will also attract 5% GST without ITC. Earlier, the rates were 12% and 18%. 
iii. Restaurants in hotel premises having room tariff of less than Rs 7500 per 
unit per day will attract GST of 5% without ITC. 
iv. Restaurants in hotel premises having room tariff of Rs 7500 and above 
per unit per day (even for a single room) will attract GST of 18% with full ITC. 
v. GST on services by  way of admission to "protected monuments"  will be 
exempted. 
 
55. The Ministry has stated that the issue of high GST rates in 
tourism-related services impacting India’ s position adversely in  International 
Tourism has been shared  with CBEC. The Pre -Budget recommendations given 
by the Ministry mentioned that the  tax bracket of 12% to 28% may negatively 
impact tourism sector due to high rate of GST.  The negative impact of high 
GST rates on MICE Tourism had also been highlighted in the  
recommendations. In view of the foregoing, Ministry of Tourism had requested 
MoF to consider bringing down GST rates for tourism related services and to 
give incentives on  GST for Tourism at a rate which is comparable and 
competitive with peer countries to  maintain India’s competitiveness as a tourist 
destination in the International Market. 
56. Further, the Ministry of Tourism has created the National 
92

 
Integrated Database of Hospitality Industry (NIDHI). The objective is to create 
a comprehensive national database, which will help the State and Central 
Governments in creating policies and strategies for promotion and development 
of tourism, assessing the carrying capacity of  various destinations, assessing 
requirements for skilled human resources and formulating  disaster management 
plans in case of disasters like the COVID pandemic. It will  serve as a common 
repository of data from Ministry of Tourism, State Departments of Tourism and  
Industry and enable the Central and State Governments to deliver better support 
and services including policies and strategies. 
 
57. The Ministry has informed that  the following steps were taken to 
revamp the tourism sector in the aftermath of Covid-19 pandemic : 
i. Detailed operational guidelines for Covid safety and hygiene for hotels, 
restaurants, B&Bs/Home stays and Tourism Service Providers have been 
formulated an d issued on  08.06.2020 to facilitate smooth resumption of  
business. 
ii. Validity of approval  or certifications of hotels and other accommodation units 
whose project approval/re -approval and classification/re -classification have 
expired / were likely to expire, has been extended upto 30th April, 2021. 
iii. Operational Recommendations for safe resumption of business with easing of 
lockdown restrictions have been issued for various segments of the travel and 
hospitality industry and circulated amongst all stakeholders. 
iv. Recognition of Travel Agents, Tour Operators, Tourist Transport Operators by 
the Ministry of Tourism has been extended automatically by six months. Those 
who have  submitted applications for recognition by the Ministry have been 
given provisional recognition for six months, pending completion  of required 
procedures. 
v. In addition to the above steps taken by Ministry of Tourism, other 
agencies/Ministries of  Government of India have declared stimulus packages 
like loan moratorium, waived off PF  contribution, deferment of TCS up to 
93

 
October 2020, collateral free automatic loan under Atamnirbhar Bharat package 
etc. to revive the economy and industry including units of the  hospitality 
industry. 
58. On being asked whether Tourism Export should be treated at par 
with other exports and services, the Ministry has submitted that the subject of 
Tourism Export under  Service Export from India Scheme (SEIS), which aims 
to promote export of services from  India by providing 5 or 7 % Incentive on 
Net foreign income i n the form of duty credit  scrips for eligible exports, has 
been taken up by the Ministry with Ministry of Commerce  and Ministry of 
Finance. 
59. To a query regarding Service Exports from India Scheme, the 
Ministry has informed the Committee that the matter rega rding hiking the rate 
of rewards to 10% for the  Tourism, Travel & Hospitality industry for the FY 
2019-20 and 2020 -21 has been taken up  with the Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry, as this would provide some relief during the  liquidity crunch triggered 
by COVID-19 pandemic. 
60. The Ministry of Tourism has also taken up the GST taxation slabs 
with the  Ministry of Finance, Government of India, from time to time, as a 
result of which the following changes have been effected in GST rate slabs with 
respect to tourism products and services: 
i. GST (Goods and Services Tax) Council announced a cut in the tax rate on hotel 
room tariffs, a move aimed at giving a boost to the hospitality sector. The GST 
rate on hotel rooms with tariffs of up to Rs 7,500 per night has been cut  to 12% 
from the existing 18%.  Similarly, the tax on room tariff of above Rs 7,500 has 
been slashed to 18% from the  existing 28%. There  will be no GST  on room 
tariffs of below Rs 1,000 per night. 
ii. GST on restaurants eateries has been brought down to 5% irre spective of 
whether they are  air-conditioned or not. If a restaurant is located within the 
premises of hotels, inns, guest  houses, club or any commercial place meant for 
residential or lodging purposes with a daily tariff of Rs.7500 per day per unit or 
above, the tax will be 18%. 
94

 
iii. The basis for determination of the applicable rate has been changed from 
declared tariff to actual tariff. 
 
61. In reply to a question regarding declaring hotels as infrastructure 
status, the Ministry has submitted that Three Star and higher category classified 
hotels located outside  cities with population of more than one million was  
granted infrastructure status by its  inclusion in the Harmonised Master List of 
Infrastructure Sub-Sectors (HML). All Star rated hotels with a project  cost of 
over 200 Crore were also included in the Harmonised Master List vide Gazette 
Notification No. 13/6/2009 -INF dated 07.10.2013, which lapsed 3  years after 
notification via sunset clause. The Ministry of Tourism moved a proposal for  
grant of Infrastr ucture Status to investment in hotel industry of over Rs. 50 
crore and in  towns less than 5 lakh population, to accelerate creation of 
additional hotel rooms and help  generate both direct and indirect jobs.  
However, the Department of Economic affairs (DEA) turned down the proposal 
vide their letter dated 12.05.2020, citing the reason that it will crowd out the 
flow of credit to the other  core infrastructure sectors. Ministry of  Tourism, as 
part of its tourism sector revival plan post  Covid 19 pandemic, requested 
Ministry of Finance to consider grant of infrastructure status to lower 
investment hotel projects i.e. hotel capex above INR  25 Cr. capex (excluding 
land) to bring the mid - segment properties under the ambit of Infrastructure to 
give a boost to i nvestment in the accommodation sector. However, no response 
has been received from the Department of Economic Affairs. 
 
62. The industry stakeholders have requested Ministry of Tourism to 
take up several additional issues with the concerned Ministries for the revival 
of the sector. Hon’ble Minister(IC) for Tourism has taken up the following 
issues with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Commerce and Industry: 
(i) Moratorium on loans may be extended and making loans more accessible 
(ii) TCS exemption under GST 
95

 
(iii) Rolling back of TCS on sale of Overseas Tour Packages 
(iv) Rolling back of TDS  by Travel agents/  Tour Operators/OTAs under Income 
Tax 
(v) Refund of GST to international travellers 
(vi) Declare hotels capex above INR 25Crs. capex (excluding land) as infrastructure 
(vii) Incentivising domestic tourism and MICE 
(viii) Waiver /relaxation of Annual average conditions for hotels under EPCG 
Scheme 
(ix) enhanced benefits (10%) under SEIS 
63. To a question regarding the adequacy of financial parameters as 
specified in the RBI‟s “Resolution Framework for COVID-19” Related Stress” 
and the Expert Committee Report to assist the tourism and hospitality sector, 
the Ministry has submitted  that the KV Kamath Committee appointed by the 
Reserve Bank of India has listed tourism  among the 26 sectors that require 
financial restructuring in the aftermath of the COVID -19 crisis. The committee 
has recommended five financial parameters or ratios with sector - specific 
thresholds that lending institutions can factor in as part of a graded approach to  
restructuring or finalising a resolution plan for a borrower. The five parameters 
for each sector are as below: 
(1) Total outstanding liability to adjusted net worth 
(2) Total debt to EBITDA (Earnings Before Interest Taxes 
Depreciation and Amortization) 
(3) Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) 
(4) Average DSCR 
(5) Current Ratio 
64. While the tourism industry has welcomed the recommendations of 
the Kamath Committee, industry players think it may be difficult for some to 
meet the parameters. Especially, larger players in hospitality with higher debt 
96

 
levels may face challenge in meeting the parameter criteria. 
65. The travel and Tourism sector does not feature in the Centre, State 
or Concurrent Lists. On being asked whether this has affected the growth of 
tourism in the  country, the Ministry has  submitted that  Travel & Tourism  
Sector has backward and forward linkages with other sectors of the economy, 
like transport, construction, handicrafts, manufacturing, horticulture, agriculture 
and involves multiple issues falling  under the purview of both Centre and State 
Governments. It may be mentioned that the  tourism sector has been showing 
growth over the years. The Foreign Tourist Arrivals  (FTAs) have increased 
from 5.78 Million in 2010 to 10.93 Million in 2019. Similarly,  Foreign 
Exchange Earnings (F EEs) from Tourism have increased from Rs. 66,172 
Crore in 2010 to Rs.2,11,661 Crore in 2019. 
66. The Ministry has also taken up with State Governments the issues 
covering various relief measures such as excise fees, electricity and water 
tariff, property tax etc. The Ministry of Tourism has issued an advisory to all 
the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries (Tourism) State Governments/UT 
Administrations to address the  requests for refund/waiver in the outbreak of 
COVID 19 in coordination with all travel &  hospitality related associations and 
establishments under its control. The request of financial support/relief 
measures received from Tourist Guide Federation of India (TGFI)/Regional 
Level Guides (including State/Local Level Guides) has also been referred  to the 
Chief Labour Commissioner(C), M/o Labour & Employment, New Delhi, for 
favourable consideration treating them as a category of the unorganized work 
force in the country. 
67. As regards the impact of fiscal and relief measures taken by the 
Government and RBI on tourism industry, the Government announced 
following fiscal and relief measures under the Atmanirbhar Bharat package. 
 The definition of MSMEs has become  inclusive by doing away with the  
distinction of services and manufacturing MSME and introduction of the  
additional criteria of turnover. 
 Rs 20,000 crore subordinate debt will be provided for stressed MSMEs 
97

 
which would benefit 2 lakh such businesses. 
 Rs 3 lakh crore collateral free automatic loan for businesses, including 
MSMEs. The loan will have  4 year ten ure and will have  12 month 
moratorium. 
 PF contribution of both employer and employee will be reduced to 10% 
each from existing 12% each for all establishments covered by EPFO for 
the next three months 
 Govt of India will pay the Employees' Provident Fund (EPF) 
contribution, both of employer and employee for next 3 months for 
those establishments which have   upto 100 employees and 90% of them 
earn less than Rs15,000. 
68. The Ministry of Tourism has not instituted any study on the 
impact of financial and relief measures announced by the Government. The 
impact of these measures on units can be  ascertained only after travel for  
tourism takes off. 
69. The Committee observes that the tourism, travel and 
hospitality sector which has direct as well as multiplier effect on  a host of 
sectors and contributes significantly to the national economy, has suffered 
unemployment and bankruptcies due to the COVID -19 pandemic. Though 
the Government of India has undertaken various fiscal and relief measures 
under the Atmanirbhar Bharat to restore the growth momentum of the 
economy, these measures have not been supplemented with  sector specific 
credit measures for the tourism sector. The Committee notes that as per 
the “Report of the Working Group on Tourism” of the 12 th Five Year Plan 
in India, the travel and tourism sector is estimated to create 78 jobs per 
million rupees of investment compared to 45 jobs in the manufacturing 
sector for similar investment. This critical sector is one of India’s largest 
contributors to GDP. The  sector which has huge potential to stimulate 
overall economic growth and can act as a  catalyst for the recovery of the 
currently battered economy needs direct Government  support by way of 
relief measures like a stimulus package, rationalization of  GST, liquidity 
98

 
support, etc. The Committee has been informed that governments across 
the world are undertaking measures to mitigate the impact of COVID -19 
pandemic on  this critical sector. For example, the United Kingdom has 
provided a 12-month business t ax rates holiday for all retail, hospitality 
and leisure businesses in England; France has set up a €2 billion Solidarity 
Fund for which many  Tourism Businesses  will be eligible; in Singapore,  
tourism businesses affected by COVID-19 received wage subsidies of up to 
75%. Taking all the above factors into account, the Committee is of the 
considered view that since the COVID -19 pandemic and the  consequent 
lockdowns have a crippling blow to the Indian tourism, travel and 
hospitality industry and the whole value  chain has been hit hard, the 
Government needs to provide targeted support to the sector. The 
Committee accordingly recommends  that the Government should inject 
tourism sector-specific financial/monetary stimulus in the system and offer 
immediate liquidity  support and  rationalization of the GST structure for 
the sector. The Committee observes, even at the cost of sounding repetitive, 
that such a critical sector contributing so much to the  GDP and generating 
employment opportunities should not be ignored,  especially when it is in 
dire straits. The Committee would like the Ministry to pursue this matter  
with the Ministry of Finance with a sense of urgency and promptitude 
and apprise the Committee of their response. 
70. Domestic tourism plays an important role in overall tourism 
development in the country. At a time when foreign tourist arrivals have 
registered a de-growth due to the COVID -19 pandemic, domestic tourism 
visits have re -started and are helping to soften the blow in a significant 
way. The Committee, however, observes that despite having a strong 
domestic tourism base coupled with a rapidly  rising middle class with 
disposable incomes, domestic tourists, currently represent an  extremely 
small fraction of the total population of the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Government should incentivise domestic 
tourism by way  of modifying rules and allowing citizens to avail Leave 
99

 
Travel Allowance benefit on  domestic tours including travel fare and 
accommodation expenses for a period of two  years. This will give the 
necessary fillip to the sector and help make domestic tourism a mainstream 
part of our economy. 
71. The Committee observes that India currently has 
approximately 1% share of global MICE (Meetings, Incentives, 
Conferences, & Events) market. Since  MICE forms a large segment of 
tourism business, the Committee recommends that the Government should 
incentivize Indian corporates to undertake domestic MICE  and to prevent 
MICE events from going abroad. 
 
72. The Committee notes that the Government under the 
leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi has set a target of taking the 
economy to 5 trillion  dollar Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by 2024.It has 
been widely accepted that the  tourism sector in the country has the 
potential to emerge as a key economic driver for  this economic growth and 
can create large scale employment. The Committee feels  that the country 
can make a giant leap towards reaching the 5 -thrillion dollar GDP  target 
by focusing on this critical sector. However, this cannot  be achieved 
without the active cooperation from the States and Union Territories – 
because a comprehensive set of strategies for a diversity of actions from 
macro to micro level,  including product and infrastructure development, 
marketing, branding, promo tion, planning, policy and investment would 
need to be developed and the multiple challenges thrown up by capacity 
constraints and inadequate policies would need to be addressed. The 
Committee, however, notes that the Travel and Tourism Sector  does not 
figure in the Centre, State or Concurrent Lists. Ours is a federal polity and  
the responsibility for policy making and implementation are fragmented 
across levels  of Government and coordination between them is often 
lacking due to absence of  clearly defined mandate. Since tourism is a 
multi-sectoral activity, inclusion of tourism in the Concurrent List will play 
100

 
an important role in facilitating the issues  involved with multiple 
Ministries/ Organisations at Central level as well as with the  States/Union 
Territories to create convergence and synergy of actions across multiple  
agencies and programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
Tourism be included in the Concurrent List. 
73. The Committee observes that the hospitality industry is in 
huge distress under the impact of the COVID -19pandemic and is looking 
at mass unemployment  and pan India bankruptcies. The Committee 
notes from the written submissions of the Ministry of Tourism that all 
star-rated hotels with a project cost of over Rs. 200  crores were granted 
infrastructure status by their inclusion in the Harmonized Master List of 
Infrastructure sub-sectors vide gazette Notification dated 07.10.2013 which 
lapsed three years after notification via sunset clause. The Ministry’s 
proposal for grant of infr astructure status to investment in hotel industry 
of over Rs. 50 crore  and in towns with less than 5 lakh population has 
been turned down by the Ministry of Finance. Subsequently, the Ministry 
of Finance was requested to grant infrastructure status to  hotel projects 
with lower investment, i.e. hotel capex above  Rs. 25 crore (excluding land) 
capex, but the Department of Economic Affairs is yet to  respond to the 
proposal. The Committee has been given to understand that the Reserve 
Bank of India has equate d the hotel sector with real estate which leads to  
lending at high interest rate from banks. The Committee observes that 
shortage of  quality accommodation  to tourists is a big deterrent to 
development of tourism. One of the key impediments for investment i n the 
hospitality and hotel sectors  has been the non-availability of credit at low 
interest terms. Considering the fact that construction of hotels is highly 
capital intensiveand has a long gestation period with a  long break even  
period, availability of quality hotel accommodation has a direct correlation 
to the Ministry’s vision of taking the share of India’s Foreign Tourist  
Arrivals (FTAs) from 0.75% in 2019 to 2% by 2025. The Committee is of 
the considered view that there is an imperative need to accor d 
101

 
infrastructure status to  hotel projects with capex above Rs. 25 crore 
(excluding land) and include the same in  the infrastructure lending list of 
the RBI. The Committee exhorts the Ministry of  Tourism to immediately 
bring the above recommendation to the notice of Ministry of  Finance who 
should enumerate their policy stance on this issue with a sense of urgency 
and expediency and bring down this threshold limit to Rs. 25 crore. This  
move will attract more investment in hotel projects which in turn shall 
drive employment generation. The Committee desires to be kept apprised 
of the decision  taken by the Ministry of Finance in this regard so that the 
matter could be deliberated/pursued with them in the right earnest. The 
Committee is convinced that according infrastructure status to hotels will 
not only attract more investments in  hotel projects but also go a long way 
in reviving the growth momentum of this sector  which has witnessed a 
major slump since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
74. The Committee observes that one of the bottlenecks in tapping 
the full  potential of the hospitality sector is the high incidence and 
multiplicity of taxes. While  some States like Maharashtra, Gujarat, 
Uttarakhand, etc., have accorded industry  status to hospitality secto r, 
there is no uniformity in the tax structure across States  and the cumulative 
impact of the present tax structure is that room tariffs in the  country have 
become exorbitantly high, thereby leading to tourist packages being  priced 
out in comparison to com peting destinations of other countries who are 
luring tourists. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that levy of taxes 
on hotels should be rationalized and industrial rates for power supply, 
water supply, property tax  should be charged instead of the commercial 
rates. This, in the opinion of the Committee, would be a game changer in 
reviving this badly hit sector due to COVID-19 pandemic and boost 
investment in the sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should immediately initiate policy measures for according 
Industry status to hotels so that benefits of lower rates of electricity, water,  
102

 
property tax could be extended to hotels and taxes levied on hotels are 
rationalized and made globally competitive. 
 
75. The Committee notes  that based on the representations of the 
industry stakeholders, the Ministry of Tourism has taken up several issues 
with the Ministry of  Finance and Ministry of Commerce and Industry for 
revival of the tourism sector.  One of the issues taken up with the M inistry 
of Commerce is enhanced benefits of  10% under the Service Exports from 
India Scheme (SEIS). Under this scheme, the  Government offers domestic 
exporters duty credit scrips in the range of 5% to 7% of  the net foreign 
exchange earned, depending on the  nature of services. The Committee  has 
been given to understand that the SEIS scrips due for the financial year 
2019-20 have not been paid as yet. Since services exporters need continued 
support to survive in these challenging times, the Committee recommen ds 
that the Ministry of Tourism  should increase the scale of its engagement 
with Ministry of Commerce to ensure that  the SEIS credit scrips due to 
service providers against their foreign exchange earnings are paid without 
further loss of time. 
 
76. The Committee also recommends that given the changed 
scenario and at  a time when the tourism sector is faced with the crisis of 
the century, the notified  services be incentivised under SEIS at an 
enhanced rate of 10% for both tour operators and hotels in order  to 
provide them cash flow support. The Committee  desires to be kept 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
77. The Committee observes that as per the provisions contained 
under IGST law, export of goods or services or both are regarded as “zero-
rated supplies” and GST is not levied on export of such goods and services 
and exporters who earn in  convertible foreign exchange are exempted 
103

 
from GST. However, the foreign exchange  earned by the inbound tour 
operators and hotels are not exempted from GST. The Committee observes 
that the foreign exchange earnings through tourism were to the  tune of Rs. 
211661 crore in 2019. After serious reflection the Committee recommends  
that in order to enhance export competitiveness of Indian tourism as also 
to provide  relief to the tourism and hospitality sector, the payments 
received by all the tourism  and hospitality entities in convertible foreign 
exchange be considered as deemed export and be exempted from GST and 
the concept of zero -rating also be applied to  tourism foreign exchange 
earnings. 
*** 
104

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
ANNEXURE D
 
List of witnesses who appeared before the Department
-
 
related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
 
1
3
th
 
October, 2020
 
II.
   
ASSOCIATION OF DOMESTIC TOUR OPERATORS OF INDIA
 
1.
 
Mr. P.P. Khanna
 
President
 
2.
 
Mr. Anil Rajput
 
Joint Secretary
 
INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF TOUR OPERATORS
 
3.
 
Mr. Pronab Sarkar
 
President
 
INDIAN TOURIST TRANSPORTERS ASSOCIATION
 
4.
 
Mr. Satish Sehrawat
 
President
 
FEDERATION OF ASSOCIATIONS IN INDIAN TOURISM & HOSPITALITY
 
5.
 
Shri 
Ashish Gupta
 
Consulting
 
 
CEO
 
 
 
 
19
th
 
April
, 2021
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TOURISM
 
 
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri Arvind Singh
 
Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri Rakesh Kumar Verma
 
Joint Secretary
 
3.
 
Ms Rupinder Brar
 
Additional Director General
 
4.
 
Shri B. B. Dash
 
Director
 
***
 
 
105