PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 142
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED FORTY SECOND REPORT
ON
FUNCTIONING OF PRIVATE AIRPORTS
AND THE RELATED ISSUES
RD 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED FORTY SECOND REPORT
ON
FUNCTIONING OF PRIVATE AIRPORTS
AND THE RELATED ISSUES
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—21
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 22—28
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 29—31

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
3. Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Shanta Kumar
6. Shrimati Hema Malini
7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
10. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shrimati Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Prahlad Joshi
21. Shri P. Karunakaran
22. Dr. P.P. Koya
23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Rakesh Singh
31. Shri Suraj Singh

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to submit on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Forty Second Report on Functioning of Private Airports and related
issues.
2. The Government of India had decided to modernize and upgrade the existing domestic and
international airports at Mumbai and Delhi to world standards and to construct Greenfield airports
in Bangalore and Hyderabad through Public Private Partnership. The Greenfield airports in
Hyderabad and Bangalore have started functioning from the 23rd March and 24th May, 2008
respectively. The modernization of Delhi and Mumbai Airports are in different stages of
development.
3. There were a large number of reports/representations about the problems faced by the
passengers and associated agencies at Mumbai and Delhi Airports and also at Bengaluru and
Hyderabad after the new Greenfield airports were opened and the old ones were closed. The
Committee while discussing these issues felt it necessary to visit these airports for an on-the-
spot assessment of the problems and to see facilities available at these airports. Accordingly,
the Committee visited the new airports at Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Mumbai from the 14th to
20th September, 2008 on this issue. The Committee also visited the old airport at Begumpet, in
Hyderabad. The Committee had already visited the Delhi Airport on l0th January, 2008. The
Committee interacted with various stakeholders at these airports for finalizing its report.
4. Apart from passenger amenities, the Committee has also dealt with various issues/points
relating to the policy of privatization of airports, procedures adopted for this and other related
matters.
5. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation, Airports Authority of India, managements of Bangalore International Airport Ltd. (BIAL),
Hyderabad International Airport Ltd. (HIAL), Mumbai International Airport Ltd. (MIAL) and Delhi
International Airport Ltd. (DIAL) for placing before the Committee the material and information
desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members.
6. The committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the
20th October, 2008.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 20, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Asvina 28, 1930  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
India is experiencing a phenomenal growth in its aviation sector which plays a vital role in
the overall economic growth of the country. The Indian civil aviation sector has shown an
extraordinary growth rate in the last few years. In 2006-07, total air passenger traffic increased
by 32.6% with around 78.7 million passengers, of whom 57.5 million reflecting an increase of
40.5% were domestic passengers and 21.2 million showing an increase of 15% in international
sector. Present slackness in aviation sector both national and international, notwithstanding, the air
passenger traffic is expected to grow in the coming years.
2. Presently, India has a total of 454 airports or airstrips including operational, non-operational,
abandoned and unused airports, of which 138 belong to India’s defence establishment, 97 to
Airports Authority of India (AAI), 158 to various State Governments, and 61 to its fledgling private
sector. Due to increase in traffic both domestic and international, movement of aircrafts has also
gone up rapidly. However, such a growth in air traffic has led to strain on the available aviation
infrastructure, which is already over-stretched. It has resulted in traffic congestions and delays
mainly at the major airports. To sustain this boom in the civil aviation sector, an urgent need for
expansion and improvement of the airport infrastructure was felt to cope up with the emerging
requirements. Airports being the centres of economic activity, play a crucial role in the Nation’s
economy. Faced with. such a situation, the Government is working on a proposal of getting around
500 airports operational by 2020, which would include redevelopment of currently unused airports,
Greenfield airports, and also ‘merchant’ airports dedicated to the movement of cargo and logistics.
It is estimated that by 2020, Indian airports should be able to handle 100 million passengers
including 60 million domestic passengers and cargo in the range of 3.4 million tones per annum.
3. The Government decided to modernize and upgrade some for the existing domestic and
international airports to world standards. The Government through its Airport Infrastructure Policy
of 1997, decided to set up Greenfield Airports in the country. As a result, permission was granted
to construct two Greenfield Airports at Devanahalli in Bengaluru and Shamshabad in Hyderabad on
joint venture basis in PPP mode. The selected companies, namely, GMR Hyderabad International
Airport Ltd. (GHIAL); and Bengaluru International Airport Ltd. (BIAL) entered into Concession
Agreements separately with the Government of India for development, construction operation and
maintenance of the Airports at these places. Both these airports have started functioning from 2008.
The Government also handed over the Delhi and Mumbai airports to the Joint Venture Companies
namely, GMR and GVK groups respectively for modernization. The modernization of these airports
is in different stages of development.
4. There were a large number of reports/representations about the problems faced by the
passengers and associated agencies at Mumbai and Delhi Airports and also at Bengaluru and
Hyderabad after the new Greenfield airports were opened and the old ones were closed. The
Committee while discussing these Issues felt it necessary to visit these private airports for an on-
the-spot assessment of the problems and to see facilities available at these airports.
5. The Committee, accordingly, visited new airports at Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Mumbai
from the 14th to 20th September, 2008. The Committee also visited the old Begumpet airport at
Hyderabad. The Committee had taken stock of the facilities, available and proposed, as also the
problems being faced by the passengers/tourist, Airports Authority of India (AAI), Private Airline
operators and other associated agencies at these airports. The Committee also discussed the issues
at length with the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Airports Authority of India,
CEOs of BIAL, HIAL and MIAL, Airports Authority Employees Unions and Private Airlines.

2
Operators. During its visit, the Committee had also received a large number of written
representations from various stakeholders.
(A) Bengaluru International Airport Limited (BIAL)
6. The Committee has been informed that the BIAL is being developed to handle upto 11
million passengers as Greenfield airport at Devanahalli near Bengaluru on a Build Operate and
Transfer (BOT) basis with Public Private Participation. Government of Karnataka through Karnataka
State Industrial Investment Development Corporation (KSIIDC) and AAI each hold 13% equity and
the strategic joint venture partners hold the balance 74%. A Memorandum of Understandlng to this
effect was signed on the 3rd May 1999, between AAI and KSIIDC to facilitate further action
leading to implementation of the project.
7. A consortium led by Siemens, Germany with Unique Zurich, Switzerland and Larsen and
Toubro India Ltd. as other members, have been chosen as the strategic Joint Venture Partners.
Government of Karnataka is extending Rs.3.5 billon as State support and is providing approximately
4000 acres of land on concessional rate. AAI’s investment in the equity is capped at Rs. 50 crore,
while the approximate cost of the project is Rs. 1400 crore.
8. While the construction of the new airport commenced on the 2nd July, 2005, it started its
operations from the 24th May; 2008.
9. During the course of discussions, the representatives of BIAL informed the Committee that
the project implementation of BIAL has been done with thrust on predominant use of locally
available input materials. Meticulous supervision and stringent quality control were enforced during
project implementation. In the Phase-I of the Project Implementation, BIAL has constructed the
following facilities:
(a) Operational Facilities: This airport currently has Runway which is 4000 mts. long and 60 mts.
wide with 6 exits. It has 9 Aerobridges, 8 one armed and 1 double armed. There are 42 Aircrafts
stands (Code C aircraft stands). It provides 13 Security counters (8 Domestic and 5 International)
and has five level security screening system for checked-in baggage. Immigration Counters are 18,
both departure and arrival. It has a Cargo Capacity of 350,000 tons annually (presently
160,000.tons).
(b) Terminal building Facilities: This airport has 53 check-in counters including 18 self check-
in counters. It has single check-in process with no queues for screening baggage. Various facilities
like Valet Service, Shops, restaurants and lounges (common & dedicated), Short walkways, Baby
care, 24 hour pharmacy, Special needs-elevators with Braille Plates and Free Wi-Fi access have also
been provided at this airport.
Buses: 46 V ayu Vajra AC V olvo buses and 23 Suvara non AC buses are run for airport shuttle
service having minimum fare of Rs.70 and Maximum of Rs.200 for AC buses and Rs.20 to 90 for
non-AC buses.
Taxi: AC Taxi Services- Merucabs and Easycabs, equipped with tracking service are also being run.
Post paid taxis are available on meter charges @Rs.15/-per km. Cars can be rented for self drive-
a new concept at an Indian airport
Car parking arrangements: Airport has a car parking with 2000 car park slots, in which 700
car park slots are for employees. Charges are: for the first 10 minutes free, Rs.40/- for 2 hours
and Rs.20 per additional hour, Rs.300 for 24 hrs with Rs.200 for every additional day. Porter
services are there for minimum Rs.70 for up to 3 bags and V alet service is for Rs.150.
Helicopter: Deccan Aviations helicopter shuttle service has provided 3 pick up points - Electronic
city, Whitefield, Palace grounds and HAL, operating between 630 hours to 1800 hours. Minimum

3
fare is Rs.4800/- and maximum fare is Rs.5800/- per person per trip. New Service by Global
Vectra heli services will begin in October, 2008.
Travel retail unlocked
• Airport has a design reflecting the flowers of Lal Bagh. It has a mix of domestic and
international brands in 18 shopping outlets to choose from. It has Duty Free Shops at
arrival and departure areas and 15 Food and Beverages outlets ranging from local cuisine
to international cafes. It has 2 Lounges and another 2 more in the making. Additional
reserved lounge are being created.
• It had handled 2.5 million passengers as on August 29, 2008, with 30,000 air craft
movements and 45,000 MT of cargo. It has seen 30% increase in international flights.
BIAL has approx.5000 employees.
• It claimed 70% increase in the toilets and increase in passenger seating areas and seats
and has installed drinking water fountains.
• It handled on an average 151 arrival/departure flights per day with departure of 9431
domestic passengers and departure of 2283 international passengers per day.
• Average arrival of domestic passengers per day is 9330 and of international passengers
per day was 2279.
Extension Plan
Phase – 1:  The BIAL extension plan has been design to expand and upgrade infrastructure of the
Initial Project, Re-design 2006, Trumpet Fly-over, Airline Buildings, Greenery and canopy and
Security Equipment PSF.
Phase – 2:  This phase is the implementation of several immediate measures such as Apron
Expansion and Express Terminal
Phase – 3:  Phase 3 to be completed by 2012 includes Terminal 2 and Second runway
(B) Hyderabad International Airport Limited (HIAL)
10. HIAL also is a public-private joint venture between GMR Group, Malaysia Airports Holdings
Berhad and the State Government of Andhra Pradesh and Airports Authority of India (AAI). The
Greenfield airport at Shamshabad near Hyderabad is being implemented on a Build Operate and
Transfer (BOT) basis with Public Private Participation. The Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP)
have selected a consortium led by M/s GMR as the developer for this airport. The Government
of Andhra Pradesh and AAI together hold 26% equity, with AAI’s investment in the equity capped
at Rs.50 crore. The joint venture partners, GMR Group holds the balance 74% in the Company
namely, Hyderabad International Airport Ltd. (HIAL) set up to implement the project. The
Government of Andhra, Pradesh extended Rs.315 crore as State support and Rs.107 crore as, a
grant. Further, Government of Andhra Pradesh provided 5000 acres of land on concessional rate.
The concession Agreement between the GoI and HIAL was executed on the 20th December 2004.
11. The Committee visited the Shamshabad airport on the 17th September, 2008 and was
informed that the total project cost, as per the DPR submitted by HIAL, was estimated to be
Rs.I400 crore (2005 figure). This was being financed by State support to the extent of
Rs.422 crore and rest by way of Debt and Equity to the tune of 40% and 60%, respectively. This
project cost was for estimated passenger traffic of 5 million. However, the final cost of the project
is Rs.2920 crore for estimated passenger traffic of 12 million. The new airport started its
operations from the 23rd March, 2008.

4
12. During the course of the discussion with the Committee, the representative of HIAL
presented the following facts about the passenger amenities available at the airport:
Location: Airport is located at 25Km/I9 miles from Begumpet, the old airport. It is operating 22
airlines connecting 35 destinations which is further growing. Total area of the project is 5495
acres.
Airport Capacity:  It has initial passenger capacity of 12 million persons per annum (MPPA), with
the ultimate capacity of over 40, MPPA. Initial car go capacity is l 1akh MT/Per Annum (MTPA)
and final capacity would be 1.3 million, MTPA. It has an exclusive cargo apron for four, code C
freighter aircraft with facility for “Express/Courier’ cargo.
Operational facilities: It has India’s longest runway (4.2 km) which is A 380 Compatible and has
India’s longest taxiway (4.2 km). Airport has 10 runway entry/exit points (including four rapid exit
taxiways).
Car Parking arrangements:  It has parking area for 3000 cars in front of passenger terminal
building providing easy Transit from domestic to international and vice-versa.
Terminal building facilities: It has 130 Check-in-counters with CUTE (Common User Terminal
Equipment) and 16 self check-in kiosks with CUSS (Common User Self Service).
• 46 Immigration counters - 23 departure and 22 arrival and 1 transit. . City Check-in
facility has been proposed at Begumpet and Secunderabad Railway Stations. There are
42 aircraft parking stands including 12 passenger boarding bridges.
• It uses modem IT systems like FIDS (Flight Information Display Systems), ACN
(Airport Community Network), Baggage Tag & Boarding Card Printers etc. It claimed
to have tallest A TC Tower (75 mtr.).
• The Committee was informed that the Airport has a full fledged medical center,
international brand concessionaires, radio taxis system and Aero express shuttle services.
A business hotel with 308 rooms is also coming up.
• For security, 4 level in-line baggage security system has been put in place with
perimeter intrusion detection system.
• The airport had completed 178 days of operation and handled 3.10 million passengers,
with average daily ATMs of 240. it also claimed that ATF Sales had increased from 550
KL/day as compared to old Begumpet airport to around 880 KL/day now.
• GMR management claimed to have taken feedback/suggestions from 1.5 lakh passengers
and other stakeholders till date and had incorporated these inputs to improve the
services further and increase passenger convenience.
13. The Committee found the plan and design of the Greenfield airports to be of the
international standard with certain useful facilities for the comfort and convenience of the
passengers, for example, adequate and efficient check-in counters, self check-in machines
and quick immigration clearance, large number of shops, eateries, etc. However, the
Committee also came across certain areas that needed immediate attention. For example,
the Committee found that the passengers at the Greenfield airports have to pay exorbitant
prices for food items. The eateries are charging much more than the MRP, which is against
the Supreme Court order. There is no separate canteen for the employees and the staff
working at the airports. The drivers and others who are waiting outside the airports have
no affordable canteen facility and basic amenities like toilets and bathrooms. The
Committee recommends that the Government should ensure that the Greenfield Airports at

5
Bengaluru and Hyderabad provide basic facilities to the drivers and passengers and stop the
eateries from charging exorbitant prices. Private airlines have to cough up hefty amounts
for parking bays and aerobridges, security charges, lounge rentals, telephone rentals and
other facilities at the new airports.
14. The parking charges for vehicles are also quite heavy at the new airports. At
Bengaluru, it is Rs.40/- per hour and Rs.20/-per additional hours. The Committee is
surprised to know that at Hyderabad airport, a vehicle while entering the airport for
dropping or picking up a passenger has to pay Rs.35/- per trip. The Committee notes that
space earmarked for passenger seating areas was inadequate and numbers of seats are also
not adequate, causing inconvenience to the passengers during peak times. This is so because
much of the airport space has been let out for commercial use and given to shopping outlets
and F&B outlets. There is conspicuous absence of lounges at these airports. There is a need
for creation of additional reserved lounge for VIPs and passengers. To help and guide the
passengers at these airports, there should be round-the-clock help service at these airports.
There were inadequate facilities provided for free drinking water at these airports. More
drinking water fountains should be installed. The emergency medical facilities for treatment
of the passengers in case of sudden illness should be in place in all the new airports as has
been done at the new Hyderabad airport.
15. The Committee recommends that the flight delay or cancellation must be reported
to passengers well in time to avoid hardships to the passengers. The baggage handling
process should be strengthened so as to reduce the baggage delivery time and hardship to
the passengers. Apron driving discipline should be maintained to avoid any accident on
apron and staff should be given proper training for the driving skills and behaviours. There
should be integration of air and ground surveillance information along with flight related
data to enhance air. travel safety and efficient air traffic management.
16. The private operators should recognize various staff welfare committees of Airports
Authority of India and others working at these airports. There should be regular
consultative and coordination meeting of all the stakeholders at the new airports so as to
resolve the different issues/grievances.
17. The Committee learnt that it was discouraging for the short-haul passengers to take
air travel after the new airports. A higher User Development Fee (UDF) was being charged
by the new airport developers from the passengers. The user development fee added with
high taxi/bus fares due to long distances, compel the passengers to use other means of
transport such as road and trains for the short distance destinations. This has, in fact
rendered the air travel from these airports added with high ATF prices, just prohibitive.
18. The Committee notes that the Task force on Financing Plan for airports (July 2006)
had recommended that the users should not be burdened with ADF/UDF for financing at the
airport projects. This is particularly important in the context of the policy objective to make
civil aviation a mass, rather than an elitist model of travel and to make air travel more
affordable. After taking into account various aspects and the above recommendation of the
Task Force the committee feels that the imposition of UDF on passengers is a retrograde
step contravening the Task Force recommendations and recommends that the UDF imposed
on passengers may be withdrawn immediately and no more UDF may be imposed on
passengers in any of the airports.
19. CAPACITY OF BIAL AIRPORT
19.1 As per the original Concession Agreement (CA) dated 05.07.2004, BIAL was supposed to

6
build a Terminal of 55,000 sq. mtr. to accommodate 2017 passengers in the peak hour. This works
out to annual capacity of around 4.00 million passengers. The Committee was informed that the
CA was amended in 2006 and the capacity of the airport was enhanced to 2733 passengers during
peak hour with a terminal capacity of 71500 sq. m.
19.2 However, the current terminal is of total 71310 sq. m., out of which the basement area
consists of around 18665 sq. m. The basement area is neither used, nor usable by the passengers.
This space is used for storage, services and utilities. Hence, this cannot be counted while
computing the total terminal area. Also the kerb area of 5616 sq m outside the terminal which is
not a part of the terminal building and not used by passengers.
19.3 As per the IATA guidelines, the type of airport (level C) the area per peak hour passenger
(PHP) should be 26 sq m per passenger. As per the Concession Agreement, the area per passenger
should be 27.3 sq m. Hence, considering the actual terminal area available for passengers, the
capacity of the terminal works out to be 1928 PHP only, against the 2733 PHP capacity to be
provided as per the Concession Agreement.
19.4 As per the IATA standards, the area required for 10 million passengers per annum is 150000
sq. m. In view of the above, it can be inferred that the actual capacity of the BIAL terminal
building is still around 3.5 million only (1928 passengers per peak hour), which is much below the
capacity to be provided by BIAL as per the Concession Agreement.
19.5 BIAL was obligated to provide the facilities as per the IATA/ICAO standards. As per the
IATA standards the maximum commercial area permissible in the. terminal area is 12% of the total
passenger area. But in case of BIAL, 30% of terminal space has been utilised for commercial area.
If this aspect is considered the capacity of the terminal would further come down.
19.6 The Committee notes that the Government of India appears to be unconcerned about
the obligation of BIAL to construct and provide an airport as per the concession agreement.
Even the area and capacity were not verified before permitting to open new and closing HAL
Airport. This appears to be an irregularity committed by Government of India in this
matter.
20. During the meeting at Hyderabad the representatives of the AAEU argued that the idea
behind developing the Greenfield Airport was to handle the excess traffic beyond the capacity of
existing Airports. But, in this case, the entire commercial operations were diverted and old airport
was closed for commercial operation. This has deprived Airports Authority of India a huge revenue.
The Committee was informed that Begumpet Airport is having the full fledged infrastructure for
efficient operation of NTR Domestic Terminal/Rajiv Gandhi International Terminal. This airport has
handled wide bodied aircrafts defence/commercial/cargo airlines of various countries. Recently AAI
have spent roughly Rs.200 crore towards development of infrastructure of Begumpet Airport with
a commitment to serve to the public for another fifteen years. Presently the entire establishment
worth thousands of crores is lying idle.
21. Before commissioning of the Greenfield Airport, the airport at Hyderabad was the sixth
largest airport in India having 250 scheduled aircraft movements per day. 10 domestic and 13
international operators operated from this Airport. In 2006-07, a total of 69727 aircraft movement
was registered with the 5.87 millions passengers. In 2007-08, a total of 86484 aircrafts movements
were registered with 7.05 millions passengers. After commissioning of the new airports the old
airport is catering only to VVIP aircrafts, defence movement, local flying club, and movement
related to emergencies and general aviation including chartered aircrafts.
22. The Committee wanted to know the details of flights which were handled at old Hyderabad
Airport after its closure for commercial operations and RNFC collected by the Airports Authority

7
of India. The Committee was informed that a total number of 631 movements of Airforce Aircrafts
and 654 take off was done since the closure of airport till 5th July, 2008. As regard total number
of movement of private, non-commercial, non-revenue and VIP flights including helicopters was
478 landings and 479 take offs upto 5th September, 2008. The RNFC collected for casual flight
operations since March, 2008 is Rs.1,72,498.00. The Committee was informed that the short haul
traffic growth has been reduced after the opening of the new airports at Bengaluru and Hyderabad.
The Aircraft movements per day from HAL Airport as on 23.05.08 were 361 whereas the aircraft
movement per day from HIAL as on 1st week of September, 2008 was 280.
23. It was also submitted before the Committee that Airports Authority of India with
comprehensive traffic study/survey can distribute the traffic for both the Airports on competitive
basis based on the handling capacity, peak load traffic on operative measurement basis with the
available infrastructure from the existing operating airport (Begumpet) comparing with Shamshabad
Airport, since the funnel point for both the airports are same with regard to traffic movement.
After commissioning the new Greenfield Airport by the private operator the practical difficulties for
the passengers and airline operators have increased enormously on various account such as road
travel, UDF, etc. which affects the air travelers very badly and the very purpose of low cost
airlines will be defeated. Therefore, the decision to close down the existing airport within the
frame-work of concession agreement needs to be reviewed immediately.
24. The Committee notes that hundreds of crores of rupees were spent for developing
infrastructure at the old airports at Bengaluru and Hyderabad but it is lying unutilized due
to the closure of airports for commercial purposes. Another interesting thing brought to the
notice of the Committee is that the old airports, the HAL Airport and Begumpet airport,
are being used for operation of VIP flights, Non-schedule Flights, General Aviation,
Helicopter-Taxis, etc. During the deliberations of the Committee the Airports Authority of
India reported that there is absolutely no problem in opening up two airports
simultaneously in a city. The Committee therefore, recommends that the old airports of
Hyderabad and Bengaluru may be used exclusively for short haul flights which are operating
from the nearby airports.
25. The Committee also notes that the closure of HAL airport led to loss of jobs due to
reduction of flights and due to closure of airlines operators. Thousands of direct and indirect
workers also lost their jobs, this also includes trolley retrievers, small time vendors, taxi
drivers, auto drivers, loaders etc. Despite the assurances given by the BIAL and HIAL
managements, they have not been accommodated in the new airports. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that all those people who are directly or indirectly affected due to
closure of the HAL Airport and Begumpet Airport may be given preference and suitably
accommodated at the new Green Field Airports.
26. The Committee is of the opinion that the HAL Airport is most convenient for
common public due to it being situated closer to the City Centre, easy accessibility and
availability of multi-mode transport options like Bus, Auto, Taxis, even 2-wheeler, etc. HAL
Airport, therefore, would be more convenient and economical for public compared to BIAL
due to absence of UDF and less transportation cost due to multiple modes and shorter
distance. Less time in coming and going from the airport is also important aspect in this
regard.
27. The Committee further recommends that the old airports may be made operational
for short-haul passengers. Moreover, this is the practice being followed in many of the
major cities in the world wherein more than one airport exists. There is no reason or
justification for keeping the hundreds of crores of worth infrastructure at the old airports
idle just to be used for VIP and other flights.

8
CLOSURE OF HAL AND BEGUMPET AIRPORTS - SOME LEGAL AND PROCEDURAL ISSUES
28. During the visit of the Committee, there were wide ranging discussions with various
stakeholders of the Airports in Bengaluru and Hyderabad. The representatives of the Airports
Authority Employees Union gave a detailed presentation before the Committee inter alia on the legal
and procedural issues involved in the closure of HAL Airport at Bengaluru and Begumpet Airport
at Hyderabad.
29. During the discussion at Bangaluru, the representatives of the Airports Authority Employees
Union (AAEU) submitted before the Committee that the Government was adopting a strange policy
of privatising and closing down the profit-making airports of Airports Authority of India; AAI was
struggling to manage to cross-subsidise non-profit making airports in the remote areas, from the
revenue it was earning through the profit-making airports. The Committee was informed that during
2004, Prime Minister of India had formed a Tripartite Committee to look into various issues
connected with airport infrastructure. The Chairman of the Tripartite Committee had given
categorical assurance to the Joint Forum and to AAEU on 13.10.06 that even after the opening of
BIAL Airport, HAL Airport will be functioning and airlines will be given the freedom to choose
between the two airports.
30. AAEU have also brought before the Committee various facts and arguments in connection
with the closure of HAL Airport, Bengaluru. Various points raised by Airports Authority of India
Employees Union were forwarded by the Committee to the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 3rd
October, 2008 for their comments. Even after reminders the Ministry did not offer their comments
till the writing of this Report.
31. Some of the major issues submitted before the Committee by them during the deliberations
are given are in the following paragraphs:
31.1 No comprehensive Privatisation Policy for the airports
31.1.1 It was argued that in the post-liberalisation era, privatisation had been done in sectors in
which only public sector organisations were present like Airlines, Insurance, Banking, Petroleum
etc.: In all these above sectors, not even a branch of any PSUs were closed down after private
players entered and a healthy competition was allowed between them resulting in quality services
at much competitive price. Also, the total volume of business in all these sectors also increased
due to competition. The Government, however, has signed an agreement with BIAL to close down
HAL Airport owned by AAI for commercial operations. This action of GoI is not at all consistent
with its own policy in other sectors.
31.2 Violation of 150 Km. norm
31.2.1 The Committee was informed that in 1997, Government of India announced a policy on
airport infrastructure which said that no Greenfield airport will normally be allowed within an aerial
distance of 150 kilometers of an existing airport. Where it is allowed as a second airport in the
same city or close vicinity, the parameters for distribution of traffic between the two airports will
be clearly spelt out. But the Bengaluru and Hyderabad Greenfield airports were permitted within 150
kms of radius of the existing airports in violation of the said policy. Also, the distribution of the
traffic between the two airports was also not spelt out.
31.2.2 It was further contended that as per this “a Greenfield airport may be permitted where an
existing airport is unable to meet the projected requirements of traffic or a new focal point of
traffic emerges with sufficient viability. It can be allowed both as a replacement for an existing
airport or for simultaneous operation. This aspect will have to be clearly spelt out in the notice

9
inviting tenders.” Therefore, this fact ought to have been clearly spelt out in the notice inviting
tender in the case of Bengaluru and Hyderabad. But the notice inviting tender did not contain any
clause about closure of HAL Airport.
31.3 Airports Authority Act, 1994
31.3.1 It was further contended that there was no provision in the AAI Act 1994, to close down
an AAI airport, particularly, ‘only for commercial purposes’. The representatives of AAEU further
submitted that an MoU signed between AAI and Karnataka Industrial and Infrastructure
Development Corporation (KSIIDC) in 199.9 for developing the Greenfield Airport also did not have
any clause on closing down of HAL Airport for commercial operations, after the proposed
Greenfield airport was opened. Shareholders’ Agreement, 2002  also did not mention about this.
Hence the closing of HAL Airport is in violation of the very MoU which has envisaged the
Greenfield Airport project near Bengaluru.
31.3.2 The Committee was informed that many viability enhancement methods provided in the
procedure guideline to set up Greenfield Airports have been suggested including giving land on
concessional price, exempting taxes etc. But these methods do not envisage closure of existing
airport as a method to enhance the economical viability of a Greenfield airport project.
31.3.3 The Committee notes that the closure of HAL Airport was not mentioned in the
tender for Bengaluru Greenfield Airport. Naturally, all the parties who participated in the
tender process would have made their offers on this basis only. Making an offer of Closure
of HAL Airport, after the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT), appears to be a clear violation of
the due process.
31.3.4 As regards the restriction on having another airport within 150 Kms of existing
airport, granting permission to start a new Greenfield airport within that radium prima facie
seems to be in violation of the Government policy on airport infrastructure.
31.3.5 The pronounced policy also states that if an airport was allowed within an aerial
distance of 150 kms of an existing airport, a passenger sharing formula has to be evolved.
In the present case, the Government not only allowed the new airports to come up within
a distance of 150 kms but also closed down the existing profit-making airports, not to speak
of passenger sharing formula.
31.3.6 The Committee notes some merit in these arguments made by the representatives
of AAEU. It also feels that the closure of old airports at Bengaluru and Hyderabad appears
to have been done in haste. It is no doubt deprives the AAI a good amount of revenue that
it needs to cross-subsidize airports in remote areas.
31.4 Concession Agreement - Irregularities
31.4.1 V arious arguments questioning the validity of the Concession Agreement signed between the
private companies and the Government were made before the Committee. For example, the
Concession Agreement (CA) dated 5th July, 2004 has a clause making it obligatory on GoI to
publish a notification declaring that HAL Airport will not be available for commercial civil aviation
from the date of opening of the new BIAL Airport at Devanahalli, Bengaluru.
31.4.2 The representatives of AAEU claimed that the Concession Agreement which was initially
prepared and approved by the Cabinet did not provide for the closure of HAL Airport. However,
allegedly, the clause related to HAL Airport closure was brought at a later stage into the
Concessional Agreement, after a demand made to this effect by the BIAL.

10
31.4.3 The Committee’s attention was drawn to a Notification issued by Government of India on
the 16th May, 2008 for HAL Airport which inter alia stated that in exercise of powers conferred
by Section 5A of the Aircraft Act, 1934, read with Rules 11 and 78 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937
and in deference of the contractual commitments including Clause 5.5 of the Concession Agreement
signed between Government of India and BIAL on the 5th July, 2004 and consequent on
commissioning of the Bengaluru International Airport at Devanahalli, w.e.f. 0001 hours of
23rd May, 2008, the HAL Airport at Bengaluru will no longer be available for “commercial civil
aviation operations”.
31.4.5 The representatives of AAEU pointed out that the powers under Section 5A are limited to
the matters mentioned in Section 5 and can be used only in two situations (a) if the security of
India is in danger and (b) if the safety of the Aircraft is in danger. In the given case of HAL
Airport, both these reasons are not present. Moreover, GoI itself says in the Notification that it has
used these powers “in deference of the contractual commitments including Clause 5.5 of the
Concession Agreement”, which clearly shows that the use of the powers u/s 5A was not due to
the above said reason but only in deference to the reasons best know to the Ministry and perhaps
to BIAL also.
31.4.6 They further argued that though the Notification says about closing HAL Airport for
“Commercial civil aviation operations” such a phrase is not defined in any of the Acts or rules
applicable in India (Aircraft Act 1934, Aircraft Rules 1937, Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR)).
31.5 Impossibility of the implementation of the Notification
31.5.1 With regard to the above notification, the representatives of AAl submitted that its
implementation is not possible. They stated that at HAL Airport Air Traffic Control (ATC) controls
almost half of the Bengaluru airspace even after the commissioning of BIAL. HAL ATC is an integral
part of Bengaluru HAL Airport. Even for the operations of BIAL Airport, HAL ATC operations are
necessary. HAL A TC still controls and will continue to control all aircraft operations including
commercial operations through the part of Bengaluru airspace controlled by it. Hence, it is a myth
that by this notification, commercial civil aviation operations of HAL Airport has been banned.
31.5.2 Even after the notification HAL Airport is being used by all types of Chartered Aircrafts.
Both parties to the Notification have already violated the notification by express action. BIAL has
violated the notification by giving permission to air taxi operations of M/s Deccan Aviation Limited
and Global Vectra Helicorp from and to HAL Airport. GoI has also violated when it has informed
Deccan Aviation that they do not have any objection for air taxi operations out of HAL Airport as
BIAL has no objection.
31.5.3 The Committee notes that commercial civil aviation activities are continuing in the
Bengaluru HAL Airport with the consent of the management of BIAL and Government of
India, whereas the Concession Agreement and the notification issued by the Government of
India clearly prohibits any commercial aviation activity. This shows that if the Government
wants, they can operationalise the old airports notwithstanding the Concession Agreement.
The Committee is of the considered view that HAL Airport at Bengaluru and Begumpet
Airport at Hyderabad may be made operational for domestic civil aviation.
31.5.4 The Committee notes that the Government has taken shelter of Section 5A of
Aircraft Act 1934 to close down HAL airport. However, Section 5A talks of closing of any
airport when there is danger to the aircraft/country. The above reason is totally irrelevant
for the instant case. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
revisit various provision of the Concession Agreement to ensure that all the illegalities, etc.
are removed from it that are creating all kind of misgivings in the people’s mind.

11
31.6 NOC for setting up of Bengaluru Greenfield Airport by Ministry of Defence
31.6.1 It was contended before the Committee that as per the Aircraft Rules, 1937 and CAR, NOC
by the Ministry of Defence is mandatory for setting up of an airport. Ministry of Defence has
given its NOC for Devanahalli Greenfield Airport vide its letter No. 3(48)/02/D (Air. II) dated
03.03.04. But this NOC was subject to a condition that the operations at HAL Airport, Bengaluru
will continue even after the BIAL becomes functional and the choice of airport to be utilized should
be left to the operators/commuters/general public.
31.6.2 On the same ground, the license given to BIAL for airport operations by DGCA as per the
Aircraft Rules, 1937 (Rule 78) also becomes subject to this conditional NOC given by Ministry of
Defence. In view of this, they argued, GoI Notification for closing of HAL airport as well as
Aerodrome License of BIAL issued by DGCA ipso facto became null and void.
31.6.3 The Committee notes that the NOC for setting up of Bengaluru Greenfield Airport
by Ministry of Defence made it amply clear that the operations at HAL Airport Bengaluru
will continue even after the BIAL becomes functional and the choice of airport to be utilized
should be left to the operators/commuters/general public. Same is true about the license
issued to BIAL by the Director-General, Civil Aviation. In terms of Notification dated the
16th May, 2008, the HAL Airport stands closed for commercial operations. However, it is
still being used for chartered flights, air taxi services and VIP flights. The Committee fails
to understand that in such a situation, how the losses being incurred by the HAL Airport
would be compensated as desired by the Ministry of Defence while issuing NOC for the new
airport at Bengaluru.
31.7 Licensing of Airports
31.7.1 As per the Aircraft Rules 1937 (Rule 78) and also Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR)
aerodromes can be licensed either for public use that will be available to all persons on equal terms
and conditions or for Private Use  by the licensee and by individuals specifically authorized by the
licensee. It may be noted that private use of aerodromes exclude the operation of schedule flights
therefrom.
31.7.2 Their argument was that as per the above provisions of relevant rules and CAR, an
Aerodrome can be either for public use or private use only. There cannot be a third category, “for
public use but not for commercial civil aviation operations” as has been exactly done by the
notification about closer of the HAL Airport. It is thus clear that an aerodrome which is for public
use should be available to all persons on equal terms and conditions. Hence, an aerodrome like HAL
Airport, which is available for public use cannot be, closed for commercial civil aviation operations
and no such restriction can be imposed on an Airport for public use it was contended.
31.7.3 The Committee would like to have Ministry’s response on this point.
31.8 Similar International Examples
31.8.1 The Committee has learnt that Don Mueang International Airport (Old Bangkok Airport) was
closed completely on opening of new Suvarnabhumi Airport on 28.09.06, which was 40 kms away
from the city. However, mainly due to demands of low cost carriers and the higher costs at the new
Airport, old airport was reopened on 24.03.2007, without restrictions on distance or aircraft capacity.
31.8.2 Another example brought to the notice of the Committee was Dallas Love Field Airport
(USA) that was closed after new DFW International Airport become operational. There was no
Concession Agreement between the Operator and the Regulator or the Federal Government.
However, Southwest Airlines was permitted to operate from the old Airport even after opening of
DFW International Airport, as it was not a signatory to this Agreement.

12
31.8.3 The Committee takes note of these examples of more than one airport co-existing
in the cities to cater to the needs of various types of passenger requirements. The
Committee feels that the same can be applied in case of Bengaluru and Hyderabad Airports
also and the old airports in these cities may be made functional.
31.9 Role of AAI
31.9.1 It was further argued that AAI was an authority created by an Act of Parliament (55 of
1994) with no budgetary support and it was continuously making profit since inception and has
a Mini-ratna Status. The Airports Authority of India operates 127 airports including 16 international
airports, 83 domestic and 28 civil enclaves at defence airfields. AAI thus control and manages the
entire Indian airspace of 2.8 million square nautical miles. AAI provide communication navigation
and surveillance (CNS-ATM) services at all the airports in the country, including Greenfield
Airports. AAl’s competency in airport infrastructure is well known. AAI has constructed many
airports and has consulting projects in other countries like South Yemen, Libya, Algeria, Nauru,
Seychelles and Afghanistan.
31.10 Impact on AAI
31.10.1 The Committee was informed that due to the closure of HAL Airport alone, the estimated
revenue loss to AAI was around Rs 389 crores in 2007-08. Similarly, due to the closure of
Begumpet airport, Airports Authority of India lost and estimated revenue of Rs.221.15 crore during
this period. Thus, it lost of Rs.610 crore in the year 2007-08.
31.10.2 In addition to the above losses, AAI was losing revenue on account of RNFC (Route
Navigational Facility Charges) in other AAI Airports by cancellation of outbound flights from BIAL
Airport to other AAI Airports all over the country. It was underlined that AAI was running airports
in non-profit remote areas of the country as National obligations.
31.10.3 The Committee notes most  of the reasons advanced for the opening of the HAL
Airport at Bengaluru are applicable to  the Begumpet airport in Hyderabad also.
31.10.4 The committee notes that the equity contribution of the consortium of private
companies in BIAL is only Rs. 240/- crores. The rest of the financing has come from state
support, AAI, Government of Karnataka and by way of debt from financial institutions. The
land was also given on a concessional rate. The same is the case with HIAL also. The equity
contribution of the private companies is around Rs. 330/-  crores. The rest of the finance has
come from Government agencies and by way of debt from financial institutions. The
Committee notes that with the kind of resources and expertise that the Airports Authority
of India has, these airports could have been easily developed and operated by the Airports
Authority of India itself.
31.10.5 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that being leading airport infrastructure
provider, the Airports Authority of India which has got the resources and expertise should
have a better say in the modernization of airports in the country. The Committee
recommends that any future Greenfield airports or Brownfield airports project must be done
under the management of Airport Authority of India. JVCs can be formulated but the
Airports Authority of India must have a majority holding in the company and management
control must rest with it.
(C) Modernization of Mumbai and Delhi airport
(I) Mumbai Airport
32. Mumbai International Airport Pvt. Ltd. (MIAL) a Joint Venture Company (JVC) of Airports

13
Authority of India (AAI) (26%) and GVK. Led Consortium (74%) took over management and
development of Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport (CSIA) w.e.f. 3r May, 2006. There was a
transition phase of three months and w.e.f. the 3rd August, 2006; MIAL is independently handling
management and operation of CSIA.
33. As per the Master Plan prepared by MIAL, total project cost for development of CSIA is
estimated to be Rs.9800 crore. Till the 31st March, 2008, MIAL has spent Rs.937 crore. Estimated
capital expenditure till the 31st March, 2009 would be Rs.3081 crore. Financial closure for the
project was achieved on the 24th April, 2007.
34. Operation, Management and Development Agreement (OMDA) which was signed on the
4th April 2006 prescribe that mandatory capital projects to be completed. It also lists out various
compliances and procedures to be followed. It also spells out subjective and objective service
quality requirements to be achieved by MIAL. OMDA prescribes objective service quality
standard and subjective quality standard. These standards, it was ciaimed, were being achieved.
In the survey conducted by Airport Council International (ACI) for the quarter ending the
31st December, 2007, Mumbai airport has been rated at 3.58 on a scale of 0-5, which is highest
among all Indian airports. CSI Airport has also been granted ISO 10002:2004 certification. As per
schedule 7 of OMDA, there are 32 mandatory capital projects to be completed by MIAL as per
prescribed time schedule. All mandatory capital projects ( i.e. 27 projects), which were to be
completed within first two years from the date of signing of OMDA i.e. by the 3rd April, 2008,
have been completed. Balance 5 projects are required to be completed by the 31st March, 2010.
Out of these, 2 projects have been completed before time.
35. During the course of the discussion with the Committee, the representatives of MIAL
presented the following facts about the airport besides highlighting the development plan for the
future:
➣ India’s busiest international airport with 22% of India’s air traffic.
➣ This airport handles more than 50% of the passengers in India and Mumbai 180,000
landings and takeoffs and over 20 million passengers, with a total of 13.56 million
domestic air passengers and 6.73 million international passengers.
➣ The airport consists of two main terminals: Terminal 1 for domestic flights and
Terminal 2 for international flights.
➣ These terminals use the same airside facilities but are physically separated on the
landside.
➣ Terminal 1 is further divided into Terminal I-A,.
➣ Terminal 2 is now Terminal 2-A.
➣ Terminal 2-B, when 2-C opened. Terminal 2-B is now back in use following the closure
of 2-A for renovation.
➣ Mumbai has two intersecting runways designated 09/27 as main runway and cross
runway 14/32. Runway 14/32, 2,925 metres (9,596 ft), runs between terminals 1 and
2, while the main runway 09/27 is 3,445 m (11,302 ft) (previously designated as 3,489
m (11,447 ft) intersects it south of the terminal buildings.
➣ On average, about 50 flights of smaller aircrafts have taken off daily from 14/32 in this
time period.
➣ A rate of 25 departures per hour is being targeted in the evening slot.

14
➣ MIAL improved areas of passenger convenience like curbside, terminal entrances and
improved cleanliness. Human resources initiatives were taken such as employee
communication and training. Some of the changes that have taken place at CSIA in the
recent past include: aesthetic changes, additional check-in counters, refurbished toilets,
improved signage, additional food and beverage outlets, better curbside management
leading to a smoother traffic flow.
MASTER PLAN
36. In October, 2006, MIAL unveiled the master plan for CSIA, which has been designed to expand
and upgrade the infrastructure to cater for 40 million passengers per year and one million metric
tonnes of cargo per year by 2010. The separate international and domestic terminals will be merged
into one terminal building at the current international building and the current domestic terminal will
be converted to a dedicated cargo terminal. The implementation will be undertaken in two stages:
• The Interim Phase is the implementation of several immediate measures. These are to
be completed by 2008 and will include:
° Refurbishment and construction at Terminal 2
° Revamp of Terminal 1A to upgrade and expand facilities such as check in
counters and boarding bridges
° Setting-up of temporary cargo facilities to add capacity
° Upgrading of the airside runway facilities such as rapid exit taxiways to increase
runway capacity to cater to traffic growth
° Enhancing city-side facilities such as multi-level car parks
• Phase One to be completed by 2010 includes:
° Creation of a brand new terminal building (T2) at Sahar catering to both
international and domestic passengers
° Construction of a dedicated link from the Western Express Highway to T2 at
Sahar
° Enhancement of the airside facilities by shifting the air traffic control tower and
construction of a parallel taxiway
° Development of infrastructure on the city-side
° Building new cargo facilities
° Construction of Terminal 1C (by 2009)
Key facilities at the revamped CSIA :
Facilities Proposed Existing
Parking stands for aircraft 106 (67 in contact and 39 remote) 92 (19 in contact and
73 remote)
Boarding bridges 51 19
Check-in counters 316 182
Car parking 12000 3600

15
37. There are plans to extend the scope of the system to the air traffic control (ATC) and apron
control areas, the airport website and even to leading hotel chains. While a parallel runway seems
to have been ruled out, the ATC tower is now expected to be taken down and relocated to facilitate
cross-runway operation. A Wi-Fi service, that passengers can access free of charge throughout the
airport. When complete, the terminal will serve 40 million people per year. The design combines
both International and Domestic operations, employing an innovative set of swing facilities to
optimise utilisation of the terminal across the 24-hour operational day.
PROJECT FACTS
38. Completion Year: 2014 Project Area: 4,843,759ft Building Height: 45m Number of
Stories: 4
Ground Transportation
Within Airport
• Free shuttle service between the international and domestic terminals
• Pre-paid taxi service between the international and domestic terminals
39. The Committee from its visit to the Mumbai airport and interaction with various airlines
operators noted the following observation about the available facilities/shortcomings:—
1. There has been delay in execution of modernization of Mumbai airport by JVC causing
concerns in implementing process and procedures as promised for the terminal building.
The work for development of infrastructure of terminal building and approach fly-over
and facilities provided for departure gate security after immigration should be
stream-lined and made time-bound.
2. The proposed new ground handling policy effective 1st January, 2009 will have a
negative impact on airline industry and will render several thousand employees jobless.
The airlines that are presently performing self handling may be permitted to continue to
do the same for providing best customer services.
3. The international passenger transport facilities to domestic flights are inadequate. The
international passenger transportation needs immediate attention and the facilities should
be augmented.
4. There is shortage of CISF staff leading to reduced manning at entry and exit points,
thereby causing long queues at entry points.
5. Mumbai International Airport Ltd. is charging electricity charges as per the rates
applicable to the commercial activities claiming that M.E.R.C. has categorized airports
as a business and commercial activity resulting in huge losses to the airlines operators.
The operators had submitted that it is service industry rather than a commercial activity
and accordingly, they may be charged electricity charges applicable only to the industrial
units.
6. The lounge space offered by the airport operator to the airlines is being provided at a
very steep commercial rate, whereas the lounge facilities provided to passenger is not
a commercial activity.
7. The airlines do not have a choice of selecting their service providers but are forced to
go to the one proposed by the airport operator.

16
8. The Common User Terminal Equipment (CUTE) facility charges should be rationalized
and domestic airlines should not be forced to accept CUTE as the situation does not
actually warrant it.
9. Screening of registered baggage is perceived to be a serious cause of concern, once in-
line screening comes into place. It is understood that the airport operator has
outsourced the security screening to an outside agency, which is a serious concern to
all the airlines.
10. The airport operator is in the process charging parking fee from staff for their vehicles
and that would be equal to the outside public.
11. The airline operators also expressed their concern pertaining to the operations and
airside as under;
• Aircraft holding over Mumbai and Delhi due to ATC congestion.
• Introduction of Air Traffic Flow Management System in India.
• Sequential operation at Mumbai by deputing additional A TC officers through
expatriate terms.
• The visibility criterion for sequential operation at Mumbai is 2500m.
Consideration may be given to reduce to 1600m as in Delhi.
• Adequate notice for all major aerodrome related work affecting operations
• Acute shortage of parking bays at metro airports.
40. The above problems brought before the Committee needs serious attention of the
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should suitably
intervene to ensure that the burden is not passed on the passengers. It should furnish its
response to these points for the Committee’s consideration.
41. Another problem brought before the Committee was that alternate airports are not available
in the nearby vicinity of the major metro airports. In case of any landing difficulty in the metro
airports, the aircrafts have to go back to the originating station causing huge losses by way of fuel
expenses. They have pleaded that the small airports in and around the metro airports may be
equipped adequately to provide landing facilities to those diverted flights due to bad weather or any
other reason.
42. The Government should take adequate and essential steps to equip the airports which
are 30 to 40 minutes flying time from the major airports to meet any exigencies. The
Committee is of the view that this problem can be solved if the Government expedites
development/modernization of non-metro airports.
UNIFORM TAXATION OF ATF
43. The issue of differential sales tax on ATF in this country and the resulting problem faced by
airline operators has engaged the attention of the Committee. Airline operators pointed out about the
financial losses due to the problem of ‘fuel ferrying’ or transiting. This issue has now become more
relevant in the context of current crisis faced by airlines that is largely attributed to high cost
of ATF. With regard to the problem of high price of ATF, the Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation in its 138 report which inter-alia stated that –
“The Committee while appreciating the steps taken by the State Governments of
Kerala and Andhra Pradesh in reducing the Sales Tax on ATF from 32% to 4%
recommends that the Ministry pursue this long standing issue with other State

17
Governments so that uniformity of tax on ATF can be maintained. Since the cost of
fuel is an important component of cost structure, reduction in taxes on ATF will
definitely have a positive impact on the airfares. The Committee once again
recommends that Ministry of Finance should sympathetically consider and give
approval to the proposal of Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding notifying ATF as
‘Declared Good’ under Section 14 of Central Sales Tax Act on priority basis to all
the aircrafts so that sales tax on ATF could be contained within the maximum rate
of 4 per cent. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance may
also discuss the issue with the State Governments and try to persuade them to
reduce the sales tax on ATF. The Committee is of the opinion that the success of the
concept of low cost carrier mainly depends on the taxation of ATF which is very
much on the higher side. The Committee feels that reduction in airfares will bring
more new passengers to the airports.”
44. During the course of the discussion the representatives of the AAEU informed the
Committee that the OMDA is a clear cut violation of Airport Authority of India Act, 1994. Clause
18 which stipulates that the employees posted at the subject airport would continue to enjoy the
same terms and conditions of employment. Functional clause 12 covers all the services of
operations as well as non-operations. The JVC company has no constitutional right to send for an
option to get absorbed in the said JVC company since such provisions are not incorporated in the
AAI Act, 1994. The Principal employer (AAI) have extended 26% share value in the said agreement
by extending A TC/CNS services to the JVC company and parting away the other employees not
to discharge their duties at the respective airport is violation of the functional clause of Section 12
of the Act. Thus OMDA is a violation of clause 18 and manipulation of Functional clause 12 of
AAI Act 1994. Hence, the separating CNS/ATC with other areas of services is discriminatory.
45. The plea of the employees working at Mumbai and Delhi airports is that they should be
allowed to continue their employment at the same station of posting as per the contract of service
issued on the date of appointment by AAI without altering any service conditions by the Principal
Employer. The provisions framed in the AAI Act do not provide any option to transfer the
employees from one employer to another, as such the OMDA executed is not binding upon the
employees. No agreement (namely OMDA/concession agreement) can supersede the provisions of
a Parliament, Act. Hence the employees should continue to discharge their duties as long as the
leasing period continues with the AAI or terminates which ever is earlier. Therefore, it is stated
that suitable arrangement/provisions be made to accommodate all these employees at their
respective places of work. It may be mentioned that the said arrangement has been made with
regard to the privatization of Delhi Vidyut Board wherein the employees of the organization have
been retained in BSES on the same terms of employees enjoyed by them prior to privatization. The
various areas of violations are enumerated as below:
(a) Non-recognisition of various staff welfare committees by the Private Operator.
(b) Depriving the facility of AAI staff canteen, Mumbai Airport.
(c) Non-representation of staff in sports activities.
(d) Depriving staff of training facilities.
(e) Parking facility for the employees of Airports Authority of India. Earlier there was
specified parking lot for the employees
(f) The employees of AAI have been removed from the job which they were carrying out
earlier. Thus they have been rendered without any work and thus being mentally
tortured. It is also a violation of OMDA whereby the employees are supposed to carry
out the same job which they were carrying out earlier.

18
46. The representatives of one of the Unions submitted that they are having large representation
among the employees of the AAI working in the Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport. They
submitted that the OMDA is discriminatory and the services of any of the employees can be
terminated on simple grounds. They demanded that termination of employees should be made
rigorous and it should be only on major penalties imposed after due process of law. They have
also submitted to the Committee that presently AAI is having surplus employees still the AAI
management is recruiting people from outside. Another aspect brought before the Committee was
that in Mumbai 30 to 40% of the employees are women and if the MIAL is not absorbing them
with appropriate terms and conditions, all of them have to be relocated to other airports of AAI
in various cities. This will be a great human casualty because the family life of all these affected
employees will go haywire. The union also submitted to the Committee that the AAI should give
a V .R.S. based on golden handshake with attractive financial benefits to all those employees who
are unwilling to join MIAL and those who are unwilling to be relocated to other places.
47. The Committee recommends that the women employees should not be relocated to
other cities. They may be given employment with the same or better terms and conditions
by MIAL as they were enjoying with AAI. AAI may introduce a V .R.S. which is acceptable
to the employees.
48. It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that there are around 15000 casual
labourers working in Mumbai airport. After the handing over of the airport to the private operator,
their job is in danger.
49. The Committee notes with concern that some of the provisions of OMDA appears to
violate Clause 12 and 18 of the Airports Authority of India Act 1994. The Clause 18 provides
that the employees posted at the subject airport would continue to enjoy the same terms
and conditions of employment while Clause 12 covers all the services of operations as well
as non operations. The Committee understands that the plea of the employees working at
these two airports is that they should be allowed to continue their employment at the same
station of posting as per the contract of service issued on the date of appointment by AAI
without altering any service conditions by the Principal Employer. The provisions framed in
the said AAI Act do not provide any option to transfer the employees from one employer
to another as such the OMDA executed is not binding upon the employees.
50. The Committee is of view that no arbitrary agreement namely OMDA/Concession
Agreement can supersede the provisions of the Parliament Act. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Governments to review all the provisions incorporated in the OMDA and
make suitable provisions to accommodate all these employees of Airports Authority of India
at their respective places of work, as has been done in Delhi Vidyut Board wherein the
employees of the organization have been retained in BSES, Delhi on the same terms of
employment enjoyed by them prior to privatization.
51. The Committee recommends that MIAL should give preference to the casual
labourers working in the airport for future employment. In one form or the other, they
should be accommodated by MIAL.
52. During the meeting, the Commissioner of Police, Mumbai, pointed out that the shelter
provided for Mumbai police outside the terminals had been removed as a result police personnel
on duty faced problem. He requested for giving adequate space at suitable place. The Committee
also desires that a dedicated police post should be stationed at the airport and the members
of the police department assigned to the MIAL airport as their normal patrol area for
effective security. The Government should ensure that the private operator of MIAL should
provide adequate land at suitable locations outside the airport for construction of Police
Post.

19
(D) Modernization of Delhi airport
53. The Committee visited the Delhi International Airport Pvt. Ltd (DIAL) on 10th January,
2008 and took stock of the various facilities/infrastructure at the airport. Some of the points were
taken up by the Committee in its 141st Report on Airport Modernization. Delhi International Airport
Pvt. Ltd (DIAL) is a Joint Venture Company, between GMR led consortium (GMR, Fraport,
Malaysia Airport) and Airports Authority of India which entered into the Concession Agreement (30
year and extendable to another 30 years) for Operation, Management and Development of IGI
Airport on the 4th April, 2006 under the Operation, Management and Development Agreement
(OMDA). Subsequent to signing of OMDA, DIAL took over IGI Airport on the 3rd May, 2006.
54. DIAL prepared a 20 year Master Plan for IGI Airport projecting all the facilities which will
be commissioned in a phased manner and would finally cater to 100 million passengers upto 2036.
Under the Phase 1 of the Master Plan, major facilities will be commissioned by DIAL for the
Commonwealth games. Phase 1 is further sub divided into Phase lA for works to be completed
by 2008 and Phase 1B for works to be completed by 2010. As per the mandate agreed under
Mandatory Capital Projects (MCP) of OMDA, the following major facilities are proposed to be
commissioned under the Phase 1A and Phase IB:—
Phase lA (2008) Phase IB (2010)
• Commissioning of 3rd Runway • New Integrated Terminal Building–5
(4,43om) million sq. ft.
• Commissioning of New Taxiways, Fire • 55 Contact Stands (84 Aerobridges)
Stations, associated infrastructure and 30 remote parking bays
• Refurbishment of International Terminal • 90 Walklators, 47 Escalators, 70 lifts
• Expansion of Domestic Arrival • Multi-level Car parking, Taxi Staging
Terminal and Bus Parking-15,000 lots
• Development of New Domestic Departure • General Aviation facilities
Terminal (T1D) – Not part of Mandatory
Capital Project but being constructed to
• High speed dedicated rail link —
enhance passenger convenience Constructed by DMRC (Equity support
by DIAL)
• Expansion/Upgrade of Utilities
(Sewerage, Power, Water)
55. OMDA prescribes objective service quality standard and subjective quality standard. In the
survey conducted by Airport Council International (ACI) for the year 2007-08, IGIA has been rated
at 3.02 on the scale of 0-5. As per schedule 7 of OMDA there are 33 mandatory capital projects
to be completed by DIAL as per prescribed time schedule. Out of these mandatory capital projects,
the Committee was informed that 10 projects had been completed, 5 projects will be completed by
August, 2008 and 7 projects will be completed by March, 2010. However, 11 projects have been
partly delayed by 3 months and were likely to be completed by June, 2008. This delay was mainly
due to delay in obtaining approvals from concerned authorities, delay in shifting of 42 Airlines Back
Offices, Customs Back Offices, Warehouse and Court seized goods warehouse, Immigration Back
Offices etc.
56. The total cost of airport restructuring and modernization under Phase-I is estimated as
Rs.8890 crore. Till 2007-08, DIAL has incurred an expenditure of about Rs.2900 crore on various
projects. Further an amount of Rs.3900 crore is projected to be spent in the current financial year
(2008-09) and remaining Rs.2090 crore during the financial year 2009-10.

20
57. The Committee notes that one of the basic purposes of handing over the
modernization task of Mumbai and Delhi airports to the Joint Venture Company was to
complete it within the given time limit. However, the Committee feels that JVC has not
been able to meet the time frame as mentioned in the agreement to complete various
modernization projects (mandatory projects) and such projects are running behind schedule.
The Committee recommends the Government to institutionalize the monitoring mechanism
to avoid delays and cost over runs in the execution of the projects at Mumbai and Delhi
airports.
58. The Committee notes that the airlines and passengers are the main sources of
revenues for airport developers at Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Mumbai and Delhi and with rising
fares and cost cutting across the sector, developers are pruning infrastructure plan and
opting for ways to cut cost and install low priced facilities. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the developers in these airports should be restrained from charging user
development fee and the Government should not agree to it. The airport operators may be
directed to implement the modernization plan as per the agreements within the scheduled
time limit instead of concentrating on revenue earning from commercial activities.
59. The Committee while visiting the Mumbai and Delhi airports had noticed the poor
state of affairs at the airports as a problem leading to crowded terminal, sitting space was
inadequate, passengers were left searching for trolleys, food articles were sold over and
above the MRP, lack of basic amenities/canteen facilities, higher charges towards security,
lounge rental, aviation services, parking, telephone and other facilities, no residential space
for the ATC staff, no co-ordination with the user agencies and airport operators, no round
the clock help service available; delay in execution of building projects at Mumbai and
Delhi, inadequate inter-terminal passenger transportation facilities and airlines were not
finding space for parking bays in the airport terminal and charges for this were very high.
60. The Committee observes that due to lack of adequate civic utilities like toilets,
drinking water fountains etc. outside arrival/departure hall of all the four airport,
passengers/tourists experienced difficulties. There was also lack of toilet facility at car/taxi
parking area outside the airports. The Committee observes that Airport Operators should
not ignore the needs of such people. The Committee recommends that toilet and drinking
water facilities should be provided outside the arrival/departure lounge and parking areas
in order to avoid inconvenience to the passengers and co-passengers.
61. Some instances of impolite behavior with the passengers at the airports was brought
to the notice of the Committee. This type of behavior does not go well with the tourists and
creates an unpleasant atmosphere. The Committee desires that officials deputed at the
airport, should strictly be asked to be courteous and polite with the passengers particularly,
the tourist from other countries. The officials deputed at the airport and dealing with the
passengers/tourists should be more careful, polite, helpful and tourist friendly.
62. The Committee recommends that a coordination mechanism may be evolved for
regular interaction among various stakeholders of Chattrapati Shivaji International Airport
with representation from agencies such as MIAL, Airports Authority of India, Employees
Unions of Airports Authority of India, various airlines etc. This mechanism will iron out
differences among the stakeholders of the airport and will enable smooth functioning of the
airport.
63. The Committee, after visiting the airports at Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru and
Hyderabad and after considering the facts and information made available to it in respect
of modernization and development of private airports as well as closure of HAL and

21
Begumpet airports, has gained impression that had all the processes and procedures been
done in far more transparent and acceptable manner, most of the objections and
controversies could have been avoided. Right from arranging finances for participating joint
venture companies, giving thousands acres of land on concessional rates and allowing them
to use the land commercially, signing OMDA and Concession Agreements favorable to JVCs
and closure of existing airports, etc. are some of the areas about which there are lot of
misgivings in the minds of people and media keeps writing about these.
64. Besides, the Airports Authority of India, advertently or inadvertently, appears to not
being given its due. Even though, ATC operations of all the airports are still with them, the
closure of HAL and Begumpet airports and placing Airports Authority of India virtually at
the mercy of the management of private airports, speaks a lot about it. The manner in
which the Concession Agreement and OMDA wer e signed has also invited wide criticism and
these are alleged to have violated the existing policies, guidelines, norms, rules, etc. The
Committee feels that there appears to be some truth in the apprehensions that are being
raised against the Government in the entire exercise of privatizing the airports, developing
the Greenfield airports and the related matters. The Committee expects that the
Government of the day to provide convincing explanation to all the points, raised in this
report to clear the apprehensions that are being flown thick and wide. It is for the
Government to clarify the entire matter.
65. The Committee hastens to point out that it had sought to know the Government’s
response to the various points brought to its notice vide a letter dated 3rd October, 2008.
Despite reminders, the Committee had not received the response of the Government till the
time the Committee’s report was adopted on the 20th October, 2008.

22
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
BENGALURU INTERNATIONAL AIRPOR T LIMITED (BIAL) AND HYDERABAD
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT LIMITED (HIAL)
The Committee found the plan and design of the Greenfield airports to be of the
international standard with certain useful facilities for the comfort and convenience of the
passengers, for example, adequate and efficient check-in counters, self check-in machines
and quick immigration clearance, large number of shops, eateries, etc. However, the
Committee also came across certain areas that needed immediate attention. For example,
the Committee found, that the passengers at the Greenfield airports have to pay
exorbitant prices for food items. The eateries are charging much more than the MRP,
which is against the Supreme Court order. There is no separate canteen for the
employees and the staff working at the airports. The drivers and others who are waiting
outside the airports have no affordable canteen facility and basic amenities like toilets
and bathrooms. The Committee recommends that the Government should ensure that the
Greenfield Airports at Bengaluru and Hyderabad provide basic facilities to the drivers and
passengers and stop the eateries from charging exorbitant prices. Private airlines have to
cough up hefty amounts for parking bays and aerobridges, security charges, lounge
rentals, telephone rentals and other facilities at the new airports. (Para 13)
The parking charges for vehicles are also quite heavy at the new airports. At
Bengaluru, it is Rs.40/- per hour and Rs.20/-per additional hours. The Committee is
surprised to know that at Hyderabad airport, a vehicle while entering the airport for
dropping or picking up a passenger has to pay Rs.35/- per trip. The Committee notes that
space earmarked for passenger seating areas was inadequate and numbers of seats are
also not adequate, causing inconvenience to the passengers during peak times. This is so
because much of the airport space has been let out for commercial use and given to
shopping outlets and F&B outlets. There is conspicuous absence of lounges at these
airports. There is a need for creation of additional reserved lounge for VIPs and
passengers. To help and guide the passengers at these airports, there should be round-the-
clock help service at these airports. There were inadequate facilities provided for free
drinking water at these airports. More drinking water fountains should be installed. The
emergency medical facilities for treatment of the passengers in case of sudden illness
should be in place in all the new airports as has been done at the new Hyderabad airport.
(Para 14)
The Committee recommends that the flight delay or cancellation must be reported
to passengers well in time to avoid hardships to the passengers. The baggage handling
process should be strengthened so as to reduce the baggage delivery time and hardship
to the passengers. Apron driving discipline should be maintained to avoid any accident on
apron and staff should be given proper training for the driving skills and behaviors. There
should be integration of air and ground surveillance information along with flight related
data to enhance air travel safety and efficient air traffic management. (Para 15)
The private operators should recognize various staff welfare Committees of Airports
Authority of India and others working at these airports. There should be regular
consultative and coordination meeting of all the stakeholders at the new airports so as to
resolve the different issues/grievances. (Para 16)
22

23
The Committee learnt that it was discouraging for the short-haul passengers to
take air travel after the new airports. A higher User Development Fee (UDF) was being
charged by the new airport developers from the passengers. The user development fee
added with high taxi/bus fares due to long distances, compel the passengers to use other
means of transport such as road and, trains for the short distance destinations. This has,
in fact rendered the air travel from these airports added with high ATF prices, just
prohibitive. (Para 17)
The Committee notes that the Task Force on Financing Plan for airports (July,
2006) had recommended that the users should not be burdened with ADF/UDF for
financing at the airport projects. This is particularly important in the context of the policy
objective to make civil aviation a mass, rather than an elitist model of travel and to
make air travel more affordable. After taking into account various aspects and the above
recommendation of the Task Force the Committee feels that the imposition of UDF on
passengers is a retrograde step contravening the Task Force recommendations and
recommends that the UDF imposed on passengers may be withdrawn immediately and no
more UDF may be imposed on passengers in any of the airports. (Para 18)
CAPACITY OF BIAL AIRPORT
The Committee notes that the Government of India appears to be unconcerned
about the obligation of BIAL to construct and provide an airport as per the concession
agreement. Even the area and capacity were not verified before permitting to open new
and closing HAL Airport. This appears to be an irregularity committed by Government of
India in this matter. (Para 19.6)
The Committee notes that hundreds of crores of rupees were spent for developing
infrastructure at the old airports at Bengaluru and Hyderabad but it is lying unutilized
due to the closure of airports for commercial purposes. Another interesting thing brought
to the notice of the Committee is that the old airports, the HAL Airport and Begumpet
Airport, are being used for operation of VIP flights, Non-schedule Flights, General
Aviation, Helicopter-Taxis, etc. During the deliberations of the Committee the Airports
Authority of India reported that there is absolutely no problem in opening up two airports
simultaneously in a city. The Committee therefore, recommends that the old airports of
Hyderabad and Bengaluru may be used exclusively for short haul flights which are
operating from the nearby airports. (Para 24)
The Committee also notes that the closure of HAL airport led to loss of jobs due
to reduction of flights and due to closure of airlines operators. Thousands of direct and
indirect workers also lost their jobs, this also includes trolley retrievers, small time
vendors, taxi drivers, auto drivers, loaders etc. Despite the assurances given by the BIAL
and HIAL managements, they have not been accommodated in the new airports. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that all those people who are directly or indirectly
affected due to closure of the HAL Airport and Begumpet Airport may be given preference
and suitably accommodated at the new Green Field Airports. (Para 25)
The Committee is of the opinion that the HAL Airport is most convenient for
common public due to it being situated closer to the City Centre, easy accessibility and
availability of multi-mode transport options like Bus, Auto, Taxis, even 2-wheeler, etc.
HAL Airport, therefore, would be more convenient and economical for public compared to
BIAL due to absence of UDF and less transportation cost due to multiple modes and
shorter distance. Less time in coming and going from the airport is also important aspect
in this regard. (Para 26)

24
The Committee further recommends that the old airports may be made operational
for short-haul passengers. Moreover, this is the practice being followed in many of the
major cities in the world wherein more than one airport exists. There is no reason or
justification for keeping the hundreds of crores of worth infrastructure at the old airports
idle just to be used for VIP and other flights. (Para 27)
CLOSURE OF HAL AND BEGUMPET AIRPORTS—SOME LEGAL AND PROCEDURAL ISSUES
The Committee notes that the closure of HAL Airport was not mentioned in the
tender for Bengaluru Greenfield Airport. Naturally, all the parties who participated in the
tender process would have made their offers on this basis only. Making an offer of
Closure of HAL Airport, after the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT), appears to be a clear
violation of the due process. (Para 31.3.3)
As regards the restriction on having another airport within 150 kms of existing
airport, granting permission to start a new Greenfield airport within that radium prima
facie  seems to be in violation of the Government policy on airport infrastructure.
(Para 31.3.4)
The pronounced policy also states that if an airport was allowed within an aerial
distance of 150 kms of an existing airport, a passenger sharing formula has to be evolved.
In the present case, the Government not only allowed the new airports to come up within
a distance of 150 kms but also closed down the existing profit-making airports, not to
speak of passenger sharing formula. (Para 31.3.5)
The Committee notes some merit in these arguments made by the representatives
of AAEU. It also feels that the closure of old airports at Bengaluru and Hyderabad
appears to have been done in haste. It is no doubt deprives the AAI a good amount of
revenue that it needs to cross-subsidize airports in remote areas. (Para 31.3.6)
CONCESSION AGREEMENT – IRREGULARITIES
IMPOSSIBILITY OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NOTIFICATION
The Committee notes that commercial civil aviation activities are continuing in the
Bengaluru HAL Airport with the consent of the management of BIAL and Government of
India, whereas the Concession Agreement and the notification issued by the Government
of India clearly prohibits any commercial aviation activity. This shows that if the
Government wants, they can operationalise the old airports notwithstanding the
Concession Agreement. The Committee is of the considered view that HAL Airport at
Bengaluru and Begumpet Airport at Hyderabad may be made operational for domestic civil
aviation. (Para 31.5.3)
The Committee notes that the Government has taken shelter of Section 5A of
Aircraft Act 1934 to close down HAL airport. However, Section 5A talks of closing of any
airport when there is danger to the aircraft/country. The above reason is totally irrelevant
for the instant case. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
revisit various provision of the Concession Agreement to ensure that all the illegalities,
etc. are removed from it that are creating all kind of misgivings in the people’s mind.
(Para 31.5.4)
NOC FOR SETTING UP OF BENGALURU GREENFIELD AIRPORT BY MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
The Committee notes that the NOC for setting up of Bengaluru Greenfield Airport

25
by Ministry of Defence made it amply clear that the operations at HAL Airport Bengaluru
will continue even after the BIAL becomes functional and the choice of airport to be
utilized should be left to the operators/commuters/general public. Same is true about the
license issued to BIAL by the Director-General, Civil Aviation. In terms of Notification
dated the 16th May, 2008, the HAL Airport stands closed for commercial operations.
However, it is still being used for chartered flights, air taxi services and VIP flights. The
Committee fails to understand that in such a situation, how the losses being incurred by
the HAL Airport would be compensated as desired by the Ministry of Defence while
issuing NOC for the new airport at Bengaluru. (Para 31.6.3)
The Committee takes note of these examples of more than one airport co-existing
in the cities to cater to the needs of various types of passenger requirements. The
Committee feels that the same can be applied in case of Bengaluru and Hyderabad
Airports also and the old airports in these cities may be made functional. (Para 31.8.3)
ROLE OF AAI
IMPACT ON AAI
The Committee notes most of the reasons advanced for the opening of the HAL
Airport at Bengaluru are applicable to the Begumpet Airport in Hyderabad also. (Para 31.10.3)
The Committee notes that the equity contribution of the consortium of private
companies in BIAL is only Rs.240/- crores. The rest of the financing has come from State
support, AAI, Government of Karnataka and by way of debt from financial institutions.
The land was also given on a concessional rate. The same is the case with HIAL also. The
equity contribution of the private companies is around Rs. 330/- crores. The rest of the
finance has come from Government agencies and by way of debt from financial
institutions. The Committee notes that with the kind of resources and expertise that the
Airports Authority of India has, these airports could have been easily developed and
operated by the Airports Authority of India itself. (Para 31.10.4)
The Committee is, therefore, of the view that being leading airport infrastructure
provider, the Airports Authority of India which has got the resources and expertise should
have a better say in the modernization of airports in the country. The Committee
recommends that any future Greenfield airports or Brownfield airports project must be
done under the management of Airport Authority of India. JVCs can be formulated but
the Airport Authority of India must have a majority holding in the company and
management control must rest with it. (Para 31.10.5)
MODERNIZATION OF MUMBAI AND DELHI AIRPORTS
Master Plan
The above problems brought before the Committee needs serious attention of the
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should suitably
intervene to ensure that the burden is not passed on the passengers. It should furnish
its response to these points for the Committee’s consideration. (Para 40)
The Government should take adequate and essential steps to equip the airports
which are 30 to 40 minutes flying time from the major airports to meet any exigencies.
The Committee is of the view that this problem can be solved if the Government
expedites development/modernization of non-metro airports. (Para 42)

26
UNIFORM TAXATION OF ATF
This issue has now become more relevant in the context of current crisis faced by
airlines that is largely attributed to high cost of ATF. It is sad that airlines are resorting
to retrenchment of their staff. The Committee hopes that Government would take
adequate steps to see that civil aviation sector is not affected and young trained
manpower do not get desperate. With regard to the problem of high price of ATF, the
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation in its 138 report which inter-alia  stated
that –
‘‘The Committee while appreciating the steps taken by the State Governments of
Kerala and Andhra Pradesh in reducing the Sales Tax on ATF from 32% to 4%
recommends that the Ministry pursue this long standing issue with other State
Governments so that uniformity of tax on ATF can be maintained. Since the cost
of fuel is an important component of cost structure, reduction in taxes on ATF will
definitely have a positive impact on the airfares. The Committee once again
recommends that Ministry of Finance should sympathetically consider and give
approval to the proposal of Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding notifying ATF as
‘Declared Good’ under Section 14 of Central Sales Tax Act on priority basis to all
the aircrafts so that sales tax on ATF could be contained within the maximum rate
of 4 per cent. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Finance
may also discuss the issue with the State Governments and try to persuade them
to reduce the sales tax on ATF. The Committee is of the opinion that the success
of the concept of low cost carrier mainly depends on the taxation of ATF which is
very much on the higher side. The Committee feels that reduction in airfares will
bring more new passengers to the airports.’’ (Para 43)
The Committee recommends that the women employees should not be relocated to
other cities. They may be given employment with the same or better terms and conditions
by MIAL as they were enjoying with AAI. AAI may introduce a V .R.S which is acceptable
to the employees. (Para 47)
The Committee notes with concern that some of the provisions of OMDA appears
to violate Clause 12 and 18 of the Airports Authority of India Act 1994. The Clause 18
provides that the employees posted at the subject airport would continue to enjoy the
same terms and conditions of employment while Clause 12 covers all the services of
operations as well as non operations. The Committee understands that the plea of the
employees working at these two airports is that they should be allowed to continue their
employment at the same station of posting as per the contract of service issued on the
date of appointment by AAI without altering any service conditions by the Principal
Employer. The provisions framed in the said AAI Act do not pr ovide any option to
transfer the employees from one employer to another as such the OMDA executed is not
binding upon the employees. (Para 49)
The Committee is of view that no arbitrary agreement namely OMDA/Concession
Agreement can supersede the provisions of the Parliament Act. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Governments to review all the provisions incorporated in the OMDA and
make suitable provisions to accommodate all these employees of Airports Authority of
India at their respective places of work, as has been done in Delhi Vidyut Board wherein
the employees of the organization have been retained in BSES, Delhi on the same terms
of employment enjoyed by them prior to privatization. (Para 50)

27
The Committee recommends that MIAL should give preference to the casual
labourers working in the Airport for future employment. In one form or the other, they
should be accommodated by MIAL. (Para 51)
The Committee also desires that a dedicated police post should be stationed at the
airport and the members of the police department assigned to the MIAL airport as their
normal patrol area for effective security. The Government should ensure that the private
operator of MIAL should provide adequate land at suitable locations outside the Airport
for construction of Police Post. (Para 52)
MODERNIZATION OF DELHI AIRPORT
The Committee notes that one of the basic purposes of handing over the
modernization task of Mumbai and Delhi airports to the Joint Venture Company was to
complete it within the given time limit. However, the Committee feels that JVC has not
been able to meet the time frame as mentioned in the agreement to complete various
modernization projects (mandatory projects) and such projects are running behind
schedule. The Committee recommends the Government to institutionalize the monitoring
mechanism to avoid delays and cost over runs in the execution of the projects at Mumbai
and Delhi airports. (Para 57)
The Committee notes that the airlines and passengers are the main sources of
revenues for airport developers at Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Mumbai and Delhi and with
rising fares and cost cutting across the sector, developers are pruning infrastructure plan
and opting for ways to cut cost and install low priced facilities. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the developers in these airports should be restrained from charging user
development fee and the Government should not agree to it. The airport operators may
be directed to implement the modernization plan as per the agreements within the
scheduled time limit instead of concentrating on revenue earning from commercial
activities. (Para 58)
The Committee while visiting the Mumbai and Delhi airports had noticed the poor
state of affairs at the airports as a problem leading to crowded terminal, sitting space was
inadequate, passengers were left searching for trolleys, food articles were sold over and
above the MRP, lack of basic amenities/canteen facilities, higher charges towards security,
lounge rental, aviation services, parking, telephone and other facilities, no residential
space for the ATC staff, no co-ordination with the user agencies and airport operators, no
round the clock help service available; delay in execution of building projects at Mumbai
and Delhi, inadequate inter-terminal passenger transportation facilities and airlines were
not finding space for parking bays in the airport terminal and charges for this were very
high. (Para 59)
The Committee observes that due to lack of adequate civic utilities like toilets,
drinking water fountains etc. outside arrival/departure hall of all the four airport,
passengers/tourists experienced difficulties. There was also lack of toilet facility at car/taxi
parking area outside the Airports. The Committee observes that Airport Operators should
not ignore the needs of such people. The Committee recommends that toilet and drinking
water facilities should be provided outside the arrival/departure lounge and parking areas
in order to avoid inconvenience to the passengers and co-passengers. (Para 60)
Some instances of impolite behavior with the passengers at the airports was
brought to the notice of the Committee. This type of behavior does not go well with the
tourists and creates an unpleasant atmosphere. The Committee desires that officials

28
deputed at the airport, should strictly be asked to be courteous and polite with the
passengers particularly, the tourist from other countries. The officials deputed at the
airport and dealing with the passengers/tourists should be more careful, polite, helpful and
tourist friendly. (Para 61)
The Committee recommends that a coordination mechanism may be evolved for
regular interaction among various stakeholders of Chattrapati Shivaji International
Airport with representation from agencies such as MIAL, Airports Authority of India,
Employees Unions of Airports Authority of India, various airlines etc. This mechanism will
iron out differences among the stakeholders of the Airport and will enable smooth
functioning of the airport. (Para 62)
The Committee, after visiting the airports at Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru and
Hyderabad and after considering the facts and information made available to it in respect
of modernization and development of private airports as well as closure of HAL and
Begumpet airports, has gained impression that had all the processes and procedures been
done in far more transparent and acceptable manner, most of the objections and
controversies could have been avoided. Right from arranging finances for participating
joint venture companies, giving thousands acres of land on concessional rates and allowing
them to use the land commercially, signing OMDA and Concession Agreements favorable
to JVCs and closure of existing airports, etc. are some of the areas about which there
are lot of misgivings in the minds of people and media keeps writing about these.
(Para 63)
Besides, the Airports Authority of India, advertently or inadvertently, appears to
not being given its due. Even though, ATC operations of all the airports are still with
them, the closure of HAL and Begumpet airports and placing Airports Authority of India
virtually at the mercy of the management of private airports, speaks a lot about it. The
manner in which the Concession Agreement and OMDA were signed has also invited wide
criticism and these are alleged to have violated the existing policies, guidelines, norms,
rules, etc. The Committee feels that there appears to be some truth in the apprehensions
that are being raised against the Government in the entire exercise of privatizing the
airports, developing the Greenfield airports and the related matters. The Committee
expects that the Government of the day to provide convincing explanation to all the
points, raised in this report to clear the apprehensions that are being flown thick and
wide. It is for the Government to clarify the entire matter. (Para 64)
The Committee hastens to point out that it had sought to know the Government's
response to the various points brought to its notice vide a letter dated 3rd October, 2008.
Despite reminders, the Committee had not received the response of the Government till
the time the Committee’s report was adopted on the 20th October, 2008. (Para 65)

29
MINUTES

30

31
31
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 20th October, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shanta Kumar
3. Shrimati Hema Malini
4. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
6. Shri Joachim Baxla
7. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
8. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
9. Shri P. Karunakaran
10. Dr. P.P. Koya
11. Shri Dushyant Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered the 142nd draft report on the ‘Functioning of Private Airports and related
issues’. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the report with a few modifications.
3. The Committee decided to present the reports to the Parliament on the 23rd October, 2008.
4. * * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee authorized its Chairman and Shri Shanta Kumar to present the
reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Adhir Chowdhury and Dr. P.P. Koya to lay the reports in
the Lok Sabha.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.