PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 144
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY FIFTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE DEPARTMENT 
OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV A TIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY FIFTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ROAD
TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—16
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 17—19
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 21—24

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
3. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Shanta Kumar
6. Shrimati Hema Malini
*7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
10. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shrimati Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Prahlad Joshi
21. Shri P. Karunakaran
22. Dr. P . P . Koya
23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Rakesh Singh
31. Shri Suraj Singh
* Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.  26.11.2008.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Forty Fourth Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Thirty Fifth
Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Department of Road Transport and Highways”.
2. The One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the
28th April, 2008.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its
One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report were received from the Department of Road Transport and
Highways on the 29th July, 2008.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the
18th December, 2008.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 18, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 27, 1930  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Road
Transport and Highways on the observations/recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred and
Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Department of Road Transport and
Highways, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 28th April, 2008.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Department on the 29th July, 2008 in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been
categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Department:
Para Nos. 15, 27, 31, 36, 41, 49, 55, 64, 67, 71, 75, 78, 81, 85, 89 Total-15
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Department replies:
Para No. — Total-Nil
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Department have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Para No. 94 T otal-1
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Department are
still awaited:
Para Nos. 45, 54, 70, 92 T otal-4
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which
have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Department. The recommendations of the
Committee contained in the One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report, action taken thereon by the,
Department and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has
been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
ANNUAL PLAN 2007-08
(Recommendations at Paras 11 and 15)
5. The Committee observed that out of the RE (2007-08) Plan allocation of Rs.14066.00 crore,
an amount of Rs.11887.44 was spent (provisional) up to 12th March, 2008 which stands at 84.5%
of RE. The overall expenditure profile of the Department is also not showing any encouraging
trends. Out of Rs.16481.85 crore (RE) for the year 2007-08, a sum of Rs.13338.03 crore was
expended (provisional) till the 12th March, 2008 which stands at 81.0% of the RE. This is very
much in contrast to the quantum of expenditure incurred in the year 2006-07 where it stood at
a good 97.9% of RE allocated for that year.

2
6. The Committee finds that despite its earlier recommendations on the aspect of funds
utilization and the need for constant monitoring of projects, the Department of Road Transport and
Highways has done precious little to improve the situation. This is evident from the reply of the
Department with regard to non-utilization of funds that the allocation for road sector is based on
anticipated implementation of projects every year. The Committee is of the opinion that the road
sector plays a vital role in providing good infrastructure in the country. The Committee feels that
submission of routine replies for underutilization of funds and poor performance in achieving the
physical targets is not going to yield any result. Instead of that, the Department may list out the
bottlenecks and draw a strategy to overcome such bottlenecks. The Committee is of the opinion
that active involvement of project executing agencies such as PWD, NHAI and State Governments
would only help the Department in utilizing its fund to the maximum extent. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that proper co-ordination with all these organizations should be maintained
in order to achieve physical targets satisfactorily.
Reply of the Government
7. There was no change at RE Stage in the budgetary allocation of Rs.14066.00 crore
under Plan Head in respect of Department of Road Transport and Highways (DoRT&H). However,
under Non-Plan, the allocation was increased from Rs.2128.20 crore to Rs.22l5.00 crore at RE
Stage for the year 2007-08. Thus, the total allocation (Plan and Non Plan) at RE stage after
deducting recoveries was Rs.16281.00 crore instead of Rs.16481.85 crore as erroneously stated
earlier. Out of Rs.16281.00 crore (RE) for the year 2007-08, a sum of Rs.16018.13 crore was
expended which stood at 98.39% of the RE. The expenditure during 2006-07 was 97.9%.
Therefore, the expenditure during 2007-08 was better than that of the expenditure incurred in
the year 2006-07. All efforts are being made to maintain this expenditure trend during the current
year also.
8. The break up of allocation and expenditure under Plan and Non Plan during 2007-08 is as
shown below:—
(Rs. in crores)
Scheme RE Expenditure Percentage
Plan 14066.00 13962.16 99.26
Non Plan 2215.00 2055.97 92.82
T
OTAL: 16281.00 16018.13 98.39
9. As regards monitoring of projects, it is submitted that regular monitoring of financial and
physical progress of works is carried out with a view to removing bottlenecks. Quarterly review
meetings are being held with the Officers of the State Government for monitoring as well as
removal of bottlenecks. In addition, the following steps are also being taken by the National
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) to expedite the implementation of National Highways
Development Project:
(i) The contracts are regularly monitored at various levels such as by Supervision
Consultants, Project Directors, Senior Officers of NHAI. Progress review
meetings are also held at the level of Chairman, NHAI, Secretary, Department of
Road Transport and Highways and Minister, Shipping Road Transport and
Highways.

3
(ii) State Governments have appointed senior officers as nodal officers for resolving
State-related problems associated with implementation of the National Highway
Development Project.
(iii) A Committee of Secretaries has been constituted to address inter-ministerial and
Central-States issues which impede the progress of the work.
(iv) This Ministry has been authorized to issue notification for acquisition of land for
National Highways without referring to the Ministry of Law.
(v) To expedite the construction of railway overbridges, an officer of the Railways has
been posted to National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) to coordinate with
Ministry of Railways.
(vi) Punitive actions have been taken against non performing contractors.
(vii) Steps have been taken to improve cash flow problems of contractors by granting
financial assistance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
10. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the expenditure
pattern will be sustained at the same level for this year also. As far as the monitoring of
ongoing road projects is concerned, the Committee notes that a Committee of Secretaries
has been constituted to address inter-ministerial and Centre-State issues which impede the
progress of work.
ANNUAL PLAN 2008-09
(Recommendations at Paras 26 and 27)
11. The Committee notes that the growth of Motor V ehicles in India is unprecedented. The
process of liberalization and globalization augmented the number of vehicles to beyond the
imagination of our planners of road sector development. The infrastructure available is not at all
commensurate with the growth of vehicles. The Committee also notes that the allocation to the
Department is almost static in real terms. There is an increase of 20% in Annual Plan outlay and
7.6% in budgetary support. The above increase in Annual Plan outlay and budgetary support may
not be adequate even to meet the increase in cost. Thus, it poses a great mismatch between the
availability of the road infrastructure and vehicular population.
12. Inadequate development of road sector will result in congested roads, traffic jams, recurring
accidents and chaos in the road sector. Moreover, the development of road infrastructure is
immensely important to sustain the growth of the economy. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should allot funds to the Department of Road Transport and
Highways so as to ensure the development of road infrastructure in proportion to the growth of
vehicles. The Committee further recommends that demands of the Department may be acceded to
at the RE stage.
Reply of the Government
13. All efforts would be made to ensure that substantial amount of funds allocated to the
Department during the year 2008-09 is spent by October, 2008. Thereafter, depending upon the
assessment for requirement of funds, demands for additional allocation would be made at the RE
Stage.

4
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
14. The Committee notes that the Department has left the larger issue of huge growth
in number of vehicles and poor road infrastructure unanswered. It feels that shortage of
funds to the roads sector should not dampen the resolve of the Government to evolve
mechanisms for reducing the mismatch between the availability of the road infrastructure
and vehicular population.
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(Recommendation at Para 31)
15. The Committee notes that majority of the work of NHDP Phase-II which was conceived
in the year 2003 has yet to be completed. The Committee would like to know the reasons for the
delay and the agencies/officers responsible for it. The Committee recommends that the Government
may take immediate effective steps to complete the project. The Committee also notes that the
NHDP Phase-IV is yet to be approved by the Government however, no reasons therefor have been
given. It is pity that 20000 km, a major part of local NH, is yet to brought to 2 lane standards
under Phase-IV but the project has not been approved till date by the Government. The Committee
recommends that NHDP Phase-IV may be considered by the Government for approval immediately.
The progress of the projects under other phases may be monitored regularly so as to ensure their
timely implementation.
Reply of the Government
16. NHDP Phase-II comprising of 4 laning of 6,161 kms of North South and East West
Corridors and 486 kms of other highways was approved in December, 2003. Thereafter, works of
preparation of Detailed Project Reports was taken up, which normally takes 12 - 15 months. In
difficult terrain conditions like Jammu and Kashmir and reaches involving wild life, it took even
more time. As on 31.05.2008, 4 laning has been completed for 1,740 kms and works in 4,066 kms
are under implementation and work for 841 kms is yet to be awarded.
17. After April, 2007 no work under Phase-II could be awarded due to new policy of
Government to take up all future projects on BOT (toll) basis in the first instance. The balance
841 kms also included 264 kms in J&K, 31 kms in Assam and 201 kms in West Bengal involving
realignment due to wildlife where BOT (toll) may not be feasible. Committee of Secretaries (CoS)
has already recommended on 01.04.2008 to take up 264 kms in J&K and 31 kms in Assam on
BOT (annuity) basis. Approval of CCEA to this is awaited. Action has been initiated to take up
remaining projects on BOT (toll) basis.
18. The progress of implementation of Phase-II contracts has been seriously affected due to
problems of land acquisition in the S tates of Assam, West Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and
Tamil Nadu, delay in permission for tree cutting in U.P. due to insistence of State Government to
provide 10 metres strip of land for afforestation as also serious problem of law and order in
Assam. Progress of some projects is also affected due to slow progress by contractors and
unprecedented increase in prices of cement, steel and bitumen in recent months. Despite these
problems, works already awarded under NHDP Phase-II are likely to be substantially completed by
December, 2009 excepting some major bridges over Brahmaputra, Kosi and Chambal and Agra
bypass and Dholpur town portion, which are contractually scheduled for completion in 2010.
Keeping in view the law and order situation in Assam, some projects are likely to spell over to
2010. The delays are mainly systemic and can be attributed to various reasons and no specific
agency or officer can be said to be responsible.

5
19. Upgradation/strengthening of 5000 km of single/intermediate/two lane National Highways to
two lane with paved shoulders under NHDP Phase IV-A on BOT (Toll) and BOT (Annuity) basis
has been approved by the Cabinet on 17th July, 2008 — to be taken up on the ratio of 4:1.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
20. The Committee is distressed to note that the much publicized NHDP Phase II started
in the year 2003 is still lingering on for one reason or the other. Completion of just 1740
kms out of the approved 6161 kms after five years under the phase II present a pathetic
picture of this project. The Committee feels that such a slow progress is not going to
yield the desired result in the road sector. Due to poor and bad shape, our national
highways are not in a position to bear the rising number of vehicles. The Committee also
hopes that at least the ongoing road projects of NHAI such as the grade separator at
Badarpur Border related to Commonwealth Games 2010 in the capital region will be
completed in time.
ROADS OF INTER-STATE CONNECTIVITY AND ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
(Recommendations at Para 36)
21. The Committee notes that there is a gradual decrease in the allocation of funds for
improvement of State roads particularly during the year 2004-05 amount of Rs.101.14 crore for
projects under Economic Importance and Rs.232.94 crore for projects under Inter-State
Connectivity has gone down to Rs.27.53 crore and Rs.132.66 crore respectively during 2007-08.
The Committee hopes that the trend may be reversed and the State Roads may get more and
more allocation which may be properly utilized for the improvement of various State roads
connectivity.
Reply of the Government
22. As per the Section 10 (viii) (b) (iii) of the Central Road Fund Act, 10% of the amount
allocated for development and maintenance of State roads shall be kept as reserve by the Central
Government for allocation to States for implementation of State road schemes of Inter State and
Economic Importance other than National Highways. The allocation and expenditure of funds under
the schemes of EI and ISC during the year 2004-05 to 2008-09 are given hereunder:
(Rs. in crores)
Year Allocation under EI & ISC Expenditure
2004-05 96.00 16.88
2005-06 170.60 86.09
2006-07 170.61 93.10
2007-08 173.93 131.30
2008-09 185.74 –
23. As may be seen from above, the allocation under the Centrally sponsored schemes of
EI and ISC has been on the higher side each year since 2004-05. Earlier, the Committee had been
informed that during 2004-05, “in principle approval” for a total number of 30 projects involving
Rs.101.14 crore as Central share for roads of economic importance and 46 projects involving
Rs.232.94 crore under Inter State Connectivity were given by this Department. The number of

6
projects and the amount sanctioned under Central share during subsequent years was also given.
This has since been updated and the position is as under:
(Rs. in crores)
Y ear Economic Importance I nter State Connectivity (ISC)
No. of projects Central No. of projects Central
approved/ share approved/ Share
sanctioned sanctioned
2004-05 30 101.14 46 232.94
2005-06 16 60.99 29 187.05
2006-07 14 51.66 41 239.87
2007-08 20 74.22 31 342.78
24. As may be seen from above, “in principle” approval given by this Department
under Centrally sponsored schemes of EI and ISC has been on the higher side, particularly during
2007-08 and this trend will be maintained in future also.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee notes the reply of the Department. Though the Department has
furnished the information on the number of projects approved/sanctioned for the last four
years but it has not furnished the information on the status of various ongoing projects
under these heads. The Committee desires to have the information on the status of various
road projects as these roads play a vital role in providing inter-State connectivity and also
link to cities which are economically important.
(Recommendation at Para 41)
26. The Committee is unhappy with the delay in finalizing the Detailed Project Report on
Mughal Road in Jammu and Kashmir as a result of which, the competent authority could not
sanction the project. The Government, however, has not given any reason as to why there was
delay in finalizing the Detailed Project Report. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department to apprise the Committee about those reasons and action taken in the matter. The
Committee desires that the Department should fine tune its systems and procedures to avoid such
delays.
Reply of the Government
27. The 84 km long Mughal Road is to connect Shopian in Pulwama District of Kashmir Valley
with the remote areas of Poonch and Rajouri Districts of Jammu. The preliminary cost indicated
as approved in PM package was Rs.159.00 crore on the basis of feasibility report of 2001 and
reconnaissance survey conducted by M/s  RITES. The detailed survey and investigations of 84 km
road was required for preparation of Detailed Project Report. The stretch is in the remote areas
and terrain is hilly and difficult. The working period is very limited in the State of J&K due to
weather conditions. Further, this stretch is very near to the Pakistan border. Therefore, extra care

7
was required during survey due to security reasons. Therefore, submission of DPR has taken time
although Ministry has requested State PWD in July, 2006, September, 2007, November, 2007,
February, 2008 and March, 2008 for submission of Detailed Project Report. The DPR has now
been submitted by Government of J&K for an amount of Rs.638.85 crore in March, 2008. The
work is proposed to be considered under Economic Importance scheme. The Centre and State
shares are fifty percent each. The EFC procedure will be followed and CCEA clearance be obtained
for sanctioning of the project. The State Government has already awarded the work, which is
targeted to be completed by April, 2010.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
28. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that all out effort will be made to complete
the mughal road as per its schedule.
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (ORIGINAL) WORKS — NH(O)
(Recommendation at Para 45)
29. The Committee is not happy with the mere 15.90% increase in allocation for the
maintenance of National Highways. The Committee was informed that an amount of Rs. 2280.00 crore
is required for maintenance and repair of roads annually, The Committee is of the opinion that
Government should give adequate importance for the maintenance and repair of non-NHDP
highways to ensure that investment made in the NHs does not go waste. The Committee
recommends that one-third of the cess collected for the financing NHDP projects should be
allocated for the maintenance and repair of highways. The Committee desires that the Department
should take up the issue with the Planning Commission for getting one third portion of the cess
collected for the maintenance and repair of National Highways as this non-NHDP National
Highways are considered as lifeline of Indian transport sector.
Reply of the Government
30. The matter regarding apportionment of one-third of the cess collected on fuel towards the
maintenance and repair of National Highways (non-NHDP highways) was taken up with Planning
Commission. Keeping in view that this may result in some investment gap in the NHDP funding,
the Planning Commission was requested to agree in-principle for allocating extra funds to meet this
gap. In a meeting held on 22nd April, 2008, a Committee headed by Shri Anwarul Hoda, Member,
Planning Commission has been constituted, to prepare a revised financing plan for the National
Highways Development Project (NHDP) involving the cess fund, duly keeping in view the fund
requirement for maintenance and repair of NHs.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and urges the Planning
Commission to take a view in this regard at the earliest.
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION
(Recommendation at Para 49)
32. The Committee notes that lot of programmes are on the anvil for the development of

8
National Highways in the North-East. The Committee hopes that the Department may be able to
utilize the entire allocated amount for the North-East.
Reply of the Government
33. Progress of works is reviewed from time to time and State Public Works Departments are
requested to expedite the expenditure so that the allocated amount is fully utilized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
34. The Committee feels that progress of works in North-East should have been
furnished to the Committee. It, however, hopes that with the availability of sufficient funds
under this head, the executing agencies will be able to complete the projects under their
disposal in time.
CENTRAL ROAD FUND
(Recommendations at Para 54)
35. The Committee notes that the petrol pumps which are collecting the cess, hardly give any
bills for the purchase of petroleum products. In this way, the Committee apprehends that the
exchequer may be losing hundreds of crores of rupees as the exact amount collected may always
be under-reported. The Committee, therefore, recommends that it may be apprised about the
mechanism and procedure available for collection of cess towards Central Road Fund.
Reply of the Government
36. The matter relating to sale of petroleum products and the collection of cess etc. falls within
the purview of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The matter has been taken up with that
Ministry for apprising the mechanism and procedure followed by them for collection of cess
towards Central Road Fund. The Committee will be apprised about this aspect on receipt of
comments from that Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Committee is at loss to see that the issue of under reporting of cess collected
on fuel has not received the importance that is deserved neither by the Department nor by
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. It is a very serious issue. The Department
should submit a note on this issue for its consideration within a month of the presentation
of the report.
Recommendation at Para 55
38. The Committee further notes that Railways is a profit-making Public Sector Enterprise. The
Committee could not, therefore, understand the rationale behind the pooling of a major chunk of
the Central Road Fund with the Railways. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Railways which itself capable to undertake developmental works, wherever required, may do so
from its own resources/profits instead of seeking allocation from the Central Road Fund.
Reply of the Government
39. Allocation of resources from the Central Road Fund for different purposes is governed by

9
the Section 10 of the Central Road Fund Act, 2000. According to Section 10 (1) (viii), the Central
Government is responsible for allocation of:
(a) fifty per cent of the cess on high speed diesel oil for the development of rural roads
in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) the balance amount of fifty per cent of cess on high speed diesel oil and the entire
cess collected on petrol as follows:
(i) an amount equal to fifty seven and one-half per cent of such sum for the
development and maintenance of National Highways;
(ii) an amount equal to twelve and one-half per cent for the construction of road
either under or over the railways by means of a bridge and erection of safety
works at unmanned, rail-road crossings; and
(iii) the balance thirty per cent on development and maintenance of roads other than
National Highways and out of this amount, ten per cent, i.e. three per cent of
the total share of State roads shall be kept as reserve by the Central Government
for allocation to States for implementation of State road schemes of Inter-State
and Economic Importance to be approved by the Central Government in terms
of clauses (iii) and (iv) of this section.
40. It may be observed from the above that the Railways are entitled to a specific amount from
the Central Road Fund for the construction of road either under or over Railways by means of
a bridge and erection of safety works at unmanned rail-road crossing. Since this is an allocation
governed by the statutory provision, the Railways cannot be denied of their share of the allocation
from the Central Road Fund.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
41. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires that the requisite
additional funds to the States from the CRF may be considered so that maintenance of
roads does not suffer.
ROAD SAFETY
(Recommendation at Para 64)
42. The Committee feels that school children are the best messiahs for preaching road
safety to their parents. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the road safety campaign
may give adequate importance to this aspect and the Department may rope in schools and
school children to spread awareness for road safety. The work done by the NGOs for raising
road safety awareness may also be given due publicity in media and local newspapers. This
may ensure the better functioning of NGOs and the public in general will keep watch on their
activities.
Reply of the Government
43. To inculcate the road safety habits amongst the school children, a scheme for setting up
Road Safety Clubs in school has been formulated and action for approval of the scheme by the
Planning Commission has been initiated. Apart from this, the quiz competition, essay competition,
drawing and painting competition are being sanctioned as activities for promoting road safety
awareness by NGOs on regular basis. The NGOs are to abide by the terms and conditions annexed

10
with the sanction letter as per which they have to give due publicity in the Press and other possible
media before starting the sanction activities. At the time of sanctioning grant to the NGOs for road
safety programme, a request is being made to the Transport Department of the concerned State
for strict monitoring of functioning of the NGOs.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hope that the Planning
Commission will give timely approval to the scheme of setting up Road Safety Clubs.
REFRESHER TRAINING OF DRIVERS IN UNORGANISED SECTOR AND HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
(Recommendation at Para 67)
45. The Committee feels that this is a welcome step. The Committee recommends that the
number of organizations sponsored by the Ministry is very low and insufficient compared to the
vastness of our transport sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government may
endeavour to finance at least one NGO in each of the districts of the country for imparting
refresher course to the drivers of Heavy Motor V ehicles. The Committee also recommends that a
proper monitoring mechanism may be put in place to ensure that the organizations are actually
imparting training to the drivers.
Reply of the Government
46. The number of drivers sanctioned under this scheme for imparting training is constantly
increasing. For the year 2008-09, the target fixed is 75000 drivers against 57850 drivers sanctioned
during 2007-08. However, due to fund constraint, it is not feasible to sanction grant to one NGO
in each district of the country. For proper monitoring of the implementation of the scheme, at the
time of sanction of grant to the NGO for imparting refresher training to the driver, Transport
Department of the concerned State Government is requested for proper monitoring. The second
and final installment is released to the NGO only after getting the Final Action Taken Report from
the concerned State.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
47. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and recommends that more funds
should be allocated for imparting training to drivers. Further, monitoring of NGOs by way
of obtaining utilisation certificates may be enforced.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
(Recommendation at Para 70)
48. The Committee notes that the Planning Commission has discontinued the scheme of
Model Driving Training Schools. The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for the
discontinuance of the scheme. The Committee would also like to know whether any alternative
schemes are proposed by the Planning Commission to fill the gap of Model Driving Training
Schools.
Reply of the Government
49. Being a Centrally sponsored scheme, the Planning Commission has dropped the scheme of

11
Model Driver Training School. The revised scheme with certain changes for setting up Model
Driver Training School is being formulated and will be sent to the Planning Commission for their
approval shortly.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
50. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the revised scheme of
Model Driver Training School will be formulated on priority and the Committee may be appraised
about the new scheme once it is approved.
(Recommendation at Para 71)
51. The States where Model Driving Training Schools were sanctioned may be asked to
complete the projects in a time bound manner and funds may be allotted accordingly.
Reply of the Government
52. Out of 13, two schools have become operational. The financial assistance sanctioned to
schools in Assam, Karnataka, West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa
and Nagaland has been released to them substantially and these schools are likely to be operational
very soon. A request to facilitate the progress of the sanctioned project for setting up of school
in Madhya Pradesh and Haryana are made on regular basis.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
53. The Committee recommends that all the 13 schools should be operational at the
earliest and other States may be persuaded to set up the schools.
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS ACCIDENT RELIEF SERVICE SCHEME
(Recommendation at Para 75)
54. The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department for providing trauma care.
At the very same time, the Committee feels that the present allocation of fund of Rs.2.20 crore
for the trauma care is too inadequate. The Government should try to augment the funding for
trauma care. The Committee is constrained to note the tardy progress made in purchasing cranes
and ambulances. The Committee also recommends that the formalities for purchasing cranes and
ambulances may be completed at the earliest so that the trauma care facilities can be put in place
without further delay.
Reply of the Government
55. The specifications for small size crane, 10-ton crane and ambulances have been reviewed
and order for procurement of 100 ambulances, 30 Nos. of 10-ton cranes and 19 small size
cranes have been placed during 2007-08 for the year 2008-09. The tender process for procurement
of 10-ton crane, small size crane and ambulances (to be provided by this Department to the
identified hospitals by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) under this scheme has been
initiated.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee notes the reply of the Department.

12
NATIONAL DATA BASE NETWORK
(Recommendation at Para 78)
57. Application of information technology for the development of the country is the mantra of
the day. Of course, the Department has taken initiatives in the right direction way back in the year
2001. The Committee notes that till now, only a few States have embarked on the course of
implementing IT enabled systems for driving licences and registration certificates. We have the
resources, talent and expertise in the IT field. The Committee wonders what prevent the
Government from implementing the IT-enabled systems in the Road Transport Sector. The
Committee notes that target for completion of the IT-enabled systems is 2009 which is not far
away. The Committee has doubt whether the Government will be able to meet the target which
they could not do for the last seven years. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the matters
may be reviewed at the highest level and steps may be taken to remove the bottlenecks. The
Committee also recommends that those States which are not implementing the IT-enabled Driving
Licence (DL) and Registration Certificate (RC) may be persuaded highlighting the benefit and
importance of IT-enabled system for DL and RC. The Committee also recommends that some
incentive scheme may be developed in such a way that those States which are implementing the
IT enabled systems should get sanction for more projects and schemes.
Reply of the Government
58. For strengthening of National Database Network relating to Transport Sector, the matter is
being reviewed at the level of Secretary (RT&H) and Joint Secretary (Transport). For issue of
Smart Card based Driving License and Registration Certificate and to have their inter-operability
through out the country, meetings are being arranged with all the States/UTs to emphasize the need
for its early implementation and to discuss and eradicate the problems being faced by them.
Recently, an amount of Rs 299.50 lakh was released to NIC for the work of Data Migration to
National Standards in the Regional Transport Offices (RTOs) in the country to ensure that entire
data conforms to the National Standard. The project will be located at Delhi and data from 35
States/UTs will be brought on electronic media. This project will be completed within a period of
nine months. On 31-3-2008 the EFC meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(RT&H) and the EFC proposal for creation of State Registers and National Register at a cost of
Rs.148.00 crore was approved.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
59. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the project will be
completed in time.
ROAD SAFETY EQUIPMENT AND POLLUTION TESTING AND CONTROL
(Recommendation at Para 81)
60. The Committee hopes that the steps taken by the Ministry will bear fruits in the near future.
The allocation of Rs.5.80 crore for the year 2008-09 is very meager compared to the vehicular
population of the country. The Committee recommends that more allocation need to be given to
the objectives of schemes so that the road safety and pollution control is achieved in its optimum
level.
Reply of the Government
61. Under this scheme, road safety equipments such as interceptors and pollution testing

13
equipments such as smoke meters and gas analysers are provided to the States/UTs for
enforcement of road safety laws and Pollution Under Control norms. The recommendation of the
Committee for enhanced allocation has been noted. It will be taken into consideration while
finalizing the BE for 2009-2010.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the Department
will give due importance to road safety equipments and pollution control instruments while
finalizing its BE for the year 2009-10.
NEW SCHEMES OF ELEVENTH PLAN
(Recommendation at Para 85)
63. The Committee welcomes the intention of the Government to set up more inspection and
maintenance centres to identify the vehicles which do not meet the emission and safety norms
subject to the condition that these new centres should not override the authority of State RTOs.
The Committee feels that some monitoring or regulatory authority should be put in place before
these centres become operational as there is a possibility that these centres can harass the vehicle
owners in connivance with the vehicle manufacturers to change their vehicles by citing one or
other reasons. The Committee also recommends that a proper mechanism should also be set up
to monitor the allocation is spent meaningfully.
Reply of the Government
64. The suggestion given by the Committee shall be kept in view while finalizing the proposal
for setting up of I & M Centres.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
NEW SCHEMES OF ELEVENTH PLAN
(Recommendation at Para 89)
66. The Committee is very much disappointed about the negligence on the part of the
Government in promoting public transport system in the country. The Committee is of the opinion
that cities are jammed with rising number of private vehicles and the villages are not even getting
adequate public transport facility. The Committee once again reiterates its earlier recommendation
that in the absence of user-friendly public transports, the people in the country are resorting to
excessive use of private vehicles and this has put the roads under undue pressure. The Committee
observes that most of the investment on roads is being extracted from the public itself but the
returns accruing to the users are not equitable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
efforts of the Government should focus on developing public transport, which discourages
excessive use of private vehicles. The Government should adopt a methodology, whereby, in the
more densely populated States, the rich and the affluent are asked to pay more for keeping more
than one vehicle.
Reply of the Government
67. Road Transport is a State subject. However, keeping in view the need for strengthening

14
public transport system in the country, an amount of Rs.24.99 crore has been kept for the year
2008-09 for providing financial assistance to the S tates/UTs to strengthen their public transport
system subject to the condition that the States are committed to take certain reform measures
required for the sector. A broad scheme in this regard is being formulated by this Department.
Earlier, the views of the Committee regarding differential taxes for the owners having more than
one vehicle have been brought to the notice of the States/UTs for necessary action at their end.
While finalizing the broad scheme for providing the financial assistance to the State,
recommendation of the Committee would be taken into account so that the States would have to
take such reform measures to avail financial assistance from Central Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
68. The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
CREATION OF NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY BOARD
(Recommendation at Para 92)
69. The Committee feels that the time has come for the creation of the much talked about
National Road Safety Board as the number of road accidents on national highways is increasing
in an alarming manner. The Committee recommends that the Department should pursue the matter
vigorously and take necessary actions to establish this Board at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
70. A Committee under the chairmanship of Shri S. Sundar, former Secretary, MOST was set
up in the year 2005 to deliberate and to make recommendations for creation of a dedicated body
on Road Safety and Traffic Management. The Committee submitted its report on 20-2-2007 inter-
alia recommending the creation of a National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board through
an Act of Parliament to oversee the road safety activities in the country. The Committee of
Secretaries (CoS) in its meeting held on 4-3-2008 has considered the proposal of this Department
for creation of the Board and has in-principle, accepted the same. As directed by the CoS, a note
for creation of the Board is being finalized for consideration of the Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC). The EFC would look into the details of the Board including the mechanism of flow of funds
to the States/UTs from National Road Safety Fund.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
71. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and opines that the National Road
Safety and Traffic Management Board is the need of the hour and Department of Road
Transport is requested to pursue the case with the EFC and see that the formalities
regarding having such a Board are completed quickly.
TOLL TAX ON BRIDGES AND NATIONAL HIGHWAYS
(Recommendation at Para 94)
72. The Committee once again recommends that once the capital and interest is recovered, the
users’ fee must be discontinued. The Committee is of the opinion that there is a need for
establishment of a regulator to determine the reasonable return to the investor on road projects
which is being considered as a yardstick for fixation of toll. The Committee appreciates that in
view of the resource crunch being faced by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and

15
there is a genuine need for generation of additional revenue by the Ministry. Whenever any National
Highway is constructed, it leads to huge value addition to the land adjoining the National Highway
and these benefits of addition in value have so far been enjoyed by private agencies only. The
Government should also get advantage of the appreciation of land value because it is the taxpayer’s
money that has led to the value addition of that property. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Government may explore the possibility of imposing some cess/tax on land adjoining
National Highways which is being utilized for commercial purpose on annual basis. This could
serve as a permanent source of income for the Government and the revenue so generated could
be ploughed back for the construction and maintenance of National Highways in the country.
Provision of ducting at the time of construction of National Highways for laying telephone and
electric cables also leads to value addition and can be explored for generating more funds for the
road sector. These measures may go a long way to meet the resource gap for maintenance and
construction of National Highways in the country.
Reply of the Government
73. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee had made the same
recommendation while considering the Demands for Grants for the year 2004-05 of the Ministry
of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways. The recommendation was as follows:
“The Committee recommends that the Government may explore the possibility of imposing
some cess/tax on land adjoining National Highways, which is being utilized for commercial
purpose on annual basis. This could serve as a permanence source of income for the
Government and the revenue so generated could be ploughed back only for the construction
of National Highways in the country.”
74. The levy of cess/tax in respect of the indirect benefit like appreciation in land value due
to the coming of National infrastructure like National Highways in a nearby area is a complex issue
having legal and socio-economic implications. Considering the complexity of the issue, the above
recommendation was referred to the Ministry of Law and their advice was as follows:
(i) The land adjoining to National Highways in most cases will be agricultural or fallow
land. The power to levy taxes on such land and building is covered by the State list
and State Governments are only concerned.
(ii) The power to acquire land under the NH Act, 1956 is restricted and limited for
development, maintenance, management or operation of the National Highways.
Acquisition of land for the purpose of other activities is outside the scope of NH
Act, 1956. The land acquisition is to be done as per LA Act, 1894 if the intention is
to acquire land for construction of hotels and restaurants, etc. by the side of National
Highways.
(iii) The capital gain at the time of sale of adjoining land is taken as income for the
purposes of the Income Tax Act excluding agricultural income. Tax on capital gain is
already covered under the Income Tax Act.
75. In view of the above, it was decided not to take any further action on the recommendation
of the Committee.
76. As regards the recommendation of the Committee regarding discontinuation of the levy of
user fee, it is informed that the National Highways Act, 1956 provides for the levy of the user fee
(toll) for services or benefits referred in relation to the use of National Highway sections, bridges,
tunnels etc. The provision for discontinuation of levy of user fee was available in the National
Highways (Fees for the use of Permanent Bridges) Rules, 1992. These Rules were superseded at

16
the time of notification of the National Highways (Fees for the use of National Highway sections
and permanent bridges — Public Funded Project) Rules, 1997. According to Rule 11  of these
Rules, fee shall be collected in perpetuity by the executing agency. At present, there is no provision
for discontinuation of the fee in any of the user fee (toll) related Rules.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
77. The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires to know the yardstick
with the Department for fixing the user fees on national highways. The Department is also
silent on the issue of creation of a revolving fund for financing of major road projects. The
Committee expects the Department to come out with some practical solutions to do away
with the user fee which is being imposed on the travelling public on the national highways.

17
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
ANNUAL PLAN 2007-08
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the expenditure
pattern will be sustained at the same level for this year also. As far as the monitoring
of ongoing road projects is concerned, the Committee notes that a Committee of
Secretaries has been constituted to address inter-ministerial and Centre-State issues which
impede the progress of work. (Para 10)
ANNUAL PLAN 2008-09
The Committee notes that the Department has left the larger issue of huge growth
in number of vehicles and poor road infrastructure unanswered. It feels that shortage of
funds to the roads sector should not dampen the resolve of the Government to evolve
mechanisms for reducing the mismatch between the availability of the road infrastructure
and vehicular population. (Para 14)
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
The Committee is distressed to note that the much publicized NHDP Phase-II
started in the year 2003 is still lingering on for one reason or the other. Completion of
just 1740 kms out of the approved 6161 kms after five years under the phase-II present
a pathetic picture of this project. The Committee feels that such a slow progress is not
going to yield the desired result in the road sector. Due to poor and bad shape, our
national highways are not in a position to bear the rising number of vehicles. The
Committee also hopes that at least the ongoing road projects of NHAI such as the grade
separator at Badarpur Border related to Commonwealth Games 2010 in the capital region
will be completed in time. (Para 20)
ROADS OF INTER-STATE CONNECT IVITY AND ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
The Committee notes the reply of the Department. Though the Department has
furnished the information on the number of projects approved/sanctioned for the last four
years but it has not furnished the information on the status of various ongoing projects
under these heads. The Committee desires to have the information on the status of
various road projects as these roads play a vital role in providing inter-state connectivity
and also link to cities which are economically important. (Para 25)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that all out effort will be made to
complete the mughal road as per its schedule. (Para 28)
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (ORIGINAL) WORKS — NH(O)
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and urges the Planning
Commission to take a view in this regard at the earliest. (Para 31)
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION
The Committee feels that progress of works in North-East should have been
17

18
furnished to the Committee. It, however, hopes that with the availability of sufficient
funds under this head, the executing agencies will be able to complete the projects under
their disposal in time. (Para 34)
CENTRAL ROAD FUND
The Committee is at loss to see that the issue of under reporting of cess collected
on fuel has not received the importance that is deserved neither by the Department nor
by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. It is a very serious issue. The Department
should submit a note on this issue for its consideration within a month of the
presentation of the report. (Para 37)
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires that the requisite
additional funds to the States from the CRF may be considered so that maintenance of
roads does not suffer. (Para 41)
ROAD SAFETY
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hope that the Planning
Commission will give timely approval to the scheme of setting up Road Safety Clubs.
(Para 44)
REFRESHER TRAINING OF DRIVERS IN UNORGANISED SECTOR AND HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and recommends that more
funds should be allocated for imparting training to drivers. Further, monitoring of NGOs
by way of obtaining utilisation certificates may be enforced. (Para 47)
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the revised
scheme of Model Driver Training School will be formulated on priority and the Committee
may be appraised about the new scheme once it is approved. (Para 50)
The Committee recommends that all the 13 schools should be operational at the
earliest and other States may be persuaded to set up the schools. (Para 53)
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS ACCIDENT RELIEF SERVICE SCHEME
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
(Para 56)
NATIONAL DATA BASE NETWORK
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the project will
be completed in time. (Para 59)
ROAD SAFETY EQUIPMENT AND POLLUTION TESTING AND CONTROL
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the Department
will give due importance to road safety equipments and pollution control instruments
while finalizing its BE for the year 2009-10. (Para 62)

19
NEW SCHEMES OF ELEVENTH PLAN
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
(Para 65)
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
(Para 68)
CREATION OF NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY BOARD
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and opines that the National
Road Safety and Traffic Management Board is the need of the hour and Department of
Road Transport is requested to pursue the case with the EFC and see that the formalities
regarding having such a Board are completed quickly. (Para 71)
TOLL TAX ON BRIDGES AND NATIONAL HIGHWAYS
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires to know the
yardstick with the Department for fixing the user fees on National Highways. The
Department is also silent on the issue of creation of a revolving fund for financing of
major road projects. The Committee expects the Department to come out with some
practical solutions to do away with the user fee which is being imposed on the travelling
public on the national highways. (Para 77)

MINUTES

22

23
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday the 18th December, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
5. Shri Joachim Baxla
6. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Shrimati Priya Dutt
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the draft 143rd, 144th, 145th, 146th and 147th Reports on the
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in its (i) One Hundred and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of
the Department of Shipping; (ii) One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of the Department of Road Transport and Highways; (iii) One Hundred and Thirty Sixth
Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Tourism; (iv) One Hundred and
Thirty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Culture; and (v) One
Hundred and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation respectively. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the reports without any
modifications.
23

24
3. Thereafter, the Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Birendra Prasad
Baishya to present the reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Adhir Chowdhury and Shrimati Priya
Dutt to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2008.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3:30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.