Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIADEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEERAJY A SABHAON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CUL TUREREPORT NO.262(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th December , )14 2018(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on )14 2018th December ,TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORTDecember , 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
Development of Buddhist Circuit in India

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

53
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT
Development of Buddhist Circuit in India
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 14th December, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 14th December, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(vi)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (vi i)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (vi ii)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-23
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 24-32
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 33-46
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 47- 51

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2014)
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
^3. Shri Rajeev Shukla
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
8. Kumari  Selja
#9. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
*10. V acant
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Vinod Lakhamashi Chavda
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama
14. Shri Faizal P. P . Mohammed
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
18. Shri P. Kumar
19. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey
21. Shri Srinivasa Reddy Ponguleti
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav
23. Shri Prathap Simha
24. Shri Rakesh Singh
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari
 30. Shri K. C.  Venugopal
@31. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
(i)
^Nominated  in place of  Shri Oscar Fernandes w.e.f. 9th December, 2014.
#Nominated in place of Shri K. N. Balagopal. w.e.f. 6th May, 2015.
*V acant due to expiry of Shri Kalpatru Das, M.P. w.e.f. 25th July, 2015.
@ Nominated on 25th March, 2015 vice Shri Babul Supriyo who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his
inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 9th  November, 2014.

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-2016)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2015)
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
8. Kumari Selja
9. Shri Rajeev Shukla
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ram Charitra
12. Shri Vinod Chavda
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
14. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan
16. Shri P. Kumar
17. Shri Faizal P . P. Mohammed
18. Yogi Aditya Nath
19. Shri  Kristappa Nimmala
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey
21. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
22. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy
23. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
24. Shri Prathap Simha
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
27. Shri Rakesh Singh
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-2017)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2016)
1. Shri Mukul Roy   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
6. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
7. Kumari  Selja
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudsama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri P. Kumar
18. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
19. Yogi Aditya Nath
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
23. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
25. Shri Prathap Simha
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
 31. Shri K. C.  Venugopal

(iv)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-2018)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2017)
1. Shri Derek O’Brien   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Praful Patel
5. Kumari  Selja
6. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
*9. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
#10. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Rahul Kaswan
17. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
18. Shri P. Kumar
19. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
20. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
21. Shri Rajesh Pandey
22. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
23. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
24. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
25. Shri Prathap Simha
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
 31. Shri K. C.  Venugopal
*Nominated on 2nd June, 2018
# Nominated on 2nd June, 2018

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-2019)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Derek O’Brien   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Shri Praful Patel
7. Kumari  Selja
8. Shri Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Subrata Bakshi
12. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
13. Shri Vinod Chavda
14. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
15. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
16. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan
18. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, A VSM (Retd.)
19. Shri P. Kumar
20. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
21. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
22. Shri Rajesh Pandey
23. Shri Rajesh Ranjan (Pappu Yadav)
24. Shri Ponguleti Srinivasa Reddy
25. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha
30. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V . Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
(vi)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this
Two Hundred Sixty Second Report on “Development of Buddhist Circuit in India”.
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and Joint Secretary, Ministry
of Tourism on the subject on 6th February, 2015. The Committee also heard the views of the Secretary,
Ministry of Civil Aviation on the subject ‘Air Connectivity to sites in Buddhist Circuit’ on 13th February,
2015. The Committee also heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism; Director- General of
Archaeological Survey of India; representative of IRCTC; Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation;
Resident Commissioner, Government of Bihar; Deputy Director (Transport), Gov ernment of Uttar
Pradesh; representatives of Madhya Pradesh Tourism Board; General Manager, NHAI; representative
of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; Consulting CEO, Federation of Associations of Indian
Tourism and Hospitality; representative of the Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India;
President, Indian Association of Tour Operators; CMD, Lotus Tran Travels; MD, Top Travel and
Tours; Principal Architect, Lall and Associate; Secretary, Association of Domestic Tour Operators of
India on 15th January, 2018.
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Culture,  Ministry of
Tourism, Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and other stakeholders
for placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in connection with the subject
and for clarifying the points raised by the Members.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 26th November,
2018.
DEREK O’BRIEN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
26 November,  2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 5,  1940 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
Rajya Sabha.
(vii)

                 ACRONYMS
ASI : Archaeological Survey of India
A TR : Action Taken Report
B2B : Business to Business
BIMSTEC : Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation
CCTV : Cl osed Circuit Television
CEO : Chief Executive Officer
CMD : Chairman and Managing Director
CNB : Cultural Notice Board
GST : Goods and Service Tax
IFC : International Finance Corporation
IITTM : Indian Institute of Travel and Tourism Management
IRCTC : Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation
ITDC : India Tourism Development Corporation
JICA : Japan International Cooperation Agency
MD : Managing Director
MDA : Marketing Development Assistance
MoCA : Ministry of Civil Aviation
MoRTH : Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
NHAI : National Highways Authority of India
O&M : Operations and Maintenance
PNB : Protection Notice Board
PPP : Public Private Partnership
PRASHAD : Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation Drive
SEL : Sound and Light
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle
TFC : Tourist Facilitation Centre
UDAN : Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik
(viii)

1
REPORT
There is nothing quite like the narrative of Buddhism and its origins in India. The evangelical
spread of Buddhism via its missionaries to its Asian neighbours, bears witness to the ‘soft-power’
of India before the term itself existed. Buddhism has influenced the culture of the nations that
neighbor us in the past and continues to do so in the present.  Spread across China, Japan,
Tibet, Indo-China, Cambodia and Myanmar, Buddhism is the common thread that binds us in the
similarities that prevail in our cultures. The Buddhist Circuit is a route that follows in the
footsteps of the Buddha from Lumbini in Nepal where he was born, through Bihar in India where
he attained enlightenment, to Sarnath and Kushinagar in Uttar Pradesh in India, where he gave
his first teachings and died. The Buddhist Circuit includes places where the Buddha actually spent
time, and these sites are amongst the most significant and revered for Buddhists. The Buddhist
Circuit is an important pilgrimage destination for over 450 million practising Buddhists world over
and includes travelers interested in history, culture or religion. Global interest to visit and experience
these heritage sites, puts India amongst the most desired destinations for tourists and pilgrims.
The most important places are:
z Lumbini (in Nepal)- where he was born.
z Bodhgaya (in Bihar)- where he attained enlightenment under the Bodhi Tree
z Sarnath (in Uttar Pradesh) - where he delivered his first sermon.
z Nalanda and Rajgir (in Bihar) where he lived and taught, and Nalanda in particular, became the
centre of Buddhist learning and teaching.
z Kushinagar (in Uttar Pradesh) - where he died.
z Kapilavastu (on India Nepal Border) –Kapilavastu is deeply endowed with the Buddha’s origins.
It is believed that the Buddha spent his early years here before embarking on the long journey
to enlightenment.
z Vaishali (in Bihar)- where Buddha’s last sermon was delivered.
z Shravasti (in Uttar Pradesh)- Buddha spent twenty-four rainy seasons here at the Jetavan
monastery, built by his disciple Sudatta Anathapindika.
z Kausambi (in Uttar Pradesh) - Buddha is believed to have stayed and preached at Kausambi
during his lifetime.
2. The Ministry of Tourism (erstwhile Department of Tourism) first formulated the ‘Buddhist Circuit’
in 1985, with an aim to promote our shared cultural heritage, promote tourism and also to reinforce the
soft-power of India and in the process, further encourage greater co-operation between India and its
neighbouring nations. Though conceptualized in the year 1985, it has not achieved its full potential and a
lot is yet to be done. The development of this Circuit is however fraught with many handicaps, chief of
these being, lack of wayside amenities, infrastructural woes, cleanliness and sanitation issues, harassment
by touts, and apathy of the locals to the sanctity of the identified places due to lack of sensitization. The
federal structure of governance has become a handicap in terms of lack of Centre-State co-ordination and
apathy of the respective Governments in prioritizing the development of these sites. Moreover, the footfall

2
at these sites is a very small percentage in proportion to the total Buddhist population the world over. It is
in this backdrop that the Department- related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture decided to take up the subject ‘Development of Buddhist Circuit in the Country’  for examination
and report thereon.
3. In this con nection, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and
officials of Ministry of Tourism on the subject on 6th February, 2015. The Committee heard the views
of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the subject ‘Air connectivity to sites in Buddhist Circuit’
on 13th February, 2015.The Committee also heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism;
Director- General of Archeological Survey of India; representative of IRCTC; Joint Secretary, Ministry
of Civil Aviation; Resident Commissioner, Govt. of Bihar; Deputy Director (Transport), Govt. of Uttar
Pradesh; representatives of Madhya Pradesh Tourism Board; General Manager, NHAI; representative
of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; Consulting CEO, Federation of Associations of Indian
Tourism and Hospitality; representative of the Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Associations of India;
President, Indian Association of Tour Operators; CMD, Lotus Tran Travels; MD, Top Travel & Tours;
Principal Architect, Lall& Associate; Secretary, Association of Domestic Tour Operators of India on15th
January, 2018.
4. Some of the major points discussed during the deliberations of the Committee are:
(i) Lack of Connectivity
(ii) Efficient utilization of funds
(iii) Lack of Centre- State co-ordination
(iv) Increased State Participation.
(v) Marketing and Awareness of Buddhist Circuit.
(vi) Protection of Monuments and preservation of artefacts.
(vii) Promotion of research in Buddhist studies and creation of Buddhist database.
(viii) Increased awareness and Sensitization among the local population.
(ix) Lack of accommodation.
(x) Development of wayside amenities.
(xi) Lack of trained Tour Guides.
(xii) Safety and Security of Pilgrims.
(xiii) Promotion of local markets
(xiv) Rationalization of taxation system.
LACK OF CONNECTIVITY
5. The Buddhist Circuit includes Nepal and States such as Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Punjab. One of
the major complaints of the travelers and pilgrims has been the issueof connectivity. The lack of connectivity

3
has acted as a major deterrent for people intending to visit and is a strong discouragement to those who
want to re-visit the sites. Easy mobility encourages tourists to cover the entire Circuit and has a primary
effect on the length of stay and the extent of visit.
(A) Road
6. The discomfort of travel by road has often been cited as one of the main drawbacks of the Buddhist
Circuit. The National Highway- 22 connecting the Patna- Gaya- Bodh Gaya segment, is an example of
this problem. The Committee was informed that it takes almost 5 hours to reach Bodh Gaya. The journey
between Gaya and Bodh Gaya, though comfortable, could be improved with a four-lane road upgrade
from the present two- lane. The journey between Patna and Gaya is, however, not as comfortable. The
roads are two- lane roads, with narrow twists and turns. The combined movement of trucks, buses and
cars and the random stray cattle, leads to traffic congestions. Also, cars or buses are unable to ply at high
speeds thereby losing much in terms of travel time.
7. Further regional connectivity between the sites is also an issue. The roads leading to the places
other than Gaya- Bodh Gaya are not well developed and are shabby. Some Circuits cross State-lines and
therefore inter-State co-ordination is necessary. The Committee was informed that delegates from East
Asian countries who make frequent visits to the country, often cite the time taken to travel as a reason for
their inability to visit these sites. Lack of proper wayside amenities are also a cause for concern. This,
along with the lack of basic, hygienic amenities acts as a major deterrent for the tourists visiting these
places. Also, the hazardous road conditions compromise the transportation safety of tourists, leading to
increased travel time.
8. While rail and air services bring tourists up to certain key points, full Circuit travelers rely on road
transport for the larger section of their journeys. The Committee, therefore, recommends that roads
connecting the sites in the Circuits must be improved. The Ministry of Tourism, along with the
States concerned and the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, must come together to ensure
the completion of pending projects and develop new projects to connect these places. Moreover,
the existing roads must be made into four-lane roads and traffic congestion must be checked and
resolved. The Committee also recommends that existing roads must be maintained to meet
international standards. Roads must also be kept litter-free and must be cleaned regularly.
Unnecessary speed- breakers must be removed and roads must be tarmacked.
9. The Committee was informed that the longest stretches of road-travel around the Circuit are however,
on National Highways, which are not in good condition. Several sections of the Highway are particularly
problematic and are major obstacles for tour operators and visitors.
10. The Committee recommends that a Committee or Panel should be instituted, which would
include the State Governments concerned, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, NHAI, Ministry
of Tourism and any other stakeholders, to ensure the construction and maintenance of roads
connecting the various sites under the Buddhist Circuit.
11. The Committee notes that the Circuit does not suffer from lack of funds. However, execution
of existing projects leaves much to be desired. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a
timeline be fixed for each project undertaken for construction and periodic reports be submitted
on the same, to ensure their timely completion.

4
(B) Air Connectivity
12. The Committee was informed that efforts are being made to improve Airport infrastructure. An
international airport already exists at Kushinagar. The basic problem is that of regional connectivity.
Flights to Gaya remain seasonal, operating for a period of around 3 months during the winter, when the
weather is pleasant. At present, Air India operates 2 flights daily to Gaya and during peak season, the
airlines flying to and from Gaya include Air India, Druk Air, Mihin Lanka, Myanmar Airways International
and Thai Airways International. As many as 150 aircrafts land at Gaya airport each month during the
tourist season (September- March). The majority of these flights are however discontinued during the
off- season. The Ministry of Tourism informed the Committee under the UDAN scheme plans to increase
connectivity of Gaya with other cities as well.
13. The Committee notes the issue of seasonality that plagues the Circuit and urges that measures
must be devised to extend the seasonality of the sector. The aerial distance between Gaya and
Patna is 88 kms which is covered in one and a half hours by road. The Committee takes note of
the effort of the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Civil Aviation under the UDAN scheme
of the Centre to connect Gaya with more cities. However, the Committee feels that a lot more can
be done to increase the footfall in the popular tourist sites. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the concerned State authorities should take necessary
action to complete the Kushinagar airport at the earliest to make it feasible for use during the
peak season. Moreover, the Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
should explore the possibility of connecting more Buddhist sites by air as it is the most efficient
and the least time-consuming method of transportation, especially for foreign tourists who are
generally short on time. To increase the feasibility, the Committee impresses upon the Ministry
of Civil Aviation to look into chartering smaller aircrafts like ATRs or even consider Helicopter
trips, as is the practice in many countries.  The Committee also recommends that ATRs may be
used to connect different sites, thereby encouraging the extension of the peak season.
14. Airport maintenance is also an issue and the Committee recommends that regular
maintenance of air strips must be ensured by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to ensure passenger
safety and prevent flight delays. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of Civil Aviation to
utilize the UDAAN scheme and to work with the respective State Governments to develop the air
connectivity between the Buddhist sites and the major cities and between the Buddhist sites
themselves.
15. The Committee further recommends that facilities like ‘Hot Air Balloon’ safaris covering
various sites may be introduced through private vendors. These rides could be for a duration of
an hour connecting various nearby sites. These may be introduced along similar lines as those in
Pushkar and the Taj Mahal. These are a huge hit with tourists and has helped to increase the
popularity of various tourist spots.
16. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that other aerial adventures like paragliding,
aerial-gliding etc. may also be encouraged around suitable Circuit sites in order to increase their
popularity and thereby increase the footfall. The Committee wishes that the Ministry of Tourism,
along with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the respective State Governments, should formulate
guidelines and set a target date for completion of these projects.

5
(C) Rail
17. Rail connectivity can play an important role in improving access throughout the Circuit. The existing
rail service donot provide flexible access. Services and facilities are of inconsistent quality, the rail station
and train environment are often chaotic and overcrowded, and the system does not allow for pre-booking
and pre- payment. Further, the lack of Circuit specialized trains, Shatabdis, Rajdhanis etc.is a major issue
for lack of Circuit connectivity and decreased footfall. Moreover, the railway stations that fall along these
tourist sites are small foot-fall stations, lacking in cleanliness, cloak rooms, overall sanitation and travel
information.
18. The Committee notes that the frequency of trains in some of the more popular stations leaves much
to be desired. While the connectivity in terms of number of trains has improved considerably, Sarnath and
Nalanda have a total of only 28 trains between them. Moreover, there are no special trains like Shatabdi,
Rajdhani or even Chair – car trains that operate to these stations. The Mahaparanirvana Express was a
train dedicated to the pilgrimage groups. However, that has also been discontinued.
19. The Committee feels that trains are a beautiful way to experience the true beauty of our
country and every effort must be made to ensure that this is an efficient and preferred mode of
travel for most tourists. The Committee, therefore, recommends that cleanliness in the stations
and basic amenities like cloak rooms in the railway stations must be upgraded. More importantly,
the local populace must be taught to use these facilities and must be educated and made aware of
keeping the railway premises clean. Open defecation along the railway tracks must be discouraged
and a system of fines must be put in place. The practices of the Delhi Metro may be studied,
where fines are levied by patrolling officials for littering. Also, squatters at the railway station
should be discouraged.
20. The Committee further recommends that a special tourist ticket, with additional services
on specific scheduled trains and key routes (for instance, New Delhi- Gaya, with possible stops in
Varanasi, Sarnath, Nalanda, Rajgir) would be useful. This could be accompanied by facilities such
as tourist-assigned ticketing upto 24 hours in advance of departures, discounts on select
accommodation etc. Circuit specific trains like the Shramjeevi Express  and the Buddhapurnima
Express are good possibilities for such a scheme. The Committee further recommends that luxury
trains such as ‘Palace on Wheels’ or even hop- on- hop-off trains connecting feasible sites may be
introduced. The feasibility of a fully AC/superfast train connecting important Buddhist sites to
metros should be explored.  The conditions of Gaya and Cantonment Railways station must also
be improved upon.
21. As regards the steps to be taken to improve inter-regional connectivity in the Circuit, Ministry of
Tourism informed the Committee that the Ministry of Tourism has identified Buddhist Circuit as one of
the priority area for development. The Ministry is working on improving connectivity and overall travel
experience for the visitors in the circuit and has taken up the issue with concerned line Ministries. A
National Advisory Committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of Hon ble Minister of Tourism
and its meeting was held in Feb 2018 wherein issues affecting the development of Buddhist Circuit in the
country were discussed. The Ministry has taken up the issue with the MoRTH, MoCA and MoR to deal
with the connectivity issue. The MoRTH, has informed that work on four laning of National Highways in
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar is in process and is expected to be completed by June 2019. MoR had also

6
informed that they are in the process of upgradation of coaches in the Mahaparinirvana Train (specialised
train for Buddhist Circuit). Ministry of Tourism is focussing in big way on Development of Wayside
Amenities / Toilets on major tourist circuits in the country.  It is felt that there is an immediate need of this
basic facility for tourists with acceptable service standards. Ministry is developing wayside facilities in
partnership with other Central Ministries/ Departments, State Govts., Oil Companies, CSR Partner, Travel
Tourism and Hospitality Industry under its Swadesh Darshan Scheme. In collaboration with MoRTH,
Ministry is initially developing this facility at following sites under Buddhist circuit:
Sl.No. Route National Highway State
1. V aranasi-Gaya NH-2 Bihar
2. Gorakhpur-Kushinagar NH-28 Uttar Pradesh
3 a. Kushinagar-Gaya Road NH-28 Uttar Pradesh
   b. Gaya-Kushinagar Road NH-28
22. The Committee understands that this task is multi-pronged and will require the assistance
of various Ministries and Departments at both the State and the Centre. Hence, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take the onus of coordinating with various
Ministries and Departments including the Ministry of Railways to ensure the smooth progress
and set a time- bound completion date for each project. Infrastructure gaps need to be identified
and action mobilized.
EFFICIENT UTILISATION OF FUNDS
23. The Committee notes that the development of the Buddhist Circuit since its conceptualization in the
year 1985 has moved at a snail’s pace. While funds have not been scarce, it is lacking in its implementation.
The Loan Agreement signed by the Government of India with Japan International Cooperation Agency
[JICA] in 2005 was for the implementation of Phase II of the ‘Baudh Paripath Project’  at a total cost of
approximately 396 crores. After inspection of some of the project sites in July 2012, the JICA conveyed
that the ground realities had changed since the signing of the Loan Agreement in 2005 and that the
continuation of the project would not be possible since implementation of the proposal would have enhanced
adverse impact on environment and society and the project would require compliance under a different
category. The project was subsequently dropped in 2012. The above incident is an example of the lack of
planning, coordination and implementation in the Circuit. Lost opportunities such as these are highly
detrimental to the development of the Buddhist Circuit in India.
24. The Committee was informed that the Ministry of Tourism did not have a separate budgetary
allocation for the development of Buddhist Circuit. The Ministry, in 2014-15, launched the ‘Swadesh
Darshan Scheme’. Under the Scheme, Buddhist Circuit is one of the fifteen thematic Circuits identified
for development in the country. The Ministry has sanctioned a total of `361.97 crores during the years
2016-2018, for the development of the Buddhist Circuit across the States of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar
Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh (the sites in Odisha are under consideration). However, out of
the amount mentioned, only `72.4 crore has been released between the period of 2016-18 (refer to table
in para 30). The Committee notes that the Circuit has also benefitted from the funding provided by the
Word Bank (International Finance Corporation). However, the results have been quite disappointing.

7
25. The Ministry, in its reply to a specific query on total amount of funds received from the World Bank
and the amount utilised so far, informed the Committee that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of
India, the Department of Tourism of the Governments of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and the International
Finance Corporation (World Bank Group) together worked on the project of formulating a strategy for
up-gradation of Buddhist sites in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. The work on project is over and the strategy
formulated by the IFC “Investing in the Buddhist Circuit – 2014-2018” was launched in July 2014. The
total cost of project was ` 4.50 crore of which the share of the Ministry of Tourism was 50%, IFC 40%
and the States of Bihar and UP were 5% each.
26. The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry does not mention the amount utilised so
far. The Committee may be apprised of the amount of funds released till date, amounts utilised
etc. in the Action Taken Report.
27.  As evinced from the table below, taken from the Demands for Grants No. 85 (2018-19) of the
Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry has a total budget of `2150crore, of which an amount of `1100 crore
has been allocated to the Swadesh Darshan Scheme and an amount of `150crore has been allotted to the
PRASHAD Scheme. Furthermore, it has been noted that a meagre amount of 0.01 crore has been allocated
towards the development of the Buddhist Circuit as a whole. The Buddhist Circuit is one of the most
promising Circuits with a huge potential for development. Buddhist sites are rich in traditions
and places of spiritual significance and are thus revered by millions of people around the world.
The Committee observes that ````` 0.01 crore translates to a meagre amount of ````` 1 lakh towards the
development of the Buddhist Circuit as a whole. The Committee feels that this token amount
allocation is grossly inadequate for the development of the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee is
disappointed to state that this token sum allocation is highly impractical and is evidence of the
lackadaisical attitude towards the development of the Buddhist Circuit as a vibrant and viable
tourist destination worthy of investment and the respect it deserves.
Relevant Extracts from Demand for Grants 2018 – Ministry of Tourism
(`  in Crores)
Central Sector Actual 2016-17 Revised 2017-18 Budget 2018-19
Schemes/Projects
Tourism Reve Capi T otal Reve Capi T otal Reve Capi T otal
Infrastructure nue tal nue tal nue tal
3. Integrated 971.23 — 971.23 950.00 — 950.00 1100.00  — 1100.00
Development of
Tourist Circuits
around specific
themes (Swadesh
Darshan)
4. Pilgrimage 97.71 — 97.71 100.00 100.00 150.00 150.00
Rejuvenation and
Spiritual
Augmentation
Drive (PRASAD)

8
5. Other Support
to Tourist
Infrastructure
5.01 Product/Infrastruc- 9.89 — 9.89 10.00 — 10.00 5.00 — 5.00
ture Development
for Destination and
Circuits
Net 9.89 — 9.89 10.00 — 10.00 5.00 — 5.00
5.02 Assistance for 3.27 — 3.27 0.01 — 0.01 1.00 — 1.00
Large Revenue
Generating Projects
5.03 Assistance to 61.30 — 61.30 72.98 — 72.98 70.00 — 70.00
Central Agencies
5.04 Market Research 8.44 — 8.44 10.99 — 10.99 4.00 — 4.00
5.05 Incentive to 0.44 — 0.44 0.01 — 0.01 0.01 — 0.01
Accommodation
Infrastructure
TOTAL- Other Support to 83.34 — 83.34 93.99 — 93.99 80.01 — 80.01
Tourist Infrastructure
6. Bharat Paryatan — — — — 1.07 1.07 — 0.01 0.01
Bhawan
7. Buddhist Circuits
7.01 Programme — — — 0.01 — 0.01 0.1 0.01
Component
7.02 EAP Component — — — — — — — — —
TOTAL- Buddhist Circuits — — 13 0.01 — 0.01 0.01 0.01
TOTAL- Tourism 1 152.28 — 1152.28 1144.00 1.07 1145.07 1330.020.01 1330.03
Infrastructure
Promotion and
Publicity
8. Overseas 194.44 — 194.44 297.59 — 297.59 454.24 — 454.24
Promotion and
Publicity including
Market Development
Assistance

9
9. Domestic 78.84 — 78.84 90.00 — 90.00 135.00 — 135.00
Promotion and
Publicity including
Market
Development
Assistance
TOTAL- Promotion and 273.28 — 273.28 387.59 — 387.59 589.24 — 589.24
Publicity
Training and Skill — —
Development
10. Assistance to 90.29 — 90.29 90.00 — 90.00 85.00 — 85.00
IHMS/FCIs/
IITTM/NIWS
11. Capacity Building 29.93 — 29.93 46.95 — 46.95 30.00 — 30.00
for Service Providers
TOTAL- Training and Skill 120.22 120.22 136.95 — 136.95 115.00 — 115.00
Development
TOTAL- Central Sector 1545.78 — 1545.78 1668.54 1.07 1669.61 2034.26 0.01 2034.27
Schemes/Projects
Grand Total 1631.19 — 1631.19 1775.33 1.07 1776.40 2149.99 0.01 2150.00
28. In this regard, the Committee observes that the full potential of the Buddhist Circuit is yet
to be exploited by the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Tourism must pursue the development of the Buddhist Circuit with a renewed vigor and zeal.
29. The Ministry of Tourism, in reply to a specific query on whether the Ministry of Tourism hired
independent consultants or agencies for the monitoring, evaluation and audit of all Circuits and if there are
any mechanism in place to ensure the timely completion of projects undertaken under the various Circuits,
especially the Buddhist Circuit, informed the Committee that the implementation of projects sanctioned
under the Swadesh Darshan scheme are monitored rigorously by the Ministry of Tourism. The Central
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee chaired by Secretary (Tourism) and Mission Directorate chaired
by the Joint Secretary (Tourism) reviews the progress of project implementation on periodic basis. The
Ministry also holds regional workshops, Video Conference and review meetings with the States and UTs
to review the progress of the projects. At working level, Swadesh Darshan Division along with Programme
Management Consultants and Domestic offices of Ministry monitors the projects for Cost, Quality and
Schedule. The Ministry has also developed an on-line monitoring portal to monitor the real time physical
and financial progress of the projects.
30. As per revised scheme guidelines of the Swadesh Darshan scheme, 5% of the project cost will be
paid to the implementing agency after successful O&M of Toilet, TFC, Cafeteria facilities for one year as

10
certified by an independent agency. Since projects sanctioned under the scheme have started completing
from this year, the Ministry is in the process of appointment of agency.
31. The target market of the Buddhist Circuit is primarily international tourists from East,
South and South-East Asia. These countries have wide and varied cultures from that of India but
are bound by our connect with Buddhism. The Committee, therefore, feels that it is insufficient
to place the Circuit under the Swadesh Darshan Division as its needs are different from those of
most domestic destinations. The Committee recommends that a separate, efficient mechanism
must be set in place, as it is evident that the one at present is not adequate to meet the needs and
requirements of the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee reiterates that the development of Buddhist
Circuit is integral to the development of tourism in India.
32. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must constitute an inter-
State-Ministerial Committee at the Central level to look into the disbursal and proper allocation
of the funds that have been set aside. It is also desired that a time-line may be set for the
completion of each phase and periodical updates may be sent to the constituted Committee in
order to ensure that the projects are completed.
33. The Ministry of Tourism, in reply to a specific query on whether there is any form of Monetary
Stabilisation Fund for the Buddhist Circuit, informed the Committee that the Ministry under its existing
schemes does not have provision to provide Monetary Stabilisation fund to Tour Operators to deal with
the issue of seasonality. However, the Ministry of Tourism under the Marketing Development Assistance
(MDA) Scheme provides financial assistance to approved stakeholders and Tourism Departments of
States/Union Territories for undertaking tourism promotion activities in overseas markets, including Sales-
cum-Study Tours, Participation in Travel Fairs/Exhibitions and Production of Publicity Material.
34. The Committee feels that it is important to understand that the Buddhist Circuit is largely
seasonal owing to the weather conditions. The winter season ranging from November to March is
the ideal travelling season. The seasonality of the Circuit is not conducive to a sustained growth
and the sites wear a deserted look during the off-season. This seasonality extends to rail and
flight services as well. In order to sustain tourism, the Committee recommends that an off-
season stabilization fund may be formulated to attract more tourists to make it viable for
businesses.
LACK OF CENTRE -STATE COORDINATION
35. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism had previously proposed a ‘Buddhist Circuit
Steering Committee’ to overlook and coordinate the different aspects of the development of the Buddhist
Circuit. However, there have been no further updates in this regard. The Committee in this regard, feels
that until there is coordination between the Ministry of Tourism, State and different Ministries both at the
Centre and State level, the Buddhist Circuit cannot achieve its full potential. There needs to be an ease of
access and direct communication between the Ministry and the concerned Departments with minimal red
tape.
36. The Ministry of Tourism, in response to a specific query on implementation of the Buddhist Circuit
Steering Committee and why the National Task Force (to be integrated State-wise and Department-wise)
has not been set up yet and the reasons for the same, informed the Committee that a National Advisory
Committee on Buddhist Circuit has been formed under the chairmanship of Hon ble Minister of Tourism.

11
The Committee has members from Government, Private Sector and Academicians working in this sector.
The Committee works as a think tank for development of Buddhist Circuit in the country.
37. The Committee is of the opinion that the lack of coordination and communication between
the various stakeholders has been a key factor towards the lack of success of the Buddhist Circuit,
despite the long gestation period and the availability of funds. Seamless inter-State coordination
is integral to the success of the Circuit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should put into action the previously proposed ‘Buddhist Circuit Steering Committee’. This will
go a long way in ensuring the proper and timely development of the Circuit.
38. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should coordinate with
various stakeholders and ensure that project targets are set. The Committee also desires that
there must be greater communication with those at the local level in terms of project development
to ensure that projects recommended are feasible. Once funding has been granted, care must be
taken to ensure that the target completion date is set and all stakeholders including the
administration at the local level, are active participants in the development and maintenance of
the sites.
NEED FOR INCREASED STATE PARTICIPATION
39. The background note furnished by the Ministry of Tourism, states that, the Ministry of Tourism
had launched the ‘Swadesh  Darshan’ Scheme in 2014-15 which comprised of fifteen ‘Thematic Circuits’
identified for the development of the country. The Ministry of Tourism hadsanctioned five projects for
` 361.97 crore under the scheme for development of Buddhist Circuit. Buddhist Circuit is one of the
15 Circuits which has been highlighted upon. The following are the details provided by the Ministry of
Tourism pertaining to funds sanctioned to the Buddhist Circuit:
(` in crore)
Sl.No. Name of Name of Project Name Amt. Amt.
State Circuit & Sanctioned Released
Year
1     2      3          4    5    6
1. Madhya Buddhist Development of Buddhist 74.94 14.99
Pradesh Circuit Circuit in Sanchi- Satna-
(2016-17) Rewa- Mandasur- Dhar in
Madhya Pradesh.
2. Uttar Buddhist Development  of  Buddhist 99.97 19.99
Pradesh Circuit Circuit- Srawasti, Kushniagar,
(2016-17) & Kapilavastu in Uttar Pradesh.
3. Bihar Buddhist Construction of Cultural Centre 98.73 19.75
Circuit adjacent to Maya Sarovar on the
(2016-17) western  side  at  Bodh  Gaya,
Bihar.
4. Gujarat Buddhist Development  of  Buddhist 35.99 7.20
Circuit Circuit: Junagadh–Gir-Somnath-
(2017-18) Bharuch- Kutch- Bhavnagar-

12
Rajkot- Mehsana in Gujrat under
Swadesh Darshan Scheme
5. Andhra Buddhist Development  of  Buddhist 52.34 72.4
Pradesh Circuit Circuit:   Shalihundam-
(2017-18) Thotlakonda- Bavikonda-
Bojjanakonda – Amaravati-
Anupu in Andhra Pradesh under
the theme of Buddhist Circuit
of Swadesh Darshan Scheme.
TOTAL 361.97 72.4
40.  The Committee understands that ‘Amount Released’ are based on the submission of ‘Utilisation
Certificates’ from the concerned States and that ratio of funds released are abysmal when studied in
proportion to the amount sanctioned by the Government. It is popular knowledge that, any scheme
initiated by the Ministry of Tourism is largely dependent on the participation of the State Governments.
Over the years, successive Governments at the Centre have taken various initiatives to develop this
Circuit to its full potential and funds have been sanctioned, which include those from foreign organisations.
However, the amounts disbursed have been dismal in proportion to the funds allocated to the Circuit.
41. The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Tourism that the main reason for delay in submission
of Utilization Certificates includes issue of land availability and delay in tendering. To deal with this issue
the, Ministry has revised the guidelines of Swadesh Darshan Scheme. As per revised guidelines funds
would only be released to the implementing agency once they complete the tendering process and
award the work to the contractor. The Ministry rigorously follows up with the State Governments/
Union Territories on implementation of projects and its physical and financial progress. In certain cases
of ongoing projects, where no physical progress was noticed, the Ministry has dropped the projects
and have instructed the State Government to refund the money. In other cases, where physical progress
was not noticed on some sites of the project due to land and clearance issues, the sites have been dropped
and size of project has been restructured.
42. The Committee strongly feels that there needs to be greater initiative and pro-active
participation on the part of the States concerned and a greater facilitation of communication
between the Ministry of Tourism, the State Governments and other stakeholders. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should initiate more effective channels of
communication with the State Governments. The Committee suggests the formation of a national
task force for development of the Buddhist Circuit.
INSUFFICIENT OUTREACH AND PUBLICITY OF THE BUDDHIST CIRCUIT
43. In the background note submitted by the Ministry of Tourism, it has been stated that the Ministry
has planned the thematic promotion of the Buddhist Circuit. Thematic roadshows will be conducted in
fourteen countries, an outreach to the Buddhist populations there, through our Missions and also through
their Missions in Delhi. These road shows will also include tour operators there and propose a B2B
meeting with them. Breaking off from previous practices, where Buddhist Circuit was part of a general
marketing plan, the Ministry has now planned a specific promotion plan of the Buddhist Circuit as stated
1     2      3          4    5    6

13
in the Demand for Grants for the year 2018-19, as submitted by the Ministry of Tourism. Thematic
literature is also being developed in tandems.
44. It has however been brought to the attention of the Committee that, a major cause of the un-
inspiring footfall numbers in the Buddhist Circuit is the lack of awareness about the Circuit, especially
among the predominantly affluent Buddhist nations. The lack of awareness of the various sites of Buddhist
significance results in less footfall and reduces the viability of a site. One of the Members of the Committee
pointed out that:
“I would just like to add to this that a Parliament Delegation had gone to Taiwan. And, there
the people of Taiwan and the representatives of Taiwan told us that they don ’t know anything about
India. As far as a tourist destination is concerned, India is not known to them. So, they asked us to
open an office there …. Taiwan is a cash-rich country. They are Buddhists. They want a way out. So,
we are good destination for them and they can afford.”
45. The Committee is of the view that the lack of adequate footfall is proof of the fact that the ‘Incredible
India’ marketing campaigns, while a great concept, leave much wanting where the promotions aimed at
the Buddhist Circuit are concerned. The marketing campaigns clearly have not worked to the extent
needed and have scope for improvement.
46. The Committee feels that the integrated Buddhist Circuit has no formal brand identity and
is portrayed and packaged in a fragmented and inconsistent manner. Despite the unique status of
the Circuit and the enormous international market-size of Buddhist travelers, proactive and
coordinated destination marketing efforts are limited and the Circuit is primarily promoted by
individual operators and religious bodies. Also, there is limited online marketing. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that there should be a pan India sub-brand for Buddhist tourism, which
would be recognized the world over. Also, the Committee strongly feels the need to reclaim the
need to reclaim the legacy of Buddha which many countries are now claiming for themselves.
47. The Committee further recommends that there should be a single website for Buddhist
tourism for all the States, something along the lines of a one-stop solution for all matters and
information related to Buddhist Circuit which will cater to the needs of a tourist.  This site can be
linked to other sites for related Government agencies etc.
48. The Committee understands that Buddhism is divided into three main sects, Mahayana, Theravada
and V ajrayana. The three main sects of Buddhism practice different branches of Buddhism and as such,
not all sites hold equal sanctity as per the practice they follow. The Committee believes that there is a
need to promote the Circuit in a sect-specific manner. This will help to promote other States with
Buddhist heritages and the Circuit will not find itself confined to Gaya and Bodh Gaya. This will
also go a long way towards solving the problem of seasonality that ails the Circuit, since other
places do not suffer from extremes of temperature especially the summer heat, like in Northern
India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts must be made to promote sites specific
to the individual sects. The sites may be marketed according to the sects.
49. Moreover, destinations along the Buddhist Circuit need to be transformed into learning
contact points, which in turn will stimulate demand, promote longer stays and generate a desire
to visit other sites and lead to growth in goods and service providers.

14
50. The Ministry of Tourism, in reply to a specific query on whether there is a concrete plan of action
to target foreign tourists especially Chinese and east and south- east Asian tourists through student exchange
programmes, development of Buddhist studies, tourist apps and other publicity platforms, has stated that
the Ministry of Tourism undertakes several promotional activities in the domestic and international markets
including China for promotion of the varied tourism products and destinations of the country. The Ministry
produces publicity material and collaterals in English and foreign languages for domestic and international
markets; media campaigns in the print and electronic media are undertaken in the domestic and international
markets; familiarisation tours for trade, media and opinion makers are undertaken from overseas to the
country under the Hospitality Scheme of the Ministry. As part of its special efforts to promote tourism to
India from China, the Ministry has organised Incredible India Road shows in Beijing, Guangzhou, Wuhan
and Shanghai from 28th August to 1st September 2018.
51. In light of the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Tourism must develop a concrete plan of action to target foreign tourists, especially East and
South-east Asian tourists through student exchange programmes, development of Buddhist Studies,
tourist apps and other publicity platforms, including new age platforms like video bloggers and
application based targeted audiences (for e.g. Instagram, snapchat etc.) which is currently absent,
to increase awareness about the Buddhist Circuit in India, in other countries.
PROTECTION OF MONUMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF ARTEFACTS
52. The subject of protection of monuments and preservation of ancient artefacts was a widely discussed
issue during the deliberations held by the Committee. The representative from the Ministry of Tourism
stated that this was an area where they had to work closely with the Ministry of Culture and the ASI
because fundamentally all the monuments belong to them. Essentially, one is looking at ` 500 crores of
investment to come into the public infrastructure and one is looking at almost ` 500 crores of investment
which will come into the private infrastructure.
53. The representative from the Ministry of Culture deposed before the Committee that the Museum
which was planned at Shravasti is at Kapilavastu-Pipravahana. The Ministry of Culture wanted the entire
complex but the State Government did not give them the land. Out of the 90 acres that were allocated,
five or ten acres are with the ASI. The Ministry of Culture had asked to develop the whole 90 acres. Now,
the State Government is developing it as a University. Within the ten acres, the Ministry of Culture has
planned to develop a Museum which is in the pipeline.
54. A Member of the Committee pointed out that the reclining statue of Lord Buddha is 1600 years old.
It is seven meters long. It is one of its kind. There is none parallel to it in the world. The representative
from the Madhya Pradesh Tourism Board stated that they are developing a ‘Buddhist theme park’ at
Sanchi and also working at upgrading the ‘John Marshall Museum’. The sites are being developed with
the aim to develop it into a place of tourist attraction.
55. Regarding the current status of the Museum and University at Kapilvastu, the Buddhist Theme Park
at Sanchi and the upgradation work at John Marshall Museum, the Committee was informed by the
Ministry of Tourism that the Development of Museum and University in Kapilavastu does not fall under
the purview of Ministry of Tourism. The Ministry under Swadesh Darshan Scheme has sanctioned
components of SEL Show, Signage s, Solar Lighting, Buddha Theme Park, Tourist Facilitation Center,
Parking, Waste Management, Drinking Water Facilities, Helipad Development, CCTV & Wi Fi at Kapilvastu

15
under the project ‘Development of Buddhist Circuit’– Srawasti, Kushinagar & Kapilvastu in Uttar Pradesh
under Buddhist circuit theme. Work on the project is under implementation.
56. Furthermore, it was stated that the development of Buddhist Theme Park and John Marshal House
is a part of project Development of Buddhist Circuit: Sanchi-Satna-Rewa-Mandsaur-Dhar in Madhya
Pradesh under Swadesh Darshan Scheme. The work on Buddhist Theme Park is at implementation stage.
For John Marshall House, State Government has tendered the work. However, physical work will only
start once ASI finishes renovation work and hand over the site to the Madhya Pradesh State Tourism
Development Corporation which is expected to happen in three months’ time.
57. The Committee strongly feels that there should be greater coordination between the ASI,
State Government and the Ministry of Tourism to ensure the successful and timely implementation
of the projects at hand. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism,
State Government of Madhya Pradesh and the ASI must work together and coordinate along with
the Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation to ensure that the projects are
completed as per schedule. The Ministry of Tourism in this regard must take the lead in coordinating
the various agencies and ensure that the ASI completes the required renovation and hands over
the site to Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation and a timeline must be set
for the same.
58. John Marshall was integral to the discovery of the rich history of India s past. Marshall began the
practice of allowing Indians to participate in  excavations  in their own country. In 1913, he began the
excavations at Taxila, which lasted for twenty years. He then moved on to other sites, including the
Buddhist  centres of  Sanchi  and  Sarnath. The Buddhist Circuit would be incomplete without giving
the credit where due. The John Marshall Museum, apart from preserving the history of the
discovery of Buddhist artefacts in India, would also serve as a major attraction for tourists, both
domestic and international, academicians and researchers alike. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that though the development of the University and the Museum in Kapilavastu is
not under its purview, it may coordinate with the Ministry of Culture, the respective State
Government and its agencies and the ASI, to pursue the development of the proposed John Marshall
Museum.
59. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the status of implementation and progress
made with regard to the projects in the Buddhist Sites under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme which
includes components of SEL Show, Signages, Solar Lighting, Buddha Theme Park, Tourist
Facilitation Center, Parking, Waste Management, Drinking Water Facilities, Helipad Development,
CCTV & Wi-Fi at Kapilvastu under the project ‘Development of Buddhist Circuit’ – Sarawasti,
Kushinagar & Kapilvastu in Uttar Pradesh under the Buddhist Circuit theme, may be furnished
in the Action taken Reply.
60. The Committee was informed by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) that they have developed
project proposals for various sites under the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee notes that Circuit 1,
Circuit 2 and Circuit 3 have been provided with facilities like Toilets, Drinking water, benches, illumination,
Sound and Light show, Interpretation Centre, Cafeteria, Souvenir Shop, Audio Visual center, Ramp,
Signage (PNB & CNB) Braille and Wi-Fi. The Committee notes the efforts of the ASI towards
providing facilities for tourists and desires that steps should be taken to ensure that such
facilities are available at all the sites which fall under the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee

16
recommends that progress and status of its implementation may be furnished in the Action
Taken Reply.
61. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism needs to work with the Ministry
of Culture and the ASI on the matter of protection of monuments and preservation of artefacts.
62. Most sites in the Circuit leave much wanting in terms of restoration work and those that have been
in good condition have been left to waste away due to neglect, resulting in the loss of heritage as well as
tourism opportunities. Nalanda in Bihar was an ancient center for learning and is renowned as the first
University structured along contemporary lines. However, at present the Nalanda ruins are abysmally
maintained. Apart from the deficiency in restoration-work, the site lacks signages and amenities not to
mention the lack of connectivity. Also, congestion around sites is a potential security hazard and air
pollution may damage our ancient sites. The Committee emphasizes that the preservation of our
heritage should be an issue of national importance. Destruction of relics and sites due to a lack of
awareness and sensibility towards the fragility of ancient sites must be accorded top priority.
Efforts for preservation and maintenance should be taken up immediately, experts should be
consulted and steps taken to that effect. Lessons may be taken from Countries like Japan and
China when it comes to maintenance of their historical sites.
63. The Committee feels that encroachments in and around these Buddhist sites can only be
resolved through the joint efforts of the State authorities, Ministry of Tourism, Culture and
the ASI and the active participation of local level authorities. The Ministry should aim at
attaining the tag of World heritage sites and this can only be accomplished when sites are well
preserved.
64. Buddhism values cleanliness of the mind and values hygiene. Most of the Buddhist populated countries
place high priority on cleanliness and are offended if not abhor, the dirt and litter that pollute these sites.
As stated by a representative from the Ministry of Tourism, while deposing before the Committee:
“There was an old Japanese gentleman who met me in Tokyo. He said, “Bodh Gaya is a holy
place. We collect soil from there to keep it in our place of worship. I have only one request, please
ask people not to urinate around that place.”
65. The Committee feels that the Buddhist Circuit, being a religious Circuit, must be handled
with extra caution. Care must be taken to ensure that it does not hurt the sensitivities of the
Buddhist population. The Committee, therefore, recommends that due care and attention must
be taken to ensure the cleanliness of the places and maintain the sanctity of the sites.
PROMOTION OF RESEARCH IN BUDDHIST STUDIES AND CREATION OF BUDDHIST
DATABASE
66. It was brought to the attention of the Committee that the lack of a Buddhist database supported by
research in Buddhist Studies has proven to be a drawback in the development of various sites under the
Buddhist Circuit. Buddhism is an intellectual tradition which has been often overlooked while developing
and promoting the Circuit and the various sites related to it. There is a need to constitute a task force
which can explore, archive and document the heritage of Buddhism. One of the witnesses who deposed
before the Committee stated that:
“Sir, Kung Fu, people talk about Kung Fu in China in the Shaolin Temple. It was started by

17
Bodhidharma who was from Andhra Pradesh. Buddhism that went to Tibet, it was by the Monk
Padmasambhava who was from India from the Swat valley which is now in Pakistan.”
67. The Committee understands that several Buddhist nations have many cultural similarities with India
for e.g., names of the cities of Myanmar are similar to the present-day names of cities in Odisha. Similarly,
very little is known about Buddhist architecture because there is hardly any research on the subject and
most of the buildings have broken down due to neglect. Nalanda is a perfect example of this. We don t
know what Nalanda looks like except that we are told that it had a seven- storied library. However, very
little research has been done on the subject to substantiate the claim.
68. The Committee feels that research on Buddhist studies must be promoted and be given
adequate weightage. Buddhist architecture is rare as there is little awareness with regards to it,
moreover, most of the Buddhist structures are in a dilapidated condition, if not in ruins. The
Committee understands that there exists a Buddhist Studies department in some Central
Universities. However, the scholarship around Buddhist Studies leaves much room for improvement
as they do not produce any research of caliber. The promotion of the Buddhist scholarship with
regards to the study and research of Buddhist studies is of paramount importance. The
historiography of Buddhist culture must be studied and preserved. This will help invite scholars
from many Buddhist nations and can work as a ‘soft-power’ to promote relations with these
countries. BIMSTEC countries are eager to study and preserve Buddhist Culture and we must
work to do the same.
69. The Committee strongly feels that the internet of things has opened up new avenues and
opportunities in Buddhist studies. This may be imbibed by way of soft technology by digitizing
ancient Buddhist texts and interconnecting various resources related to Buddhist studies. This
will enable easy access and further promote the study of Buddhist culture and heritage. The
Committee, therefore, recommends, that steps must be taken to harness technology in order to
enhance the potential of Buddhist Studies and as an extension, the Buddhist Circuit.
70. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must take the initiative
to constitute a Task Force which will look into data collection for Buddhist artefacts. The
Committee feels that this will also go a long way in ensuring that precious artefacts which are
national treasures, are not smuggled out of the country. The Committee also recommends that
the Ministry of Culture, in tandem with the Archeological Survey of India, must work with various
Universities, both national and international, to revive Buddhist studies in India.
INCREASED AWARENESS AND SENSITIZATION AMONG THE LOCAL POPULATION
71. The Buddhist Circuit is promoted on the lines of „Religious Tourism . Buddhism as a „faith  preaches
values that are appreciated by non- Buddhists the world over. It preachesintrospection andencourages
gaining greater knowledge and insight about things that surround us. This is to be done through Meditation.
Meditation is thus, an integral aspect of the faith along with cleanliness, peace, quiet and tranquility which
are intrinsic part of the Buddhist faith. However, it was brought to the attention of the Committee that a
main complaint of tourists was that the local communities that surrounded the revered sites were insensitive
to the reverence with which the sites are held by the tourists. Members stated that in Bodh Gaya and at
other places, it was not uncommon for loud ‘ Bollywood music ’ to be played on loudspeakers whilst
prayers were being offered inside the temple complex, destroying the prayerful atmosphere.

18
72. The Committee feels that the aesthetic and practical integration with the surrounding urban
environment is mostly absent. In many instances, visitor friendly transaction zones between the
sites and its surroundings vary from limited to none at all. Often, outside the site boundaries, the
hustle bustle of ‘daily life’, commercial activities, squatters, touts etc. destroy the sanctity of the
place and are intrusive to those who come to seek ‘spiritual contemplation and peace’. The
Committee recommends that stringent rules must be set in place to limit the use of loudspeakers
in these areas and offenders must be made liable to pay a penalty. The Committee desires that
the concerned State Governments and the local authorities must ensure that sufficient steps are
taken in this regard.
73. The stakeholders also deposed before the Committee that there was a need for the locals living in
and around those sites to be given some training in sensitization and awareness. The Committee was
informed that many of the tourists, especially the pilgrims who stayed for more than a week in order to
conduct rituals etc. were reluctant to return for a second visit and did not recommend the pilgrimage to
others from their respective countries. A primary cause was the lack of facilities which catered to their
needs, chief of them being their dietary preferences. Due to the lack of awareness among the locals and
insufficient investment, it was found that many hotels and eateries did not provide food and amenities that
catered to their taste-buds and the tourists are forced to cook their own meals, which is not a provision
available in most hotels.
74. The Committee, therefore, recommends that amenities that cater to the needs of the tourists
from abroad must be developed. Moreover, the locals must be trained to identify and understand
the likes and preferences of people from different countries who are frequent visitors there.
‘Sensitisation training’ of the local people is necessary in order to increase the appeal of the
Circuit and this can only be accomplished in cooperation with the local- level authorities, Ministry
of Tourism and Ministry of Culture.
75. The Committee further recommends, that the areas surrounding the temple complexes and
holy sites must be kept free from commercial encroachments. They must also be well-maintained
and kept clean and litter-free in tandem with the sanctity of the sites.
LACK OF ACCOMMODATION
76. The issue of inadequate accommodation was a subject much discussed by the Committee. The
Members of the Committee felt that hotel accommodation and lodging facilities leave much to be desired.
The Members of the Committee pointed out that though the existing facilities boasted of Three-star and
Four-star facilities in and around the sites on the Buddhist Circuit, the facilities and amenities provided by
them were not up to the mark. The hotels that were operating in these areas especially in Bihar, Madhya
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh were not monitored. Their staff lacked training. Catering, in terms of food and
services provided by them were below par and unappealing to travelers. The footfall at the Buddhist
Circuit can be categorized predominantly under three groups ‘Tourists’, ‘Monks’ and ‘people who come
with their Masters’. The system of accommodation must be tailored to suit the needs of these three
groups. Moreover, tourists come at different budgets. There are no five- star hotels in the vicinity of
Bodh Gaya, Sarnath or Gaya and this presents itself as a huge loss in terms of revenue generation
opportunities, as this segment of travelers is not being nurtured . In this regard, the Committee
recommends that a system of monitoring the various hotels and lodgings must be set in place and
a standard must be set by the Government for the hoteliers to adhere to.

19
77. The Committee notes that there are plenty of Government owned ITDC hotels and Yatri Niwasin
and around the sites in the Buddhist Circuits. The Committee recommends that the management of
these properties must be operated on a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model, on a lease-term
basis. The profits must be market-incentive based. This will ensure a better and more efficient
management of these properties and will go a long way in providing better amenities.
DEVELOPMENT OF W AYSIDE AMENITIES
78. The lack of wayside amenities was highlighted by all the stakeholders concerned and Members of
the Committee. It was pointed out that the over the years since the inception of the Buddhist Circuit, the
lack of wayside amenities has been cited as an issue that needed to be addressed. Members of the
Committee stated that there were no wayside amenities along the roads that connected the sites under the
Circuit in comparison to other popular highways like those that connected Delhi – Jaipur/Delhi- Chandigarh/
Delhi - Agra etc. These highways have provisions for clean restrooms and stoppages with a variety of
eating options that were available to travellers.
79. The representative from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, during deposition before
the Committee, stated that the works under the Circuit were under progress. Patna-Gaya has a two-lane
road and four-lane work is under progress. Gorakhpur- Kushinagar has a four-lane road. In the Patna-
Nalanda- Rajgir area, the road is being maintained by the State of Bihar. Apart from this, wayside amenities
are being developed along all the National Highways at an interval of 40-60 kms. These are of 3 types. Of
these, the biggest are ‘Highway Villages’ that are planned on about 4-5 acres of land.  Here, truck-drivers
and passenger vehicles can stop their vehicles. These will be equipped with convenient parking and
stoppage facilities with washrooms and eateries. ‘Highway Mini’ is being developed as a smaller version
of ‘Highway Villages’. Next is ‘Highway Nest (Mini)’ which is a smaller version of the Highway Village.
According to the requirement of the Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
has signed an MoU to create 4 wayside amenities. Here the land is provided by the NHAI and the facilities
are to be developed by the Ministry of Tourism. The representative from NHAI further elaborated that
they had received 35 bids on Expression of Interest, of which 28 bids are under approval. However, the
Committee was also informed that there were no bids received by the private owners on the Expression
of Interests that were floated.  The lack of interest has been blamed on the lack of awareness on the part
of the public at large.
80. The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
towards the development of infrastructure and wayside amenities. However, the Committee feels
that providing wayside amenities are integral to the development of the Sites under the Buddhist
Circuit and is disappointed to know that even the most popular sites like Bodh Gaya, Gaya,
Sarnath etc. have not received any Expression of Interest by private stakeholders. This is due to
multifarious reasons, chief of them being lack of awareness in the market, the market viability
of the Circuit being unappealing to investor and private players as there is insufficient activity on
the part of the State Governments. There needs to be greater co-ordination between the Ministries
concerned and the State Government for the development of this Circuit. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that States should increase their investment in developing the
infrastructure around the Buddhist Circuit.  States should also devise new business strategies for
marketing Buddhist heritage.

20
81. The Committee strongly feels that the wider success of the Circuit will depend on providing
wayside amenities, visitor comfort facilities (shading, seating, and drinking water), opportunities
to interact with local people and lifestyles, and interesting interpretation and storytelling. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the development of facilities in association with major
petroleum companies could provide for lucrative public- private partnerships.
82. Further, the Committee feels that there are limited tourist activities beyond Buddhist sites.
Tours and activity packages are limited to pilgrimages. There is lack of evening entertainment
like light and sound shows, tourist relaxation and other such entertainments. Tourist spots are
not senior citizen friendly and disabled friendly. Tourist Information Centers are poorly managed.
The Committee therefore, recommends attracting tourist with special prices and events during
peak and off-peak seasons which would go a long way towards expanding market-share. Local
community organisations, monasteries, local bodies and other government authorities must engage
in joint planning and partnerships in offering experiences beyond pilgrimage to the tourists.
Packaging the Buddhist Circuit and its heritage in a more creative manner will facilitate accelerated
growth and improve tour operating opportunities.
LACK OF TRAINED TOUR GUIDES
83. The Committee was informed by the stakeholders that there were very few professionally trained
tour guides who were knowledgeable in the history and the background of the Sites. A majority of the so-
called tour guides charge exorbitant rates and were mostly touts looking for quick money. Most of the
tourists are from non-English-speaking countries and therefore it is essential to have trained tour guides
who were proficient in foreign languages and well acquainted with the history of the site.
84. In this regard, the Ministry of Tourism in its reply to a specific query, informed the Committee that
the Ministry of Tourism had been conducting Guide Training Course including refresher courses for
Regional Level guides through Indian Institute of Travel and Tourism Management (IITTM) under the
powers delegated by Archaeological Survey of India to Additional Director General (Tourism). The ASI
vide notification dated 31.01.2017 had withdrawn the powers and the matter is under sub-judice. No
Guide Training Course including refresher course has been conducted for the last three years.
85. Furthermore, the Ministry of Tourism has launched the “Linguistic Tourist Facilitator” programme
at Bodhgaya (an important destination in Buddhist circuit) to be conducted by Indian Institute of Tourism
and Travel Management (IITTM) to create trained manpower in different foreign languages to facilitate
the tourists visiting to India from different language speaking countries. The aim of the programme is to
upgrade the skill of the existing service providers in order to deal effectively with foreign tourists in their
own languages. To begin with, an amount of `14,49,000/- has been sanctioned for the said programme
for 60 trainees in the current financial year.
86. The Committee feels that even if there is a current system in place, the system is not
sufficient and that these guides are not qualified as per the requirement for trained guides in the
Buddhist Circuits. Language guides are integral to the Circuit as tourists from other countries
prefer a guide who can speak their language and serve as a companion rather than just a guide.
The introduction of short term language courses along with short-term courses on becoming a
tour guide, with emphasis on cultural sensitivity along with practical courses on ticketing, etiquette
etc., must be initiated in order to set an industry benchmark. The Committee, therefore,

21
recommends that the Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Tourism must work together to develop
a program to train bright, young, educated youths to become tour guides. They should be trained
in at least one foreign language and in the relevant history of the related sites. The Buddhist
Circuit can also set up Public-Private-Partnerships with various Heritage Tour companies and
harness their professionalism to improve the experience of tourists, both domestic and
international. The Committee is of the view that academic institutions in the field of tourism and
government policies need to be better aligned with market demands.
87. The Committee further recommends that programmes tailored by IITM, for the Buddhist
Circuit must not be restricted to Bodh Gaya alone; but should have a wider connotation to include
the Buddhist Circuit at large. The Committee hopes that the “Linguistic Tourist Facilitator”
programme is implemented sooner rather than later so that it may be benefit the tourist season
in the coming year and it may serve to provide employment to the youth in the region.
88. The Committee is dismayed to note that no Guide Training including refresher course has
been conducted for the last three years due to a pending court case involving ASI. The Committee
recommends that the matter may be brought to the notice of Cabinet Secretary to make efforts
to bring an out of court settlement of the case so that the Guide Training programmes can start
afresh.
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF PILGRIMS/TOURISTS
89. The Members of the Committee felt that the security and safety of the tourists should be reconsidered
and given priority. Gaya, Jahanabad and Aurangabad lie on the Jharkhand border and are sensitive to
Naxalite activities. Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Bihar witness heavy Naxalite activity. There prevails a sense of
fear and insecurity among the common people. The security and safety of the people and the tourists is of
prime importance. Many tourists and bus operators do not feel safe whilst travelling by road, due to
incidences of theft and robberies and most drivers refuse to ply by night.
90. The representative of the Ministry of Tourism informed the Committee that several States had
deployed „Tourism Police  for the purpose of ensuring the safety of tourists. The Committee appreciates
the efforts of the Ministry of Tourism and the States who have deployed the Tourism Police.
However, the Committee feels that much more needs to be done to provide security to the tourists
to ensure that tourists need not be apprehensive, while travelling to explore the Buddhist Circuit.
The State Governments must be brought on board to provide and ensure 24-hour street- light and
illumination, especially along unsafe National Highways. The Committee desires that the States
that are yet to implement and deploy the tourist police must be impressed upon to do so. The
Committee is of the opinion that there is a need for an integrated and coordinated management
approach among the various entities involved at local levels to ensure a serene and safe
environment.
PROMOTION OF LOCAL MARKETS
91. The Committee feels that the opportunity for the tourists to interact with and experience the culture
and lifestyle of local communities are limited and except from purchases from local and informal traders,
the majority of Buddhist Circuit visitors are isolated from local communities. The Committee observes
that although informal traders throughout the Circuit sell handicrafts and souvenirs, the quality and
authenticity of such products is inconsistent. There is an opportunity to sell higher quality crafts, souvenirs

22
and other locally produced items. Most sites lack suitable shopping and market areas and trading is mainly
concentrated at entrances to historical sites.
92. The representative from the Ministry of Tourism deposed before the Committee that focus was
now on ‘pro-poor tourism’, which essentially means not just creating physical infrastructure, but also
creating livelihood using tourism as a tool. The Committee takes note of the proactive step of the Ministry
of Tourism towards creating an economy around these tourist sites.
93. The Committee recommends that local craftsmanship must be supported and must be
encouraged to produce goods of higher quality. To do this, sufficient financial and institutional
backing must be provided by the Ministry of Tourism and the respective State Governments. This
must be a joint effort as one cannot be accomplished without the other. Separate shopping and
workshop areas must be created. These must be made accessible to tourists who will get to
experience and appreciate the culture and heritage of that place. There is clearly a scope for a
focused local awareness, skills training and entrepreneurship development drive, to maximize
local economic and employment impact of the Buddhist Circuit.
RATIONALIZATION OF TAXATION SYSTEM FOR THE BUDDHIST CIRCUIT TOURISM
94. The most significant tax on tourism is, invariably, the tax on accommodation (and related catering).
It has been observed by the Committee that many popular tourist Circuits require inter-State movement.
Tourist coaches/ cars travelling inter-State Circuits are liable to road and passenger taxes. While travelling
between States, tourist vehicles pay road and passenger taxes that vary across States. With the introduction
of a centralized taxation system, there has been a uniformity in the taxation rates across the country,
across State- lines. However, for most part, the levy is imposed on printed tariffs to prevent mis-declaration
of actual tariffs. Since actual tariffs in lean seasons are substantially lower than printed tariffs, effective
tax rates increase by up to 30 percent. The introduction of GST is a step in the positive direction.
However, there needs to be more clarity on the tax rates across States on taxes levied by the States and
these should be uniform.
95. In reply to a specific query regarding comparative studies to attract tourism investment by offering
incentives, it was informed that the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, the Departments of
Tourism of the Governments of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and the International Finance Corporation (World
Bank Group) together worked on a Comprehensive Plan for up-gradation of Buddhist sites in Bihar and
Uttar Pradesh. The strategy formulated by the IFC “Investing in the Buddhist Circuit – 2014-2018” was
launched in July 2014. Further, Ministry under its Market Research scheme carries out studies in the field
of tourism and funds allocated under this scheme are sufficient.
96. The Ministry of Tourism is working on development of Special Tourism Clusters in the Buddhist
Circuit under its scheme of development of Special Tourism Zones in the country. Under the scheme
Central Government will provide grant to the SPV (Special Purpose V ehicle) for development of basic
infrastructure in the Special Tourism Zone. The State Government will be bringing in land as grant to the
SPV . The SPV will be responsible bringing in the private investment.
97. THE COMMITTEE HOPES THAT THE SPVs WILL BRING THE REQUIRED
INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE BUDDHIST CIRCUIT.
98. The Committee feels that, in principle, the tourism industry should be taxed like any other. The case

23
for any exemption from income tax is extremely weak, with the caveat that there should be no bias
against the tourism industry. A few countries have addressed issues relating to market failures and other
investment climate constraints by introducing special fiscal incentives for tourism. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must take it up with the Ministry of Finance and follow
the example of countries like Mauritius, who have successfully managed to attract tourism
investment by offering incentives in the 1980’s and removed them once the sector gained
momentum. These include tax-holidays, accelerated depreciation on buildings, initial capital
allowances, exemptions of customs duties etc. These incentives raise returns and offset actual or
perceived differences in the cost of doing a business and investing in a location. This will also go
along way to promote Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) and serve to attract investment in the
Circuit and help the Buddhist Circuit in fulfilling its potential.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
LACK OF CONNECTIVITY
The Committee, therefore, recommends that roads connecting the sites in the Circuits
must be improved. The Ministry of Tourism, along with the States concerned and the Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways, must come together to ensure the completion of pending projects
and develop new projects to connect these places. Moreover, the existing roads must be made into
four-lane roads and traffic congestion must be checked and resolved. The Committee also
recommends that existing roads must be maintained to meet international standards. Roads must
also be kept litter-free and must be cleaned regularly. Unnecessary speed-breakers must be
removed and roads must be tarmacked. (Para 8)
The Committee recommends that a Committee or Panel should be instituted, which would
include the State Governments concerned, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, NHAI, Ministry
of Tourism and any other stakeholders, to ensure the construction and maintenance of roads
connecting the various sites under the Buddhist Circuit. (Para 10)
The Committee notes that the Circuit does not suffer from lack of funds. However,
execution of existing projects leaves much to be desired. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that a timeline be fixed for each project undertaken for construction and periodic reports be
submitted on the same, to ensure their timely completion. (Para 11)
The Committee notes the issue of seasonality that plagues the Circuit and urges that
measures must be devised to extend the seasonality of the sector. The aerial distance between
Gaya and Patna is 88 kms which is covered in one and a half hours by road. The Committee takes
note of the effort of the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Civil Aviation under the UDAN
scheme of the Centre to connect Gaya with more cities. However, the Committee feels that a lot
more can be done to increase the footfall in the popular tourist sites. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the concerned State authorities should take
necessary action to complete the Kushinagar airport at the earliest to make it feasible for use
during the peak season. Moreover, the Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Civil
Aviation should explore the possibility of connecting more Buddhist sites by air as it is the most
efficient and the least time-consuming method of transportation, especially for foreign tourists
who are generally short on time. To increase the feasibility, the Committee impresses upon the
Ministry of Civil Aviation to look into chartering smaller aircrafts like A TRs or even consider
Helicopter trips, as is the practice in many countries. The Committee also recommends that
ATRs may be used to connect different sites, thereby encouraging the extension of the peak
season. (Para 13)
Airport maintenance is also an issue and the Committee recommends that regular
maintenance of air strips must be ensured by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to ensure passenger
safety and prevent flight delays. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of Civil Aviation to
utilize the UDAAN scheme and to work with the respective State Governments to develop the air
connectivity between the Buddhist sites and the major cities and between the Buddhist sites
themselves. (Para 14)
24

25
The Committee further recommends that facilities like ‘Hot Air Balloon’ safaris covering
various sites may be introduced through private vendors. These rides could be for a duration of
an hour connecting various nearby sites. These may be introduced along similar lines as those in
Pushkar and the Taj Mahal. These are a huge hit with tourists and has helped to increase the
popularity of various tourist spots. (Para 15)
Furthermore, the Committee recommends that other aerial adventures like paragliding,
aerial-gliding etc. may also be encouraged around suitable Circuit sites in order to increase their
popularity and thereby increase the footfall. The Committee wishes that the Ministry of Tourism,
along with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the respective State Governments, should formulate
guidelines and set a target date for completion of these projects. (Para 16)
The Committee feels that trains are a beautiful way to experience the true beauty of our
country and every effort must be made to ensure that this is an efficient and preferred mode of
travel for most tourists. The Committee, therefore, recommends that cleanliness in the stations
and basic amenities like cloak rooms in the railway stations must be upgraded. More importantly,
the local populace must be taught to use these facilities and must be educated and made aware of
keeping the railway premises clean. Open defecation along the railway tracks must be discouraged
and a system of fines must be put in place. The practices of the Delhi Metro may be studied,
where fines are levied by patrolling officials for littering. Also, squatters at the railway station
should be discouraged. (Para 19)
The Committee further recommends that a special tourist ticket, with additional services
on specific scheduled trains and key routes (for instance, New Delhi-Gaya, with possible stops in
Varanasi, Sarnath, Nalanda, Rajgir) would be useful. This could be accompanied by facilities such
as tourist-assigned ticketing upto 24 hours in advance of departures, discounts on select
accommodation etc. Circuit specific trains like the Shramjeevi Express  and the Buddhapurnima
Express are good possibilities for such a scheme. The Committee further recommends that luxury
trains such as ‘Palace on Wheels’ or even hop-on-hop-off trains connecting feasible sites may be
introduced. The feasibility of a fully AC/superfast train connecting important Buddhist sites to
metros should be explored.  The conditions of Gaya and Cantonment Railways station must also
be improved upon. (Para 20)
The Committee understands that this task is multi-pronged and will require the assistance
of various Ministries and Departments at both the State and the Centre. Hence, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take the onus of coordinating with various
Ministries and Departments including the Ministry of Railways to ensure the smooth progress
and set a time-bound completion date for each project. Infrastructure gaps need to be identified
and action mobilized. (Para 22)
EFFICIENT UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry does not mention the amount utilized
so far. The Committee may be apprised of the amount of funds released till date, amounts utilized
etc. in the Action Taken Report. (Para 26)
The Buddhist Circuit is one of the most promising Circuits with a huge potential for
development. Buddhist sites are rich in traditions and places of spiritual significance and are thus

26
revered by millions of people around the world. The Committee observes that ````` 0.01 crore
translates to a meagre amount of ````` 1 Lakh towards the development of the Buddhist Circuit as a
whole. The Committee feels that this token amount allocation is grossly inadequate for the
development of the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee is disappointed to state that this token sum
allocation is highly impractical and is evidence of the lackadaisical attitude towards the development
of the Buddhist Circuit as a vibrant and viable tourist destination worthy of investment and the
respect it deserves. (Para 27)
In this regard, the Committee observes that the full potential of the Buddhist Circuit is yet
to be exploited by the stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
of Tourism must pursue the development of the Buddhist Circuit with a renewed vigor and
zeal. (Para 28)
The target market of the Buddhist Circuit is primarily international tourists from East,
South and South-East Asia. These countries have wide and varied cultures from that of India but
are bound by our connect with Buddhism. The Committee, therefore, feels that it is insufficient
to place the Circuit under the Swadesh Darshan Division as its needs are different from those of
most domestic destinations. The Committee recommends that a separate, efficient mechanism
must be set in place, as it is evident that the one at present is not adequate to meet the needs and
requirements of the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee reiterates that the development of Buddhist
Circuit is integral to the development of tourism in India. (Para 31)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must constitute an
inter-State-Ministerial Committee at the Central level to look into the disbursal and proper
allocation of the funds that have been set aside. It is also desired that a time-line may be set for
the completion of each phase and periodical updates may be sent to the constituted Committee in
order to ensure that the projects are completed. (Para 32)
The Committee feels that it is important to understand that the Buddhist Circuit is largely
seasonal owing to the weather conditions. The winter season ranging from November to March is
the ideal travelling season. The seasonality of the Circuit is not conducive to a sustained growth
and the sites wear a deserted look during the off-season. This seasonality extends to rail and
flight services as well. In order to sustain tourism, the Committee recommends that an off-
season stabilization fund may be formulated to attract more tourists to make it viable for
businesses. (Para 34)
LACK OF CENTRE - STATE COORDINATION
The Committee is of the opinion that the lack of coordination and communication between
the various stakeholders has been a key factor towards the lack of success of the Buddhist Circuit,
despite the long gestation period and the availability of funds. Seamless inter-State coordination
is integral to the success of the Circuit. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should put into action the previously proposed ‘Buddhist Circuit Steering Committee’. This will
go a long way in ensuring the proper and timely development of the Circuit. (Para 37)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should coordinate with
various stakeholders and ensure that project targets are set. The Committee also desires that
there must be greater communication with those at the local level in terms of project development

27
to ensure that projects recommended are feasible. Once funding has been granted, care must be
taken to ensure that the target completion date is set and all stakeholders including the
administration at the local level, are active participants in the development and maintenance of
the sites. (Para 38)
NEED FOR INCREASED STATE PARTICIPATION
The Committee strongly feels that there needs to be greater initiative and pro-active
participation on the part of the States concerned and a greater facilitation of communication
between the Ministry of Tourism, the State Governments and other stakeholders. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should initiate more effective channels of
communication with the State Governments. The Committee suggests the formation of a national
task force for development of the Buddhist Circuit. (Para 42)
INSUFFICIENT OUTREACH AND PUBLICITY OF THE BUDDHIST CIRCUIT
The Committee feels that the integrated Buddhist Circuit has no formal brand identity
and is portrayed and packaged in a fragmented and inconsistent manner. Despite the unique
status of the Circuit and the enormous international market-size of Buddhist travelers, proactive
and coordinated destination marketing efforts are limited and the Circuit is primarily promoted
by individual operators and religious bodies. Also, there is limited online marketing. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a pan India sub-brand for Buddhist
tourism, which would be recognized the world over. Also, the Committee strongly feels the need
to reclaim the need to reclaim the legacy of Buddha which many countries are now claiming for
themselves. (Para 46)
The Committee further recommends that there should be a single website for Buddhist
tourism for all the States, something along the lines of a one-stop solution for all matters and
information related to Buddhist Circuit which will cater to the needs of a tourist.  This site can be
linked to other sites for related Government agencies etc. (Para 47)
The Committee believes that there is a need to promote the Circuit in a sect-specific
manner. This will help to promote other States with Buddhist heritages and the Circuit will not
find itself confined to Gaya and Bodh Gaya. This will also go a long way towards solving the
problem of seasonality that ails the Circuit, since other places do not suffer from extremes of
temperature especially the summer heat, like in Northern India. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that efforts must be made to promote sites specific to the individual sects. The sites
may be marketed according to the sects. (Para 48)
Moreover, destinations along the Buddhist Circuit need to be transformed into learning-
contact points, which in turn will stimulate demand, promote longer stays and generate a desire
to visit other sites and lead to growth in goods and service providers. (Para 49)
In light of the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Tourism must develop a concrete plan of action to target foreign tourists, especially East and
South-east Asian tourists through student exchange programmes, development of Buddhist Studies,
tourist apps and other publicity platforms, including new age platforms like video bloggers and

28
application based targeted audiences (for e.g. Instagram, Snapchat etc.)  which is currently absent,
to increase awareness about the Buddhist Circuit in India, in other countries. (Para 51)
PROTECTION OF MONUMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF ARTEFACTS
The Committee strongly feels that there should be greater coordination between the ASI,
State Government and the Ministry of Tourism to ensure the successful and timely implementation
of the projects at hand. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism,
State Government of Madhya Pradesh and the ASI must work together and coordinate along with
the Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation to ensure that the projects are
completed as per schedule. The Ministry of Tourism in this regard must take the lead in coordinating
the various agencies and ensure that the ASI completes the required renovation and hands over
the site to Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation and a timeline must be set
for the same. (Para 57)
The Buddhist Circuit would be incomplete without giving the credit where due. The John
Marshall Museum, apart from preserving the history of the discovery of Buddhist artefacts in
India, would also serve as a major attraction for tourists, both domestic and international,
academicians and researchers alike. The Committee, therefore, recommends that though the
development of the University and the Museum in Kapilvastu is not under its purview, it may
coordinate with the Ministry of Culture, the respective State Government and its agencies and
the ASI, to pursue the development of the proposed John Marshall Museum. (Para 58)
Furthermore, the Committee recommends that the status of implementation and progress
made with regard to the projects in the Buddhist Sites under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme which
includes components of SEL Show, Signages, Solar Lighting, Buddha Theme Park, Tourist
Facilitation Center, Parking, Waste Management, Drinking Water Facilities, Helipad Development,
CCTV & Wi-Fi at Kapilvastu under the project ‘Development of Buddhist Circuit’ – Sarawasti,
Kushinagar and Kapilvastu in Uttar Pradesh under the Buddhist Circuit theme, may be furnished
in the Action taken Reply. (Para 59)
The Committee notes the efforts of the ASI towards providing facilities for tourists and
desires that steps should be taken to ensure that such facilities are available at all the sites
which fall under the Buddhist Circuit. The Committee recommends that progress and status of
its implementation may be furnished in the Action Taken Reply. (Para 60)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism needs to work with the
Ministry of Culture and the ASI on the matter of protection of monuments and preservation
of arte facts. (Para 61)
The Committee emphasizes that the preservation of our heritage should be an issue of
national importance. Destruction of relics and sites due to a lack of awareness and sensibility
towards the fragility of ancient sites must be accorded top priority. Efforts for preservation and
maintenance should be taken up immediately, experts should be consulted and steps taken to
that effect. Lessons may be taken from Countries like Japan and China when it comes to
maintenance of their historical sites. (Para 62)
The Committee feels that encroachments in and around these Buddhist sites can only be
resolved through the joint efforts of the State authorities, Ministry of Tourism, Culture and

29
the ASI and the active participation of local level authorities. The Ministry should aim at
attaining the tag of World heritage sites and this can only be accomplished when sites are well
preserved. (Para 63)
The Committee feels that the Buddhist Circuit, being a religious Circuit, must be handled
with extra caution. Care must be taken to ensure that it does not hurt the sensitivities of the
Buddhist population. The Committee, therefore, recommends that due care and attention must
be taken to ensure the cleanliness of the places and maintain the sanctity of the si tes. (Para 65)
PROMOTION OF RESEARCH IN BUDDHIST STUDIES AND CREATION OF BUDDHIST
DATABASE
The Committee feels that research on Buddhist studies must be promoted and be given
adequate weightage. Buddhist architecture is rare as there is little awareness with regards to it,
moreover, most of the Buddhist structures are in a dilapidated condition, if not in ruins. The
Committee understands that there exists a Buddhist Studies department in some Central
Universities. However, the scholarship around Buddhist Studies leaves much room for improvement
as they do not produce any research of caliber. The promotion of the Buddhist scholarship with
regards to the study and research of Buddhist studies is of paramount importance. The
historiography of Buddhist culture must be studied and preserved. This will help invite scholars
from many Buddhist nations and can work as a ‘soft-power’ to promote relations with these
countries. BIMSTEC countries are eager to study and preserve Buddhist Culture and we must
work to do the same. (Para 68)
The Committee strongly feels that the internet of things has opened up new avenues and
opportunities in Buddhist studies. This may be imbibed by way of soft technology by digitizing
ancient Buddhist texts and interconnecting various resources related to Buddhist studies. This
will enable easy access and further promote the study of Buddhist culture and heritage. The
Committee, therefore, recommends, that steps must be taken to harness technology in order to
enhance the potential of Buddhist Studies and as an extension, the Buddhist Circuit. (Para 69)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must take the initiative
to constitute a Task Force which will look into data collection for Buddhist artefacts. The
Committee feels that this will also go a long way in ensuring that precious artefacts which are
national treasures, are not smuggled out of the country. The Committee also recommends that
the Ministry of Culture, in tandem with the Archeological Survey of India, must work with various
Universities, both national and international, to revive Buddhist studies in India. (Para 70)
INCREASED AWARENESS AND SENSITIZATION AMONG THE LOCAL POPULATION
The Committee feels that the aesthetic and practical integration with the surrounding
urban environment is mostly absent. In many instances, visitor friendly transaction zones between
the sites and its surroundings vary from limited to none at all. Often, outside the site boundaries,
the hustle bustle of ‘daily life’, commercial activities, squatters, touts etc. destroy the sanctity of
the place and are intrusive to those who come to seek ‘spiritual contemplation and peace’. The
Committee recommends that stringent rules must be set in place to limit the use of loudspeakers
in these areas and offenders must be made liable to pay a penalty. The Committee desires that

30
the concerned State Governments and the local authorities must ensure that sufficient steps are
taken in this regard. (Para 72)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that amenities that cater to the needs of the
tourists from abroad must be developed. Moreover, the locals must be trained to identify and
understand the likes and preferences of people from different countries who are frequent visitors
there. ‘Sensitisation training’ of the local people is necessary in order to increase the appeal of
the Circuit and this can only be accomplished in cooperation with the local- level authorities,
Ministry of Tourism and Ministry of Culture. (Para 74)
The Committee further recommends, that the areas surrounding the temple complexes
and holy-sites must be kept free from commercial encroachments. They must also be well-
maintained and kept clean and litter-free in tandem with the sanctity of the sites. (Para 75)
LACK OF ACCOMODATION
In this regard, the Committee recommends that a system of monitoring the various hotels
and lodgings must be set in place and a standard must be set by the Government for the hoteliers
to adhere to. (Para 76)
The Committee recommends that the management of these properties must be operated
on a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model, on a lease-term basis. The profits must be market-
incentive based. This will ensure a better and more efficient management of these properties and
will go a long way in providing better amenities. (Para 77)
DEVELOPMENT OF W AYSIDE AMENITIES
The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
towards the development of infrastructure and wayside amenities. However, the Committee feels
that providing wayside amenities are integral to the development of the Sites under the Buddhist
Circuit and is disappointed to know that even the most popular sites like Bodh Gaya, Gaya,
Sarnath etc. have not received any Expression of Interest by private stakeholders. This is due to
multifarious reasons, chief of them being lack of awareness in the market, the market viability
of the Circuit being unappealing to investor and private players as there is insufficient activity on
the part of the State Governments. There needs to be greater co-ordination between the Ministries
concerned and the State Government for the development of this Circuit. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that States should increase their investment in developing the
infrastructure around the Buddhist Circuit.  States should also devise new business strategies for
marketing Buddhist heritage. (Para 80)
The Committee strongly feels that the wider success of the Circuit will depend on providing
wayside amenities, visitor comfort facilities (shading, seating, and drinking water), opportunities
to interact with local people and lifestyles, and interesting interpretation and storytelling. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the development of facilities in association with major
petroleum companies could provide for lucrative public-private partnerships. (Para 81)
Further, the Committee feels that there are limited tourist activities beyond Buddhist
sites. Tours and activity packages are limited to pilgrimages. There is lack of evening entertainment

31
like light and sound shows, tourist relaxation and other such entertainments. Tourist spots are
not senior citizen friendly and disabled friendly. Tourist Information Centers are poorly managed.
The Committee therefore, recommends attracting tourist with special prices and events during
peak and off-peak seasons which would go a long way towards expanding market-share. Local
community organisations, monasteries, local bodies and other government authorities must engage
in joint planning and partnerships in offering experiences beyond pilgrimage to the tourists.
Packaging the Buddhist Circuit and its heritage in a more creative manner will facilitate accelerated
growth and improve tour operating opportunities. (Para 82)
LACK OF TRAINED TOUR GUIDES
The Committee feels that even if there is a current system in place, the system is not
sufficient and that these guides are not qualified as per the requirement for trained guides in the
Buddhist Circuits. Language guides are integral to the Circuit as tourists from other countries
prefer a guide who can speak their language and serve as a companion rather than just a guide.
The introduction of short term language courses along with short-term courses on becoming a
tour guide, with emphasis on cultural sensitivity along with practical courses on ticketing, etiquette
etc. , must be initiated in order to set an industry benchmark. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Culture and Ministry of Tourism must work together to develop
a program to train bright, young, educated youths to become tour guides. They should be trained
in at least one foreign language and in the relevant history of the related sites. The Buddhist
Circuit can also set up Public-Private-Partnerships with various Heritage Tour companies and
harness their professionalism to improve the experience of tourists, both domestic and
international. The Committee is of the view that academic institutions in the field of tourism and
government policies need to be better aligned with market demands. (Para 86)
The Committee further recommends that programmes tailored by IITM, for the Buddhist
Circuit must not be restricted to Bodh Gaya alone; but should have a wider connotation to include
the Buddhist Circuit at large. The Committee hopes that the “Linguistic Tourist Facilitator”
programme is implemented sooner rather than later so that it may be benefit the tourist season in
the coming year and it may serve to provide employment to the youth in the region. (Para 87)
The Committee is dismayed to note that no Guide Training including refresher course has
been conducted for the last three years due to a pending court case involving ASI. The Committee
recommends that the matter may be brought to the notice of Cabinet Secretary to make efforts
to bring an out of court settlement of the case so that the Guide Training programmes can start
afresh. (Para 88)
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF PILGRIMS/TOURISTS
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of Tourism and the States who have
deployed the Tourism Police. However, the Committee feels that much more needs to be done to
provide security to the tourists to ensure that tourists need not be apprehensive, while travelling
to explore the Buddhist Circuit. The State Governments must be brought on board to provide and
ensure 24-hour street-light and illumination, especially along unsafe National Highways. The
Committee desires that the States that are yet to implement and deploy the tourist police must
be impressed upon to do so. The Committee is of the opinion that there is a need for an integrated

32
and coordinated management approach among the various entities involved at local levels to
ensure a serene and safe environment. (Para 90)
PROMOTION OF LOCAL MARKETS
The Committee recommends that local craftsmanship must be supported and must be
encouraged to produce goods of higher quality. To do this, sufficient financial and institutional
backing must be provided by the Ministry of Tourism and the respective State Governments. This
must be a joint effort as one cannot be accomplished without the other. Separate shopping and
workshop areas must be created. These must be made accessible to tourists who will get to
experience and appreciate the culture and heritage of that place. There is clearly a scope for a
focused local awareness, skills training and entrepreneurship development drive, to maximize
local economic and employment impact of the Buddhist Circuit. (Para 93)
RATIONALIZATION OF TAXATION SYSTEM FOR THE BUDDHIST CIRCUIT TOURISM
The Committee hopes that the SPVs will bring the required infrastructure in the Buddhist
Circuit. (Para 97)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism must take it up with the Ministry
of Finance and follow the example of countries like Mauritius, who have successfully managed to
attract tourism investment by offering incentives in the 1980’s and removed them once the
sector gained momentum. These include tax-holidays, accelerated depreciation on buildings, initial
capital allowances, exemptions of customs duties etc. These incentives raise returns and offset
actual or perceived differences in the cost of doing a business and investing in a location. This will
also go along way to promote Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) and serve to attract investment
in the Circuit and help the Buddhist Circuit in fulfilling its potential. (Para 98)

MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH  MEETING
The Committees met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the 6 th February, 2015 in Committee Room’ A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri K.N. Balagopal
3. Shri Kalpataru Das
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
6. Kumari Selja
LOK  SABHA
7. Shri Vinod Lakhamashi Chavda
8. Shri Faizal P. P. Mohammed
9. Ms. Arpita Ghosh
10. Shri Rahul Kaswan
11. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
12. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
13. Shri Rajesh Pandey
14. Shri Prathap Simha
15. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
17. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
18. Shri K. C. Venugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
          2:30 P.M.
Ministry of Culture
1. Shri Ravindra Singh, Secretary
2. Shri M. Nambirajan, Director
Archaeological Survey of India
3. Shri B.R. Mani, Additional Director General
4. Shri R.S. Fonia, Joint Director-General
35

36
Ministry of Tourism
5. Shri Usha Sharma, Additional Director General
6. Dr. R.K. Bhatnagar, Additional Director General
7. Shri Suman Billa, Joint Secretary (T)
8. Shrimati Neela Lad, Deputy Director General
9. Ms. Meenakshi Mehta, Deputy Director General
10. Shri M.M. Sadana, Deputy Director General
11. Ms. Tumtuni Chowdhary, Assistant Director General
2. * * *.
3. The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Culture and senior officers of the Ministry
of Tourism to the meeting. He requested the Secretary to make a presentation on the issues relating to
maintenance, upkeep, encroachment etc. of our monuments and heritage sites.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture stated that the Centrally protected monuments were governed
by the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Site and Remains Act, 2010 and that the
National Monuments Authority regulates areas outside the Archeological Survey of India (ASI) protected
monuments for an area generally upto 300 meters. He apprised the Committee that 25 monuments have
been identified in the country and steps have been taken to provide all necessary tourist facilities at these
monuments. While delving on the issue of the involvement of the local population in heritage conservation,
he said that a scheme has been started for adopting two schools in the vicinity of the monuments for
educating the children on the importance of history and to improve public involvement in the monuments
so that they would become volunteer guides.
5. As regards the removal of encroachments, he informed the Committee that existing arrangements
in this regard were not effective and ASI needed to be empowered for the purpose. Currently in case of
any encroachment, the ASI lodges an FIR with the police. He expressed concern that thereafter, ASI
has to depend/look upon them. As a result, not much progress has been made in the removal of
encroachments. He said that the Chief Secretaries have been requested to set up Committees to monitor
the removal of the encroachments. He highlighted the need for giving more teeth to the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Site and Remains Act, 2010 and stated that ASI has taken up in-house study of the
Act. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Act is being re-examined to bring in a comprehensive
legislation.
6. One Member of the Committee suggested that a Task Force should be created in order to evict
encroachments. Some Members raised the issue of vacancies in ASI.
7. The representative of Ministry of Tourism informed the Committee that in the first phase of
development of Buddhist Circuit, a study has been done on the Buddhist Circuit and that in the second
phase which would be commissioned soon, the details of the projects and investments would be drawn
up, He stated that ` 500 crores of investment each, is expected in the public and private infrastructure and
*** Relates to other matters.

37
that electronic travel authorization and viza on arrival have been initiated, of which many of the Buddhist
countries are a part. He assured the Committee that efforts would be made to ensure that the targets are
achieved within the stipulated time lines.
8. The Committee emphasized upon the need for providing better facilities for tourists in the Buddhist
Circuit and the importance of cleanliness at these places.
9. The meeting adjourned at 3:58 
P.M.

VIII
EIGHTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the 13th February, 2015 in Room No.63, First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri K.N. Balagopal
3. Shri Rajeev Shukla
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
6. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
7. Kumari Selja
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Faizal P. P. Mohammed
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan
10. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
11. Shri P . Kumar
12. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
13. Shri Rajesh Pandey
14. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
16. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
17. Shri Manoj Tiwari
18. Shri K.C. V enugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
         2:30 P.M.
** *
38
*** Relates to other matters.

39
         3.00 P.M.
Ministry of Civil Aviation
6. Shri V.  Somasundaran Secretary
7. Dr. Renu Singh Parmar Economic Advisor
8. Shri Arun Kumar Joint Secretary
9. Shri G. Asok Kumar Joint Secretary
10. Shri B.S. Bhullar Joint Secretary
11. Ms Shefali Juneja Director
12. Shri Suyash Narain Director
13. Ms Rubina Ali Director
14. Shri V .R. Hedge Director
15. Shri Puja Jindal Director
16. Dr. Balmiki Prasad Director
** *
Airports Authority of India
20. Shri R.K. Srivastava Chairman
21. Shri S. Suresh Member (Finance)
22. Shri V. Somasundaram Member (ANS)
23. Shri G.K. Chaukiyal Member (Operation)
24. Shri S. Raheja Member (Planning)
25. Shri Pankaj Jain General Manager (Finance)
Air India
26. Shri Rohit Nandan CMD
27. Shri S. Venkat Director (Fin.)
28. Shri N.K. Jain Director (Personnel)
29. Shri Pankaj Srivastava Director (Commerce)
30. Shri Pankaj Kumar Executive Director
31. Ms. Harpreet A. De. Singh Executive Director
32. Capt. A.S. Soman Executive Director
** *
** *
** *
2. * * *. The Chairman also informed the Committee that in addition to the above, representatives of
Ministry of Civil Aviation will brief the Committee on the ‘Pricing of air tickets’ and ‘Development of
airports/aerodromes for providing air connectivity to the sites in Buddhist Circuit’.
*** Relates to other matters.

40
3. * * *.
4. * * *.
5. * * *. The Secretary was also requested to apprise the Committee about development of
airports/aerodromes for providing air connectivity to the sites in Buddhist Circuit as these places
have witnessed a rise in tourist inflow.
6. * * *.
7. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised queries on specific issues relating to the above
subjects, for which the concerned officials replied. For the unanswered questions and other information
sought, the Chairman directed the officials to submit written replies to the Committee.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 4.56 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

X
TENTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 15th January, 2018 in Committee Room No.2,
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Rakesh Singh    —   voted to Chair
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri La. Ganesan
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Kumari Selja
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK  SABHA
7. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
8. Shri Vinod Chavda
9. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
10. Kumari Arpita Ghosh
11. Shri Rahul Kaswan
12. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
13. Shri Ramcharan Bohra
14. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
15. Shri Rajesh Pandey
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
17. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
18. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
20. Shri Manoj Tiwari
21. Shri K.C. V enugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shrimati Anamika Das Bora, Committee Officer
Witnesses
Ministry of Tourism
1. Smt. Rashmi Verma, Secretary
2. Shri Satyajeet Rajan, Director-General, Tourism
41

42
3. Smt. Leela Nandan, AS & FA
4. Shri Suman Billa, JS
5. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma, ADG
6. Shri S.M. Mahajan, ADG
7. Shri Gyan Bhushan, Economic Advisor
8. Shri B.B. Dash, Director
9. Smt. Ashima Mehrotra, Director
Archaeological Survey of India
10. Shrimati Usha Sharma, Director-General
11. Shri T.J. Alone, Director (Monuments)
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
12. Shri Paresh Kumar Goyal, Director
13. Sheri D.K. Agarwal, GM, NHAI
IRCTC
14. Shri Alok Nath Mathur, Group GM (SER)
Government of Uttar Pradesh
15. Shri Anoop Kumar Srivastava, Deputy Director (Transport)
Madhya Pradesh Tourism Board
16. Shri Srikant Pandey, Additional Managing Director
17. Shri Anil Saxena, GM
Government of Bihar
18. Shri Vipin Kumar, Resident Commissioner
19. Smt. Shalini Kumari, Assistant Director
Federation of Associations of Indian Tourism and Hospitality
20. Shri Ashish Gupta, Consulting CEO
Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India
21. Shri Rahul Lall, SG
The Indian Association of Tour Operators
22. Shri Pronab Sarkar, President
Top Travel and Tours
23. Shri Rajendra Kumar Mathur, MD
Lotus Trans Travels
24. Shri Lajpat Rai, CMD
Lall & Associate
25. Shri Vikram Lall, Architect

43
Association of Domestic Tour Operators of India
26. Shri Chetan Gupta, Secretary
Ministry of Civil Aviation
27. Ms. Rubina Ali, Joint Secretary
28. Sh. Kamlendra Prasad Singh, Buddhism and Tourism Consultant
2. * * *.
3. The Committee then proceeded to take up the subject ‘Development of Buddhist Circuit in the country’.
The Ministry of Tourism, during their power point presentation, highlighted the steps taken to improve the
Buddhist circuit in the country and also the importance of pro-poor tourism, providing wayside amenities,
marketing and promotion of Buddhist circuit. As Shri Rakesh Singh had to leave, Shri Harish Chandra
Meena chaired the meeting thereafter. The Committee was also apprised of the co-ordination mechanism
existing among the Ministries of Tourism, Civil Aviation and Road Transport and Highways etc. for ensuring
better connectivity to the places listed in the Buddhist Circuit.
4. The Members of the Committee discussed the problem of regional connectivity to the places coming
under the Circuit and insisted on creating awareness among people and utilizing the potential of developing
these places into big tourist spots so that employment would also be generated along with the basic amenities.
The development of Kushinagar was discussed in detail. The Committee was informed that thematic road
shows and films are being developed for promotion of the Buddhist Circuit. Developing tourism ties with
Taiwan with regard to Buddhist Circuit was also discussed.
5. The Committee also took up the issues of trained tourist guides with required language skills for
facilitating the tourists, development of the sites by creating approach roads, signage, lighting, Tourism
Information kiosks, wi-fi facility, CCTV etc.
6. DG , ASI informed the Committee that out of the Buddhist Circuits covered by the Ministry, ASI has 27
sites, out of which 10 are Adarsh sites.
7. The Committee was informed that there is no separate budgetary allocation for the development of
Buddhist Circuit, but a number of schemes have been approved for the development of infrastructure in the
Buddhist Circuit, e.g., Swadesh Darshan Scheme. Developing areas like Sariska, Bhangarh, Abhaneri was
also discussed.
8. The representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee of the problems in regional
connectivity by air. Upgrading airports and bringing airlines in those sectors needed more attention. The
representatives of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed the Committee of the work under
progress in the circuit.
9. The stakeholders suggested for development of infrastructure viz., good hotels, roads, wayside facilities,
air connectivity etc. in the Buddhist sector.
10. The stakeholders/witnesses suggested that a single website for Buddhist tourism for all the States
should be developed. Formulating marketing strategy and off season monetary stabilization fund were also
suggested. Connectivity through Shatabdi Train or Rajdhani Train to these sites was also suggested. They
*** Relates to other matters.

44
also suggested to sensitize the local people towards tourists who visit these sites. Suggestion for exploring
the heritage or potential of Buddhism, not only for tourism but for its intellectual traditions like Sutras and
Monks and for soft transformation digital ideas, museums etc. was also put forth.
11. The representatives of State of Uttar Pradesh informed the Committee that financial assistance of
` 100 crores from the Ministry of Tourism has been taken to develop three sites, i.e. Kapilvastu, Kushinagar
and Sravasti. An integrated tourism plan & policy is being worked out to develop the Buddhist Circuit.
12. The representatives of State of Bihar informed the Committee of the projects in Bodh Gaya and other
important sites like Rajgir, Vaishali, Kolhua etc. It was also informed that rope ways are under construction
in Dungeshwari and Sanchi Stupa. They flagged the requirement of air connectivity to various Buddhist
sites.
13. Creation of knowledge on Buddhist architecture and heritage was also discussed. The Committee
suggested that various Ministries and State Governments need to work in tandem to reach to a positive
conclusion.
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
15. The meeting adjourned at 5.06 
PM.

45
*** Relates to other matters.
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 26th November, 2018 in Committee Room
D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Derek O’Brien     —   Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh
6. Kumari Selja
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar
LOK  SABHA
9. Shri Parvatagouda Chandangouda Gaddigoudar
10. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
11. Shri Rajesh Pandey
12. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
13. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
14. Maj. Gen. Bhuwan Chandra Khanduri, A VSM (Retd.)
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Pushpender Verma, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Catherine John L., Under Secretary
Shri K.V. Ramana Rao, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
** *
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and informed that the
agenda of the meeting was to adopt six Reports of the Committee *  *  *.
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted six Reports viz.,
(i)   draft Report on the subject ‘Development of Buddhist Circuit’;
(ii) * * *;

46
*** Relates to other matters
(iii) * * *;
(iv) * * *;
(v) * * *;
(vi) * * *;
4. * * *.
5. * * *.
6. * * *.
7. * * *.
8. * * *.
9. * * *.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
11. The meeting was adjourned at 4.22 
P.M.

ANNEXURE

49
ANNEXURE
List of witnesses who appeared before the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
6th February, 2015
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
Shri Ravindra Singh Secretary
Shri M. Nambirajan Director
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
Shri B .R. Mani ADG
Shri R.S. Fonia Jt. DG
MINISTRY OF TOURISM
Shri Usha Sharma ADG
Dr. R.K. Bhatnagar ADG
Shri Suman Billa JS (T)
Shrimati Neela Lad DDG
Ms. Meenakshi Mehta DDG
Shri M.M. Sadana DDG
Ms. Tumtuni Chowdhary ADG
13th February, 2015
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
Shri V. Somasundaran Secretary
Dr. Renu Singh Parmar Economic Advisor
Shri Arun Kumar Joint Secretary
Shri G . Asok Kumar Joint Secretary
Shri B.S. Bhullar Joint Secretary
Ms Shefali Juneja Director
Shri Suyash Narain Director
Ms Rubina Ali Director
Shri V .R. Hedge Director
Shri Puja Jindal Director
Dr. Balmiki Prasad Director
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
Shri R.K. Srivastava Chairman
Shri S. Suresh Member (Finance)
Shri V . Somasundaram Member (ANS)
Shri G.K. Chaukiyal Member (Operation)
Shri S. Raheja Member (Planning)
Shri Pankaj Jain General Manager (Finance)

50
AIR INDIA
Shri Rohit Nandan CMD
Shri S. Venkat Director (Fin.)
Shri N.K. Jain Director (Personnel)
Shri Pankaj Srivastava Director (Commerce)
Shri Pankaj Kumar Executive Director
Ms. Harpreet A. De. Singh Executive Director
Capt. A.S. Soman Executive Director
15th January, 2018
MINISTRY OF TOURISM
Smt. Rashmi Verma Secretary
Sh. Satyajeet Rajan Director General
Smt. Leela Nandan AS&FA
Smt. Meenakshi Sharma ADG
Sh. S.M. Mahajan ADG
Sh. Suman Billa JS
Sh. Gyan Bhushan Economic Advisor
Sh. B.B. Dash Director
Smt. Ashima Mehrotra Director
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
Smt. Usha Sharma Director General
Sh. T.J. Alone Director (Monuments)
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
Sh. Paresh Kumar Goyal Director
Sh. D .K. Agarwal GM, NHAI
IRCTC
Sh. Alok Nath Mathur Group GM (SER)
GOVERNMENT OF UTTAR PRADESH
Sh. Anoop Kumar Srivastava Deputy Director (Transport)
MADHYA PRADESH TOURISM BOARD
Sh. Srikant Pandey Additional Managing Director
Sh. Anil Saxena GM
THE FEDERATION OF ASSOCIATIONS OF INDIAN TOURISM AND HOSPITALITY
Sh. Ashish Gupta Consulting CEO
FEDERATION OF HOTEL AND RESTAURANT ASSOCIATIONS OF INDIA
Sh. Rahul Lall SG

51
THE INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF TOUR OPERATORS
Sh. Pronab Sarkar President
TOP TRA VEL & TOURS
Sh. Rajendra Kumar Mathur MD
LOTUS TRANS TRA VELS
Sh. Lajpat Rai CMD
LALL & ASSOCIATE
Sh. Vikrarn Lall Architect
ASSOCIATION OF DOMESTIC TOUR OPERATORS OF INDIA
Sh. Chetan Gupta Secretary
GOVERNMENT OF BIHAR
Sh. Vipin Kumar Resident Commissioner
Smt. Shalini Kumari Assistant Director
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary
Sh. Kamlendra Prasad Singh Buddhism and Tourism Consultant