76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT
 ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS
 SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2003-2004)
OF
 
DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON­­­­­­ 3.2.2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 3.2.2004)
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
JANUARY, 2004/ MAGHA, 1925(SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                     
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                             
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                      
4.         MINUTES                                                                                                                                                                  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2004)
 
1.Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
 
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
4. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
5. Shri S.S. Chandran 
6. Shri K. Rahman Khan
7. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
8. Shri Kalraj Mishra
9. Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
10. Shri Satish Pradhan
11. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
12. Shri K. Kalavenkata Rao
13. Shri Vayalar Ravi
14. Shrimati Maya Singh 
15. Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
 
LOK SABHA
 
16.  Shri Raj Babbar
17.  Shri G.M.  Banatwalla 
18.  Shri Anil Basu
19.  Shrimati Reena Choudhary
20.  Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran 
21.  Shri P.S. Gadhavi  
22.  Shri V. Dhananjaya Kumar
23.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
24.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
25.  Shri S.P. Lepcha
26.  Shri Shivaji Mane
27.  Shri K.H. Muniyappa 
28.  Shri Vilas Muttemwar
29.  Shri Ajit Kumar Panja
30.  Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
31.  Shri Chandresh Patel
32.  Shri Sunder Lal Patwa
33.  Shri Braj Mohan Ram
34.  Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
35.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
36.  Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
37.  Capt. Satish Sharma
38.  Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
39.  Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
40.  Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
41.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
42.  Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
43.  Shri Ram Naresh Tripathee
44.  Shri D. Venugopal
45.  Shri S.D.N.R.Wadiyar
 
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary         
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
I N T R O D U C T I O N
 
 
         I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,
 having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-sixth Report of the
 Committee on “Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in its Sixty-eighth
 Report on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of Department of Culture”.
 
2.      The Sixty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 25
th April 2003.
 
3.      Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Sixty-eighth Report were
 received from the Department of Culture on 27th November 2003.
 
4.      The Committee considered the subject and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 22nd January 2004.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
January 22, 2004
Magha 2, 1925 (Saka)
NILOTPAL BASU
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Transport, Tourism & Culture
 
REPORT
           
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
 observations/recommendations as contained in its Sixty-eight Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) (Demand No.
 90) of the Department of Culture, which was presented to the Parliament on 25th April 2003.
 
2.         Action Taken Replies have been received on 12
th November 2003 from the Government in respect of all the
 observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows:-
(i)         Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
            Para Nos. 14, 58, 94, 101                                                                     Total - 4
(ii)        Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in            view of the Government
 replies:
            Para Nos. 50, 62, 84, 104                                                                   Total - 4
(iii)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government   have not been accepted by the
 Committee:
            Para Nos. 21, 24, 29, 54                                                                   Total - 4
(iv)       Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the    Government are still awaited:
             Para Nos. 10, 37, 43, 46, 72, 89, 106                                          Total -7
 
3.         The Committee desires that final replies in respect of the recommendations, which have been categorized as
 interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.
 

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
4.         On scrutiny of the said Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each item of the action
 taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry.  The recommendations of the Committee contained in the Sixty-eight
 Report, action taken thereon by the Government and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of
 action taken have been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
 
THE APPROACH IN THE 10
TH PLAN AND ANALYSIS OF THE ANNUAL PLAN 2003-04 (Recommendation
 at para 10)
 
5.         The Committee observes that for the 10 th plan an amount of Rs.1720 crores inclusive of Rs.180 crores for
 Capital Component has been allocated for plan expenditure of the Department of Culture.  Out of which only Rs.250
 crores had been allocated during the first year of the 10
th Plan i.e. 2002-03 and an amount of Rs.250 crores has been
 allocated in B.E. 2003-04 as the plan outlay of Department of Culture against the projected requirement of Rs.399
 crores.  The Committee is constrained to note that the share of the Department in terms of total plan allocation of the
 Government is only 0.2 per cent, which is abysmally low.  The Committee finds that the plan outlay approved by the
 Government of India is on lower side in comparison to the amount proposed by the Department of Culture for 2003-
04.  The Committee feels that the Government has not paid adequate attention to this Sector. The Committee
 disapproves the low pace of allocation of outlay to the Department of Culture out of the total approved allocation
 outlay, i.e. of Rs.1720 crores for the plan expenditure to be made during the 10
th five-year plan.  The Committee feels
 that any reduction in the outlay would have serious implications in the development activities of the Department.  The
 Committee, recommends that in future the Department should be allocated with more funds in order to enable them to
 fulfill the targets and the Government of India should address the financial requirements of the Department of Culture
 more realistically and allocate the amount more judiciously while sanctioning the plan outlay for the remaining periods
 of the 10th Plan.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
6.         The matter has been taken up with the Planning Commission and their comments are awaited.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
7.         The Committee notes the reply and desires the Department of Culture to pursue the matter with the
 Planning Commission for allocation of more funds to Department for the remaining period of the 10
th Plan.
 
REDUCTION OF CAPITAL WORKS ALLOCATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE AT R.E.
 STAGE BY MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(Recommendation at para 14)
 
8.         The Committee observes that the Budget Estimates of Department of Culture also include allocation for the
 capital works.  The amount earmarked for capital works is also reflected in the Demands for Grants of Ministry of
 Urban Development.  The money is spent by CPWD on the projects of Department of Culture.  The Committee took
 serious note of the reduction of the amount at Revised Estimate stage by the Ministry of Urban development
 unilaterally that too without taking them into confidence. The Committee also notes that the capital works outlay during
 IX Plan was Rs.112 crores and CPWD could spend only Rs.59.29 crores i.e. 52.94 per cent of the total allocation,
 where as projects of Department of Culture suffered severe financial crunch.  Therefore, the Committee recommends
 that this anomalous practice should be stopped at once.  The Committee further recommends that the amount for the
 capital works should be allocated in the Demands for Grants of the Department of Culture and placed at the disposal of
 Department of Culture instead of Ministry of Urban Development in order to ensure better implementation control and
 monitoring of projects.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
9.         This recommendation was taken up with the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Urban Development Necessary
 orders have been obtained for transferring the funds to the Department of Culture.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
10.       The Committee notes the reply.
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
(Recommendation at paras 21, 24& 29)
 
11.       The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Finance has released 75 per cent of the revenue collected
 through entry fee to the Department of Culture at the revised estimate stage during 2002-03 for conservation and
 maintenance of monuments.  The Committee feels that execution of conservation and preservation works need an
 excellent expertise and timely funding of projects.  But with its meager resource, it was difficult for the ASI to protect
 and maintain all the 3616 monuments/sites.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 100 per cent of the revenue
 collected from admission fees should be released to ASI for stepping up the activities and to augment resources of ASI
 besides coordinated efforts should be taken by the ASI to bring more monuments under central protection and also
 raising the number of monuments for ticketing purpose to generate more revenue.
 
12.       The Committee is happy to note that three new Circles in the States of Uttranchal, Jharkhand and Chattisgarh
 have been created under ASI and will be operational from April 2003, which will result in intensive preservation and
 maintenance of monuments in more sites.  The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts of the Department of Culture
 with regard to filling up of vacant posts in ASI and recommends that ASI should fill up these vacant posts within a
 definite time frame, so that execution of Conservation, Preservation and Developmental work of monuments do not
 suffer for want of shortage of manpower.  
                                                                                                                  
13.       The Committee notes that ASI has drawn long term programme to protect all 3616 monuments/sites of national
 importance.  These monuments have also been classified into three categories viz. Group A, B and C.  The Committee
 also notes that Group A consists of 16 monuments inscribed in the World Heritage list and 11 monuments have been
 proposed to the UNESCO for inclusion in the list of World Heritage Sites.  The Committee recommends that
 Department of Culture should identify at least one monument/site in each State for inclusion in the list of World
 Heritage Sites of UNESCO and coordinated efforts should be made for integrated infrastructure development
 conservation/preservation of these monuments sites with encompassing facilities for tourists, so as to give a major fillip
 to cultural tourism in the country as well as attracting overseas visitors.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
14.       Upto 2001, 3606 monuments were under protection.   As on date, 3622 monuments have been protected and
 included in the national list of centrally protected monuments.  This is an on going process considering the historical,
 archaeological and aesthetic importance of monuments.
 
15.       All the three newly created Circles at Raipur, Ranchi and Dehradun have become fully functional with adequate
 manpower, budget and financial powers.  As regards filling up the vacant posts, continuous efforts are being made to
 fill them up.
 
16.       The 11 sites under the present tentative list of UNESCO covers 9 States of the country, namely, Andhra Pradesh,
 Bihar, Delhi, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.  The Prehistoric Rock
 Shelters and Caves with paintings at Bhimbetka, Madhya Pradesh has been nominated for inscription on the World
 Heritage List for 2003.  At present, there is an embargo imposed by UNESCO under which only one site per country
 can be nominated in a year.  Integrated development of the sites in a befitting manner to attract more tourists is the
 present priority of the Department of Culture.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
 
17.       The Committee takes strong exception to the fact that the Government has completely overlooked the
 recommendations made by the Committee that 100 per cent collection made from admission fees by the ASI at the
 monuments should be released to ASI for stepping up its activities.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that
 revenue collected by the ASI should be transferred to ASI either through specific executive order or through suitable
 amendments in the existing statutory provisions.   Besides, efforts should also be made by the ASI to identify more
 monuments for ticketing purpose to generate more revenue.
 
18.       The Committee is not satisfied with the efforts of the Department of Culture with regard to filling up of vacant
 posts in ASI and recommends that ASI should fill up these vacant posts within a definite time frame, so that execution
 of Conservation, Preservation and Developmental work of monuments do not suffer for want of shortage of manpower. 
 
19.       The Committee notes that there is an embargo imposed by UNESCO under which only one site per country can
 be nominated in a year.  However, the present tentative list of UNESCO cover 9 States of the country, namely, Andhra
 Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal and the Prehistoric
 Rock Shelters and Caves with paintings at Bhimbetka, Madhya Pradesh has been nominated for inscription on the
 World Heritage List for 2003. The Committee recommends that Department of Culture should identify at least one
 monument/site in each State for inclusion in the list of World Heritage Sites of UNESCO and coordinated efforts
 should be made for integrated infrastructure development conservation/preservation of these monuments/sites with
 encompassing facilities for tourists, so as to give a major fillip to cultural tourism in the country as well as attracting
 overseas visitors.    
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSERVATION, PRESERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF MONUMENTS
 (Recommendation at para 37)
 
20.       The Committee notes that IOC donated Rs.25 crores to NCF and the amount has been transferred to IOF as
 Corpus Fund.  The Committee is constrained to note that an amount of Rs.10 crores per annum has not been donated by
 the IOC to the NCF for appropriation as per the provisions of MOU.  However, the Department of Culture has sent
 proposals for restorations and conservation of 14 monuments in 10 states to IOC, which was later on revised to 25 sites
 in 25 States.  Out of which, initially 5 Heritage monuments/sites have been selected by IOC for Integrated
 development.    The Committee feels that conservation of our rich cultural heritage is important both for encouraging
 tourism as well as attracting overseas visitors. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should
 make efforts to procure Rs.10 crores from IOC, as decided in the Memorandum of Understanding.  The Committee also
 recommends the Department of Culture to steep up its activities in various sectors and vigorously coordinate efforts
 with IOC for holistic development of these heritage sites/monuments and simultaneously seeks for convergence of
 resources in coordination with other Corporate Sectors/State Governments/Private Sector for development of the rest of
 the heritage sites/monuments in the country.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
21.       A number of Meetings were convened at the level of the Hon’ble Minister of Tourism and Culture.  The issue
 was taken up personally by the Minister of Tourism and Culture with the Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas vide
 letter dated 29
th May, 2002.  14 Monuments in 10 States were listed out for restoration and conservation. It was also
 promised that once Indian Oil Corporation/Indian Oil Foundation contributes Rs.10 crores, a matching contribution will
 be made by the Archaeological Survey of India.  This was followed by another letter on 16 th January 2003 giving
 estimates for the five sites already selected by the IOC/IOF for financial support.
 
22.       A list of 25 sites in 25 different States was also forwarded to Indian Oil Corporation/Indian Oil Foundation for
 financial support in the month of April 2002 in response to the directions issued by the Hon’ble Chairman of the
 Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.  The issue was further taken up by Director
 General, Archaeological Survey of India and Member-Secretary, National Culture Fund in the Trust Meeting of Indian
 Oil Foundation.  Following this, the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India had a meeting with
 Secretary(Petroleum) on 9.4.2003 followed by a letter to him on June 4, 2003.

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
23.       The Committee notes that 14 Monuments in 10 States have been listed out for restoration and conservation. The
 Committee recommends that the Department of Culture should keep pursuing the IOC for holistic development of these
 sites in a time bound manner.
 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXCAVATION AND EXPLORATION
(Recommendation at para 43)
 
24.       The Committee is not happy with the lackadaisical approach in the matter of publication of pending excavation
 reports.  The Committee notes that reports upto 1996-97 have been published by the ASI but still there remains a
 backlog for writing and printing of these reports.  However, in this connection, the Committee would like to be
 informed whether the final reports on excavation works taken up long back have been finalised as pointed out by the
 Committee in its recommendations contained in its 56
th Report and recommends that the ASI should expedite writing
 and publication of all the pending reports in a time bound manner.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
           
25.       Among the pending reports, one on Kalibangan and other Nagarjunakonda are at final stage of printing and one
 on Adam is under finalisation.  However, mandatory summary report under the Ancient Monuments, Ancient Sites and
 Remains Rules, 1959 on excavations conducted upto 1997-98 have been published in annual issues of the Indian
 Archaeology – A Review of the concerned year.  Report for the year1998-99 is under printing.  Report for the year
 1999-2000 is under editing prior to being sent to the Press.  Reports for the years upto 2002 are under compilation.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
26.       The Committee took strong exception to the fact that there is long pendency & backlog for writing & publication
 of excavation reports.  Even though the mandatory summary reports under the Ancient Monuments, Ancient Sites and
 Remains Rules, 1959 on excavations conducted upto 1997-98 have been published in annual issues of the "Indian
 Archaeology – A Review" of the concerned year, the reports for the year 1998 to 2002 are still under compilation.  The
 Committee further reiterates its recommendation that the Department of Culture should expedite writing and
 publication of all the pending reports in a time bound manner.
 
MUSEUMS
(Recommendation at para 46)
 
27.       The Committee feels that museums are major attractions for tourists, foreign students and scholars and is a link
 between culture and education.  The success of a museum or Art Gallery depends, to a large extent on its ability to
 project “Unity in Diversity’ in the cultural matrix of the nation.  This could be better achieved if an integrated approach
 has been adopted for linking art with science, craft with technology, man made treasures with natural resources and
 strengthening of basic functions of museums in collections, conservation, documentation, research, publication,
 presentation and education.  The Committee recommends the Department of Culture to strengthen and provide better
 infrastructure to improve the standards of museums in the country.  In this connection, the Committee observes that
 large-scale excavations have been undertaken at the sites of Dholavira and Hatab in Gujarat, Govishan, Kashipur in
 Uttaranchal, Sravasti in UP and Udaigiri in Orissa.  The Committee recommends that items found during excavation at
 Dholavira should be exhibited and conserved in a museum at the site itself.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
28.       The Department of Culture is operating a Scheme for Promotion & Strengthening of Regional & Local
 Museums.  It provides grants to existing museums in the country such as State Government Museums, University

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
 Museums and Private Museums registered under the Societies Act or any other Acts, all over India for promotion of
 Antiquities, Numismatics, Paintings, Ethnological collections, Folk Arts & Crafts, Textiles etc. The grant is provided
 for the following
purposes:
 
S.
No.
Purpose For Category-I
(State & Renowned Museums)
Category-II
(Other Museums)
1. Renovation/repair/modernisation 50.00 lakhs 25.00 lakhs
2. Publication 10.00 lakhs 5.00 lakhs
3. Conservation 25.00 lakhs 12.50 lakhs
4. Museum Library 5.00 lakhs 2.50 lakhs
5. Equipment 15.00 lakhs 7.50 lakhs
6. Documentation 15.00 lakhs 7.50 lakhs
 
29.       The budget allocation for the Scheme is Rs.300.00 lakhs during 2003-2004 for the museums under Department
 of Culture; Government of India has already undertaken a programme of modernization of their galleries and use of
 Information Technology in display and strengthening of the infrastructure of the museum, Conservation and
 documentation of Art objects, research, publications, educational activities and exhibitions of Art objects are the regular
 schemes of Museums.
 
30.       ASI complex at Dholavira comprising Documentation Centre and Orientation Centre for display of a selected
 collection of objects found during excavation as well as huts for the excavation team and the scholars/students is
 presently under construction.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
31.       The Committee is happy to note that the Department of Culture is operating a Scheme for Promotion &
 Strengthening of Regional & Local Museums and providing grants to existing museums in the country and has already
 undertaken a programme for modernization of their galleries and use of Information Technology in displaying
 programmes.  This will help in strengthening the infrastructure of the museums, conservation and documentation of art
 objects, research, publications, educational activities and exhibitions of art objects etc.
            The Committee recommends that ASI complex at Dholavira comprising Documentation center and orientation
 center for display of selected objects found during excavation, which is under construction, should be completed in
 time and Department of Culture should report back to the Committee after its completion.
 
NATIONAL MISSION FOR MANUSCRIPTS
(Recommendation at para 50)
 
32.       The Committee recommends that Department of Culture should make consistent efforts and give paramount
 importance to the work relating to preservation of manuscripts and to salvage this cultural heritage from extinction,
 their preservations and continued availability of scholars and public in general.  The Committee also recommends that
 sincere efforts should be initiated to acquire the manuscripts, which are still under private possession partly due to mass
 ignorance about their importance and partly due to attachment towards these as hereditary acquisitions.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
33.       The National Mission for Manuscripts has been fully operationalised with the National Empowered Committee
 under the Chairmanship of the Minister and other bodies.  The Mission has already undertaken extensive awareness
 building programmes and have got scheme for financial assistance approved.   Under the scheme, 24 institutions all
 over the country have been designated as Manuscript   Resource Centre.     15 institutions have been identified as
 Manuscript Conservation Centre.  Through these Centre cataloguing, listing and conservation activities have been taken
 up. It is proposed to hold conservation camps in these centers.  The required personnel is being trained for this purpose.

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
34.       The Committee notes the reply.
 
 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS
(Recommendation at para 54)
 
35.       The Committee takes strong exception for reducing the plan allocation of IGNCA from Rs.1 crore in BE 2002-
03 to Rs.10 lakhs in B.E. 2003-04.  The Committee notes that the corpus fund of Rs.50 crores has been increased to
 Rs.83 crores in 2002-03 to meet the recurring and non-recurring expenditure and a grant of Rs.100 crores has been
 released to IGNCA for construction activities.  The Committee also notes that the request for enhancement of corpus
 fund and additional amount for its building project is pending before the Cabinet.  However, in this connection the
 Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation contained in 56
th Report, which is reproduced below:-
“The Committee fails to understand as to how the Centre will be able to manage its recurring expenses from out
 of the accrued interest of corpus fund when the rate of interest is changing frequently.  The Committee,
 therefore, recommends that the Government should make an assessment ofrecurring requirements of the Centre
 and make provision to meet shortage of fund in the budget itself.”
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
36.       A decision was taken to allow the IGNCA to draw an amount of 30 crores from their Corpus Fund so as to
 enable them to complete the building project at a convenient stage.(operationalise the completed building and  
 construct   the  already started  building upto the  ground floor and make it ready for occupation).  It was also decided
 that to meet the shortfall in their income, to run   programmes, Government could consider financial assistance on
 specific proposals.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
37.       The Committee notes the reply.  However, the Committee fails to understand how the Government has
 addressed the shortfall in the corpus fund allocated to IGNCA.  The Committee expresses its serious concern regarding
 the reduction in plan allocation made in BE 2003-04 as compared to BE 2002-03.
 
FESTIVAL OF INDIA
(Recommendation at para 58)
 
38.       The Committee notes that a Festival of India in Bhutan is being organized from March 2003 to October 2003. 
 The Committee does not approve the idea of Department of Culture for reducing the allocation under the head in B.E.
 2003-04 and holding festival of India in foreign countries at a smaller scale to propagate Indian Culture and traditions
 and popularize the rich variety of handicraftsproduced in India.   In this connection the Committee would like to draw
 attention of the Government towards its earlier recommendation contained in its 56
th Report wherein the Committee
 has recommended that the Government should chalk out a strategy to make it a regular phenomenon so that the
 objective of promotion of cultural links with foreign countries should be achieved which in turn will also attract the
 foreign tourists to India.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
39.       The Department of Culture has initiated action to organize Festivals of India in Iran and Brazil. Other agencies
 like FICCI, CII, Handicrafts Commissioner Department of Tourism and Ministry of External Affairs are also being

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
 involved.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
40.       The Committee notes the reply.
 
SCIENCE CITIES
(Recommendation at para 62)
 
41.       The Committee is not satisfied with the pace of development work under different science city projects.  The
 Committee feels that the project has been given low priority by the Government, which is reflected by the meagre
 budgetary allocation.  The Committee recommends that Department of Culture should prioritise the projects and
 provide convergence of resources in coordination with State/Private Sector.  The Committee also recommends that
 Department of Culture should explore the possibility of setting up of Science City in each and every State and take into
 confidence the Members of Parliament belonging to respective States so as to ensure coordination and cooperation of
 local bodies. The Government should also see that sufficient funds be provided for these science city projects.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
42.       The norms/guidelines for setting up of Science Cities/Regional Science Centres/Sub-Regional Science Centres
 were approved by the Cabinet, in its meeting held on 23
rd April, 2003.  These norms provide that both the Central
 Government and State Government concerned should contribute @ 13% each and the remaining 74% to be raised by
 the private entrepreneurs.  State Governments and the Societies/authorities promoted by them for the purpose shall be
 eligible for financial assistance.
 
43.       The Planning Commission has already set apart Rs.90.28 crores during the 10
th Plan period for meeting the
 proposals of Science Cities.  Grant-in-Aid have been released to Pushpa Gujral Science City, Kapurthala; Gujarat
 Science City, Ahmedabad; and Regional Science Centre, Ranchi, Jharkhand as follows:
                                                                       
 
                       
Year             (Rs. in crores)
Pushpa Gujral Science City, Kapurthala                        1998-2001                14.00
         13.00
           8.50
Gujarat Science City, Ahmedabad                    2002-2003                  1.00
Regional Science Centre, Ranchi                       2002-2003                  1.50
 
44.       A sum of Rs.2.00 crores has also been released in 2002-2003 for the upgradation of the Regional Science
 Centres, Lucknow to Regional Science City.  The proposals for setting up Science Cities in other States can be
 considered after these are received by the Government of India/Department of Culture as per guidelines/norms
 approved by the Cabinet.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
45.       The Committee notes that the norms/guidelines for setting up of Science Cities/Regional Science Centres/Sub-
Regional Science Centres have been approved by the Cabinet and the Planning Commission has already set apart
 Rs.90.28 crores during the 10
th Plan period for implementing the proposals of Science Cities.  Grants-in-Aid have been
 released to Pushpa Gujral Science City, Kapurthala; Gujarat Science City, Ahmedabad; and Regional Science Centre,
 Ranchi, Jharkhand.
 
CENTRAL SECRETARIAT LIBRARY & NATIONAL LIBRARY, KOLKATA

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
(Recommendation at para 72)
 
46.       The Committee is happy to note that sufficient funds have been provided by the Department of Culture during
 the year 2003-04 to the modernization of Central and Public Libraries with a view to encourage resource sharing,
 networking and to improve reader services, developing a National Bibliographic Database in electronic format and to
 carry out activities of retro conversion of existing records in electronic formats with National Library and Central
 Secretariat Library besides upgrading of conservation laboratory and construction of reader’s hostel in the National
 Library.  However, the Committee expresses its dismay over slow pace of progress in the construction of Bhasha
 Bhawan for which no fund has been provided this year as informed by the Department of Culture.  The Committee
 recommends that a time schedule for completion of Bhasha Bhawan be prepared and communicated to the Committee
 and responsibility should also be fixed in case of delay, if any, in future.
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
47.       During 2002-03 the Central Secretariat Library initiated a project for retro-conversion of its bibliographic
 records into machine readable form.  The work began in the month of July, 2002 and by the end of the financial year of
 2002-03, Central Secretariat Library have been able to convert the bibliographical information into machine readable
 form to the tune of 3.15 lakhs as on date.  The project is beingcontinued in 2003-2004 and hopefully, it will be
 completed in the current financial year.
 
48.       Another project undertaken by Central Secretariat Library was on the digitization of Annual Reports,
 Performance Budget, Demands for Grants of the Department of Culture for 10 years period beginning 1981 to 1990 and
 also digitization of the Government of India Gazette published since 1950.  The project started in 2002-03 and Central
 Secretariat Library has been able to complete one part of the project i.e. scanning the images of the Gazette of India
 documents to the tune of 17.75 lakh pages.  The project is being continued in the current financial year also.
 
49.       The total allocation on the above two projects in the current financial year is Rs.259.00 lakhs at B.E. stage.
 
50.       The National Library, Kolkata has taken up the programme for modernization of Library during the year 2003-
2004 in various ways with a view to encouraging resource sharing, networking, improving reader services and carrying
 out activities pertaining to Retro-Conversion measure for the Laboratory of the Library and taking up the project of
 construction of Readers Hostel together with construction of Type II and Type III staff quarters in the National Library
 premises.
 
51.       As regards the progress of work relating to the Bhasha Bhavan, it is submitted that the project has been
 periodically reviewed. The work, both civil and electrical, in respect of the auditorium with 580 seats is yet to be
 completed; furniture supplying is in progress.
 
52.       The Secretary(Culture) also visited Bhasha Bhavan and held discussion with CPWD authorities to expedite the
 work.  It is expected to formally inaugurate the new building before the end of the financial year  (2003-2004).
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
53.       The Committee notes that the work of conversion of bibliographic records into machine readable form and
 digitization of Annual Reports, Performance Budget, Demands for Grants of the Department of Culture for 10 years
 period beginning 1981 to 1990 and also digitization of the Government of India Gazette published since 1950 is being
 pursued.  The work relating to the Bhasha Bhavan is in progress and is expected to complete by end of the financial
 year  (2003-2004).  The Committee however recommends that physical targets be set for completion of such work in a
 time bound manner.
 
AKADEMIS AND NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
(Recommendation at para 84)

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
 
54.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that Department of Culture has enhanced the plan allocation of Sangeet
 Natak Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi, Sahitya Akademi and National School of Drama for the year 2003-2004 for
 continuing its ongoing programmes besides strengthening inter organizational networks to introduced management
 oriented approach in the administration.  The Committee feels that the increased allocation will certainly help boost
 these institution to achieve their targets. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
55.       No Action required.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
56.       The Committee notes the reply.
LALIT KALA AKADEMI
(Recommendation at para 89)
 
57.       The Committee feels that the Lalit Kala Akademi is playing a vital role in the promotion of visual arts in the
 country.  The Committee is in agreement with the suggestion of the Akademi for an increase in the scholarships.  The
 Committee recommends that the number of scholarships in the field of visual and plastic art should be increased from
 40 to 64 as suggested by the Department of Culture so as to ensure 2 scholarship for each of the 32 States/Union
 Territories.  It will help the Akademi in extending its reach to more and more people as also popularising the visual and
 plastic arts.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
58.       This matter will be examined by the Government in detail.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
59.       The Committee notes that the Department of Culture is examining the issue of increasing the scholarships in the
 field of visual and plastic art and recommends that the matter should be expedited by an early date.
 
ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRE
(Recommendation at para 94)
 
60.       The Committee notes that the Zonal Cultural Centres were set with the objective to extend various cultural
 activities specially folk and tribal art forms through them.  The Committee however finds that Zonal Cultural Centres
 are facing a severe resource crunch and consequently very little fund is now available with them for their activities. 
 The Committee recommends that a plan funding should be done for the Zonal Cultural Centres to create additional art
 infrastructure facilities and improve the existing facilities by the Department of Culture besides setting up of uniform
 facilities across all the Zonal Cultural Centres so that activities of Zonal Cultural Centres should be carried out in
 accordance with the objective of promotion and dissemination of the arts of the respective zone.  The Committee also
 recommends that shilpgrams should be setup by all Zonal Cultural Centers for providing promotion and marketing
 facilities to artisans.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
61.       Zonal Cultural Centres are implementing their Annual Plan and programmes/activities out of the interest earning
 on the one-time corpus fund contributed by the Department of Culture and member States.  Department of Culture
 gives annual grant-in-aid under NCEP and Documentation schemes and RDFD Festival under Plan Budget.  The Zonal
 Cultural Centres are facing resource crunch due to reduction in interest rates by bank and financial institutions. 

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
 Department of Culture has approved enhancement of corpus fund to the tune ofRs.35 crores for Zonal Cultural Centres
 during 10th Five Year Plan; enhancement of NCEP grants from Rs.25 lakhs to 35 lakhs per annum per Zonal Cultural
 Centre.  The Zonal Cultural Centres have been allowed to utilize 25% of the NCEP grant for inter Zonal programmes. 
 Two newschemes i.e. guru shishya parampara and theatre activities have been sanctioned for implementation by Zonal
 Cultural Centres.  Zonal Cultural Centres have already set up Shilpgrams.  North Eastern Zonal Cultural Centre has also
 started to construct their Shilpgram.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
62.       The Committee is satisfied that Department of Culture has approved enhancement of corpus fund to the tune of
 Rs.35 crores for Zonal Cultural Centres during 10
th Five Year Plan.  The Committee hopes that with the enhancement
 of NCEP grants from Rs.25 lakhs to 35 lakhs per annum per Zonal Cultural Centre, these centers will be able to execute
 various cultural activities smoothly.
 
SETTING UP OF MULTI PURPOSE CULTURAL COMPLEXES INCLUDING THOSE FOR CHILDREN
(Recommendation at para 101)
 
63.       The Committee notes that the plan allocation during 2003-2004 has been increased for setting up of Multi
 Purpose Cultural Complexes for Children in coordination with autonomous body created by State Government but still
 it falls short of the requirement of Department of Culture.  As a result, the Department could not take up its proposal for
 revising the guidelines for multipurpose complex.  The Committee is of the view that these complexes will foster and
 coordinate activities in the State in the different cultural field such as music, drama, dance, literature, fine arts etc. and
 promote the cultural unity of the country.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of India should
 provide sufficient outlay for timely completion of Multi Purpose Cultural Complexes and to enable the Department of
 Culture to take up the work of revision of guidelines of the scheme.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
           
64.       Sufficient funds have been released to complete the on going projects. The schemes is being revised keeping in
 view the Committee’s recommendations.
 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
           
65.       The Committee notes that sufficient funds have been released to complete the on going projects under multi
 purpose cultural complexes including those for children and the scheme is being revised as per the recommendation of
 the Committee.
 
NORTH EAST REGION
(Recommendation at para 104)
 
66.       The Committee is happy to note that the Department of Culture has been able to utilize 100 per cent plan outlay
 allocated for North East Region during 2002-2003 to highlight and popularize the rich and diverse art and culture of
 North East India including Sikkim.  The Committee notes that a budgetary allocation of Rs.22crores has been made
 during 2003-2004 for various activities and programme of the Department of Culture in North East Region.  The
 Committee recommends that the Department of Culture should adopt proactive approach in initiating activities so that
 rich cultural wealth of North Eastern Region will come into limelight.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
67.       The Department shall work towards adopting a proactive approach in initiating steps to highlight the rich culture
 of the North Eastern Region.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
           
68.       The Committee notes the reply.
 
COORDINATION BETWEEN THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
(Recommendation at para 106)
           
69.       The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Culture and Department of Tourism should
 develop some institutional mechanism with regard to the formulation of policies and projects for integrated
 development, conservation and preservations of monuments. Coordinated efforts should be taken by the Department of
 Culture in consultation with the Department of Tourism in order to ensure integrated development of clusters of
 monuments.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
70.       The Hon’ble Minister of Tourism & Culture has set up a system for formulation of projects and regular
 monitoring of integrated development activities including cultural regeneration, conservation and preservation, creation
 of tourist facilities and integration of the elements of tourism, culture and clean civic life.
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
71.       The Committee notes the reply. But as regards the new system for formulation of projects and regular
 monitoring of integrated development activities including cultural regeneration etc. is concerned the Committee would
 like to know in detail the basic principle which formed the basis of this new system and whether adequate scientific,
 historical and archaeological inputs have gone into the choice of sites earmarked for those integrated projects. 
MINUTES
 
D MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 22
nd January 2004 in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
5. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Shri Kalraj Mishra
7. Shri Satish Pradhan
8. Shri K.Kalavenkata Rao
9. Shri Vayalar Ravi
10. Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
 
LOK SABHA
11.Shri Raj Babbar

76th report of Transport,Tourism, and Culture
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/76threport.htm[28-08-2018 13:07:28]
      12.  Shri G. M. Banatwalla
      13.  Shri Anil Basu
      14.  Shri P.S.Gadhavi
      15.  Shri S.P.Lepcha
16.  Shri Vilas Muttenwar
17.  Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
      18.  Shri Braj Mohan Ram         
      19.  Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
 
   SECRETARIAT
         Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
         Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
         Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
2.         The Committee considered the draft Reports on Action Taken by the Government on the
 recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its 68
th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
 Department of Culture and 69th Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of Ministry of Civil Aviation and, after some
 discussion, adopted the said reports with slight modifications.  The Committee also decided to present the reports to the
 Parliament after the resumption of the sitting of current Session of Parliament.
 
3.         *                                              *                                                                     *
 
4.         *                                              *                                                                     *
5.         The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.05 p.m.
________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to matters not included in this Report.