Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT
 
REPORT NO. 
208
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred 
and Ninety Fifth Report on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) 
of the Ministry of Tourism

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

51
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Fifth Report on the Demands for Grants (2013-14)
of the Ministry of Tourism
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—25
5. O BSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE ................................. 26—28
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 2 9—31
7. L IST OF R EPORTS ............................................................................................................... 32—50

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2013-14)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
8. Shri Satish Sharma
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shri S. Pakkirappa
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
26. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture having authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred and Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Ninety Fifth Report
on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Tourism.
2. One Hundred Ninety Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 3
rd May, 2013.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred Ninety Fifth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on the 6 th August, 2013.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 17 th December, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
17th December, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 26, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ATF – Aviation Turbine Fuel
B E – Budget Estimate
CBSP – Capacity Building for Service Providers
CFA – Central Financial Assistance
CFC – Chloroflurocarbon
CS – Central Sector Scheme
CSR – Corporate Social Responsibility
CSS – Centrally Sponsored Scheme
DA VP – Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity
DG – Director General
DGCA – Director General Civil Aviation
DPPH – Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality
DPR – Detailed Project Report
DoPT – Department of Personnel and Training
FCI – Food Craft Institute
FEE – Foreign Exchange Earning
FHRAI – Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Associations of India
FTA – Foreign Tourist Arrival
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
GBS – Gross Budgetary Support
HAI – Hotel Association of India
HSRT – Hunar Se Rozar Tak
HRACC – Hotel and Restaurant Approval Classification Committee
HRD – Human Resource Development
IHM – Institute of Hotel Management
IISM – Indian Institute of Skiing and Mountaineering
ILP – Inner Line Permit
IMCCTS – Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee for Tourism Sector
ITDC – India Tourism Development Corporation
(iv)

IITM – Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management
ITTA – India Tourist Transport Association
MICE – Meetings Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions
MHA – Ministry of Home Affairs
MoT – Ministry of Tourism
NCF – National Culture Fund
NCHMCT – National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology
NCR – National Capital Region
NE – North-East
NGO – Non-Governmental Organisation
NIWS – National Institute of Water Sports
PIDDC – Product Infrastructure Development for Destination and Circuits
PUC – Public Sector Undertaking
RE – Revised Estimate
RT – Rural Tourism
TSA – Tourism Satellite Account
TVOA – T ourist Visa on Arrival
UT – Union Territory
UPSTDC – Uttar Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation
(v)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism on
the observations/recommendations as contained in its One Hundred and Ninety Fifth Report on
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Tourism, which was presented to both the
Houses of Parliament on 3
rd May, 2013.
2. The Action Taken Replies received from the Ministry in respect of all the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report have been categorized as follows:–
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Department:
Para Nos. 10, 11, 12, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 40, 50, 58, 61, 91, 100, 101, 102, 107,
108, 109, 118, 126, 130, 131, and 132 Total : 24
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Department replies:
Para Nos. 13, 54, 71, 79, 94, 100, 120, 125 and 134 Total : 9
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Department have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos . Nil
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are
still awaited:
Para Nos. 25, 26, 27, 37, 38, 39, 52, 53, 64, 72, 95, 110, 119, 123, and 133 Total : 15
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of these recommendations/
observations, which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be
furnished to it at the earliest.
On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee
contained in the One Hundred and Ninety Fifth Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and
recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in the
succeeding paragraphs
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
4. The Committee notes that during Eleventh Plan period, the Ministry of Tourism could spend
Rs.4896 crore out of the Rs.4953 crore allocated at RE, which is almost 98% of the total
allocations. The Committee also notes that the Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned 1226 tourism
projects for an amount of Rs.4090 crore during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. But the Committee
was not informed about the completion of these projects or the current status of these projects.
It hopes that after sanctioning the projects and releasing the money, the Ministry of Tourism is
monitoring its implementation by the State Governments. It is learnt that the State Governments are
diverting these funds according to their own priority. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should actively pursue each of these projects sanctioned to ensure that the sanctioned amount is
utilized in the prescribed manner for the approved project only.
(Para No. 10 of the 195
th Report)

2
Reply of the Government
5. The Ministry of Tourism monitors implementation of projects through Regional
Conferences, field inspections by the officers of State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations. The State Governments/Union Territory Administrations are also required to
periodically submit reports of the State Level Monitoring Committee to the Ministry of Tourism.
However, the pending projects are considered in the prioritization Meetings held with the State
Governments/Union Territory Administrations for the next Financial Year.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
6. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7. The Committee observes that under these schemes, Union territories appear to have been
neglected as the data shows that very few projects were sanctioned to them. For example,
Lakshadweep-1, Daman and Diu-1, Dadra and Nagar Haveli-3, and nothing for Andaman and
Nicobar Islands. The exceptions were Puducherry-20 and Chandigarh-11. If non receipt of the
proposal has been the reason, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should
guide and encourage these union territories to submit viable projects so that they may also get the
fund allocations under these very important schemes. These areas have ample potential for tourism
development.
(Para No. 11 ibid)
Reply of the Government
8. Development and promotion of tourism destinations and products, including infrastructure
projects is primarily the responsibility of the respective State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations. The Ministry of Tourism only provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to the
projects prioritized and proposals received thereof from the State Government, subject to availability
of funds, inter-se priority and adherence to scheme guidelines.
9. The Ministry of Tourism, through prioritization and review meetings has been requesting  all
the Union Territory Administrations to submit proposals for various infrastructure projects.
However, the Union Territory Administrations of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep
Islands have regularly stated that they are unable to take up projects due to Coastal Regulation Zone
regulations, clearances from the Ministry of Environment and Forests etc. Procuring material and
labour is another challenge and shortage of suitable experts/officers for planning projects is also
one of the major problems faced by Union Territories. The projects that have been sanctioned face
inordinate delays because of the afore-mentioned reasons. Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and
Diu have also been requested to send suitable project proposals.
10. Under the Twelfth plan the Ministry of Tourism has appointed State Level Project
Monitoring Agencies (SLPMA) to address some of the above problems particularly those related to
shortage of suitable experts. The SLPMAs would provide consultancy, make recommendations for
infrastructure projects to be taken up, and prepare DPRs. This would be done in consultation with
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
11. The Committee observes that the constraints of the Andaman andNicobar Islands and
Lakshadweep Island Administrators are a genuine one. The Committee recommends that

3
the Ministry of Tourism need to look into the issues/difficulties in the coastal region as a
separate issue and tourism projects suitable to the topography of such regions should be
explored.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
12. The Committee also appreciates the NE-States on their eagerness in implementing tourism
projects during the Eleventh Plan period. All the NE-States have got good amount of allocations and
that Committee hopes that all these projects are being implemented earnestly and timely. This will
increase the tourist visits in this region which will improve their over all economic condition in the
coming years.
(Para No. 12  ibid )
Reply of the Government
13. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
14. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee also observes that bigger States having immense potential for tourism
development, particularly pilgrimage, wild life and niche tourism, have not had commensurate
projects/funds under these schemes. The Committee recommends that more attention should be
given during Twelfth Plan to those States which were yet to exploit their potential for tourism
development.
(Para No. 13 ibid)
Reply of the Government
16. The Ministry of Tourism has appointed a National Level Consultant to identify major tourist
circuits in the country except North-Eastern States and they have  identified integrated tourism
circuits, Rural Tourism Cluster and Tourism Parks, in consultation with the respective State
Governments. For identification/development of Tourism Circuits in the North – East Region (NER)
a study has been conducted by Tata Consultancy Services commissioned by North-Eastern Council,
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
17. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
18. This Committee has always been arguing the case of Ministry of Tourism for enhanced
allocations every year during the examination of its Demands for Grants. The Planning
Commission, however, appears to have been reluctant to do so for reasons best known to it.
Normally, it does not give any reason for this to a Ministry. During current year also, only
Rs.1282.00 crore has been allocated to the Ministry against a projected demand of Rs.1773.79
crore. The Committee, keeping in view the various targets fixed for development and promotion
of tourism infrastructure, creating skilled and trained manpower, exploring new tourism projects
etc., reiterates its recommendation for providing additional funds to the Ministry of Tourism so that

4
the ideal of linking tourism with employment generation and poverty alleviation could be achieved
in reality.
(Para No. 20 ibid)
Reply of the Government
19. The Ministry of Tourism agrees with the recommendation of the Committee for enhancing
the allocation under Plan Schemes.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
20. The Committee recommends to convey its sentiments in this regard to the Planning
Commission, Ministry of Finance for necessary action.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
21. The Committee notes that during the Eleventh Plan period, right from the opening years,
the spending had remained more than 98%. However, in the opening year (2012-13) of the Twelfth
Plan, the spending patterns had not been so. The BE 2012-13 stood at Rs.1210 crore which was
reduced at the RE to Rs.950 crore. But only Rs.724.34 crore could be spent upto February, 2013.
If this spending is analyzed on the basis of the BE allocation of Rs.1210 crore during the period,
it forms only 60% of it. The Committee feels that there are failures on the part of the Ministry
in dealing with Plan Schemes whatever be the adverse policy changes. The Ministry should have
taken up the matter at the appropriate Governmental levels, rather than blaming the system. The
Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism needs to be more proactive and work as
facilitator for implementation of its schemes.
(Para No. 21 ibid)
Reply of the Government
22. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted to be more proactive and work as
facilitator for implementation of its schemes.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
23. The Committee feels that merely noting its concerns is not enough, the Ministry has
to list out efforts made in this regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
24. The Committee notes that the Ministry has not projected their achievement in measurable
terms by providing required information in quantified and comparable format to the Committee.
That would have helped the Committee to understand and appreciate the real problems before the
Ministry and concretize its opinion accordingly. Next time the Committee would like to have
information in user friendly format for its purpose.
(Para No. 22 ibid)
Reply of the Government
25. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for taking suitable steps in this
regard.

5
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
26. The Committee would like to see a format in which the Ministry proposes to send
information, figures etc. for examining its Demands for Grants showing financial and
physical performance in respect of last three years including those proposed for the coming
Financial Year.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27. The Committee also notes that some of the schemes such as incentives to accommodation,
assistance to large revenue generating projects, creation of land banks, etc. are languishing for
many years. The Committee recommends that these schemes may be reviewed so that it may
accomplish its targets.
(Para No. 23 ibid )
Reply of the Government
28. The proposal for continuation of scheme ‘Incentives Scheme for Budget Hotels’ to provide
subsidy to private sector for augmenting the budget accommodation in the categories of 1, 2 and
3 star hotels was discussed with the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission was of the
view that the Ministry of Tourism need not pursue this scheme. As regards other schemes, the
recommendation of the Committee has been noted for taking suitable action.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
29. The Committee would like to know “suitable action” taken by the Ministry of
Tourism in respect of other schemes as stated in their reply above.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
30. The Committee observes that the strict guidelines on adherence to the utilization certificate
of each projects and further allocation of funds strictly thereafter has been able to bring some
accountability and discipline in the spending pattern of the Ministry. However, the Committee is of
the opinion that such measures should be based on practical consideration as the infrastructure
projects are required to get various sanctions/clearances from so many agencies under different
Ministries. Usually, the projects, involving land acquisition and environment clearance are the most
time consuming. Therefore, keeping all these matters in mind, if the interpretation of rules/
guidelines on fund disbursement scheme has posed any problem ·to the Ministries, it should be
taken up at appropriate levels and resolved as soon as possible.
(Para No. 24 ibid)
Reply of the Government
31. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for implementation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
32. The Committee would like to know efforts being made for implementation of the
above recommendation.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
33. The Committee notes that the Twelfth Plan has given emphasis to rural tourism and
projected tourism as a tool to reduce poverty. The Committee, however, finds no special schemes

6
or efforts to promote the rural tourism or spread the idea of tourism as a mass activity. The
Committee notes in the Budget 2013-14, just routine programmes which are going on for the last
so many years.
(Para No. 25 ibid)
Reply of the Government
34. The Ministry of Tourism implements the scheme “Product/Infrastructure Development for
Destinations and Circuits” which also includes the provision for the development of rural projects.
The said Scheme is under revision for Twelfth Plan and the Ministry of Tourism has proposed to
develop ‘Rural Tourism Cluster’ instead of standalone villages.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
35. Again the Committee feels that the Ministry has given a sketchy reply. Therefore,
the Committee may be appraised on the details of the scheme.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
36. The Committee is also of the view that the plans and programmes of the Ministry of
Tourism should be aimed at positioning tourism as a major contributor of economic growth and
harness its direct and multiplier effects for employment and poverty eradication in an
environmentally sustainable manner. The schemes taken up by the Ministry should be aimed at
enhancing employment in the activities relating to tourism sector as well as at fostering economic
integration through developing linkages with other sectors.
(Para No. 26 ibid)
Reply of the Government
37. During Twelfth Five year Plan the Ministry of Tourism has proposed a strategy for pro-
poor tourism. The Planning Commission has also emphasized on the need to adopt a “pro-poor
tourism” approach aimed at increasing the net benefits to the poor from tourism and ensure that
tourism growth contributes to poverty reduction. This strategy will also lead to the growth of
employment in the country.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
38. The ‘pro-poor tourism’ sounds interesting to the Committee. It would like to have
a note on it spelling out clearly its components, strategy to be adopted and its possible
implications to the poor.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
39. The Committee further recommends that with the aim to achieve socio-economic development
in rural areas which have core competence in arts, crafts, heritage etc., the Ministry of Tourism
should provide assistance for development of tourism infrastructure and capacity building of rural
inhabitants in the States. The Ministry need to pursue with the State Governments for completion of
rural tourism projects sanctioned in a particular financial year within a fixed time-frame.
(Para No. 27 ibid)
Reply of the Government
40. The Ministry of Tourism has been providing Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to States/

7
Union Territories for rural tourism projects. The State/UT Governments are regularly pursued  for
completion of sanctioned projects within prescribed time limit.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
41. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires to know the response from
State Governments/UTs in this regard and accordingly a consolidated Status report may be
furnished.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
42. The Committee notes that allocations for PIDDC scheme are getting reduced as compared
to allocations made during 2011-12 and 2012-13. The Committee also notes that current year
allocation stands further reduced at Rs.400 crore. The Committee thus finds a regular reduction
in allocation from the 2011-12 onwards. A re-interpretation of the guidelines for funds disbursal in
this regard was given as the reason. The Ministry of Finance regulations provides that spending
pattern of the first quarter is criteria for getting eligible for subsequent allocations on various
schemes of the States. The Committee observes that these guidelines may have adverse impact on
other projects also and in such a case no scheme could be properly implemented by the States.
The Committee recommends that the utilization certificates may be obtained scheme/project-wise.
If a particularly scheme/project is lagging behind in its execution, it should not be a reason to deny
fund to the other schemes/projects of the State. The Committee recommends that the guidelines
on the utilization certificates may be reviewed by the Ministry of Finance so that the proposed
projects may not be affected by the bottlenecks in the fund allocation norms.
(Para No. 37 ibid)
Reply of the Government
43. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The matter will be taken up with
the Ministry of Finance regarding the fund allocation norms so that the proposed projects are not
affected.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. The Committee would like to know the stand taken by Ministry of Finance in this
regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
45. The Committee observes that even though the rural tourism scheme was started in the year
2002-03, the scheme has not made much progress so far. Only 186 projects have been sanctioned
since the inception of the scheme. The completion status is less than 50% as only 90 projects out
of 186 have been completed during a decade i.e. 2002-2012. Now the scheme has been replaced
with Rural Tourism Cluster scheme. The Committee observes that undue delay in implementing the
scheme is not acceptable. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may set the
guidelines in such a way that the scheme may yield results at the earliest.
(Para No. 38 ibid)
46. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism should ensure convergence of
resources and expertise through coordinated efforts with State/UT Governments and stakeholders
for an integrated and intensive development of tourism infrastructure in the country through careful
planning and execution while giving importance for improvement in accessibility, environmental and
other aspects.The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism should ensure convergence of

8
resources and expertise through coordinated efforts with State/UT Governments and stakeholders
for an integrated and intensive development of tourism infrastructure in the country through careful
planning and execution while giving importance for improvement in accessibility, environmental and
other aspects.
(Para No. 39 ibid)
Reply of the Government
47. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
48. The Committee desires to know the follow up action taken in this regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
49. The Committee notes that some projects identified in the years 2008-09, 2009-10 or 2010-11
are yet to take off like Aurangabad destinations of Maharashtra, Eco and Adventure circuit,
Arunachal Pradesh, Mubarak Mandi Heritage, Jammu and Kashmir etc. as no fund allocations have
been made for these so far. The Committee recommends that the concerned State Governments
may be encouraged to take the follow-up actions in these regards and the funds may be granted
in each case at the earliest.
(Para No. 40 ibid)
Reply of the Government
50. The Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned the project – Development of Aurangabad as a
Mega Destination in the year 2012-13 for a total Central Financial Assistance (CFA) of Rs.2343.20
lakh with release of Rs.117.16 lakh to the Government of Maharashtra so that the State
Government can initiate the works pertaining to the project. In Arunachal Pradesh one adventure
tourism project ‘Development of Adventure Tourism Campaign Destination site at Jottee Poma
River’ sanctioned in 2008-09 and one eco-tourism project ‘Construction of Eco-Tourism at Tego
Gamlin Village, West Siang’ sanctioned in 2009-10 have been completed with CFA of Rs.387.05
lakh and Rs.370.65 lakh respectively. As far as Jammu and Kashmir is concerned, one project for
Conservation/Restoration of Mubarak Mandi Heritage Complex, Jammu as a Mega Tourist
Destination has been sanctioned in 2012-13 with CFA of Rs.1691.57 lakh and Rs.338.31 lakh have
been released as first installments.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
51. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is happy to know about the new
initiatives undertaken during the financial year 2013-14.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee notes that there was about one third cut in the allocations during the RE
stage for Domestic Campaign but even then it could not be utilized properly during 2012-13. The
spending up to February 2013 was Rs.55.62 crore out of the RE amount of Rs.65 crore. The
Committee feels the revision of rates and DA VP guidelines are not convincing reasons for this. The
Committee feels that Ministry should have been more careful about this. The Committee also feels
that the projects proposed by the Ministry need to be innovative, interactive, and educative using
mostly the print and electronic media. The Committee appreciates the work done at the Delhi and

9
Mumbai airports. The schools and colleges throughout India can also be involved to spread
awareness about tourism. The school children may be given incentives to undertake tours and
excursions by the Ministry of Tourism which may ignite awareness of children and ultimately
results in promotion of tourism. The Ministry of Tourism should come forward with innovative
campaign strategies on these lines. The Committee also recommends that the State Governments
may be guided and assisted in marketing the tourist destinations and circuits in a particular State
as the Centre is not marketing the State destinations directly.
(Para No. 50 ibid)
Reply of the Government
53. The recommendation of the Committee to involve schools and colleges for spreading
awareness about tourism has been noted for inclusion in the future. Further, development and
promotion of tourism, including new tourism spots, is primarily the responsibility of the State
Governments/Union Territory Administrations.
54. The Ministry of Tourism provides financial assistance to State Governments and Union
Territory Administrations for production of publicity material. The Ministry of Tourism also
provides financial assistance to State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for
tourism projects based on proposals, received from them which are complete in all respects as
per the Scheme Guidelines, inter-se -priority and subject to availability of funds. Under the
Scheme ‘Product/Infrastructure Development for Destinations and Circuits’, the Ministry of
Tourism also provides Central Financial Assistance for last mile connectivity to the tourism
destinations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism being the nodal agency connecting
all the institutions and State Governments in tourism promotion, they may also share their
memorable experiences with other States, so that they can also follow the pattern.
Therefore, rather than a monitoring agency, it can be a guide to others for getting similar
efforts converted to success stories in future.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee feels that the initiatives of “Clean India Campaign” is a good idea but the
manner in which it has been proposed to be implemented leaves much to be desired. As has
happened in the case of National Culture Fund (NCF), under Ministry of Culture, this campaign
also may not get desired response from the PSU, etc. We understand that the desired activity
perhaps has not been recognized as an activity under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). And
if it is so, the Ministry of Tourism should together with Ministry of Culture, pursue this matter
with the concerned Ministries for this purpose. The Committee expresses its doubt about the
success of such a campaign in the existing form.
(Para No. 52 ibid)
Reply of the Government
57. The Ministry of Tourism has launched ‘Campaign Clean India’ to bring about an acceptable
level of cleanliness at important tourist destinations. This campaign is to be sustained through
adoption and involvement of private and public sector stakeholders as part of their Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR). The campaign is not restricted to upkeep and cleanliness only. The adopters
have taken holistic approach in adopting monuments for overall up-gradation including components

10
such as restoration, preservation, beautification, cleanliness and maintenance of the monuments and
its surroundings.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
58. The Committee would like to have a list of such PSU adopters involved so far in this
regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
59. In addition to this, awareness generation programmes also should be made about the
importance of keeping the tourist places and its surroundings clean. Such a campaign may begin
from our schools in which Government organizations, private companies, local bodies and State
Governments and NGOs should also participate.
(Para No. 53 ibid)
Reply of the Government
60. Institutes of Hotel Management and Catering Technology located at Hyderabad, Goa,
Gwalior, Mumbai, Shillong, New Delhi, Bhubaneswar, Bhatinda, Chennai, Lucknow and IITTM
Gwalior have adopted various monuments for creation of awareness about cleanliness by involving
the students, general public and tourists.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
61. The Committee desires to know the details of the programme in various monuments.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62. The Committee notes that assistance is given to Central Agencies like Archaeological Survey
of India, Port Trusts, ITDC etc. to ensure development of tourism infrastructure like illumination,
preservation of monuments, development of cruise terminals etc. The Committee recommends that
the funds earmarked under the Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure
Development can be spared for construction of toilets, waste disposal mechanism/recycling plants
etc., so that the efforts of the Ministry of Tourism in their Clean India Campaign could be made
a success.
(Para No. 54 ibid)
Reply of the Government
63. As per guidelines for Assistance to Central Agencies, activities/items such as improvement
of surroundings, landscaping, civic amenities at the destination would also be taken up.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
64. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee notes that the Ministry has failed to utilize the fund allocated for overseas
campaign as they could spend only Rs.150 crore i.e. 56% of BE of Rs.267 crore. Based on the
previous years performance, increased allocation of Rs.350 crore in 2013-14 needs to be carefully

11
utilized. Last year, the overseas campaign could not be launched till the date Committee took
meeting with the Ministry on 9 th April, 2013. The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that such
unduly longer delays in finalizing schemes should be avoided in future.
(Para No. 58 ibid)
Reply of the Government
66. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
67. The Committee notes the reply. However, the compliance report regarding full
utilization of the fund allocated for overseas campaigning should also be furnished to the
Committee.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
68. The Committee is happy to note the increases in FTAs and FEEs from tourism during 2010
and 2011. But the contribution of tourism to GDP and to employment as per the second TSA for
India does not give a clear picture in the absence of similar figures for other years or for other
countries.
(Para No. 61 ibid)
Reply of the Government
69. The contribution of tourism in the total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the country in
India along with some other countries are given in the table below :–
Sl. No. Country Y ears
# Share in GDP *
1. Australia 2010 5.2%
2. Brazil 2011 8.6%
3. India 2009-10 6.8%
4. New Zealand 2010 8.7%
* Direct and indirect share in GDP
# Usually, the Tourism Satellite Account is prepared with a periodicity of 5 years therefore the time series data for all
the year are not available.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
70. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
71. India holds immense tourism potential of different kinds a better and variegated than
anywhere else. But, we have a long way to go in exploring that potential and marketing effectively
India abroad. Secondly, looking at the possible contribution from tourism to our GDP and
employment, role of our tourism offices abroad becomes of utmost significance. The Committee
is at a loss to see that working of our tourism offices abroad leave much to be desired. Some
are without heads and others are headed or manned by persons having no experience in the relevant
area. How can a person with no experience be allowed to head our offices abroad? The Committee

12
fails to understand the logic behind this and is not surprised as to why the allocation for Overseas
Campaign is not being utilized properly. The Committee, therefore, recommends reconsidering the
policy regarding postings abroad and including an element of experience in relevant area in our
guidelines for this. We must observe complete transparency in this regard leaving little scope for
any controversy regarding favouritism, etc. The Committee recommends that the DOPT rules for
deputation may be strictly applied on deputation to tourism promotion offices abroad.
(Para No. 64 ibid)
Reply of the Government
72. The Guidelines for posting of officers in overseas India Tourism Offices has an element of
minimum experience for each grade. Minimum experience of one year for Regional Directors/DDG
andDirector/Assistant DG, two years for Assistant Director, Assistant Director (Accounts)
andPrivate Secretary and four years for Tourist Information Officer is required for their posting
in abroad offices abroad. Interview for the selection of officers for overseas posting is conducted
by a duly constituted Selection Committee. The criteria of selection mentioned in the guidelines
ensures transparency in selection and leaves no scope of favouritism. The Ministry of Tourism
always follows the DOPT rules relating to deputation while making such appointments.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
73. The Committee would like to have a list of all selections made for overseas postings
during the last three years providing qualification, experience etc. for each one who
appeared for interview for the three categories mentioned above. The composition of
selection Committee should also be provided.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
74. The Committee observes that for over several years, there has been a huge gap in demand
and supply in respect of trained manpower in tourism/hospitality sector. The Committee has
underlined this matter a number of times in the past also but it does not find any significant
improvement in this regard. There appears to be a lack of required emphasis and urgency to fill
up these gaps. More and more institutions and courses need to be offered for manpower training
and skill development in the tourism sector. The CBSP scheme, no doubt, has very valuable
components in it that seem to cover almost every aspect of our requirements for Capacity Building
and Training in tourism/hospitality sectors. It appears that the Scheme is not being implemented
with required emphasis. It needs proper monitoring of and coordination with all the agencies
involved at various levels. The Committee emphasizes the need for having more training Institutions
in hospitality and related sectors in all parts of the country.
(Para No. 71 ibid)
Reply of the Government
75. A Programme Monitoring Unit for/on Skill Development is already in place. This unit will
undertake inspection of projects directly or through agencies engaged for this purpose. Additionally,
it has been decided to put in place a system of Individual monitors for monitoring of various
programmes sanctioned.
76. Further, the India tourism offices are a part of the monitoring mechanism. The Ministry of
Tourism sponsored Institutes are to act as mentor institutes to the State Governments, State
Tourism Development Corporation and Hotels. The Ministry of Tourism also holds meetings with

13
the implementing agencies from time to time to review the progress of the programmes sanctioned
and supply correctives where necessary.
77. There are at present 21 Central IHMs in various States of the country. Besides, 1 Central
IHM at Jagdishpur, Distt. Sultanpur (UP) has since been approved by the Cabinet. Also, 15 State
IHMs and 7 FCIs are operational in various parts of the country. 16 State IHMs and 14 FCIs are
in various stages of completion with the Central Financial Assistance provided by the Ministry of
Tourism. The recommendation of the committee has been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
78. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
79.  The Committee notes that Grants to IHM, the fund allocations seems to be going to a
limited number of States. In this case also adequate fund allocations need to be done to those
States which are having highest tourist density and potential yet to be explored.
(Para No. 72 ibid)
Reply of the Government
80. At present there are 15 operational State Institutes of Hotel Management and 15 State IHMs
are in various stages of completion with the Central Financial Assistance provided by the Ministry
of Tourism. These Institutes are scattered throughout the country.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
81. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee would like to know progress report of the
15 States IHMs and hopes that the fund allocated will be duly utilized.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
82. The Committee notes that the funds under the scheme Incentives to Accommodation
Infrastructure is not properly utilized in the previous years as the BE during 2010-11 was Rs.10.00
crore and actual expenditure was only Rs.50 lakh. During 2011-12, also as against Rs.2.00 crore,
only one lakh could be spent. During 2012-13, also against the BE Rs.10.00 crore, the expenditure
is just Rs.4.94 crore. This year (2013-14) again Rs.10.00 crore has been allocated at the BE stage.
The Committee recommends that the scheme may be revisited at the appropriate levels after finding
out the reasons for low utilization in the scheme and how far the same has affected the growth
in tourist accommodations in the country. The land owning agencies may be adequately incentivized
to develop budget hotels at tourist destination and cities as the existing incentives have not
generated the required confidence in the scheme.
(Para No. 79 ibid)
Reply of the Government
83. The reason of non-utilization of funds against the provision made under BE during the year
2010-11 and onwards is that the provision was made to clear old cases only.
84. Under the scheme for granting interest subsidy to 1, 2, 3 and Heritage category hotels on
loan taken from designated Financial Institutions was available upto 31.3.2002 and scheme for
granting capital subsidy for 1, 2, 3 Star and Heritage category hotels w.e.f. 01.04.2002 to
31.03.2007.

14
85. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
86. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
87. The Committee understands that NE-States are generally prompt in getting their tourism
development schemes sanctioned and implemented. The Committee is also satisfied that out of the
186 rural tourism projects, the NE-States have secured 56 projects. The Committee hopes that this
may boost the tourism earnings in that Region. However, the Committee is concerned about the
fact that classification of cities in the NE Region has not yet been taken up at the appropriate
levels. The Committee feels that keeping the remote nature of the NE Regions and its difficult
terrains, there should be a waver on the population criteria for grading of cities. The Committee
recommends that Ministry of Tourism may expedite the matter with Ministry of Urban
Development. The Committee further recommends that more hotel projects to provide sufficient
accommodation to the tourists may also be identified among these States. The Committee also
recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take up with the Ministry of Development of
North-East Region for inclusion of Darjeeling District as part of North-Eastern States for special
status. The feedback received in this regard may be communicated to the Committee.
(Para No. 87 ibid)
Reply of the Government
88. The Ministry of Tourism has a voluntary scheme of approval of hotels  at the project stage
based on documentation. Project approval is given to 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Star and Heritage (Basic)
categories. Hotels after becoming operational may seek classification under 5 Star Deluxe, 5 Star,
4 Star, 3 Star, 2 Star, 1 Star and Heritage (Grand, Classic and Basic) categories.
89. Construction of hotels is primarily a private sector activity. However, the Ministry of
Tourism has advised all the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations to follow tourism
friendly policies like allotting land sites for hotels on revenue sharing basis, granting extra Floor
Space Index (FSI)/Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for Hotels, Creation of Land Banks, adopt Single
Window approach for clearing Hotel projects, Rationalization of Taxes etc., for the growth of hotel
industry in the country.
90. Further to encourage the growth of budget hotels, the following incentives have been
announced:
● Five year Tax Holiday for two, three and four star hotels located in all UNESCO
declared World Heritage Sites (except Mumbai and Delhi) for hotels operating w.e.f.
01.04.2008 to 31.03.2013.
● The Government has announced the extension of Investment Linked Tax Incentive
under Section 35 AD of the Income Tax Act to new hotels of 2 star Category and
above anywhere in India.
● The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has de-linked credit for hotel projects from
Commercial Real Estate (CRE), thereby enabling hotel projects to avail credit at relaxed
norms and reduced interest rates.
● Hotel and Tourism related industry declared high priority industry and Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) allowed upto 100% under the automatic route.

15
91. The Ministry of Development of North-East Region has informed that North-Eastern Council
(NEC) was established in 1972 by an Act of Parliament, namely, the North-Eastern Council
Act, 1971, as apex level advisory body, for securing balanced and coordinated development and
effecting co-ordination among seven States of North Eastern Region i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura. Sikkim was added as the eighth member-
State of the Council following the amendment of the NEC Act in December 2002 (notified on
23
rd June, 2003). North-Eastern Council is, inter-alia , a Council of Governors and Chief Ministers
of eight north-eastern States. The developmental projects are sanctioned under NEC Scheme on the
basis of the Priority Lists received from the North-Eastern States as well as the Five Year Plan
Working Group recommendations pertaining to the relevant sectors of the NEC and the techno-
economic scrutiny as per extant procedures. However, while formulating the regional plans for the
North-Eastern area, the Council gives priority to schemes and projects which will benefit two or
more States – provided that in case of Sikkim, the Council shall formulate specific projects and
schemes for that State including the review of implementation of such projects and schemes.
Similarly, developmental projects are taken up by that Ministry under Non-Lapsable Central Pool of
Resources (NLCPR) scheme from list of annual priority projects submitted by State Government.
92.  The eight North-Eastern States forming part of North-Eastern Region are ‘special category
States’ (unlike West Bengal). Development of tourism and other sectors in Darjeeling is outside
purview of Ministry of DoNER/NEC as Darjeeling falls in West Bengal which is not a part of
North-Eastern Region. Further, the smallest constituent unit of North-Eastern Region and their
Council is State. Therefore, inclusion of district like Darjeeling from neighbouring State of West
Bengal in the NEC/NER is not feasible.
93. The Ministry of Development of North-East Region further informed that it supports the
approach of the Ministry of Tourism to develop regional circuits, cutting across the States
boundaries, in the country including NER. Development of Tourism sector in Sikkim can be
accomplished successfully only by integrating Darjeeling and other tourist destinations of West
Bengal in this endeavour.
94. The matter regarding classification of cities in the NE Region  has been taken up with the
Ministry of Urban Development.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95. The Committee finds the reply repetitive. The Committee notes that the tax holidays
given to hotels had expired in the previous financial year itself.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
96. The Committee appreciates the emphasis given on the use of IT and Internet-based options
for providing updated information on India on a range of aspects needed by a tourist. The
Committee is aware of the ‘Incredible India’ and ‘Atithi Devo Bhav’ websites which have been
created for the purpose. However, these efforts require to be made more comprehensive and user-
friendly. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism may coordinate with the State
Governments, UT Administrations and important service providers such as travel agents, tour
operators, taxi operators, airlines, railways, airport operators, local police, hotels, shopping arcades,
etc. so that tourists have all the information from there.
(Para No. 91 ibid)
Reply of the Government
97. The upgradation of the websites of Ministry of Tourism is a continuous process. The

16
Ministry of Tourism provides information on important service providers on its websites and is
making efforts to add more information on the websites and make it more user- friendly.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
98. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
99. The Committee observes that the luxury tax on the hotel tariff ranges from 4% to 20%
which may shoot up to 30% in the off season. Also the V AT on food items ranges from 5% to
16.84%. Tourist used to get discounts on the printed rates of room rent etc. during the off season
but the tax should be paid on the original rate. The Committee recommends that the tax concern
of the tourism industry may favourably be considered.
(Para No. 94 ibid)
Reply of the Government
100. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Tax on services like hotels and food
items is as per the policy of the State Governments with no direct interference of the Central
Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
101. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
102. The Committee observes that one of the major bottlenecks of tourism sector today is the
absence of uniform and rational Road Transport Tax structure in State and multiplicity of taxes at
inter-state borders. This is acting as an impediment to seamless movement of tourist vehicles
across State borders. The Committee, therefore, recommends that tourist vehicles with all India
permit may be taxed uniformly so that the bottlenecks in the tax structures and the difficulties
faced by tourists in crossing the State borders could be addressed properly. (Para No. 95 ibid)
Reply of the Government
103. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
104. The Ministry of Tourism in collaboration with the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways and the State Governments of NCT of Delhi, Rajasthan, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh has
made an arrangement whereby taxes would be collected centrally at each of the four starting nodes
at Delhi, Gurgaon, Jaipur, and Agra in such a way that the taxes thus collected are apportioned
and the tourist coach/car would be allowed unhindered movement in the Golden Triangle.
105. The arrangement made for Delhi – Agra – Jaipur sector is proposed to be replicated in other
States also because:
(i) Multiple tax structures in various States severely cramp seamless movement causing
discomfort to tourists. A simplified/uniform and rational tax structure cutting across
all the States/Union Territories has to be implemented on top priority.
(ii) A system of single window payment of taxes through which tax can be collected
centrally and apportioned to states, has to be implemented to overcome the bottlenecks

17
of multiple inter–state road transport barriers. It is recommended that an online
transaction system be instituted within one year to facilitate the smooth movement of
tourist traffic and avoid delays and inconvenience to tourists.
(iii) The proposal for the allocation of a separate “TV” series registration for tourists
vehicles and one time/annual payment of taxes would facilitate the smooth movement
of tourist traffic and it would do away with the requirement to stop for payment of
taxes at State borders. The Ministry of Tourism recommends the implementation of
a separate “TV” series registration for tourist vehicles in the long run. 
106. The above proposals have been forwarded to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
and they are being studied by the Empowered Group of State Transport Ministers. Various models
are being researched and regular meetings being held by the Empowered Committee of officers set
up for the purpose. No final decision has yet been taken.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
107. The Committee finds the reply to be same as provided during examination of
Demands for Grants (2013-14). The Committee desires to know the latest data on the
decisions of the Empowered Committee of officers set up for the purpose.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108. The Committee recommends that tourism activities should be based on scientific carrying
capacity and sustainability principles. As such, the normal peaceful living of the wild life should
not be disturbed by the tourism activities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the ‘National
Tiger Conservation Authority (Normative Standards for Tourism activities and Project Tiger)
Guidelines, 2012’ should strictly be adhered to, for an eco-friendly tourism development in the
country.
(Para No. 100 ibid)
Reply of the Government
109. The Ministry of Tourism agrees to above recommendations of the Committee. The National
Tourism Policy also states that sustainability should serve as the guiding principle for development
and promotion of Tourism in the Country. While sanctioning tourism projects to various State
Governments and Union Territories, the Ministry of Tourism stresses upon the need for
implementing eco-friendly measures like solid waste management, non use of polythene bags,
harnessing solar energy, rain water harvesting, using local architecture, involvement of community etc.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
110. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
111. The hotels projects also need to follow the guidelines as regards conservation of natural
resources, increased use of recycled products, solar energy, water conservation like rain water
harvesting etc. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism should strictly monitor other
measures like pollution control, introduction of non-CFC equipment for refrigeration and air-
conditioning, measures for energy and water conservation which are to be undertaken by the
hotels.
(Para No. 101 ibid)

18
Reply of the Government
112. As per existing guidelines of the Ministry of Tourism, for hotels seeking approval for their
Hotel Projects at implementation stage and at the time of classification/re-classification, it is
mandatory to fulfill the criteria/measures which, inter-alia , include energy/water conservation (use
of CFL lamps, solar energy, water saving devices/taps), pollution control, non-CFC equipment for
refrigeration and air conditioning and rain water harvesting.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
113. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
114. The Committee recommends that tourism activities at the protected areas should be
regulated as per the environment protection guidelines. No development is sustainable if it is acted
against the existence of nature. The Committee recommends that there should be sincere efforts
in environment protection while enhancing tourism facilities.
(Para No. 102 ibid)
Reply of the Government
115. The Ministry of Tourism recognizes following cardinal principles for development of eco-
tourism: It should involve the local community and lead to the overall economic development of
the area.
● It should identify the likely conflicts between resource use for eco-tourism and the
livelihood of local inhabitants and attempt to minimize such conflicts.
● The type and scale of eco-tourism development should be compatible with the
environment and socio-cultural characteristics of the local community; and
● It should be planned as a part of the overall area development strategy, guided by an
integrated land-use plan while avoiding inter-sectoral conflicts and ensuring sectoral
integration associated with commensurate expansion of public services.
116. The Ministry of Tourism has guidelines for approval of Hotel Projects at the implementation
stage and also guidelines for classification of operational hotels under various categories. As per
these guidelines, hotels at the project stage itself are required to incorporate various eco-friendly
measures like sewage treatment plant (STP), rain water harvesting system, waste management
system etc.
117. Once the hotel is operational, it can apply for classification under a Star category to the
Hotel and Restaurant Approval Classification Committee (HRACC) of the Ministry. During the
physical inspection of the hotel by the HRACC Committee, it is ensured that in addition to the
afore-mentioned measures, other measures like pollution control, introduction of non-CFC
equipment for refrigeration and air conditioning, measures for energy and water conservation are
also undertaken by the hotel.
118. Under the guidelines for project level and classification/re-classification of operational hotels
it has been prescribed that the architecture of the hotel buildings in hilly and ecologically fragile
areas should keep in mind sustainability and energy efficiency and as far as possible the
architecture be in conformity with the local ethos and encourage use of local materials.

19
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
119. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may review whether the
guidelines are strictly adhered to by the hoteliers in view of the recent natural disaster in
Uttarakhand. The Committee also recommends that strict monitoring of violations of the
rule especially in the ecologically fragile areas need to be done and corrective steps should
be taken with the agencies concerned.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
120. The Committee was given to understand that occupancy in ITDC hotels has remained 40-
50 percent even in the peak seasons. The Committee feels this is on low side and does not know
the reasons for this. ITDC has to function and compete with the professionally-managed hotels in
private sector. Therefore, it has to be competitive as regards services offered by them.
(Para No. 107 ibid)
Reply of the Government
121. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. ITDC is putting in
all efforts for product improvement and aggressive marketing to increase the occupancy of hotels.
However, high inventory, recession and construction of new branded hotels have led to decrease
in occupancy.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
122. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
123. The Committee noticed that the websites of the Ministry of Tourism or the Incredible India
has no advertisement of ITDC hotels. The Committee feels that proper links and advertisements
about ITDC Hotels may be given in all the websites under the Ministry of Tourism. The Committee
feels that ITDC hotels should also be marketed as part of the overseas campaign.
(Para No. 108 ibid)
Reply of the Government
124. The Ministry of Tourism in collaboration with You Tube has placed the two ITDC run
‘Sound and light shows’ at Red Fort, Delhi and Purana Quila, Delhi on You Tube in order to
promote the country’s heritage. The Incredible India website has links to FHRAI and HAI
websites which have information on ITDC hotels. The link of ITDC website is available on the
website (www.tourism.gov.in) of the Ministry of Tourism. ITDC is being informed about Road
Shows being conducted by the Ministry of Tourism for suitable participation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
125. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
126. The Committee notes that the financial performance of ITDC has improved during the last
two years. The Committee is hopeful that ITDC would keep its recovery path intact in the coming

20
years. The Committee appreciates ITDC on performing its social commitment by extending its help
organizing training of youth and contributing to the Clean India Campaign.
(Para No. 109 ibid)
Reply of the Government
127. ITDC would ensure better  performance in the coming years.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
128. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
129. The Committee recommends that light and sound shows have to be introduced in other
tourist spots of the country so that the famous tourist places may be made more attractive to the
visitors. Simulator based light and sound shows as available in the ChardhamTemple, Gangtok can
be experimented in other parts of the country with different themes. ITDC may take the initiative
in this regard.
(Para No. 110 ibid)
Reply of the Government
130. In pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee, ITDC would write to the various
State Governments/UT Administrations and if desired by them, ITDC would prepare Detailed
Project Reports (DPRs) for such projects. In the meantime, ITDC would study the simulator based
Sound and Light shows as available in the Chardham Temple, Gangtok.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
131. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires to know the developments in this
regard and the details of response from the State Governments.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
132. The Committee notes recent development in the visa-on Arrival Policy. The Committee is
surprised to hear that because of non-availability of foreign languages experts of Japanese, German
etc. the Ministry is seeking help from locals for the visa related issues in the foreign countries.
(Para No. 118 ibid)
Reply of the Government
133. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. In the foreign
countries, the local German, Japanese or any other foreign language expert is more easily available
than a Government official having expertise in the foreign language, being posted overseas or sent
on tour. Also, it is more cost effective.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
134. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
135. The Committee recommends that our visa forms should be bilingual incorporating the local

21
language of the country. This will facilitate the tourists and increase their confidence in visiting our
country. The Tourism promotion offices should play a major role in this regard. The Committee
has reason to believe that many of our Tourism promotion offices are filled up with deputationists
who have no idea about tourism of India or the local language of the countries they are posted.
(Para No. 119 ibid)
Reply of the Government
136. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. The Ministry of
Tourism has requested the Ministry of Home Affairs to consider that the Visa Forms should also
be made in another 9 foreign languages which do not use the Roman Script like Japanese, Chinese
and Korean.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
137. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee also desires to know the follow up
action in this regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
138. The Committee recommends that there should be clarity in issuance of inner-line permits
for the North-East. The Ministry of Tourism should take up the issue with the Ministry of Home
Affairs to clear all confusions in this regard. The Committee recommends for immediate corrective
measures in this regard.
(Para No. 120 ibid)
Reply of the Government
139. The Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that Inner Line Permit (ILP) regulates visit of
Indian citizens to States where ILP regime is prevalent under Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation,
1873. In terms of Section 2 of the Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulations, 1873, ILP system is
prevalent in the three North-Eastern States, namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland.
Section 2 of the Regulation provides that the State Government may, by notification in the official
gazette, prohibit all citizens of India or any class of such citizens or any persons residing in or
passing through such districts from going beyond such line without a pass under hand and seal
of the Chief Executive Officer of such district or of such other officer as the State Government
may authorize to grant such pass.
140. Presently, the ILP regime is prevalent in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and
Nagaland only. Citizens of other States require ILP for visiting these three States. However, certain
class of people like the Central Government and State Government employees who possess valid
Identity Cards as proof of their being Government servants, are exempted from permits while
visiting these States.
141. The ILP is issued by State Government officials and MHA is not consulted in the matter.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
142. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
143. The Committee recommends for more cruise tourism projects at the viable states on the
lines of the initiative taken in Cochin Port. All the Major Ports, especially the Mormugao Port has

22
immense potential of cruise tourism which needs to be explored by the Ministry of Tourism for
development.
(Para No. 123 ibid)
Reply of the Government
144. The Steering Committee on Cruise Tourism has identified the ports of Chennai, Cochin,
New Mangalore, Mormugao and Mumbai for development of Cruise Tourism.
145. Under the Guidelines for implementing Scheme for Assistance to Central agencies for
Tourism Infrastructure Development, the Ministry of Tourism provides financial assistance to the
ports for development of Cruise Tourism related infrastructure.
146. During 2012-13, the Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned an amount of Rs.2243.32 lakh to
Cochin Port Trust for Development of dedicated cruise berthing facilities at Cochin Port and an
amount of Rs.1724.66 lakh to Chennai Port Trust for developing Cruise Passenger Facility Centre
in the existing passenger terminal at Chennai Port.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
147. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires to know the facilities/
services available to the tourists in the above two cases.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
148. The Committee notes the various measures taken in the Adventure tourism. The Committee
also recommends that adequate trained people should be deputed in all the adventure spots to
monitor the participants and for rescue operations if required.
(Para No. 125 ibid)
Reply of the Government
149. Development and promotion of tourism is primarily the responsibility of State Governments/
UT Administrations concerned. Training and provision of safety equipment for various activities for
adventure tourism including safety-precautionary measures to prevent any untoward incidents, are
under the purview of the concerned State Governments/UT Administrations. The Ministry of Tourism,
under its ‘Hunar Se Rozgar Tak’ Scheme assists the State Governments/UT Administrations,
recognized adventure institutes for organizing Training/Skill Development Programmes for the
unemployed youth as Adventure Travel Guides, Eco Rural Guides, River Rafting Guides etc.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
150. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
151. The Committee feels that there is lot of potential in all these new tourism products like
Cruise, Adventure, Medical, Wellness, Golf, Polo, Meetings, Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions
(MICE), Eco-tourism and Film Tourism. The Ministry of Tourism should work on a detailed guide
map on all these areas.
Reply of the Government
152. The Ministry of Tourism has taken the initiative of identifying, developing and promoting

23
various niche products of the tourism to overcome the aspect of ‘seasonality’ to promote India as
a 365 day destination, attract tourists with specific interests and to ensure repeat visits for the
unique products in which India has competitive advantage. The niche products identified by the
Ministry of Tourism for development and promotion inter-alia, include Cruise, Adventure, Medical,
Wellness, Golf, Polo, Meetings, Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions (MICE), Eco-tourism and
Film Tourism.
153. The production of guide maps/brochure and tourist literature for various products including
the ‘Niche Tourism’ Products is an ongoing process in the Ministry and the recommendation of
the Committee is noted for compliance.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
154. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
155. The Committee observes that safety and security is equally important, if not more, for the
growth of tourism sector. The Committee is concerned about the recent incidents of attacks on
tourists at different parts of the country. In addition to this, the Committee noticed that even
though safety guidelines are in place, these are less enforced and the authorities are negligent
towards these aspects until there are some incidents. All the State Governments, therefore, may be
persuaded/helped to set up tourism Police and prevent touts and goons from various tourist
destinations, airports, railway stations, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the safety
measures should be strictly implemented and monitored at the different levels. The 24x7 infoline
in foreign languages is a welcome step up to attract the tourists. However, the Ministry should
ensure that the people who are manning it are capable and the service is available at ease. It should
assist the tourists, whenever they want.  (Para No.130 ibid)
Reply of the Government
156. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
1. In order to ensure safety and security of tourists, including foreign tourists, the
Ministry of Tourism has advised all the State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations to deploy Tourist Police in the States/Union Territories. The State
Governments/Union Territory Administrations of Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh,
Delhi, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh and Odisha have deployed Tourist Police, in one form
or the other.
2. Further, the guidelines for formation of Tourist Facilitation and Security Organisation
comprising Ex-servicemen formulated by the Ministry of Tourism in consultation with the
Ministry of Defence, Home and Directorate General of Re-settlements have been forwarded
to the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations for necessary action.
3. In addition, the Ministry of Tourism along with stakeholders has adopted the ‘Code of
Conduct for Safe and Honourable Tourism’ which is a set of guidelines to encourage tourism
activities to be undertaken with respect to basic rights like dignity, safety and freedom from
exploitation of both tourist and local residents, in particular, women and children.
4. In the wake of unfortunate incidents involving foreign tourists, the Ministry of Tourism
has posted its advisory on its website 
www.incredibleindia.or g indicating that India
remains a safe destination for international tourists including women.

24
5. Further, the Ministry of Tourism has also written to all the Chief Secretaries of the
State Governments and Union Territory Administrations to take immediate effective
steps for ensuring conducive and friendly environment for all tourists. They have also
been requested to publicize the steps being taken/proposed to be taken to increase the
sense of security amongst the present/prospective visitors and also to counter the
negative publicity.
6. In order to further emphasise the need for ensuring safety and security of tourists in
general and esteemed lady guests in particular, Hon’ble Minister of State for Tourism
(Independent Charge) has written personally to all the Chief Ministers of States and
Union Territory Administrators.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
157. The Committee notes the various steps the Government has taken for the safety and
security of the tourists.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
158. The Committee observes that the Tourism Ministry is mainly a fund-disbursing agency.
More than 90 per cent of its Plan allocation every year goes to four schemes relating to
infrastructure development, training assistance to institutes and publicity - overseas and domestic.
Once these funds are released, it seems it is left with the State Governments and Union territories
to utilise them. Nowhere is it reflected how the Ministry is monitoring the utilisation of these funds
and how they get feedback on whether the States and Union territories are actually utilising these
funds for the purpose for these funds have been allocated. The Committee desires to know whether
there is any robust mechanism at different levels to coordinate these various aspects.
(Para No. 131 ibid)
Reply of the Government
159. The Ministry of Tourism monitors implementation of projects through Regional
Conferences, field inspections by the officers of State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations. State Governments/Union Territory Administrations are also required to periodically
submit reports of the State Level Monitoring Committee to the Ministry of Tourism.  The field
offices of MoT are also assigned inspections and the Ministry deputes its officers also to inspect
the projects, from time to time.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
160. The Committee recommends for further strengthening of the prevailing system in
order to get better performance over all. A review mechanism on the present system may
also be worked out.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
161. The Committee observes that sky rocketing of airfares and lack of Government control over
it has recently affected the domestic tourist movement in the country. The Committee also observes
that higher user fee and ATF surcharges have eventually made the air traffic journey un-affordable
to many. The DGCA has taken some steps in this regard. The Committee however, recommends
that a more regular and strict watch on predatory airfares being resorted by the airlines needs to
done to prevent unreasonable airfares especially during the peak seasons.
(Para No. 132 ibid)

25
Reply of the Government
162. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
163. The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
164. The Committee also observes that the rail travellers are facing problems due to shabby
coaches which are usually unclean with rodents roaming freely. The toilets are very dirty and are
seldom cleansed during the journey. Beggar menace and under quality food served are other areas
to be immediately attended. All these problems have made the train journey a nightmare for most
of the travellers and the tourists in particular. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism
may take up the matter with Railway Board so that the train journey may be made attractive and
comfortable to the tourists.
(Para No. 133 ibid)
Reply of the Government
165. Prime Minister’s  Office has constituted an Inter Ministerial Coordination Committee for
Tourism Sector (IMCCTS) under the Chairmanship of the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister
to facilitate the resolution of inter-ministerial issues involved in the development of tourism in the
country, as well as issues raised by Industry Associations in the tourism sector. The Ministry of
Tourism takes up all such issues through this Committee with the Ministry of Railways.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
166. The Committee desires to know the follow up action in this regard.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
167. The Committee observes that we are not utilizing the full potential of tourism in India. We
always feel very sad about the fact that, probably, there is no country like ours that has snow,
hills to seas and beaches, adventure tourism, wildlife tourism, medical tourism, etc., within the
country. India has such a wide variety and destination. In spite of that, the confidence does not
seem to come that we are able to actually reach anyway close to using our potential.
(Para No. 134 ibid)
Reply of the Government
168. The Ministry of Tourism has a target to increase India’s share of International Tourist
arrivals to at least 1% by the end of Twelfth Plan and provide adequate facilities for domestic
tourism to sustain the growth of 12.16% during Twelfth Plan period.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
169. The Committee hopes that the decline in rupee value may bring more international
tourists to the country as a trip to India is cheaper than before.

26
26
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 6)
The Committee observes that the constraints of the Andaman & Nicobar Islands and
Lakshadweep Island Administrators are a genuine one. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry of Tourism need to look into the issues/difficulties in the coastal region as a
separate issue and tourism projects suitable to the topography of such regions should be
explored. (Para 11)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 14)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 17)
The Committee recommends to convey its sentiments in this regard to the Planning
Commission, Ministry of Finance for necessary action. (Para 20)
The Committee feels that merely noting its concerns is not enough, the Ministry has
to list out efforts made in this regard. (Para 23)
The Committee would like to see a format in which the Ministry proposes to send
information, figures etc. for examining its Demands for Grants showing financial and
physical performance in respect of last three years including those proposed for the coming
Financial Year. (Para 26)
The Committee would like to know “suitable action” taken by the Ministry of
Tourism in respect of other schemes as stated in their reply above. (Para 29)
The Committee would like to know efforts being made for implementation of the
above recommendation. (Para 32)
Again the Committee feels that the Ministry has given a sketchy reply. Therefore,
the Committee may be appraised on the details of the scheme. (Para 35)
The ‘pro-poor tourism’ sounds interesting to the Committee. It would like to have
a note on it spelling out clearly its components, strategy to be adopted and its possible
implications to the poor. (Para 38)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires to know the response from
State Governments/UTs in this regard and accordingly a consolidated Status report may be
furnished. (Para 41)
The Committee would like to know the stand taken by Ministry of Finance in this
regard. (Para 44)
The Committee desires to know the follow up action taken in this regard. (Para 48)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is happy to know about the new
initiatives undertaken during the financial year 2013-14. (Para 51)
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Tourism being the nodal agency connecting
all the institutions and State Governments in tourism promotion, they may also share their

27
memorable experiences with other States, so that they can also follow the pattern.
Therefore, rather than a monitoring agency, it can be a guide to others for getting similar
efforts converted to success stories in future. (Para 55)
The Committee would like to have a list of such PSU adopters involved so far in this
regard. (Para 58)
The Committee desires to know the details of the programme in various monuments.
(Para 61)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 64)
The Committee notes the reply. However, the compliance report regarding full
utilization of the fund allocated for overseas campaigning should also be furnished to the
Committee. (Para 67)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 70)
The Committee would like to have a list of all selections made for overseas postings
during the last three years providing qualification, experience etc. for each one who
appeared for interview for the three categories mentioned above. The composition of
selector committee should also be provided. (Para 73)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 78)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee would like to know progress report
of the 15 States IHMs and hopes that the fund allocated will be duly utilized. (Para 81)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 86)
The Committee finds the reply repetitive. The Committee notes that the tax holidays
given to hotels had expired in the previous financial year itself. (Para 95)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 98)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 101)
The Committee finds the reply to be same as provided during examination of
Demands for Grants (2013-14). The Committee desires to know the latest data on the
decisions of the Empowered Committee of officers set up for the purpose. (Para 107)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 110)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 113)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may review whether the
guidelines are strictly adhered to by the hoteliers in view of the recent natural disaster in
Uttarakhand. The Committee also recommends that strict monitoring of violations of the
rule especially in the ecologically fragile areas need to be done and corrective steps should
be taken with the agencies concerned. (Para 119)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 122)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 125)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 128)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires to know the developments in
this regard and the details of response from the State Governments. (Para 131)

28
The Committee notes the reply.  (Para 134)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee also desires to know the follow up
action in this regard. (Para 137)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 142)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires to know the facilities/
services available to the tourists in the above two cases. (Para 147)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 150)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 154)
The Committee notes the various steps the Government has taken for the safety and
security of the tourists. (Para 157)
The Committee recommends for further strengthening of the prevailing system in
order to get better performance over all. A review mechanism on the present system may
also be worked out. (Para 160)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 163)
The Committee desires to know the follow up action in this regard. (Para 166)
The Committee hopes that the decline in rupee value may bring more international
tourists to the country as a trip to India is cheaper than before. (Para 169)

29
MINUTES

30

31
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th December, 2013 in Room No. 67,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary
10. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
11. Shri S. Pakkirappa
12. Shri Prabodh Panda
13. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the Committee. *** *** ***. Thereafter, the
Committee considered and adopted the following draft Action Taken Reports on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14).
(i) * * *
(ii) * * *
(iii) * * *
(iv) * * *
(v) Two Hundred Eightth Report on the Action Taken Replies on the Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of Ministry of Tourism.
3. The Committee adopted the said reports with certain modifications after some discussion.
4. * * *
5. The meeting adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
31
*** Relate to other matters.

32
32
List of Reports of Department-Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
Report
No.
1
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
l2th
13th
Title of the Report
2
Demands for Grants (1993-94) of
Department of Tourism
Government Policy on Private Air Taxi
Operation and Matters connected
therewith
Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment), Bill, 1992
Air Corporations (Transfer of
Undertakings and  Repeal) Bill, 1992 (with
evidence)
The Airports Authority of India Bill, 1993
(with evidence)
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment) Bill, 1993
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against
Safety of Civil Aviation (Amendment)
Bill, 1993
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1994-95) of
Ministry of  Surface Transport
Merger of Vayudoot with Indian Airlines
Development of Tourism and Transport in
North-East
National Highway System
Date of
Presentation
4
30.04.1993
17.08.1993
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
08.12.1993 (RS)
09.12.1993 (LS)
16.03.1994
19.04.1994
19.04.1994
21.04.1994
22.04.1994
25.04.1994
24.08.1994
20.03.1995
25.04.1995
Date of
Adoption
3
29.04.1993
21.07.1993
08.09.1993
20.10.1993
14.02.1994
29.03.1994
29.03.1994
05.04.1994
12.04.1994
19.04.1994
28.06.1994
29.12.1994
21.02.1995
1993-94 (5 Reports)
1994-95 (8 Reports)

33
1
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
*20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
2
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Department of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
National Highways (Amendment) Bill,
1995 (with evidence)
Inland Waterways
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)
(Inapplicability to Major Ports) Bill, 1995
(with evidence)
Privatisation Policy in regard to Major
Ports
Seamen’s Provident Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 1995
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airfields
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1996-97) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Demands for Grants (1997-98)
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1997-98) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
26.04.1995
26.04.1995
10.05.1995
26.05.1995
25.08.1995
04.12.1995
27.02.1996 (LS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
28.02.1996 (RS)
29.02.1996 (LS)
07.03.1996
27.08.1996
04.09.1996 (RS)
06.09.1996 (LS)
09.09.1996
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
15.05.1997
3
18.04.1995
18.04.1995
04.05.1995
24.05.1995
22.08.1995
11.10.1995
04.01.1996
07.02.1996
29.02.1996
21.08.1996
29.08.1996
04.09.1996
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
08.05.1997
1995-96 (8 Reports)
1996-97 (8 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 25 th January, 1996.

34
1
29th
30th
31st
32nd
33rd
34th
35th
36th
37th
38th
39th
40th
41st
42nd
43rd
2
Ship-building and Ship-repair Industry in
India
Functioning of Indian Airlines and Alliance
Air
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Merchant Shipping Second (Amendment)
Bill, 1998 (with evidence)
Functioning of Air India
Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 1998
(with evidence)
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (1999-2000) of
Ministry of Surface Transport
Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at
the Airport in the country
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the
Ministry of Surface Transport
4
24.07.1997
14.08.1997
03.07.1998 (RS)
06.07.1998 (LS)
06.07.1998
06.07.1998
04.12.1998
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
04.03.1999 (LS)
08.03.1999 (RS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
19.04.1999 (RS)
22.04.1999 (LS)
07.03.2000 (RS)
08.03.2000 (LS)
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
19.04.2000
3
08.07.1997
11.08.1997
29.06.1998
01.07.1998
01.07.1998
02.12.1998
01.02.1999
26.02.1999
07.04.1999
07.04.1999
08.04.1999
01.03.2000
03.04.2000
03.04.2000
13.04.2000
1997-98 (l Report)
1998-99 (9 Reports)
1999-2000 (7 Reports)

35
1
44th
45th
46th
47th
48th
49th
50th
51st
52nd
53rd
54th
55th
56th
57th
58th
59th
2
Disinvestment of Air India
Functioning and Revival of Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (CIWTC)
Chartering and Management of flights for
Haj Pilgrims
Functioning of the Department of
Lighthouses and Lightships
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the
Ministry of Shipping
The Aircraft (Exemption From Taxes and
Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000
(with evidence)
Functioning of Border Roads Organisation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
22.8.2000
13.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
14.12.2000 (LS)
15.12.2000 (RS)
21.03.2001 (LS)
23.03.2001 (RS)
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
26.04.2001 (RS)
27.04.2001 (LS)
27.11.2001 (RS)
28.11.2001 (LS)
12.12.2001
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
23.04.2002 (LS)
24.04.2002 (RS)
3
17.08.2000
06.12.2000
06.12.2000
14.03.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
11.04.2001
29.10.2001
28.11.2001
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
16.04.2002
18.04.2002
18.04.2002
2001 (8 Reports)
2002 (7 Reports)

36
1
60th
61st
62nd
63rd
64th
65th
66th
67th
68th
69th
70th
*71st
72nd
2
Development of Tourism in the Country
The Airports Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 (with evidence)
The Major Port Trusts (Amendment)
Bill, 2001 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Fifty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants 2002-03
of Ministry of Shipping
Sale of Centaur Hotel Mumbai Airport
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the
Ministry of Shipping
Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (with evidence)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixtieth Report
on Development of Tourism in the
country
4
21.11.2002
21.11.2002
19.02.2003
25.02.2003
25.02.2003
10.03.2003
10.04.2003
10.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
25.04.2003
11.11.2003
03.12.2003
3
06.08.2002
11.11.2002
03.02.2003
10.01.2003
20.02.2003
05.03.2003
08.04.2003
08.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
23.04.2003
16.10.2003
29.10.2003
2003 (12 Reports)
*Presented to Hon’ble Chairman on the 11 th November, 2003.

37
1
73rd
74th
75th
76th
77th
78th
79th
80th
81st
82nd
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Sixty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2003-04)
(Demand No. 91) of Department of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 67
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 70
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 68
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Department of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its 69
th Report on
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
4
03.12.2003
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
03.02.2004
18.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
26.08.2004
3
29.10.2003
09.01.04
09.01.04
22.01.04
22.01.04
14.08.2004
23.08.2004
23.08.2004
25.08.2004
25.08.2004
2004 (4 Reports)
2004-05 (12 Reports)

38
1
83rd
84th
85th
86th
87th
88th
89th
90th
91st
92nd
93rd
94th
2
Functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2004 (with evidence)
Development of Airport Sector with Special
Emphasis on New Modern Airports
Functioning on Archaeological Survey of
India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fourth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Department of Shipping
4
6.12.2004 (RS)
3.12.2004 (LS)
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
29.04.2005
27.07.2005
23.08.2005
25.11.2005
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
27.2.2006
3
17.11.2004
15.04.2005
15.04.2005
21.04.2005
21.04.2005
27.04.2005
06.06.2005
17.08.2005
19.9.2005
22.2.2006
22.2.2006
22.2.2006
2005-06 (18 Reports)

39
1
95th
96th
97th
98th
99th
100th
101st
102nd
103rd
104th
105th
106th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-seventh
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained In its Ninetieth
Report on the ‘Development of Airport
Sector with special emphasis on new
modern airports’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained In its Eighty-third
Report on the ‘Functioning of the
Commission of Railway Safety’
The Admiralty Bill, 2005
The Inland Vessels (Amendment) Bill, 2005
The Carriage By Road Bill, 2005
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Road Transport and
Highways
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Culture
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
27.02.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
21.03.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
22.05.2006
3
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
22.02.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
17.03.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006
19.05.2006

40
1
107th
108th
109th
110th
111th
112th
113th
114th
115th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its Ninety-first
Report on ‘Functioning of the
Archaeological Survey of India’
Functioning and Performance of India
Tourism Development Corporation Limited
(ITDC)
The Aircraft (Amendment) Bill, 2006
The Central Road Fund (Amendment)
Bill, 2006
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Second Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of Department of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Culture.
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fourth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Department of Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-07) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
4
22.05.2006
15.12.2006
13.03.2007
20.03.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.05.2007
14.5.2007
3
19.05.2006
12.12.2006
09.03.2007
19.03.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.04.2007
16.4.2007
16.4.2007
2006-07 (13 Reports)

41
1
116th
117th
118th
119th
120th
121st
122nd
123rd
124th
125th
126th
2
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra
Stretch of Rivers Geonkhali-Charbatia
Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-
Dhamra Stretch of Matai River and
Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006.
The National Waterway (Kakinada-
Pondicherry Stretch of Canals and the
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam –
Rajahmundry Stretch of River Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of
River Krishna) Bill, 2006.
The Seamen’s Provident Fund
(Amendment) Bill, 2007
The Carriage by Air (Amendment) Bill, 2007
presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
on 17.10.2007
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred and
Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Nineteenth Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Tourism
4
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
14.5.2007
16.8.2007
16.8.2007
05.09.2007
17.10.2007
(Presented to Chairman)
20.11.2007
(Presented to House)
20.11.2007
20.11.2007
3
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
9.5.2007
18.07.2007
18.07.2007
31.08.2007
25.09.2007
02.11.2007
02.11.2007
2007-08 (19 Reports)

42
1
127th
128th
129th
130th
131st
132nd
133th
134th
135th
136th
137th
138th
139th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Department of
road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventeenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Twentieth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Culture
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2007
Closure of Bangalore and Hyderabad
Airports and matters related thereto
The Indian Maritime University Bill, 2007
The Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Bill, 2007
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Department of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Department of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
The Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Bill, 2007
4
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
04.03.2008
05.03.2008
17
.04.2008
17.04.2008
17.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
28.04.2008
3
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
18.01.2008
31.01.2008
04.03.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
15.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008
24.04.2008

43
1
140th
141st
142nd
143rd
144th
145th
146th
2
Promotion of tourism in Jammu and
Kashmir
Modernization of Airports
Functioning of Private Airports and the
related issues
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Shipping
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Department of
Road, Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Seventh Report on Demands
for Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of
Culture
4
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
20.08.2008
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 23.10.08
23.10.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
19.12.2008
3
11.08.2008
11.08.2008
20.10.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
18.12.2008
2008-09 (l0 Reports)

44
1
147th
148th
149th
150th
151st
152nd
153rd
154th
155th
156th
157th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for
Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2008
Development of Tourism Infrastructure
and Amenities for the Commonwealth
Games 2010
The National Commission for Heritage
Sites Bill, 2009
Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India: Its
Impact on The Civil Aviation Sector
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Fortieth Report on promotion of
Tourism in Jammu and Kashmir
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Forty Ninth Report on Development
of Tourism Infrastructure and Amenities
for the Commonwealth Games, 2010
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Tourism
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Culture
4
19.12.2008
17.12.2009
24.02.2009
23.11.2009
21.01.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to Parliament
on 03.03.2010
03.03.2010
03.03.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
22.04.2010
22.04.2010
3
18.12.2008
13.02.2009
19.02.2009
13.11.2009
08.01.2010
09.02.2010
09.02.2010
07.04.2010
07.04.2010
20.04.2010
20.04.2010
2009-10 (11 Reports)

45
1
158th
159th
160tn
161st
162nd
163rd
164th
2
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Thirty First Report on Closure of
Bangalore and Hyderabad Airports; One
Hundred and Forty First Report on
Modernisation of Airports; and One
Hundred and Forty Second Report on
Functioning of Private Airports
The National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board Bill, 2010
The Anti-Hijacking (Amendment)
Bill, 2010
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Tourism
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One hundred
Fifty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Sixth Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
22.04.2010
06.05.2010
28.07.2010
(Rajya Sabha)
27.07.2010
(Lok Sabha)
18.10.2010
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman and Hon’ble
Speaker)
Presented to the Houses
of the Parliament
01.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
3
20.04.2010
05.05.2010
14.07.2010
08.10.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
2010-11 (12 Reports)

46
1
165th
166th
167th
168th
169th
170th
171st
172nd
173rd
174th
175th
176th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Seventh Report on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Fifty Eight Report on Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Functioning of National Museum
Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA) – Issues and Challenges
Helicopter operations in India
Modernization of Major Port
Functioning of Sahitya Akademi, Lalit Kala
Akademi, Sangeet Natak Akademi and
National School of Drama
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern
Region
The National Highways Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Culture
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Tourism
4
04.03.2011
04.03.2011
10.03.2011 (RS)
11.03.2011 (LS)
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the Houses of
the Parliament 11.08.2011
04.05.2011 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman and
Hon’ble Speaker)
Presented to the House
of the Parliament on
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
17.08.2011
17.08.2011
15.03.2012
27.04.2012
07.05.2012
07.05.2012
3
20.12.2010
20.12.2010
25.01.2011
13.04.2011
13.04.2011
27.05.2011
11.08.2011
11.08.2011
13.03.2012
26.04.2012
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
2011-12 (8 Reports)

47
1
177th
178th
179th
180th
181st
182nd
183rd
184th
185th
2
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty Seventh Report on ‘Functioning of
National Museum’
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Seventy Second Report on Development
of Tourism in North-Eastern Region
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty eighth Report on Directorate General
of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and
Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Sixty-ninth Report on Helicopter Operations
in India
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-seventh Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Shipping (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-sixth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Tourism (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
4
07.052012
07.05.2012
21.05.2012
21.05.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
3
03.05.2012
03.05.2012
17.05.2012
17.05.2012
18.10.2012
18.10.2012
05.11.2012
05.11.2012
18.10.2012
2012-13 (20 Reports)

48
1
186th
187th
188th
189th
190th
191st
192nd
193rd
194th
195th
2
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report on the
Demands for Grants of Ministry of
Culture (2012-13)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
Seventy-eighth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways (2012-13)
Functioning of Commission of Railway
Safety
Development of National Waterways-
Potential and Challenges
Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and
Sikkim
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Culture
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Shipping
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of
Ministry of Tourism
4
04.12.2012
04.12.2012
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
on 27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
06.02.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament
27.02.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
03.05.2013
3
05.11. 2012
18.10.2012
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
03.01.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013
02.05.2013

49
1
196th
197th
198th
199th
200th
201st
202nd
203rd
2
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013
The Merchant Shipping (Amendment)
Bill, 2013
Management of Road Transport in National
Capital Region: Issues and Challenges
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Eighty Ninth Report on the
Development of National Waterways-
Potentials and Challenges
Development of Tourism, National
Highways and Water Transport in Kerala
and Cochin Shipyard Limited
Functioning of National Akademis and
other Cultural Institutions: Issues and
Challenges
The Merchant Shipping (Second
Amendment) Bill, 2013
Privatization of Services at Airports
4
26.06.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
07.08.2013
26.06.2013 (Presented
to Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
07.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
27.08.2013
l7.10.2013 (Presented to
Hon’ble Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon’ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
20.11.2013
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on 17.12.2013
3
20.05.2013
17.06.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
23.08.2013
01.10.2013
31.10.2013
31.10.2013
2013-14 (7 Reports)

50
1
204th
205th
206th
207th
2
The Civil Aviation Authority of India
Bill, 2013
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Two Report on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Culture
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in its One Hundred
and Ninety Third Report on Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in its One-Hundred
Ninety Fourth Report on the Demands for
Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of
Shipping
4
24.01.2014
(Presented to Hon'ble
Chairman)
Presented to the
Parliament on
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
06.02.2014
3
13.01.2014
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
17.12.2013
(The above mentioned reports are available on the website of Rajya Sabha
http://rajyasabha.nic.in ➝Committees➝Department related RS-committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture ➝Reports)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.